

THE Gentlewomans Companion; OR, A GUIDE TO THE Female Sex: CONTAINING
Directions of Behavior, in all Places, Companies, Relations, and Conditions,
from their Childhood down to Old Age: VIZ. As, Children to Parents. Scholars to
Governors. Single to Servants. Virgins to Suitors. Married to Husbands.
Huswifes to the House Mistresses to Servants. Mothers to Children. Widows to
the World Prudent to all.


With LETTERS and DISCOURSES upon all Occasions.

Whereunto is added, A Guide for Cook-maids, Dairy-maids, Chamber-maids, and
all others that go to Service.

The whole being an exact Rule for the Female Sex in General.

By Hannah Woolley.

LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwell for Dorman Nowman at the Kings-Arms in the
Poultry, 1673.

To all Young Ladies, Gentlewomen, and all Maidens whatever.
I Have formerly sent forth amongst you two little Books, the first called, The
Ladies Directory; the other, The Cooks Guide. Both which have found very good
Acceptance. It is near Seven years since I began to write this Book, at the
desire of the Bookseller, and earnest entreaties of very many worthy Friends;
unto whom I owe more than I can do for them. And when I considered the great
need of such a Book as might be a Universal Companion and Guide to the Female
Sex, in all Relations, Companies, Conditions, and states of Life, even from
Childhood down to Old Age; and from the Lady at the Court, to the Cook-maid in
the Country: I was at length prevailed upon to do it, and the rather because I
knew not of any Book in any Language that has done the like. Indeed many
excellent Authors there be who have wrote excellent well of some particular
Subjects herein treated of. But as there is not one of them has written upon
all of them, so there are some things treated of in this Book, that I have not
met with in any Language, but are the Product of my Thirty years Observations
and Experience.

I will not deny but I have made some use of that Excellent Book, The Queens
Closet; May's Cookery; The Ladies Companion; my own Directory and Guide. Also,
the second part of Youths Behavior, and what other Books I thought pertinent
and proper to make up a Complete Book, that might have a Universal Usefulness;
and to that end I did not only make use of them, but also of all others,
especially those that have been lately writ in the French and Italian
Languages. For as the things treated of are many and various, so were my Helps.

I hope the Reader will not think it much, that as the famous Lymner when he
drew the Picture of an exact Beauty, made use of an Eye from one, of a Mouth
from another, and so culled what was rare in all others, that he might present
them all in one entire piece of Workmanship and Frame: So I, when I was to
write of Physic and Chyrurgery, have consulted all Books I could meet with in
that kind, to complete my own Experiences.

If any shall wonder why I have been so large upon it, I must tell them, I look
upon the end of Life to be Usefulness; nor know I wherein our Sex can be more
useful in their Generation than in having a competent skill in Physic and
Chyrurgery, a competent Estate to distribute it, and a Heart willing thereunto.

The like Apology I have for my Prolixity about Cookery and Carving, which
being essential to a true Houswife, I thought it best to dwell most upon that
which they cannot dwell without, unless they design to render themselves
insignificant, not only in the world, but in those Families where they are.

As for what concerns Gentlewomens Behavior, I have the concurrent advice and
directions of the most able Professors and Teachers, both here and beyond the
Seas; yet durst not be so airy and leight in my Treatise about Ladies Love and
Courtship as some of the French Authors have been, but have taken out of them
what I found most taking with our English Gentry. The like I may say for Habits
and Gesture; I am not ignorant of the vanity of some Men's styles upon these
Subjects; and that young Ladies are too apt to take what may gratify their
Fancies, and leave what may better their Judgments about true Behavior.

I know I may be censured by many for undertaking this great Design, in
presenting to all of our Sex a complete Directory, and that which contains
several Sciences: deeming it a Work for a Solomon, who could give an account
from the Cedar to the Hysop. I have therefore in my Apology to the Bookseller,
declared how I came to be of Ability to do it, reciting to him the grounds of
my knowledge in all those Sciences I profess; and also what practice and
experience I have had in the World, lest any should think I speak more than I
am able to perform. I doubt not but judicious persons will esteem this Essay of
mine, when they have read the Book, and weighed it well; and if so, I shall the
less trouble my self what the ignorant do or say.

I have now done my Task, and shall leave it to your candid Judgments and
Improvement; your Acceptance will much encourage

London, Nov. 10. 1672. Your Most humble Servant Hannah Woolly.

THE TABLE
INtroduction Page 1. The duty and qualification of a Governess to Gentlewomens
Children, 4. A short account of the Life and Abilities of the Authoress of this
Book, 10. Good Instructions for a young Gentlewoman, from the age of Six to
Sixteen, 15. Advice to the Female younger sort, 17. The duty of Children to
their Parents, 21. Of a young Gentlewomans deportment to her Governess and
Servants in the Family, 25. What Qualifications best become and are most
suitable to a Gentlewoman, 29. Of a Gentlewomans Civil Behavior to all sorts
of People in all places, 33. Of the Gait or Gesture, 37. Of the Government of
the Eye, 39. Of Speech and Complement, 41. Choice and general Rules for a
Gentlewomans observation in Conversation with Company, 43. Rules to be observed
in walking with persons of bonour, and how you ought to behave your self in
congratulating and condoling them, 53. Of Habit, and the neatness and propriety
thereof; of Fashions, and their ridiculous apish Imitation, 54. Of New
Fashions, 62. Of young Gentlewomens fit hours and times for their recreations
and pleasures, and how to govern themselves therein, 81. What Recreations and
Pleasures are most fitting and proper for young Gentlewomen, 83. Of the guiding
of a Ladies love and fancy, 87. The Gentlewomans Mirror, or Patterns for their
imitation of such famous Women who have been eminent in Piety and Learning, 98.
Of Marriage, and the duty of a Wife to her Husband, 103. Of Women's Behavior to
their Servants, and what is to be required of them in the House, or what
thereunto apppertains, 109. Ferms for Carving all sorts of Meat at Table, 113.
Quaint Directions for the Carving all manner of Fowl, 114. Artichoaks Fried,
117. Artichoaks stewed, ibid. An Almond-Pudding, ibid. An Almond-Pudding in
Guts, ibid. An Almond-Tart, 118. Almond-Cream, ibid. Apple-Cream, ibid.
Apricocks green Baked, ibid. Barley-Broth, 119. Bisk, ibid. Beef Hashed, 121.
Beef A-la-Mode ibid. Beef Carbonadoed, ibid. Beef baked red Deer fashion in
Pies or Pasties, either Sirloyn, Brisket, Buttock or Fillet, larded or not,
122. Beef Collared, ibid. Brawn, how to make a Collar, 123. Brawn made of a
Sucking-Pig, otherways called a Souced Pig. 124. Calves-head roasted, 125.
Calves-foot Pie, or Neats-foot-Pie. ibid. Capons Souced, 126. Calves-Chaldron
Mince-Pies, 127. Capon or Chicken in white Broth, ibid. Chicken-Pie, ibid.
Clouted Cream, 128. Cabbidge-Cream, ibid. Carp stewed, 129. Carp Marinated,
130. Carp Roasted, ibid. Deer red and Fallow Roasted, 131. Deer Baked, ibid.
Egg Mince-Pie, ibid. Florentines on Paste, or without Paste, 132. Flowers of
all sorts pickled, ioid. Grapes and Goosberries Pickled, ibid. Geese Boiled,
ibid. Hashes several ways, 133. Hashes of Neats-feet, or any Feet, as Calves,
Sheep, Deer, Hogs, Pigs or Lambs, ibid. Hashing of any Feet, ibid. Hares
Roasted without, and with the skin, 134. Ipocras, ibid. Jellies of several
Colors, for all sorts of Sonc'd Meats, and to be eaten alone, 135. Land or
Sea-fowl, how to boil them, 136. Land-Fowl the smaller sort, how to boil a
Plover, Quails, Black-birds, Rails, Thrushes, Snites, Wheatears, Larks and
Sparrows. ibid. Marrow-Pudding in a Dish baked, garnished with Puff-paste.
ibid. Mutton hashed the French way, 137. Marinated Mullet, Bace, Gurnet or
Rochet, ibid. Mullets Fried, 138. Mullets or Bace baked, ibid. Mushrooms Fried,
139. Mushrooms stewed, ibid. Neats-tongues Boiled, 140. Neats-tongues Stewed,
ibid. Neats-tongues an excellent way how to dry them ibid. Neats-tongues
roasted, 141. Neats-tongue Mince-Pye, ibid. A Norfolk fool, ibid. Oysters
Stewed, 142. Oysters Fried, ibid. Oyster-Pyes, ibid. Oysters Pickled, 143.
Ox-cheeks Baked in a Pie, 144. A Calves-head-Pye, ibid. Puff-paste, the best
way how to make it, ibid. Panadoes, 145. Posset of Sack, Claret, or White Wind,
the best manner, ibid. Pumpion-Pye, ibid. Pig-Roasted with the Hair on, 146.
Pigeons Boiled, 147. Pike Boiled, ibid. Pike Stewed, ibid. Pike Souced, 148.
Pike Roasted, ibid. Quaking-Pudding, 149. Quince-Pyes, ibid. An excellent
Restorative for a weak back, 150. A most incomparable Broth or Drink for a sick
person, ibid. Rice-Tart, ibid. Rice-Cream, ibid. Another excellent and rare
Cream, 151. Several excellent Sawces for several Dishes, and first for
Green-Geese, ibid. Salmon Roasted, 153. Salmon Fried, ibid. Souc't Veal, Lamb,
or any Joint of Mutton, Kid, Fawn, or Venison, 154. Taffety-Tart, ibid. Venison
how to recover when tainted, 155. To make Beef, Ram, or Mutton pass for
Venison, ibid. Warden Tarts, ibid. A Bill of Fare of suitable Meat for every
Month in the Year, 156. Bills of Fare for Fasting-days, or Leut, 159. An
Introduction to Physic and Chyrurgery, 167. What is to be observed by a
Gentlewoman before she undertakes the Administration of Physic (...) A most
approved Receipt for a Quartane Ague 168. For a sudden and violent bleeding at
the Nose, ibid To stop the bleeding of a Wound, 169. An approved Medicine of
London-Midwifes to break and heal Women's sore Breasts, ibid. An excellent way
to dry up a Woman's Breast, ibid. An infallible way to increase Milk in Women's
Breasts, ibid. Against a stinking Breath, 170. For a Cancer in a Woman's Breast,
ibid. For young Children who by reason of the weakness of their Limbs can
neither stand nor go, ibid. An approved China-broth for a Consumption, 171. A
most excellent Jelly for the Consumption, ibid. An excellent Comforter for the
Stomach, and helper of Digestion, 172. A well tried Medicine for the Corns on
the Feet or Toes, ibid. An excellent Diet-drink for the Spring to purge the
Blood and cleanse it, 173. A Remedy for the Dropsy, whether hot or cold, ibid.
Another for the Dropsy, ibid. For the Web or Pin in the Eye, 174. To cleanse
the skin of your Face, and make it look beautiful and fair, ibid. How to ripen
and heal a Felon or Whitclof, ibid. How to cure the bloody Flux, ibid. A Cure
for every sort of Gout, 175. How to cure the Green Sickness, 176. An Universal
Medicine of wonderful use hoth for Man and Woman, ibid. Against the Yellow
Jaundies, 177. Against the Itch. ibid. Against Kibed Heels, 178. What is best
to be administered to one sick of the Meazels, ibid. To cure the Fits of the
Mother, ibid. To take away the heat of a Burn or Scald, 179. For a Scald-head,
ibid. For one burnt with Gunpowder ibid. A very safe Clister to be used by
either Man or Woman who is much bound or costive, ibid. How to cure old Sores
on the Legs which have been of so long standing that the Bones have appeared,
180. An excellent way to dissolve the Stone, ibid. A way not only to prevent
but to cure the Toothach, or to make an aching Tooth fall out of it self, ibid.
How to order a Woman with Child before, in, and after the Dilivery, 181. An
excellent Cordial for Women troubled with swooning Fits in Travel, 182. Of
Candying, Conserving and Preserving, 184. Barberries Preserved, 185. Pears
Preserved, ibid. Green Pippins, ibid. Black-Cherries, ibid. Mulberries, ibid.
Oranges and Lemons, 187. Goosberries Preserved, ibid. Roses, or any other
Flowers, 188. Cherries, ibid. Apricocks, ibid. Green Walnuts, 189.
Eringo-Roots, ibid. Ennula-Campana-Roots, ibid. Conserve of Roses, 190. How to
Candy all sorts of Flowers as they grow with their Stalks on, 191. Candied
Eringo-Roots, ibid. The best and most approved way to dry Plumbs, 192. Proper
Colors for Fruitage, ibid. Quince Marmelade, ibid. How to make Syrrup of
Violets, 193. Syrrup of Roses, ibid. Syrrup of Coltsfoots, ibid. Of
Distillation, 195. Dr. Stevens his famous Water, 196. Aqua Mirabilis, ibid.
Water for the Eyes, ibid. An admirable water against the stone in the Kidneys,
197. An excellent Water for the Worms, ibid. An excellent artificial Wine like
Claret, 198. An Ointment for any Wound or Sore, 199. A Searcloth for all Aches,
ibid. What things belong to a Country Gentlewoman; of Dairies, and making
Butter and Cheese, ibid. How to make your ordinary clouted Cream, 201. To make
fresh Cheese in Cream, 202. Cream of Codlins, ibid. To make a Junket, ibid. To
Gentlewomen who serve Persons of Quality, 204. To all Maidens who desire to be
Chamber-maids to Persons of Quality, 207. Instructions for all Nursery-maids in
Noble Families, 208. Instructions for all Chamber-maids to Gentlewomen in City
and Country, 209. To Nursery-Maids in London or elsewhere, 211. To Cook-maids,
212. Under-Cook-maids, 214. Dairy-maids, ibid. Laundry-maids, 215. House-maids,
216. Scullery-maids, 217. Writing Letters, 218, to page 248. The Resolute
Lover: A Pastoral Dialogue, 248. Addresses of Love and Service, from Erotus to
Aurelia. 250. A merry Dialogue between an ingenious Gentlewoman and a Poetaster
or Rimer, 252. A form of Discourse at a casual meeting between Silvester and
Sylvia, 255. A method of Courtship on fair and honorable terms, 256. An
impertinent and lying Travelers Discourse with his witty and Jocose Mistress,
258. A Gentleman accidentally happening into a room where a Company of Ladies
were well known to him, 261.
THE Introduction.
THE right Education of the Female Sex, as it is in a manner every where
neglected, so it ought to be generally lamented. Most in this depraved later
Age think a Woman learned and wise enough if she can distinguish her Husbands
Bed from another. Certainly Man's Soul cannot boast of a more sublime Original
than ours, they had equally their efflux from the same eternal Immensity, and
therefore capable of the same improvement, by good Education. Vain man is apt
to think we were merely intended for the Worlds propagation, and to keep its
humane inhabitants sweet and clean; but, by their leaves, had we the same
Literature, he would find our brains as fruitful as our bodies. Hence I am
induced to believe, we are debarred from the knowledge of humane learning, lest
our pregnant Wits should rival the towering conceits of our insulting Lords and
Masters.

Pardon the Severity of this expression, since I intend not thereby to infuse
bitter rebellion into the sweet blood of Females; for know, I would have all
such as are entered into the honorable state of Matrimony, to be loyal and
loving Subjects to their lawful (though lording) Husbands. I cannot but
complain of, and must condemn the great negligence of Parents, in letting the
fertile ground of their Daughters lie fallow, yet send the barren Noddles of
their Sons to the University, where they stay for no other purpose than to fill
their empty Sconces with idle notions to make a noise in the Country.

Pagans of old may teach our Christian Parents a new lesson. Edesia, an
Infidel, taught her Daughters Learning and Morality. Cornelia, hers (with the
Greek Tongue) piety. Portia, hers (with the learning of the Egyptians) the
exemplary grounds of Chastity. Sulpitia, hers (with the knowledge of several
Languages) the precepts of conjugal Unity. These, though Ethnicks, were
excellent informers of youth; so that their Children were more bound to them
for their breeding than bearing, nurturing than nursing. Emulation of goodness
is most commendable; and though you cannot hang up the pictures of these worthy
persons, so that their memories may live with you; however, imitate their
Virtues, that their memories may live fresher in you. All memorials, being
materials, be they never so durable are subject to frailty, only the precious
monuments of Virtue survive time, and breathe eternity.

Thus as ye take good example from others, be ye Mother-patterns of Virtue to
your Daughters: Let your living actions be lines of their direction. While they
are under your command, the error is yours not theirs, if they go astray. Their
honor should be one of the chiefest things you are to tender, neither can it
be blemished without some soil to your own credit.

I have known some inconsiderate Mothers, and those none of the lowest rank and
quality, who either out of the confidence of their Daughters good carriage, or
drawn with the hopes of some rich Suitors to advance their Marriage, have
usually given too free way to opportunity, which brought upon their Daughters
name a spreading infamy. Suffer not then those who partake of your image, to
lose their best beauty. Look then to your own actions, these must inform them;
look to your own examples, these must confirm them. Without you, they cannot
perish; with you they may. What will you do with the rest that is left, when
you see a part of your self lost.

There is no instruction more moving, than the example of your living. By that
line of yours they are to conform their own. Take heed then lest the damp of
your own life extinguish the light of your Childrens. As you are a kind Mother
to them, be a careful Monitor about them; and if your business will permit,
teach them your self, with their letters, good manners. For there is an
inbred, filial fear in Children to their Parents, which will beget in them
more attention in hearing, and retention in holding what they hear. But if it
be inconsistent with your convenience, and that you must commit the Tutelage
and education of your Children to a Governess, give me leave to inform you what
she ought to be.

The duty and qualifications of a Governess to Gentlemen's Children.
THey who undertake the difficult Employ of being an Instructress or Governess
of Children, should be persons of no mean birth and breeding, civil in
deportment, and of an extraordinary winning and pleasing conversation. They
should not be harsh in expression, nor severe in correcting such as are under
their charge; but instruct them with all mildness, cheerfully encouraging them
in what they are enjoined to perform; not suddenly striking, nor startling them
with a loud rebuke, which causes in some an aversness to what they should
love, imbittering all the former delight they had in learning. Whereas if you
woo them with soft words, you will soon find them won by the testimony of their
good works.

There is so much servility in rigor and restraint, that of consequence there
can be no greater enemy to Ingenuity and good nature. Fools are to be always
bauld upon, and blows are fitter for beasts than rational creatures; wherefore
there can nothing more engage an ingenious generous soul, than cheerfulness and
liberty; not over-frightned. I have often observed the many ill consequences
which attends an unadvised severity. A Gentlewoman of my acquaintance, who was
well born and bred, and every way accomplished for a Tutoress to young Ladies,
lost all her employment in that faulty, by her irresistible passion. Another in
Dorsetshire being somewhat aged, and suspecting her strength was not able to
grapple with active youth, called up her maid to her assistance, with whose
help she so cruelly chastised a young Gentlewoman for some fault she had
committed, that with grief and shame she died in a little time after. Many more
instances I could insert, but I shall forbear to publish further the shame of
such inconsiderate rashness.

As I must condemn the insolent severity of such a Governess, so I must not let
pass without reproof the tyranny of some Mothers, whose presence makes their
Children tremble, without the commission of a fault; by which means they many
times with their imperiousness frighten their love into an abhorrency of their
fight; to be sure they make them tell many a lie to excuse their negligence,
(which otherwise they would not do) only that for that time they might escape
the rigor of their punishment. Yet I would not have any mistake me in my
persuading young Gentlewomen to be used mildly, and tenderly, that I intend
thereby their over-indulgence, so as to let their tender age rust in sloth and
vanity; all that I would have a Mother do, is, that she would be moderate in
the correction of an offense, lest by correcting one, she commit another, and
so transgress that positive command in holy Writ, Parents provoke not your
children to wrath.

A Governess is to study diligently the nature, disposition, and inclination of
those she is to teach; and so by suiting their humors, make their study the
more facile, by how much it is more pleasant to them; praising such and such of
their own age, that are thus and thus qualified, which will breed in them an
emulation to tread in their footsteps. If she finds any addicted to reading,
let her ask the question, What she thinks of such a Book she has read? by the
answer she may easily conjecture at the strength of her Intellect: If she find
her a lover of conversation, it will not be amiss to ask what she thinks of
such a Gentlewoman or Gentleman whose virtues she has a great esteem for; when
she has returned an answer to the demand, let the Governess require a reason
for her so saying; which in the approving or condemning will not only make the
Scholar cautious of what she delivers, but give a great insight both into her
disposition and understanding.

Whatever she does, let her have a special care in obstructing the growth of
evil manners, and ingraft the good, stifle in the very birth those corruptions
which will grow in the purest natures without an indefatigable circumspection.

Countenance not an untruth by any means, especially if they stand in it; this
is a very great vice, and argues an inclination impudently vicious; there is a
fault contrary to this, and shall be reckoned in the number of infirmities,
when by an over-modesty, and too much bashfulness, a young Maid cannot hold up
her head when spoken to; and if asked a question, would blush, as if by some
gross miscarriage she had lately contracted a guilt. This sudden alteration of
the countenance may breed an undeserved suspicion, and therefore it ought to be
corrected discreetly with good instruction. Favor not obstinacy by any means,
for flattery in this case will spoil the Gentlewoman.

Be the incessant tormentor of her sloth, left by proving burdensome to
others, she at length becomes so to her self, by which means her understanding
starves, and her body contracts an Hospital of Diseases. This you may remedy by
suffering her not to sleep over long, lest the spirits be over dulled, as well
as by too little rest.

If the season be dry, walk them in the fields; if not, some moderate exercise
within doors, which will be instrumental in keeping them from the knowledge of
the Physician. And now since Nature only gives us a being; and education, a
well being; the Parent or Governess ought to have a special care how she
seasons youth with what is most conducible to the orderly and prudent
management of the concerns of this life; let such a foundation be therefore
laid which may sufficiently promise the Parents a happy issue, when their
Children shall arrive to maturity of age.

Letters undoubtedly is the first step to the perfection of knowledge, by which
means they come to improve their own understandings by the help of others:
Reading furnishes them with agreeable discourse, and adopts them for the
conversation of the most ingenious, without which I know not how the fancy can
be supplied with what is acceptable to the Auditor. How little would
conversation signify, did not reading on all occasions find matter for
discourse. The want of which has made so many Country-Gentlewomen stand like
so many Mutes or Statues when they have happened into the company of the
ingenious; their quaint expressions have seemed to them Arabian sentences; and
have stared like so many distracted persons, in that they should hear the sound
of English, and yet understand but here and there a word of their own language.
The consideration hereof is sufficient one would think to make the preposterous
suspicions of some to vanish, who vainly imagine that Books are Women's
Academies, wherein they learn to do evil with greater subtilty and cunning;
whereas the helps of Learning, which are attained from thence, not only
fortifies the best inclinations, but enlarges a mean capacity to a great
perfection.

Having thus proved, That the reading Books does much conduce to the improving
the understanding of young Gentlewomen, it behooves the Governess to be careful
in her choice of them. In the first place let them read some choice pieces of
Piety, which may inflame their hearts with the love of God, and kindle in them
ardent desires to be early followers of the Doctrine of Christ Jesus. Let there
be a strict watch to keep unviolated the two gates of the Soul, the Ears and
Eyes; let the last be employed on good and proper Subjects, and there will be
the less fear that the Ears should be surpised by the converse of such who
delight in wanton and obscene discourses, which too often do pleasantly and
privately insinuate themselves into the Ear, carrying with them that unwholesome
air which infects and poisons the purity of the Soul.

I know it will be expected what sort of Books of Piety, I would recommend to
the perusal of these Gentlewomen; London affords such plenty of them, I know
not which to pitch on; not to trouble you with too many, take these which
follow: Bishop Vshers Body of Divinity. Mr. Swinnocks Christian-calling. Mr.
Firmins Real Christian. Mr. James Janeways book, Entitled, Acquaintance with
God betimes; and his Token for Children when they are young.

Some may imagine, that to read Romances after such practical Books of Divinity,
will not only be a vain thing, but will absolutely overthrow that fabric I
endeavored to erect: I am of a contrary opinion, and do believe such Romances
which treat of generosity, gallantry, and virtue, as Cassandra, Clelia, Grand
Cyrus, Cleopatra, Parthenessa, not omitting Sir Philip Sydney's Arcadia, are
Books altogether worthy of their Observation. There are few Ladies mentioned
therein, but are charactered what they ought to be; the magnanimity, virtue,
gallantry, patience, constancy, and courage of the men, might entitle them
worthy Husbands to the most deserving of the female sex. Thus having qualified
them for reading, you should so practice them in their pen, as not to be
ignorant in a Point de Venice, and all the Productions of the Needle, with all
the curious devices of Wax-work, Rock-work, Moss-work, Cabinet-work,
Bengle-work, etc. and in due time let them know how to Preserve, Conserve,
Distill; with all those laudible Sciences which adorn a complete Gentlewoman.

Having thus uncharacterized in part, what a Governess ought to be, I shall with
your leave and patience give you some account of my self.

A Short account of the life and abilities of the Authoress of this Book.
I Would not presume to trouble you with any passages of my life, or relate my
innate qualifications, or acquired, were it not in obedience to a Person of
Honor, who engaged me so to do, if for no other reason than to stop the mouths
of such who may be so maliciously censorious as to believe I pretend what I
cannot perform.

It is no ambitious design of gaining a name in print (a thing as rare for a
Woman to endeavor, as obtain) that put me on this bold undertaking; but the
mere pity I have entertained for such Ladies, Gentlewomen, and others, as have
not received the benefits of the tithe of the ensuing Accomplishments: These
ten years and upwards, I have studied how to repair their loss of time, by
making public those gifts which God has bestowed upon me. To be useful in our
Generation is partly the intent of our Creation; I shall then arrive to the top
of the Pyramid of my Contentment, if any shall profit by this following
Discourse. If any question the truth of what I can perform, their trial of me I
doubt not but will convince their infidelity.

The things I pretend greatest skill in, are all works wrought with a Needle,
all Transparent works, Shell-work, Moss-work, also cutting of Prints, and
adorning Rooms, or Cabinets, or Stands with them.

All kinds of Beugle-works upon Wyers, or otherwise.

All manner of pretty toys for Closets.

Rocks made with Shells, or in Sweets.

Frames for Looking-glasses, Pictures, or the like.

Feathers of Crewel for the corner of Beds.

Preserving all kind of Sweetmeats wet and dry.

Setting out of Banquets.

Making Salves, Ointments, Waters, Cordials; healing any wounds not desperately
dangerous.

Knowledge in discerning the Symptoms of most Diseases, and giving such
remedies as are fit in such cases.

All manner of Cookery.

Writing and Arithmetic.

Washing black or white Sarsnets.

Making sweet Powders for the Hair, or to lay among Linen.

All these and several things beside, too tedious here to relate, I shall be
ready to impart to those who are desirous to learn.

Now to the intent I may increase your wonder, I shall relate how I came to the
knowledge of what I prosess. When I was fourteen years old, I began to consider
how I might improve my time to the best advantage, not knowing at that age any
thing but what reason and fancy dictated to me. Before I was Fifteen I was
entrusted to keep a little School, and was the sole Mistress thereof. This
course of life I continued till the age of Seventeen, when my extraordinary
parts appeared more splendid in the eyes of a Noble Lady in this Kingdom, than
really they deserved, who praising my works with the appellation of curious
pieces of Art, was infinitely pleased therewith. But understanding withal,
that I understood indifferently the smooth Italian, and could sing, dance and
play on several sorts of Musical Instruments, she took me from my School, and
greedily entertained me in her house as Governess of her only Daughter. Unto
this honorable Person I am indebted for the basis, or groundwork of my
Preserving and Cookery, by my observation of what she ordered to be done. By
this Ladies means I came acquainted with the Court, with a deportment suitable
thereunto.

The death of this Lady gave me a fit opportunity to be entertained by another
no way inferior to the former, with whom I lived seven years. At first I was
Governess to those of her Children, whose forward virtue sufficiently declared
the goodness of the stock from whence they came. Time and my Ladies good
opinion of me, constituted me afterward her Woman, her Stewardess, and her
Scribe or Secretary. By which means I appeared as a person of no mean authority
in the Family. I kept an exact account of what was spent in the house. And as I
profited in Externals; so I treasured up things necessary for my understanding,
having an happy opportunity so to do, nor only by hearing that ingenious and
agreeable discourse interfac'd between my Lady and Persons of Honor, but also
by inditing all her Letters; in the framing and well fashioning of which (that
I might increase my Ladies esteem) I took indefatigable pains. there were not
any who both wittily and wisely had published their Epistles to view of the
world, whom I had not read, and on all occasions did consult: those which I
placed in my greatest esteem were the Letters of Mr. Ford, Mr. Howel, Mr.
Loveday, and Monsieur Voiture.

But that which most of all increast my knowledge, was my daily reading to my
Lady, Poems of all sorts, and Plays, teaching me as I read, where to place my
accents, how to arise and fall my voice, where lay the emphasis of the
expression. Romances of the best sort she took great delight in; and being very
well verst in the propriety of the French Tongue, there was not any thing
published by the Virtuosi of France, which carefully and chargably she procured
not; this put me upon the understanding of that Language, she was so well
experienced therein, which is as great an Ornament for young Ladies as those
learned Tongues, of which the Academical studioso boasts a more than common
understanding.

Here as I learned hourly courtly phrases and graces, so how to express my self
with the attendency of a becoming air. And as I gathered how to manage my
tongue gracefully, and discreetly; so I thought it irrequisite to let my hands
to lie idle. I exercised them daily in carving at Table. And when any sad
accident required their help in Physic and Chyrurgery, I was ready to be
assisting; in those two excellent arts in this place I acquired a competent
knowledge.

In short time I be came skilful, and stayed enough to order an house, and all
Offices belonging to it; and gained so great an esteem among the Nobility and
Gentry of two Counties, that I was necessitated to yield to the importunity of
one I dearly loved, that I might free my self from the tedious caresses of a
many more.

In the time I was a Wife, I had frequent occasions to make use of all, or most
of my aforenamed qualities; and what I exercised not within my own roof, I used
among my neighbors, friends, and acquaintants.

That which qualified me as a Governess for Children as well as any thing yet I
have mentioned was the great knowledge I had in the humors, inclinations, and
dispositions of Children, having often had at one time above threescore in
number under my tuition.

Besides, as I have been the Mistress of many Servants, so I have qualified
them with my instructions to be Mistress to others; the major part of them
living very comfortably in a married condition.

As I have taken great pains for an honest livelihood, so the hand of the
Almighty has exercised me in all manner of Afflictions, by death of Parents
when very young, by loss of Husband, Children, Friends, Estate, very much
sickness, by which I was disenabled from my Employment. Having already given
you an account of the duty, and requisite endowments which ought to be in a
Governess, and how qualified I was my self in that troublesome conccrn. I shall
now proceed in giving young Ladies such Rules which long experience and
observation has taught me, which may be as their perfect guide in all ages and
conditions, the practice whereof will assuredly imbalm their names here, let
their steadfast faith in Jesus Christ only crown them with glory hereafter.

Good Instructions for a young Gentlewoman, from the age of Six to Sixteen.
I Shall suppose your Parents have not been so remiss in their duties as not to
furnish your tender age with what it is capable of understanding; and therefore
do not question but that you can read well, sow and write indifferently; but I
would have, long before you arrive at your teens, your first age watered with
the wholesome and sound doctrine of fearing God. Remember thy Creator in the
days of thy youth; that thou may have, with David, in thy later days this
comfortable testimony of thy self, From my youth up have I loved thy Law.

I cannot bewail enough the careless neglect of Parents in this matter, who
think neither God nor Nature does tie them to further regard of their Children
than to afford them food, and make them strut in the fashion, learn them to
dance and sing, and lastly lay up a considerable sum for some person whom they
value by his greatness, not his goodness; but how far that care falls short of
what is required from Parents, I appeal to the sad effects thereof, profaness
toward God, and a contempt of his people, and not only a daily breach of his
holy Laws, but the Laws of civil Society.

Above all things, let the fear of God be improved in you. Omit not by any
means the duty of Prayer, Morning and Evening, and forget not to read some
portion of the Sctipture every day.

Be very cautious in the choice of your Companions, and when your age adapts
you for Society, have a care with whom you associate. If you tender your
repute, you must beware with whom you consort, for report will bruit what you
are by the company which you bear. Would you then preserve those precious
odours of your good name? consort with such whose names were never branded,
converse with such whose tongues sor immodesty were never taxed. As by good
words evil manners are corrected; so by evil words, are good ones corrupted.

Make no reside there where the least occasion of lightness is ministered; avert
your ear when you hear it; but your heart especially, lest you harbor it.

It is proverbially said, Maids should be seen, not heard; not that they should
not speak, but that they should not be too talkative. A Traveller sets himself
out best by discourse, but a Maid is best set out by silence.

For your carriage, let it be in a Mediocrity, neither too precise, nor too
free. These simpring, made-faces partake more of Chambermaid than Gentlewoman.

Being grown up, you may possibly be wooed to interchange Favors; Rings or
Ribbands may seem trifles, yet trust me they are no trifles that are aimed at
in those exchanges. Wherefore let nothing pass from you that may any way
impeach you, or give others advantage over you. It is probable that your
innocent credulity may be free from the conceit of ill as theirs from the
intention of good; but these intercourses of Courtesies are not to be admitted,
lest by this familiarity an entry to affection be opened which before was
closed. It is dangerous to enter parley with a beleaguring-enemy; it implies
want or weakness in the besieged.

Presuming on your own strength is a great weakness; and the ready way to
betray your self to dangers, is to contemn them. Presumption is a daring sin,
and ever brings out some untimely birth, which, Viper-like, is the destruction
of its Parent. I shall desist here in this place from giving you more rules of
caution and good behavior, having designed another, wherein I intend a more
copious relation.

Advice to the Female younger sort.
INcline not to sloth, and love not to laze in bed, but rise early; having
dressed your self with decency and cleanliness, prostrate your self in all
humility upon your bended knees before God Almighty, beseeching his Infinite
Majesty to forgive you whatever sins you have committed in deed, word or
thought; begging protection from the sin and evil of that day, and his holy
assistance in the prosecution of good all the days of your life. Having said
your Prayers, then on your knees ask your Parents Blessing; and what they shall
appoint for your Breakfast, do you by no means dislike or grumble at; waste not
too much time in eating thereof, but hasten to School, having first taken your
leave of your Parents with all reverence. Do not loyter by the way, or play the
truant; abuse none whom you meet, but be courteous and mannerly to all who
speak with you. Leave not any thing behind which you ought to carry with you,
not only things you learn in or by, but also Gloves, Pocket-Handkerchiefs; and
have a special care of any thing that may mischief you by the way.

When you come to School, salute your Mistress in a reverent manner, and be
sure to mind what she injoyns you to do or observe. You cannot but live well if
you conform to what you hear. Be not offended if your Governess advise you
rather what is most fitting, than what is most pleasing; for such is the
property of a good Instructress. And these are to be entertained with such
indeared respect, as their speeches (be they never so tart) should not incense
you; nor their reproofs, be they never so free distaste you; having done this,
salute civilly your School-fellows, and then apply your self to your book,
work, writing, or what ever else you are to learn.

Show not your ill breeding and want of manners, by eating in the School,
especially before your Mistress.

Mind what you are about, and neglect not what you are to do, by vain prattling
in the School: make no noise, that you may neither disturb your Mistress, or
School-fellows.

When you are called to read, come reverently to your Mistress, or any whom she
appoints; avoid reading with a tone, huddle not over your lesson, but strive to
understand what you read, and read so plainly, distinctly, and deliberately,
that others may understand; if you are doubtful of a word, carefully spell it,
and mistake not one word for another; when you have done, return, showing your
reverence to your place. Whatever work you take in hand, do it cleanly and
well, though you are the longer about it; and have a care of wasting or losing
any thing that appertains thereunto. Sit upright at your work, and do not lean
or lol: and forbear to carry Children in your arms out of a wanton humor; for
these, whilst you are so young, may incline your body to crookedness. If you
write, be careful you do not blot your paper; take pains in the true forming or
cutting your letters, and endeavor to write true and well after your copy.
Preserve your Pens, spill not your Ink, nor flurt it on your own or others
clothes, and keep your fingers from being polluted therewith.

Returning from School, make haste home, not gaping on every idle object you
meet with by the way. Coming into the house, apply your self immediately to
your Parents; and having saluted them according to your duty, acquaint them
with what proficiency you have made in your learning that day; be not absent
when Dinner is on the Table, but present when Grace is said; and sit not down
before you have done your obeisance to your Parents, and the company then
present. Keep your Clothes from greasing, by pinning or keeping your napkin
tite about you; and receive what is given you, thankfully. Be not talkative at
Table, nay, nor do not speak, unless you are asked a question. Eat not your meat
greedily, nor fill your mouth too full; and empty your mouth before you drink;
and avoid smacking in your eating. Grease not your fingers as those that are
slovenly, up to the knuckles. You will show your self too saucy by calling for
sauce or any dainty thing. Forbear putting both hands to your mouth at onee;
nor gnaw your meat, but cut it handsomely, and eat sparingly. Let your nose and
hands be always kept clean. When you have dined or supt, rise from the table,
and carry your trencher or plate with you, doing your obeisance to the company;
and then attend in the room till the rest rise.

In the intervals of School-time, let your recreation be pleasant and civil,
not rude and boisterous.

Sit not before your betters, unless you are so desired, and unless you are at
meat, working, or writing.

Be no makebate between your Parents and their servants; tell not a lie in any
case, nor mince it into a plausible excuse to save you from the hand of
correction.

Going to bed, make no noise that may disturb any of the Family, but more
especially your Parents; and before you betake your self to rest, commit your
self into the hands of the Almighty; desiring his infinite Majesty not only to
watch over you in the night, but preserve you for, and assist you in the duties
of the ensuing day.

If the Poor beg at your Father's door, though you cannot your self supply his
necessities, yet you may do it by persuading your Father or Mother, which may
be the sooner induced to it by observing your early and forward inclination
toCharity.

Get that Catechism the Government has made choice of for you, by heart; by the
practice of which you will be enabled to perform your duty to God and man.

Behave your self in the Church reverently, giving an awful regard to what
sacred truths the Minister shall deliver for your future observation and
practice; and do not proclaim publicly to the whole Congregation your levity
and vanity, by laughing, talking, pointing with your finger, and nodding, or
your careless contempt of Gods word by drowsiness or sleeping.

Do not despise the aged, but rather honor them for their antiquity; and
indeed you have but little reason to contemn old people, if you consider this,
that you will be old if God shall think fit to continue your days to the length
of theirs, and therefore would not be so served your self.

God enable you to observe and practice what I have here already laid down, and
give you yielding hearts to the exercise of what shall hereafter follow to the
glory of God, the unspeakable comfort of your Friends, and eternal salvation of
your immortal Souls.

Thus I have given you general instructions as to your learning and deportment:
Give me now leave to insist in particular on the duty you owe your Parents.

The duty of Children to their Parents.
THE duties of a Child (Male or Female) to Parents, may be branched out into
these particulars; Reverence, Love, Obedience, (especially in Marriage)
assisting them in their wants, nay all these considered as a due debt to the
worst of Parents.

You ought in the first place to behave your self toward them with reverence,
respect, humility, and observance; and although their infirmities may tempt you
into a contempt of them, yet you must not despise them in your behavior, nor
let your heart entertain an undervaluing thought. What infirmities they have,
you must endeavor to cover and conceal, like Shem and Japhet, who whilst
cursed Cham endeavored to disclose the nakedness of their Father to public
view, they privately covered from the sight of others, that which they debarred
their own eyes to look upon. It is a great fault in our days, and too
frequently practiced, for youth not only to deride the imperfections of their
Parents, but forge and pretend more than they have, that their counsel and
correction may seem rather the effect of weakness, than good judgment in the
punishing their Childrens errors. They think they then best express their wit,
when they can most flout and abuse grave Counsel. Let such, if they will not
practice the exhortations, yet remember the threatenings of the wisest of men,
Prove. 30. 17. The eye that mocketh his Father, and despises to obey his
Mother, the Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall
eat it.

Thus as your behavior ought to be respectful to them, so ought you to show
them all the demonstrations of love imaginable, striving to do them all the
good you can, and shunning all the occasions of their disquiet. This you are
obliged unto by common gratitude; for they were not only the instruments of
bringing you into the world, but of sustaining and supporting you afterward;
if you could but rightly weigh the fears and cares that are required in the
bringing up a Child, you would judge your love to be but a moderate return in
compensation thereof.

This love is to be expressed several ways: First in all kindness of behavior,
carrying your self not only with awe and respect, but with kindness and
affection, which will encourage you to do those things they affect, and make
you avoid what may grieve and afflict them.

Secondly, This love is to be expressed in praying for them. The debt a Child
owes her Parents is so great, that she can never make satisfaction unless she
call God to her aid and assistance, by beseeching him to multiply his blessings
on them. Do not for any temporal benefit, or to be freed from the severity of
thy Parents, wish their death. God in the Old Testament has denounced death
and destruction to the Curser of his Parents, and therefore certainly will not
let thy ill wishes toward them go unpunished; certainly they who watch for the
death of their Parents, may untimely meet with their own.

The third duty we owe them, is Obedience; this is not only contained in the
fifth Commandment, but injoined in many other places of Scripture. This
obedience extends no farther than to lawful things; otherwise it is
disobedience, and offends against a higher duty, even that you owe to God your
Heavenly Father. How little this duty is regarded, daily experience makes
evident; the careful Mother having her child no longer under her command, than
under the rod.

Wherefore think not, though grown up to Woman's estate, that you are freed from
obedience; and let not your motive thereunto be out of worldly prudence,
fearing to displease your Parents, lest they should diminish your intended
portion, and so be a loser thereby; but let your obedience be grounded upon
conscience of duty.

But of all the acts of Disobedience, that of Marrying against the consent of
Parents is the highest. Children are so much the Goods and Chattels of a
Parent, that they cannot without a kind of theft give themselves away without
the allowance of those that have the right in them; and therefore we see under
the Law, the Maid that had made any Vow, was not suffered to perform it without
the consent of the Patent, Numb. 30. 5. The right of the Parent was thought of
force enough to cancel and make void the obligation even of a vow; and
therefore surely it ought to be so much considered by us to keep us from making
any such whereby that right is infringed.

A fourth duty is, To minister to, and assist your Parents in what ever
necessities or infirmities God Almighty shall think fit to inflict upon them.
It may be thy Parent is weak or decayed in understanding, supply his or her
wants according to thy ability, since in thy infancy thou did receive the
same benefits from them. When an infant, you had neither strength to support,
nor understanding to guide your self, but was supplied with both by your
indulgent Parents; wherefore common gratitude, when either of these becomes
their case, obliges you to return the same offices back again to them.

And as for the relieving their Poverty, there is the same obligation with the
former, it being but just to sustain those who had maintained thee.

How then shall those answer it, who will not part with, or circumscribe their
own excesses and superfluities for the relief of such to whom they owe their
being and well-being? and worse it will be with those who out of pride deny
their Parents, being themselves exalted, fearing lest the lowness of their
condition should betray the meanness of their birth.

Lastly, that I may conclude this Discourse, assure your self, That no
unkindness, fault, or poverty of a Parent, can excuse or acquit a child from
this duty. Although the gratitude due to a kind Parent be a forcible motive to
make the child pay his duty; yet though our Parent were ever so unnatural, yet
still we are to perform our duty, though none of that tie of gratitude lie on
us.

Take this for all, Honor and obey thy natural Parents in what condition
soever; for if they cannot give thee riches, yet thy Heavenly Father has
promised thee length of days.

Of a young Gentlewomans deportment to her Governess and Servants in the Family.
IF your Parents have committed you to the care and tuition of a Governess in
the house with you, think with your self, that this person whom I must now call
my Governess, is one whom my Father and Mother have elected and entertained for
my education, to lessen their own trouble, but not their tender care of me.
Therefore if I obey her not in all things requisite, I transgress the commands
of my loving Parents, and displease God in abusing their kindness.

Next, consider within your self, that this person who is constituted the guide
of my actions, is such a one as they are confident either in their own
judgments, or those who have recommended her, to be fit in all points to
perform this charge committed to her; therefore in obedience to them I must and
will obey her and follow those good examples and precepts she shall lay down
for my better information.

If she seem somewhat harsh, reserved, and abridgeth your freedom, yet let not
your green years be too forward in condemning her, nor let not the ill counsel
of inferior servants persuade you against her; lest by so doing you betray your
want of reason and good nature, and detract from your Parents worthy care for
you.

If you have just cause of complaint, yet speak not maliciously against her,
but truly and opportunely impart your grief; by this means she will be either
removed from you, or regulated by their commands. Be sure therefore that your
complaints be just, lest you should have one in her stead who may more justly
deserve your censure, and so make your self unhappy by your Parents fears of
having a child that is refractory. Besides, think thus with your self, that too
often complaining makes dull and careless the Auditor; and instead of
extracting compassion, it creates a jealousy of an ill disposition.

If your Governess be a Woman in years, honor her the more; if young, you may
promise your self more freedom with her; yet if I may advise, I would not have
a person too young to have such a charge, for they will have sufficient to do
to govern themselves, therefore the more unfit to govern others; besides youth
will be the more easily induced to submit rather to their Elders than their
Equals.

What I now declare, is the fruit of experience, having had too great a charge
in this nature, when I was very young; and do know how defective I was then in
my duty, since I became a Mother of Children, having now more tenderness to
youth; and can speak it knowingly, that a mild moderate way is to be preferred
before rigor and harshness, and that correction of words is better than that of
blows.

Give me leave, Gentlewomen, to wish you a good Governess, not such a one as I
have been, but as I could or would be now. I can now with a greater sense look
back upon my faults, than I could discern them when first committed: Thus much
to your Governess. Now to your Maid who is to dress you.

Be not peevish or froward to her, but sweetly accept her endeavors, and
gently admonish her of her neglects or errors; if she be good natured and
willing to please, this carriage will oblige and command a constant diligence
from her; otherwise you will cause her to serve you only for her own ends, and
with an eye-service; and whilst you are making a wry face in the Glass, she
will make another behind your back.

Be courteous to all the Servants belonging to your Parents, but not
over-familiar with any of them, lest they grow rude and saucy with you; and
indeed too much familiarity is not good with any, for contempt is commonly the
product thereof.

If you can do any Servant good in any thing, either in mitigating your Parents
anger toward them, or presenting their humble petition for them, be not slack
in so doing, for by this means you will purchase to your self both love and
honor.

If any poor body sue to you to beg in their names that which is not unfit for
them to ask, do not deny them, and God will not deny you your requests: Do good
to all, and turn not your face away from the indigent, but let your charity
extend to their relief and succor.

Be courteous to all people inferior to your quality; but in such a way, that
they may know you understand your self, and this will be a sweet kind of
commanding reverence from them, and will give you the character of a good and
humble spirit; assure your self it is better to be good than great. Majesty
mixed with modesty and humility forcibly commands the service of all; but pride
and imperiousness, though in a great person, breeds scorn and contempt in the
heart and tongue even of the meanest Peasant. If God has blessed you with birth
and fortune above others, be sure your virtue shine with greater luster than
others.

Despise not those who have not so great a portion of wit and wealth as you
possess; but think with your self, to whom the Lord, gives much he requires
much from. As God made nothing in vain, so he gives nothing in vain. That
person is not to be trusted, who does not endeavor to improve what he is
entrusted withal. If you have wisdom, boast not thereof, but give God thanks,
and use it to his glory and your own comfort.

What qualifications best become and are most suitable to a Gentlewoman.
I Have already endeavored to prove, that though Nature has differed mankind
into Sexes, yet she never intended any great difference in their Intellect.
This will evidently appear not only from those many arguments learned Cornelius
Agrippa has laid down in a particular Treatise for the Vindication of the
excellency of the Female-Sex, but likewise from the many learned and
incomparable Writings of famous Women, ancient and modern, particularly Anna
Comnena who wrote the Eastern History in Greek, a large Folio. Nor can we
without great ingratitude forget the memory of that most ingenious Dutch Lady
Anna Maria a Schurman, who was so much admired by the greatest Scholars in
Europe for her unparalled, natural and acquired parts, that there were very
few (as the great Salmasius, etc.) who did not frequently correspond with her
by Letters. Her Opusucla or smaller works are now extant, printed in Holland in
Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, in which there is a small tract, proving that a
Woman's capacity is no way inferior to man's in the reception of any sort of
learning; and therefore exhorts all Parents who are not much necessitated, not
to let their Children spin away their precious time, or pore on a Sampler, till
they have pricked out the date of their life; but rather instruct them in the
principles of those learned Tongues, whereby they may at pleasure pick-lock the
Treasuries of Knowledge contained in those Languages, and adapt them for the
conversation and discourse of most Nations.

I need not go out of our native Country to produce you Examples enough of our
own Sex for your imitation and encouragement in treading the paths of learning;
I shall forbear to speak of the incomparable worth and pregnant parts of some
Gentlewomen lately deceased, as Mrs. Philips the ingenious Translatress of
Pompey, etc. since what is extant of hers, or her Contemporaries will more at
large express their matchless merit; nor shall I eulogize or praise the living,
nominating any person, left I be thought one partially addicted to flattery.
Yet give me leave to say, I could instance not a few, who (to the glory of our
Sex, and the place of their Nativity if occasion modestly required) would not
blush to answer a Capricious Virtuoso in three of the most useful Tongues
spoken or understood, that is, Latin, French, and Italian.

I desire not to hyperbolize; it is probable they may not be so expert in the
anatomizing an Insect, or the discovery of some monstrous production, as these
Epidemical Wits are; yet for ought I know, may find out many monstrosities in
their brain, whilst they are subtly plumming the depth of their self-admired
understanding.

Now since it may hence appear, Ladies, that you have no Pygmean Souls, but as
capable of Gygantick growth as of your Male-opponents; apply your self to your
Gramar by time, and let your endeavors be indefatigable, and not to be tired
in apprehending the first principles of the Latin tongue. I shall forbear to
give you rules for attaining the perfect knowledge thereof, but leave you to
that method your Tutor or skilful Governess shall propound for your observation.

I need not tell you the vast advantages that will accrue hereby, your own
experience will better inform you hereafter. However I shall hint some; as
first, your understanding the Latin tongue will enable you to write and speak
true and good English; next, it will accommodate you with an eloquent style in
speaking, and afford you matter for any discourse; lastly, you will be freed
from the fear of rencountring such who make it their business to ransack a new
world of words to find out what are long and obscure; not regarding how
insignificant, if they carry a rattling sound with them. Thus these Fops of
Rhetoric, spawns of non-intelligency, will venture the spraining of their
tongues, and splay-footing their own mouths, if they can but cramp a young
Gentlewomans intellect.

Our English tongue is of late verymuch refined, by borrowing many words from
the Latin, only altering the termination; these you will never perfectly
understand without the knowledge of the Latin, but rather misapply or displace
them to your great discredit, although you should consult all the English
Interpreters that were ever extant.

And as our Mother Tongue has finified her expressions with the Roman dialect;
so to make them the more spruce and complacent, she has borrowed some choice
words from other Nations, more especially the neighboring French, whose tongue
you must in no sort be ignorant of, if you intend to speak with the air of the
Court, or like the quaint Oratresses of the Courtair.

It is no small benefit which will accrue to you by learning the Italian; for
by reason of our Gentries traveling into foreign parts, occasioned by our late
unhappy and inhumane homebred distractions, these two Languages are generally
spoken in England; insomuch that a Court-Lady will not be induced to esteem a
friend, or entertain a Servant who cannot speak one of them at least: and that
you may not despair of a competent knowledge of either, or both, without going
into those Countries where they are naturally spoken, know there are many
excellent Masters who teach here in London those Languages; but more especially
that sober and learned natural Italian Seignor Torriano; and that unimitable
Master of the French Tongue, Monsieur Mauger; both which have published their
Gramars; the first a large and useful Italian Dictionary also. Both these
Countries have been happy, and may be justly proud in producing so many learned
and ingenious men; so many, should I nominate them with their deserved
Encomiums, this small Treatise would swell into Volumes; I shall therefore pass
them over, but would not have you their Writings, where you shall find plenty
of every thing, which shall either tickle your fancy, or furnish your
understanding. Having thus adapted you for conversation, let me next show you
your deportment therein.

Of a Gentlewomans civil Behavior to all sorts of people in all places.
A Painter of old being about a draught of a most absolute beauty, propounded
for the accomplishment thereof half a dozen of the most exquisite and wonderful
fair Maidens he could find, that he might steal from each those charms and
features which he thought were most powerful; but I will assure you, a greater
assistance is required in the framing and fashioning of a Woman, whose
behavior should be such as to please in all companies. Whatsoever Nature can
afford, or good manners inform, come short of this purpose. In this subject the
fairest Ornaments are most necessary; among which what I have already expressed,
are highly to be prized, which with the aggregation of all the best qualities
can be desired, are the proper things, which as in their Center, must terminate
in conversation.

The first things I judge most necessary, and do wish, with Socrates, were in
you Ladies, as he desired in his Pupils, are Discretion, Silence and Modesty.
But this is too general; wherefore since conversation (after the milk) is the
first and chiefest thing, both animal as well as rational creatures do most
desire and delight in, I shall first advise, as to choice of company; next,
your carriage therein, both in gesture, look, speech and habit.

No wonder all Mankind is so generally inclined to conversation, since Life
without Society is more insupportable than Death; it is discourse makes us pass
over our tedious hours and days with delight. What a Desert would this World
seem without company! and how dangerous would it prove were we not cautious in
our election! For example is more forcible than precept; thus by ill company
you may gain a bad custom, which all good instructions shall never root out.
But should you be so prudent as not to follow their evil example; yet by
associating your self, you will inevitably contract a suspicion of being as bad
as they; this made the Philosopher say, Show me thy Companion, and I will tell
thee what thou art.

Be not easily induced to enter into discourse with strangers, for nothing
argues levity and indiscretion more than that. Consort your self with your
betters as near as you can, yet do not despise your equals, but in a most
especial manner avoid all familiarity with your inferiors; if Female, in a
little time they will thereby be drawn to slight you; if Male, they will be
encouraged to attack your honor unlawfully, or subtly insinuate themselvcs
into your affection, whereby though you are as high in fortune as honorable in
birth, you may stoop to so low a contract, that forgeting your self by the
incessant importunities of their over-blown desires, you are overcome, and so
become a grief to your friends, a shame to your selves, and a lamentable
spectacle of reproach and sorrow to that worthy Family, from whence you had
your Original.

Affect not the vanity of some, in being seen in public too frequently. Thus
many excellent Ladies have exposed themselves to the mercy of the Tempter, who
otherwise had stood impregnable in the defense of their Chastities. You think,
it may be, and intend no harm in your Promenades or walks; but by so doing, you
give too often occasion for licentious Amorists to meet with you, and may
thereby be persuaded to throw off the vail of circumspection, to give attention
to some wanton smutty story. Consult not too much with youthful blood and
beauty, lest they prove too dangerous enemies to be your Privy-Councellors.

Be not guilty of the unpardonable fault of some, who never think they do
better than when they speak most; uttering an Ocean of words, without one drop
of reason; talking much, expressing little. Much like that Woman Dr. Heylin
unhappily met withal, in his younger years, with whom he was constrained to
travel a long Journey in a Coach: So indiscreetly reserved she was at first
meeting, that tendering his devoir of a salute, (as it is customary) she would
not admit thereof; so speechless withal at first, as if a vowed resolution had
tied up her tongue to the strict observance of an everlasting silence; but the
next day, she so far presumed on the slenderness of the acquaintance, that,
though she was so silent before, she then opened upon their setting forward;
and the continual click of her tongue never ceast till the Sun was set; which
the motion of her tongue, and the Doctor's watch, kept exact time for eleven
hours; and notwithstanding her seeming modesty in refusing a kiss, did now
voluntarily prompt him to a close embrace.

As I would not advise you to be over-reserv'd, so give not too loose reins to
liberty, making pleasure your vocation, as if you were created for no other end
than to dedicate the first fruits of the morning to your Looking-glass, and the
remainder thereof to the Exchange, or Playhouse. Many of our Sex are too
blame, who have no sooner tinged their faces artificially, than some Attendant
is dispatched to know what Plays are to be acted that day; my Lady approves of
one which she is resolved to see, that she may be seen; being in the Pit or
Box, she minds not how little she observes in it, as how much to be observed
at it. If the novelty or goodness of the Play invite them not, then what Lady
Fashion-munger? or what Lord Beauty-hunter?

Shun all affectation in your behavior; for Virtue admits of no such thing in
her gesture or habit, but that which is proper, and not enforced; native or
decent, and not what is apishly introduced. Therefore since nothing better
befits you than what is your own, make known by your dress, how much you hate
formality. To this end play not the Hypocrite with your Creator, in pretending
to go to Church to serve him, whereas it is to serve your selves in the
imitation of some new fashion. That which becomes another well, may ill become
you: You deserve in your preposterous imitation, suitable correction with the
Ass in the Fable, who seeing the Spaniel fawningly to leap on his Master,
thought that the like posture would alike become and oblige him; which he
adventuring to put in practice, alarmed the whole Family, and was soundly
beaten for his unadvised folly. Affectation cannot be concealed, and the
indecency of your deportment will quickly be discovered in public Societies;
wherefore behave your self so discreetly abroad, that you may confer no less a
benefit on such as see your behavior, than you profit such as shall observe
your carriage at home. Express in public such a well-becoming Garb, that every
action may deserve the applause and imitation of all that are in your company.
Let your conceits be nimble and ready, and not tempered or mixed with
leightness, let your jests be innocent and seasonable, without the least
capriciousness; let your discourse be free without niceness; your whole
carriage delightful, and agreeable, and flowing with a seeming carelessness.
Thus much in general, let me now come to particulars.

Of the Gait or Gesture.
IT is an easy matter to gather the disposition of our heart, by the dimension
of our Gait. A leight carriage most commonly discovers a loose inclination; as
jetting and strutting, show haughtiness, and self-conceit. Were your bodies
transparent, you could not more perspicuously display your levity than by
wanton Gesticulations.

Decency, when she sees Women, whose modesty should be the Ornament of their
beauty, demean themselves in the streets, or elsewhere, more like an Actoress,
than Virtues Imitatress; she endeavors to reclaim them, by bidding them look
back to preceding times, and there they shall find Women (though Pagans) highly
censured, for that their outward carriage only made them suspected. A Vail (no
Vizard-mask) covered their face, modesty measured each step, and so circumspect
were they in general of their carriage, lest they should become a scandal or
blemish to their Sex.

Their repair to their (profane) Temples was decent, without any loose or
leight gesture; and having entered them, constant and settled was their
behavior. Quick was their pace in the dispatch of oeconomick or household
affairs, but slow in their Epicurean visits, or extravagant Gossipings. How
much more should you in these purer Christian times, affect that most which
most adorns and beautifieth? Eye your feet those bases of frailty, how they who
so proudly exalt themselves on the surface of the Earth, are but Earth; and are
the daily Porters which carry their earthly frame nearer its Earth.

With what apish gestures some walk, to discover their leightness; others like
Colosso's, discovering their ambition and haughtiness? How punctually these, as
if they were Puppets, who are beholding for their motion to some secret
Artifice? These unstaid dimensions, argue unsettled dispositions. Such as these,
discretion cannot prize, nor sound judgment praise. Vulgar opinion, whose
applause seldom receives life from desert, may admire what is new; but
discretion only that which is neat. Having thus spoken what is requisite in
Gesture, I shall next treat how the Eye ought to be governed.

Of the Government of the Eye.
AS Prudence is the eye of the Soul, so Discretion is the apple of that Eye;
but as for the natural Eyes, they are the Casements of the Soul, the Windows of
Reason: As they are the inlets of Understanding, so they are the outlets or
discoverers of many inward corruptions. A wanton Eye is the truest evidence of
a wandering and distracted mind. As by them you ought not to betray to others
view, your imperfections within; so be not betrayed by their means, by vain
objects without: This made the Princely Prophet pray so earnestly, Lord turn
away my eyes from vanity. And hence appears our misery, that those eyes which
should be the CIsterns of sorrow, Limbecks of contrition, should become the
lodges of lust, and portals of our perdition. That those which were given us
for our Assistants, should become our Assassinates.

An unclean Eye, is the messenger of an unclean Heart; wherefore confine the
one, and it will be a means to rectify the other. There are many Objects a
wandering Eye finds out, whereon to vent the disposition of her corrupt heart.

The ambitious Eye makes Honor her object, wherewith she torments her self,
both in aspiring to what she cannot enjoy; as likewise, in seeing another enjoy
that whereto her self did aspire. The covetous makes Wealth her object; which
she obtains with toil, enjoys with fear, foregoes with grief; for being got,
they load her; loved, they soil her; lost, they gall her. The envious makes her
Neighbors flourishing condition her object; she cannot but look on it;
looking, pine and repine at it; and by repining, with envy, murders her quiet
and contentment. The loose or lascivious makes Beauty her object; and with a
lecring look, or wanton glance, while she throws out her lure to catch
others, she becomes caught her self.

Gentlewomen, I am not insensible, that you frequent places of eminency for
resort, which cannot but offer to your view variety of pleasing Objects. Nay,
there where nothing but chaste thoughts, staid looks, and modest desires, should
harbor, are too commonly loose thoughts, leight looks, and licentious desires
in especial honor. The means to prevent this malady, which like a spreading
Canker, disperseth it self in all Societies, is to abate your esteem for any
earthly Object. Do you admire the comeliness of any Creature? remove your Eye
from thence, and bestow it on the contemplation of the superexcellency of your
Creator.

Put a check to the straggling disposition of your eyes, lest Dinah-like, by
straying abroad, you are in danger of ravishing. Now to preserve purity of
heart, you must observe a vigilance over every sense; where, if the Eye which
is the light of the body be not well disposed, the rest of the Senses cannot
choose but be much darkened. Be assured, there is no one sense that more
distempers the harmony of the mind, nor prospect of the Soul, than this window
of the body. It may be said to open ever to the Raven, but seldom to the Dove.
Roving affections, it easily conveys to the heart; but Dove-like innocence, it
rarely retains in the breast. The very frame of your eyes may sufficiently
inform you how to govern and guide them. For it is observed by the most curious
Oculists, that whereas all irrational Creatures have but four Muscles to turn
their Eyes round about; Man alone has a fifth to draw his Eyes up to Heaven.
Do not then depress your Eyes, as if Earth were the Center of their happiness,
but on Heaven the Haven of their bliss after Earth. To conclude, so order and
dispose your looks, that censure may not tax them with leightness, nor an
amorous glance impeach you of wantonness. Send not forth a tempting Eye to take
another; nor entertain a tempting look, darting from another. Take not, nor be
taken. To become a prey to others, will enslave you, to make a prey of others
will transport you. Look then upward, where the more you look, you shall like;
the longer you live, you shall love. From the managenagement of the Eyes let us
next proceed to Speech.

Of Speech and Complement.
THE Eye entertains it self not with more Objects than the Invention furnishes
the Tongue with Subjects; and as without Speech, no Society can subsist; so by
it we express what we are; as Vessels discover themselves best by the sound.
Let Discretion make Opportunity her Anvil, whereon to fashion a seasonable
Discourse; otherwise, though you speak much, you discourse little.

It is true (Ladies) your tongues are held your defensive armor, but you never
detract more from your honor than when you give too much liberty to that
slippery glib member. That Ivory guard or garrison, which impales your tongue,
does caution and instruct you, to put a restraint on your Speech. In much talk
you must of necessity commit much error, at least, it leaves some tincture of
vain glory, which proclaims the proud heart from whence it proceeded, or some
taste of scurrility, which displays the wanton heart from whence it streamed.

A well disposed mind will not deliver any thing, till it has rightly
conceived; but its expressions are always prepared by a well-season'd
deliberation. Think not I would have you altogether silent (Ladies) in company,
for that is a misbecoming error on the other side; but I would have you when
you do speak, to do it knowingly and opportunely.

A saying of a Philosopher will not be unworthy of your commemoration, who
seeing a silent guest at a public Feast, used these words, If thou be wise,
thou art a fool; if a fool thou art wise in holding thy peace. For as propriety
of Speech affords no less profit than delight to the Hearer, so it argues
discretion in the Speaker.

By the way, let me advise you never to tie your self so strictly to elegancy,
or ornament; as by outward trimming, the internal worth of right understanding
should be altogether forgotten, and so your expressions savor of some absurd
impertinency. This were to prefer the rind before the pith, and the sound of
words before solid reason.

That excellent precept of Ecclesiasticus, though it was spoken in general, yet
I know not to whom it is more particularly useful than to young Women. Thou
that art young, speak, if need be, and yet scarcely when thou art twice asked.
Comprehend much in few words; in many, be as one that is ignorant; be as one
that understandetb, and yet hold thy tongue.

Volubility of tongue in these, argues either rudeness of breeding, or boldness
of expression. Gentlewomen, it will best become ye, whose generous education
has estranged ye from the first, and whose modest disposition has weaned ye
from the last, in public Society to observe, rather than discourse, especially
among elderly Matrons to whom ye owe a civil reverence, and therefore ought to
tip your tongue with silence.

Silence in a Woman is a moving-rhetorick, winning most, when in words it woeth
least. If opportunity give your Sex argument of discourse, let it neither taste
of affectation, for that were servile; nor touch upon any wanton relation, for
that were uncivil; nor any thing above the Sphere of your proper concern, for
that were unequal. This will make your Discourse generally acceptable, and free
you from prejudicate censure.

Choice and general Rules for a Gentlewomans observation in Conversation with
Company.
BEfore I shall direct you in a method for civil converse in Society, it will
not be improper to give you an account of Civility, and in what it consists;
next, the definition, circumstances, and several kinds thereof; lastly, the
difference of things decent, and undecent according to custom.

Civility, or gentle plausibility, of which I intend to give you information;
is in my slender judgment nothing else but the modesty and handsome decorum, to
be observed by every one according to his or her condition; attended with a
bonne grace, and a neat becoming air. It lies not in my power to lay you down
rules and precepts for the procuring this charming air, and winning
agreeableness. Nature has reserved this to her self, and will not bestow this
inexpressible boon, but to her choicest favorites, and therefore I do not see
how Art with her utmost skill can imitate it to any purpose.

I confess this very much engages the Eye, and sometimes does very subtly
steal into the affections; but we rest too much on a trifle, if we do not
endeavor to make our selves more grateful to the eye of Reason. It is not
barely the outward ornamental dress, or becoming-address which is the true
principle and form of a complete Gentlewoman; there is something more required,
more substantial and solid, which must discover the disposition of her Soul,
rather than the gesticulations of her Body. Were it not for this, alas what
would become of a great many to whom Nature has proved an unkind Stepmother,
denying them not only convenient use of members, but has thrown on them
deformity of parts; these Corporal incommodities would make them pass for
Monsters, did not the excellency of their souls compensate those irreparable
defects; their minds being well cultivated and polite, their actions may be as
pleasing as those of the handsomest; that Lady that is so unfortunate in the
one, and so happy in the other, may say with the Poet:

Si mihi difficilis formam Natura negavit,
Ingenio formae damna rependo meae.
In English thus:

If Nature has denied me what is fit,
The want of Beauty I repay with Wit.
But whether you are afflicted with any natural or accidental deformity, or
not, you can never be truly accomplished till you apply your self to the Rule of
Civility, which is nothing but a certain Modesty or Pudor required in all your
actions; this is the Virtue I shall labor to describe, which description I
hope will be sufficient to direct you toward the acquisition of that agreeable
deportment which has the power to conciliate and procure the applause and
affection of all sorts of people.

The definition of Civility may be thus understood; it is a science for the
right understanding our selves, and true instructing how to dispose all our
words and actions in their proper and due places.

There are four circumstances which attend Civility; without which, according
to its Rules, nothing can be done exactly.

First, Ladies, you must consult your years, and so accordingly behave your
self to your age and condition.

Next, Preserve all due respect to the quality of the Person you converse
withal.

Thirdly, Consider well the time. And, lastly, the place where you are.

These circumstances relating to the knowledge of our selves, and all persons in
all conditions, having respect to time and place, are of such great
consequence, and necessary import, that if you are deficient in any of these,
all your actions (how well soever intended) are the rags of imperfection and
deformity. I shall find it somewhat difficult to prescribe the exact rules of
Civility, so as to render them compliable with all times, places, and persons,
by reason of variety of Customs: You may fall accidentally into the society of
some exotic and foreign person of quality; and what may seem civil and decent
in you, may seem undecent and ridiculous to another Nation. Nay, should you
observe and practice in your behavior what has been applauded for useful and
profitable, and commended to posterity for a Gentlewomans laudible imitation,
may decline or grow altogether contemptible in our critical and curious Age. In
short, nothing is so intrinsically decorous, but the experience or capricio of
a fantastical Lady will alter or explode. By reason of this variety, I think
it altogether requisite to treat of it as it stands at this time in reputation
among such who call themselves Christians, and accordingly reduce these Notions
into practice.

This Modesty or Civility we speak of, take it according to its truest
acceptance, is little else but Humility; which being well practiced by Persons
of Quality, is sufficient to stamp an everlasting impress on them of Virtue and
Civility. And this Humility consists not only in a moderate and submiss opinion
of our selves, but in preferring the satisfaction and commodity of other
persons before our own; and that so ingeniously, first, by not provoking or
disobliging any one; to be of this disposition, is to be not only esteemed
modest, but good-natured; the benefit that will redound to you hereby, may
incite and encourage you to the practice of this shining-Virtue: for as there
is nothing will render any one more insupportable, and lessen estimation among
all, than Insolence and Vanity; so nothing recommends more strongly to the good
opinion and affection of all, than affability and submission.

This virtue of Humility, above all others, has this great privilege in
extraordinary eminence. I have known some, who having been endued with a more
than an ordinary measure hereof, have been so far from being accused for their
formal indecencies, and other errors, which otherwise might have been objected
to their disparagement, that every one endeavored to excuse them. I have
known, on the other side, a proud and an imperious carriage (though the person
was adorned with much breeding, and beautified with all the usual ornaments of
Art, yet) was beloved by few, because displeasing to most, and hardly welcome
to any. Modesty therefore is the effect of Humility, as Civility and the
gratefulness of our actions is the effect of Modesty. To conclude this Chapter,
I shall add the difference or discrimination between things civil and uncivil,
convenient and inconvenient, decent and undecent.

For the better understanding hereof, a good natural judgment is required in a
Gentlewoman for the perception and discerning the various qualities of things;
for want of this, she may many times fall into a mistake, and commit gross
absurdities.

In the next place, it is necessary that you take an exact observation of what
is owned and established for civil or uncivil, in the place wherein you are.

Lastly, You must have a special regard, not to confound Familiarity with
Civility. To persons of Quality in a higher rank than your own, be very
attentive to what they say, lest you put them to the trouble of speaking things
twice. Interrupt them not whilst they are speaking, but patiently expect till
they have done. Have a special care how you contradict them; but if finding
them in an error, and necessity obliges you to inform them of the truth, first
beg your excuse; but if they persist therein, contend not, but refer your
further discourse till another opportunity.

When it comes to your turn to speak to intelligent Ladies, entertain them not
with things you understand but imperfectly. If you find the company more
facetious and witty than your self, leave the discourse to time, and be silent,
contenting your self to be an attentive hearer: if you will run the hazard, be
smart and pithy, comprehending much in few words; and be not the vain imitatrix
of those who affect to have the whole talk; and when their mouths are once
open, can never shut them again. If you are obliged to complement any great
person, do it as briefly as possible; and return your answers rather in
Courtships, than in any prolix discourse. Avoid especially that rudeness that
is too frequently practiced among some, who think they are never heard, unless
they come up so close to the face, as to run against your nose; in that case
you are to pray heartily their breath be sweet, or you faint irrecoverably.

Let not your visits be too long; and when you think it convenient to retreat,
and that Lady you visited will do you the honor to accompany you out of the
Chamber, do not seem to oppose it in the least; that would imply she understood
not what she went about; but you are only to testify by some little formality
how undeserving you are of that great honor.

When you enter into a room by way of visit, avoid the indiseretion and vanity
of a bold entrance without ceremony, but do it quietly and civilly; and when
you come near the person you would salute, make your complement, and render
your devoir modestly, and with some gravity, shunning all bauling noise or
obstreperousness.

The Ladies which do you the civility of rising when you come in, do not
displace, by assuming any of their Chairs; but make choice of another seat;
observing still, not to sit down till they are most in their places: it being a
great indecorum to seat your self in that case, whilst any person which gave
you that respect continues in a standing-posture.

It is an intolerable incivility to enquire what they were talking about; or
if you see any two or more discoursing or dialoguing together, to interrupt
them by hastily asking what they said last.

If you are in a mixed company, and you are qualified with those Languages (the
knowledge whereof I have advised you to prosecute), speak as little as you can:
but be sure you do not hold a discourse in that language the rest do not
understand.

It is not civil to whisper in company, and much less to laugh when you have
done. The generality of Gentlewomen are suspicious, and somewhat conscious, and
are apt to surmize what was never intended, and to apply to themselves what was
meant of another; by which means they have conceived so great a displeasure, as
never to be irradicated or removed.

I need not put you in mind of those documents you learned every day when you
were children; that is, when ever you answer negatively or affirmatively, to
give always the titles of Sir, Madam, or my Lord. It is very unhandsome, when
you contradict a person of quality, to answer him with, It is not so; if you
are necessitated thereunto, do it by circumlocution, as, I beg your Honor's
pardon: Madam, I beseech your Ladyship to excuse my presumption if I say you
mistake, etc. If any discourse you complementally, and run out into some
extravagant expressions in commendation of your person, it is a breach of
civility if you should say, Pray forbear your jeers, my back is broad enough to
bear your flouts; but say, You strangely surprise me, Sir; or, I am confident,
Sir, what you now express, is rather to show your wit and ingenuity, than to
declare any thing worth a taking notice of in me. If your love and respect to a
Lady's person, obliges you to reprove a fault in her, do not say, Madam, you
acted the part of a mad woman, in doing such a thing; but, had such a thing
been left undone, you had neither disobliged your self or friends.

Take special care of speaking imperiously to your Superiors, but rather do it
in some indefinite manner; as instead of saying, Come, you must, do, go, etc.
say, Come, Madam, if you think it convenient, or if it stand with your
Ladyships pleasure, we will go to such a place, or do such a thing; in my
opinion such a thing is requisite to be done, if it suits, Madam, with your
approbation.

As it is a great argument of indiscretion in a Gentlewoman that would be
thought prudent and wise, to talk much in praise of her Relations in the
presence of Persons of Honor; so it is very unhandsome to seem affected or
overmuch pleased in hearing others speaking largely in their commendations.

There is a certain ambitious vanity that possesses the minds of some of the
younger sort, who being nobly extracted, think they add to the honor of their
Parents, when having occasion to speak of them in honorable company, they
never mention them without their titles of Honor (though we ought always to
speak of them with respect), as, My Lord my Father, My Lady my Mother; in my
opinion every jot as ridiculous, as for young Gentlewomen of twelve years old
to call them Dad and Mam. Avoid, as a thing very improper, to send
commendations or messages to any person by your Superior; you may make choice
of your equal for that purpose, but choose rather your inferior.

In relating a story, do not trouble your Auditors with the vain repetion of Do
you understand me, mark ye, or obsrve me; and do not accustom your self to the
empty cautologies of said be, and said she.

Be backward in discourse of minding any one of any thing which may renew their
grief, or perplex and trouble their spirit.

Carelessly to nod, gape, or go away whilst one is speaking, is both an act of
incivility and stupidity; to laugh, or express any Tom-boy trick, is as bad or
worse; be careful therefore you do not pat or toy with her that sits near you,
nor do not that childish or foolish thing which may provoke laughter; left the
company, being indisposed for such idle diversious, take distaste at you, and
look upon you as the subject of their scorn.

It is very ungentile and indiscreet, to peep over any Ladies shoulder when she
is either writing or reading; or to cast your eye seriously on any one's papers
lying in your way.

Let it be your principal care, of not intruding upon persons in private
discourse, which will be discovered either by their retirement, their
whispering, or by changing their discourse upon your approach: having observed
either of these signs, make it your business to withdraw, lest you incur the
censure of indiscretion.

If the person you visit be sick, and in bed, let not your stay be long: for
sick perfons are unquiet; and being tied up to Physic, and controlled by its
operations, you may offend them by their being offensive to you: you must
remember likewise to speak low; and urge him not to answer as little as you can.

In company it is ill-becoming to break out into loud and violent laughter,
upon any occasion whatever; but worse by far, to laugh always without occasion.

Rules to be observed in walking with Persons of Honor; and how you ought to
behave your self in congratulating and condoling them.
If you walk in a Gallery, Chamber, or Garden, be sure to keep the left hand;
and without affectation or trouble to the Lady, recover that side every turn.
If you make up the third in your walk, the middle is the most honorable place,
and belongs to the best in the company; the right hand is next, and the left in
the lowest estimation. If the Lady with whom you walk, has a desire to fit
down, to the intent she may repofe her self; if you pretend any difference
between persons, it would be very ridiculous and slighting to leave her to her
rest, whilst you continued walking on.

If you understand a person for whom you have any deference or respect, meets
with a subject or occasion of rejoicing or sorrowing; Civility requires you so
to conform your self, that this Lady may be fully persuaded of your affection,
and how much you are concerned in all her affairs; and as your countenances, so
ought your habit testify the sentiment of your heart, as well as words and
actions. How preposterous would it appear to the meanest capacity, for any out
of a ridiculous nonconformity, who hearing of some joyful and succesful
accident which has befaln some Noble Family of his or her acquaintance, repair
thither with all the symptoms of sorrow and melancholy in the countenance; and
on the contrary, if it be in mourning, or under any eminent affliction, to
express all the signs of joy and satisfaction?

And now since I have touched on Clothes; I think this a fit place to give you
an account of what kind of habit is most necessary for a civil, sober, and
modest conversation.

Of Habit, and the neatness and property thereof. Of Fashions, and their
ridiculous apish imitation.
THE neatness and property of your Clothes, may be said to show a great part of
your breeding. Property, I call a certain suitableness and convenience, betwixt
the Clothes and the Person; as Civility is the framing and adapting our actions
to the satisfaction of other people. And indeed the suitableness and comeliness
of your habit, makes the greatest discovery of your virtue and discretion; for
it must consequently follow, that a ridiculous Garb is the most certain
indicium of a foolish person.

Now if you desire to be exact, you ought to proportion your Clothes to your
shape, condition, and age; and not to run into excesses, stimulated thereunto
by too much exactness, or an overvalu'd conceit. And indeed it is a great fault
in our Sex, being very much inclined to pride it in sin with what our merciful
Creator bestowed upon us to cover our shame. The fruit of a Tree made Woman
first to sin, and the leaves thereof made her first covering.

How careful ought you to be in your Habit, since by it your modesty is best
expressed, your dispositions best discovered? As none can probably imagine such
to have modest minds, who have immodest eyes; so a Maid cannot be accounted
modest whose attire openly proclaims arguments to the contrary. It matters not
whether the quality of your Habits be Silken or Woollen, so they be civil and
not wanton.

Pardon me, I am not of that Cynical and morose temper of some, who affirm all
gorgeous apparel is the attire of sin; but if it be a sin, I am persuaded the
quality of the person extenuates the quality thereof: For I read, that noble
and eminent persons were in all times admitted to wear them, and to be
distinguished by them; neither indeed is the sumptuousness of the Habit so
reprehensive, as the phantastickness in respect of form and fashion, which of
late has been so much affected, that all fashion is in a manner exiled.

I shall not trouble my self with what the glittering Bona-Robas of our times
think, but I am confident it is Civility which adds most grace, Decency which
expresses best state, and Comeliness in attire, which procures most love.
These misconceived ornaments are mere deformities to virtuous minds. Foreign
fashions are no baits to catch them; nor fantastic, rather phanatick
dressings, to delude them. Decency is their choicest livery, which sets them
forth above others gaudy pageantry.

Those whose erected thoughts sphere them in an higher Orb than this Circle of
frailty; those whose spotless affections have devoted their best services to
goodness, and made modesty the exact mold of all their actions, will not easily
be induced to stoop to such worthless brainsick lures.

Now such of you whose generous descent, as it claims precedence of others, so
should your virtuous demeanor in these four things which I have already spoken
of, viz. Gesture, Look, Speech, and Habit, improve your esteem above others. In
Gesture, by appearing humbly where ever you are; in Look, by disposing it
demurely; in Speech, by delivering it moderately; in Habit, by attiring your
self modestly.

Frown not on me, Ladies, that I seem to be thus severe in reproving the excess
of Apparel; yet I dot not deny, there is a kind of privilege in youth for
wearing fashionable Clothes, Jewels and Diamonds, which Nature (who does
nothing in vain) has provided; and whatsoever some maliciously may whisper to
the contrary; the use of Apparel is to dignifie the Wearer, and add more beauty
to the Creature, provided the Apparel be not above the dignity of her that
wears it, nor does exceed the Arithmetic of her Revenues.

But whilst I seem to give you (young Gentle-women) some allowance of liberty
in your Clothing; for indeed it is impossible there should be youth without
some vanity; yet I know not how to excuse the vain custom now so much in
fashion, to deform the face with black Patches, under a pretense to make it
appear more beautiful. It is a riddle to me, that a blemish should appear a
grace, a deformity be esteemed a beauty: I am confident were any of them born
with those half Moons, Stars, Coach and Horses, and such like trumpery, by
which a Lady becomes a stranger to her self, as well as others, she would give
more money to be freed from them, than a seven years costly expense, in
following the fashion, would amount to.

It must not be denied but that the indulgence of Nature has left a greater
liberty to Women, than unto Men, in point of curiosity in Apparel. A privilege
which men ought not to envy them, because whatever imbellishment she bestows on
her own beauty, is to be supposed an effect of that great love she would show
to man, by endeavoring and studying how to show her self most complaisant,
grateful, and acceptable to man. And yet Nature has limited this privilege of
Women with strict Laws. The dictate of this natural Law is, That no Woman use
any habit or form of attire but that which contributeth to her truest beauty.
For since the fall of their first Parent has subjected them to the necessity
of apparel, they must ever remember to wear it as an ornament of decency, and
not of vanity. But if we shall examine the present fashions by the standard of
this rule, we shall find, to the amazement of sober thoughts, a newborn Law of
Custom to have defaced the reverend old Law of Nature.

I cannot imagine whence our Ladies borrowed that monstrous and prodigious
custom of patching their faces; if they did borrow it from the French, they did
ill to imitate such, who it may be made use of the fashion out of pure
necessity, and not novelty; having French-pimples, they needed a
French-plaister. Mere need taught us at first to build houses, and wear
Clothes, which afterward were used for ornament: Who then can tax their
witty-pride (although justly we may the imitation of the English Gentry
therein) which could so cunningly turn botches into beauty, and make ugliness
handsome? I know not but that the fashion of wearing Farthingals of old, were
politickly invented to hide the shame of great bellies unlawfully puffed up; and
of late the large-topt stockings with supporters to bear them up, were a good
excuse for some hot gallants, in that they stradled so much when they walked the
streets; whereas, poor Gentlemen, they could do no otherwise.

I have read, that the Indians did accustom themselves to print the volume of
their bodies all over with Apes, Monkies, and other Beasts. I know not whether
our Ladies have endeavored to epitomize their Works, and abridg them into the
narrow compass of the Title Page of their own faces. But sure I am, that they
are much beholding to the ingenious Artist, whose skilful hand much exceeded
his who writ the Ten Commandments and Paternoster (to be legibly read) within
the compass of a penny. Such a one is able to vie with Wonder it self, since he
can pass a Camel through the eye of a Spanish Needle without a Miracle; and
contract a Coach and Horses into the narrow dimension of four Gnats.

By the impertinent pains of this curious Facespoiling-mender, the Exchanges
(for now we have three great Arsenals of choice Vanities) are furnished with a
daily supply and variety of Beautyspots (with many other things, whose names
are only known to the Inventer and Buyer); and these Patches are cut out into
little Moons, Suns, Stars, Castles, Birds, Beasts, and Fishes of all sorts; so
that their Faces may be properly termed a Landscape of living Creatures. The
vanity and pride of these Gentlewomen has in a manner abstracted Noah's Ark,
and expressed a Compendium of the Creation in their Front and Cheeks. Add to this
the gallantry of their garb, with all the ornamental appurtenances which rackt
Invention can discover, and then you will say, there wanted nothing except it
be that which a Roman Writer said was wanting to the accomplishments of Poppaea
Sabina (Mistress to bloody Nero), That she was defective in nothing but a
virtuous mind.

Mediocrity in most things is the best rule for your observation: As in mode
and fashion you are to avoid profusion, so you are to shun singularity: The
one, as well as the other, will render you ridiculous. I would not advise you
to be obstinate, and altogether oppose the torrent of the fashion then in
being: for example, should you now wear a Farthingal, or narrow brim'd Hat with
a long crown, and a strutting Ruff (it is not long since such things were in
fashion), a Jack-pudding could not attract more Boys after him, than would
follow you. Or should you always keep in one fashion, you would be laughed at
for your singularity, almost as much as others for their profuseness.

To avoid this incommodious extravagancy, incline somewhat to the Mode of the
Court (which is the source and foundation of fashions); but let the example of
the most sober, moderate, and modest, be the pattern for your imitation.

Those who are too remote in the Country, or hindered by any other impediment
to resort to Court, let them acquaint themselves (if they can) with some
prudent person who is frequently there, and by her pattern and direction order
your habit with reference, as near as may be, to your quality, age, and estate.
Your own wit and ingenuity may so contrive your clothes, as to retrench a great
part of the luxury of a fashion, and reduce it to suit with your convenience,
modesty, and Christian deportment.

I have already declared, your habits ought to be adapted to your conditions;
it is easy to judge of the truth of this Rule, if you consider how preposterous
you would appear (being nobly born) dressed in the habit of a Dairy-maid, or for
a Scullion to be arrayed in the dress of a Ladies daughter; this would be
looked on no other than a Masquerade, or a Christmas Mumming. As it is very
unfit to suit your selves unsuitable to your condition, so it is likewise as to
your age. For an old woman to habit her self as youthfully as a Gentlewoman of
fifteen, is as improper as to sing a wanton song at a Funeral. For a young
Woman to clothe her self in the habit of a grave and aged Matron is as
preposterous as to weep and mourn at a merry Gossiping.

Proportion therefore your Clothes to your bodies, and let them be proper for
your persons. I could not forbear to laugh heartily, when heretofore I saw a
little man lost in a great Band; nor can I now abstain from laughter, when I
see a man of small stature with a monstrous broad brim'd Hat; I have often
thought the Hat has walked alone, and that the narrow Breeches and short Coat
shrunk, for fear of the Hats greatness, into an exact fitness for an overgrown
Monky or Baboon.

Agreeableness therefore ought to be exact, and adequate both to age, person
and condition, avoiding extremities on both sides, being neither too much out,
nor in the fashions.

Now lest I have been too rigid concerning Apparel, and so have justly incurred
the displeasure of some Ladies I am ever bound to respect for those singular
favors they have from time to time conferred on their poor Servant; I shall
endeavor to make them amends for it, without wronging my Conscience, in this
ensuing Chapter.

Of New Fashions.
MAN at first was left at liberty to be his own Tailor, and had the whole World
to furnish him with all sorts of Materials, both for Stuff and trimming, and so
made his Clothes as he thought fit and convenient.

Hence it is apparent that he was the first fashion-inventer; some of his
posterity imitated him, and others them, and we others; since then fashions
seem to be left at liberty, I think no wise man should reprehend them, unless
inconvenient and ridiculous.

If Women's palats are not confinable to one sort of meat, why should their
fancies to one particular mode? Nature is the Mistress of Variety; shall we
then be so ungrateful to her various kindnesses, as to rest in the the
enjoyment of one individual? She made all things for strength, use and
ornament; and shall we be so slothful and negligent, as not to contemplate
their worth, and applaud them in our due use?

It is true, we never heard any thing of Apparel till sin sent man in an errant
to seek for it; at first it was chosen for a covering for our first Parents
shame; but their progeny beside that, have since found a decency therein. And
certainly good Clothes are not displeasing to Heaven; had they been so, God
would never have commanded the Garments of his Highpriests to be glorious and
beautiful; not only to be rich in the outward Materials, but richly wrought
with the best eye-pleasing colors, and refulgent with precious Stones and
Jewels.

The Peacocks starry train we cannot look on, but we must incline to
admiration; and that the glory thereof may not be useless, Nature has given
that bird an excellent art to spread it to the best advantage.

I may be bold to say, Ladies, you sin more in the sordidness of your Apparel,
than in its splendour; and you will not lose in your reputations, by being
clothed a little above your rank, rather than altogether beneath it. A Jeweller
when he would enhanse the price of his Commodity, sets his precious Stones to
the best advantage; and the richer they are, the greater is his endeavor and
care to grace them in the luster. Its true, a Diamond will sparkle in the dark,
and glitter, though unpolisht or ill set; yet we think the excellency of the
cut, or water, can never cast abroad its rays too much.

Let me ask the gravest and most prudent Matron living, whether it be not only
convenient, but necessary, that as occasion shall require, young Gentlewomen
should be finer than ordinary, as upon their addresses and visitings of persons
of quality, on days of public feasting and joy, and on solemn and sacred
meetings. Socrates, though a serious and sour Philosopher, being asked the
question, Why one day he was so unusual fine and brave? answered, That he might
appear handsome to the handsome. We ought in our Clothes to conform our selves
to those with whom we do converse.

Besides, we commonly guess at the fatness and goodness of the soil, by the
grass which we see upon the ground. Since most then judge by outward
apparencies, it is requisite to provide for a good estimation, even from
externals.

I have heard of some profuse Gallants, who having spent all their money, yet
prudently and for credit, have kept good Clothes to their back, otherwise they
might have hoop'd for a Dinner, and looked sor a Lodging.

If there were not a due respect to be had, according to rank and quality, what
use would there be of Scarlet, Velvet, Cloth of Tissue, Silk, Satin, Jewels,
and precious Stones of all sorts? They would be accounted superfluous, and
rather burdens than benefits to the World.

This is a maxim undeniable, That Nature does nothing in vain. Certainly then
she had never produced such multiplicity and quantity of excellent and
inestimable things, but for our use and ornament: Yet withal remember the
saying of Demonax, who seeing a Gallant brave it in the fashion, and insult
with his Feather, whispered these words in his ear, The Silk and fine Clothes
you boast of, were spun by a worm, and worn by a Beast, before they came on
your back, and yet the Worm continues still a Worm, and a Beast a Beast; and
the Bird in whose tail was the Feather you wear, is a Fowl still. There are
some persons whose Gallantry of Apparel can never hide the fool from them,
whilst others do grace and are graced by every thing they wear. Yet still we
must conclude, that comely Apparel is to be preferred before what is costly or
conceited.

Some choice Observations for a Gentlewomans Behavior at Table.
Gentlewomen, the first thing you are to observe, is to keep your Body strait
in the Chair, and do not Iean your Elbows on the Table. Discover not by any
ravenous gesture your angry appetite; nor fix your eyes too greedily on the
meat before you, as if you would devour more that way than your throat can
swallow, or your stomach digest.

If you are invited abroad, presume not on the principal place at the Table,
and seem to be persuaded with some difficulty to be seated, where your Inviter
has chosen in his opinion the most convenient place for you. Being a Guest,
let not your hand be first in the Dish; and though the Mistress of the Feast
may out of a Complement desire you to carve, yet beg her excuse, though you are
better able to do it than her self.

In carving at your own Table, distribute the best pieces first, and it will
appear very comely and decent to use a Fork; if so touch no piece of meat
without it.

I have been invited to Dinner, where I have seen the good Gentlewoman of the
House sweat more in cutting up of a Fowl, than the Cookmaid in rosting it; and
when she had soundly beliquor'd her joints, has sucked her knuckles, and to
work with them again in the Dish; at the fight whereof my belly has been three
quarters full, before I had swallowed one bit. Wherefore avoid clapping your
fingers in your mouth and lick them, although you have burnt them with carving.
Take these more especial Rules, according to the newest and best mode for
Carving.

If Chicken-broth be the first dish, and you would help your principal Guest
with a part of the Chicken, the best piece is the breast; the wings and legs
are the next; and of them, the general opinion of most is, That in all boiled
Fowl the legs are looked on as chief.

As to all roasted Fowl, those which are curious in the indulging their
pallats, do generally agree, that flying wild-fowl are much tenderer than
tame-fowl, and quicker of concoction; such as scratch the earth, and seldom use
the wing, the legs are to be preferred before any other part; the wings and
breasts of wild-fowl are best.

The ordinary way of cutting-up a roast-fowl, is by dividing the four principal
members, beginning first with the legs; and be not tedious in hitting the
joints, which you may avoid by well considering with your eye where they lie,
before you exercise your knife.

The best piece to carve to the best in the company, of the larger sort of
Fowl, as Capons, Turkies, Geese, Duck, and Mallard, Pheasant, Dottril, Cock of
the Wood, etc. is the piece on the breast, observing always to cut it long-ways
toward the rump. But do not cut your Oranges long-ways, but cross.

Since in Butchers-meat there are few ignorant of the best pieces, it will be
to little purpose to give you an account of them in this place; for my design
is to treat of that which is not commonly known: however, without deviating
from my intention, take these remarks which follow.

In boiled or roasted Beef, that which is interlin'd or interlarded with fat,
is most to be esteemed; and the short ribs being most sweet and tender, is to
be preferred before any other.

Cut a Loin of Veal in the middle, and present the Nut or Kidney as the best
part in the whole Joint. Thrust your knife into a Leg of Mutton a considerable
depth, above the handle, to let out the gravy; and begin to cut on the inside,
as if you intended to split it; in the joint on the other side, is a little
bone fit to be presented, and in great estimation among the Curious.

I heard of a Gentleman coming from hunting, and falling into a friend's house,
complained he was extremely hungry; the Mistress thereof replied, That she was
very sorry she had nothing to accommodate him with but a cold Leg of Mutton.
His appetite being very sharp, made him commend that Joint beyond any other;
whereupon it was brought: but finding that choice bone remaining still
untoucht, refused to eat a bit: being demanded the reason, Madam, said he, the
sharpness of my stomach shall never make me feed uncleanly; for I am confident
they must be Bores and Clowns that first handled this Leg of Mutton, or else
their breeding would have taught them not to have left untoucht the choicest
bit in the whole joint. I cannot but applaud the jest, but I must condemn the
rudeness of the Gentleman.

A Shoulder of Mutton is to be cut semicircularly, between the handle and the
flap; the Pope's eye (as it is commonly called) is a choice bit both in Leg and
Shoulder.

In a roasted Pig, the dainty most approve the ears and divided Jaws, the neck
and middlepiece, by reason of the crackling. In Hares, Leverets, and Rabbets,
the most esteemed (called the Hunts-mans piece) is by the sides of the tail;
and next to that, is the back, legs, and wings, improperly so termed.

Some who esteem themselves the Virtuosi for rarity of diet and choice
provision, esteem (in Fish) the head, and what is near about it, to be the
best: I must acknowledge it in a Cods-head, with the various appurtenances,
dressed Secundum artem, sparing no cost; such a dish in Old and New Fish street,
has made many a Gallant's pocket bleed freely. As also, I approve it in a
Salmon or Sturgeon, the Jowles of both being the best of the Fish; likewise in
Pike or Carp, where note, the tongue of this last-named is an excellent morsel;
but in other Fish you must excuse the weakness of my knowledge. In Fish that
have but one long bone running down the back (as the Sole), the middle is to be
carved without dispute; there is none so unacquainted with fare, to contradict
it.

If Fish be in paste, it is proper enough to touch it with your knife; if
otherwise, with your fork and spoon, laying it hansomely on a plate with sauce,
and so present it. But should there be Olives on the board, use your spoon, and
not your fork, lest you become the laughter of the whole Table.

All sorts of Tarts, Wet-Sweat-meats, and Cake, being cut first in the dish
wherein they were served to the Table, are to be taken up at the point of your
knives, laid dexterously on a plate, and so presented: and whatever you carve
and present, let it be on a clean plate; but by no means on the point of your
knife, or fork, nor with your spoon. If any one carves to you, refuse it not,
though you dislike it.

Where you see variety at a Table, ask not to be helped to any dainty; and if
you are offered the choice of several dishes, choose not the best; you may
answer, Madam, I am indifferent, your Ladyships choice shall be mine.

Be not nice nor curious at the Table, for that is undecent; and do not mump
it, mince it, nor bridle the head, as if you either disliked the meat, or the
company. If you have a stomach, eat not voraciously; nor too sparingly, like an
old-fashion Gentlewoman I have heard of, who because she would seem (being
invited to a Feast) to be a slender eater, fed heartily at home (before she
went) on a piece of powder'd-beef and cabbage; by-chance a fleak thereof fell
on her Ruff, and not perceiving it, went so where she was invited; being
observed to eat little or nothing, a Gentlewoman asked her why she did not eat;
Indeed, Madam, said she, I did eat (before I came forth) a whole pestle of a
Lark to my Breakfast, and that I think has deprived me of my appetite. The
witty Gentlewoman presently replied, I am easily induced to believe you fed on
that Bird, for on your Ruff I see you have brought a feather of him with you.
Thus your nicety may be discovered by means you dream not of, and and thereby
make your self the subject of public laughter.

On the other side, do not baul out aloud for any thing you want; as, I would
have some of that; I like not this; I hate Onions; Give me no Pepper: But
whisper softly to one, that he or she may without noise supply your wants.

If you be carved with any thing (as I said before) which you do not like,
conceal (as much as in you lies) your repugnancies, and receive it however:
And though your disgust many times is invincible, and it would be insufferable
tyranny to require you should eat what your stomach nauseates; yet it will show
your civility to accept it, though you let it lie on your plate, pretending to
eat, till you meet with a fit opportunity of changing your plate, without any
palpable discovery of your disgust.

If you are left to your own liberty, with the rest, to carve to your self, let
not your hand be in the dish first, but give way, to others; and be sure to
carve on that side of the dish only which is next you, not overcharging your
plate, but laying thercon a little at a time. What you take, as near as you can
let it be at once; it is not civil to be twice in one dish, and much worse to
eat out of it piece by piece; and do not (for it savours of rudeness) reach
your arms over other dishes to come at that you like better. Wipe your spoon
every time you put it into the dish, otherwise you may offend some squeamish
stomachs. Eat not so fast, though very hungry, as by gormandizing you are ready
to choke your selves. Close your lips when you eat; talk not when you have meat
in your mouth; and do not smack like a Pig, nor make any other noise which
shall prove ungrateful to the company. If your pottage be so hot your mouth
cannot endure it, have patience till it be of a fit coolness; for it is very
unseemly to blow it in your spoon, or otherwise.

Do not venture to eat Spoon-meat so hot, that the tears stand in your eyes, or
that thereby you betray your intolerable greediness, by bewraying the room,
besides your great discomposure for a while afterward. Do not bite your bread,
but cut or break what you are about to eat; and keep not your knife always in
your hand, for that is as unseemly as a Gentlewoman who pretended to have as
little a stomach as she had a mouth, and therefore would not swallow her Pease
by spoonfuls, but took them one by one, and cut them in two before she would
eat them.

Fill not your mouth so full, that your cheeks shall swell like a pair of
Scotch-bag-pipes; neither cut your meat into too big pieces.

Gnaw no bones with your teeth, nor suck them to come at the marrow: Be
cautious, and not over-forward in dipping or sopping in the dish; and have a
care of letting fall any thing you are about to eat, between the plate and your
mouth.

It is very uncivil to criticize or find fault with any dish of meat or sauce
during the repast, or more especially at another's Table; or to ask what such a
Joint or such a Fowl cost; or to trouble your self and others with perpetual
discourses of Bills of Fare, that being a sure sign of a foolish Epicure.

It is very uncomely to drink so large a draught, that your breath is almost
gone, and are forced to blow strongly to recover your self: nor let it go down
too hastily, lest it force you to an extreme cough, or bring it up again, which
would be a great rudeness to nauseate the whole Table; and this throwing down
your liquor as into a Funnel, would be an action fitter for a Jugler than a
Gentlewoman. If you sit next a Person of Honor, it will behove you, not to
receive your drink on that side; for those who are accurately bred, receive it
generally on the other.

It is uncivil to rub your teeth in company, or to pick them at or after meals,
with your knife, or otherwise; for it is a thing both indecent and distastful.

Thus much I have laid down for your observation in general; wherein I am
defective as to particulars, let your own prudence, discretion, and curious
observation supply.

Rules for a Gentlewomans Behavior at a Ball.
Ladies, it is presumed you know the grounds of Dancing, else your resort to a
Ball amongst well accomplished Gentlewomen, would not only be improper but very
much hazard your repute and good esteem among them; and as you can dance, so I
would have you understand the rules and formalities of dancing, which are
practiced in that place.

If you are skilful in this faculty, be not difficultly persuaded to make a
demonstration of your art. A fault is found in many of whom if you request a
Dance or Song, they will be deaf to all your importunities; but may be when you
are out of humor, and have left them to their own liberty, will Dance so long
till they have tired themselves and the Spectators; and Sing till they have
neither voice, nor their Auditors ears.

I say, if you have skill, be not over-conceited thereof, lest it lead you into
the error of engaging in some Dance you do not understand, or but imperfectly.

If you are persuaded to Dance, and though you alledg a great many Apologies to
the contrary, yet when you find your self obliged thereunto, by no means
refuse. For it is much better to expose your self to some little disorder in
being complacent, than be suspected of pride.

Rules to be observed by a Gentlewoman in Vocal and Instrumental Music.
Do not discover upon every slight occasion you can sing or play upon any
Instrument of Music; but if it be known to any particular friend in company,
whom you have a special respect for, and he or she persuade you to sing, excuse
your self as modestly as you may; but if your friends persist, satisfy their
desires, and therein you will express no part of ill breeding; your prompt and
ready compliance thereunto shall serve you against censure; whereas, a
refractory resistance savours of one that makes a livelihood of the profession,
and must expect to have but small doings if there be no better recommendation
than that distastful kind of morosity.

Use not your self to hemming or hauking, a foolish custom of some,
endeavoring to clear their throat thereby; nor be not too long in tuning your
Instrument.

Having commenced your Harmony, do not stop in the middle thereof to beg
attention, and consequently applause to this trill, or that cadence, but
continue without interruption what you have begun, and make an end so as not to
be tedious, but leave the Company an appetite: As you would desire silence from
others being thus applied, be yon attentive, and not talkative when others are
exercising their harmonious voices.

Let the Songs you make choice of be modest, yet witty, and ingenious; and
because there are so many, which though they may please the ear, yet may
corrupt good manners; let me give you this caution to have a care.

Of wanton Songs, and idle Ballads.
Let your prudence renounce a little pleasure for a great deal of danger. To
take delight in an idle vain Song without staining your self with the obscenity
of it, is a thing in my mind almost impossible; for wickedness enters
insensibly by the ear into the Soul, and what care soever we take to guard and
defend our selves, yet still it is a difficult task not to be tainted with the
pleasing and alluring poison thereof.

Physicians endeavor to persuade the wiser sort of men, as well as ignorant
and credulous women, That a Mother fixing steadfastly her eye on a Picture, she
will secretly convey the Complexion, or some other mark on the Infant; from
hence we may be induced to believe, that lascivious and wanton expressions
contained in some Songs and Ballads may have the same effect in our
imagination, and do most frequently leave behind them some foul impressions in
our spirits.

The reading these wanton things do heat by little and little; it insensibly
takes away the horror and repugnancy you ought to have to evil; by this means
you acquaint your self so thoroughly with the image of Vice, that afterward you
fear it not though you meet with Vice it self.

Licentiousness is not bred in a moment, at one and the same instant; so the
contagion of loose Songs seizes by degrees on the heart; they may be said to
work on the minds of youth as seed in the ground, it first appears only above
the surface of the Earth, but every day afterward adds to its growth till it
be fit for the sickle.

Nay more, these Songs of wantonness will breed in you a more than fitting
boldness, which will put you on the confidence of practicing what you read or
sing. Assure your self, if you admit of a familiarity with these things, your
innoceny will be in daily danger.

You may easily believe this to be truth, if you consider the multiplicity of
vanity and trumpery which stuff these Ballads; how an amorous or rather
foolishly fond Virgin forsook Kindred and Country, to run after a stranger and
her Lover. In another you find how craftily two Lovers had plotted their
private meetings to prosecute their unlawful enjoyments; and the Letters that
pass between for the continuation of their affection; which straight ways makes
the Reader up to the ears in Love. In the one is expressed the Constancy of two
Fools one to the other; in the other, what trouble, what hazard, and what not,
they run into, to ruin themselves, distract their Parents, and leave a stain on
their own reputations, never to be washed out.

These are the things which contain cunning Lessons to learn the younger sort
to sin more wittily; and therefore no judicious person can comprehend with what
reason these dangerous Songs and Sonnets can be justified.

The Lacedaemonians prohibited Plays, because Adulteries were exhibited; then
why should such Pamphlets be permitted where such dishonest actions, lascivious
examples, and extravagant passions are maintained? Shall it be said, that
Christians have less love for Virtue than Infidels?

Ladies, accuse me not of too much severity, in endeavoring to take away this
too much accustomed delight in singing wanton, though witty Sonnets: I say
excuse me rather, since I aim at nothing more than your welfare. I know your
inclinations as you are young and youthful, tend rather to these things, than
what is more serious; and are apt to read those Books which rather corrupt and
deprave good manners than teach them.

Some may be so vain as to delight more in a Comedy than a Sermon, and had
rather hear a Jack-pudding than a Preacher: This made a sober Philosopher
complain, he had fewer Scholars than such a one of meaner parts, and a greater
Libertine; because there are more who haunt the School of Voluptuousness, than
that of Virtue, and we love them better who flatter and make us merry, than
those who tell us the truth, and the danger, if we follow not her precepts.

Wherefore I cannot allow of any sort of Poetry, though it be ever so
ingenious, if Vice lurk therein to do you harm; and wheresoever you find Vice,
let it be your intention and strong resolution to fight against it, and throw
aside all those instruments and implements, which will but learn you to fin
with the greater dexterity. This is one vanity the younger sort incline to, and
there are a great many more which our Sex (and to their shame) are prone to
follow, take a brief account of them.

Of the Vanities some young Ladies and Gentlewomen are too prone to prosecute.
I need not speak of the vanity of Gentlewomen in overmuch affecting bravery,
since we find it thoroughly ingrafted in most of them; so that we may as easily
take off their skins from their bodies, as this vanity from their minds.

If this were to be observed only in some particular Court-Ladies, it were
something excusable; but this is an innate humor, an original sin which
Gentlewomen bring into the world with them; the tincture of which infirmity
their Baptism washes not off. From hence proceeds the Babel or confusion of
Habits, insomuch that of late there is neither order observed, nor distinction;
a Chambermaid finified on a Festival or Holiday, may be taken for her
Mistress, and a Citizens Wife mistaken for a Court-Lady.

Where shall we find any so regular as to follow the dictates of Modesty and
Mediocrity, so that the most fevere cannot blame their superfluities, nor the
more favorable accuse their defects? A young Gentlewoman well accomplished, is
like a Star with five rays, Devotion, Modesty, Chastity, Discretion and
Charity; such Women whose composition is made up of these, seem to have been
molded upon the Celestial Globes, by the hands of Cherubims; so excellent are
their Virtues, and so sweet their deportments; they are in their Houses as the
Sun in his proper Sphere: Should I attempt to represent their worth, I might
sooner find poverty in the Center of all the rich Ore and precious stones of
the Earth, than want of merit in this subject.

Were all our Sex of the same temper, by being inhabitants of this Earth, they
would speedily convert it into a Heaven. But alas, too many there are who every
day must be dressed up like Idols, as if they intended thereby to be
worshipped. Their Filles de Chamber have more to do in attending their
Beauties, than some have in fitting and rigging out a Navy. Their Glass with
studied advantages takes up the whole morning, and the afternoon is spent in
visits.

And indeed should a man come into some Ladies Chambers unacquainted with the
Furniture that belonged to them, and seeing them lie on the Table, having never
seen such vanities before, would think them the coverings and utensils of some
Creature of a monstrous and prodigious bulk, and that there was Mercery enough
to furnish a little City, rather than the body of a little Lady. They may be
fitly compared to some Birds I have seen, who though they have but little
bodies, yet have abundance of Feathers. And though they seem to load themselves
with variety of things, yet they do but seem to cover what they should disclose
to none; and though they have but little flesh, they will show as much of it as
they can. It was a true saying of one, and very applicable to this purpose; I
know not what may be reserved for the eyes of a chaste Husband, when almost
through all Markets where they go, the secret parts of his Wives body are
exposed, as if they were ready to be delivered to the best bidders.

Moreover, how dangerous is it for young Gentlewomen to affect a small Waste,
thinking that the most exquisite proportion? endeavoring by strait-lacing to
be as slender in the middle as the Strand-May-pole is tall in its height. I am
sure they are big enough to be wiser, who never think themselves finer, than
when the Girl with her span can make a girdle. I know, Gentlewomen, that the
inconveniences which attend this affectation, do not proceed altogether from
you, or that you are in the fault, but your Mothers or Nurses: but did they
know how speedily and wilfully they destroy you by girding your tender bodies,
certainly they would prove kinder Mothers, than be your cruel Murderers. For by
this means they reduce your bodies into such pinching-extremities, that it
engenders a stinking breath; and by cloistering you up in a Steel or
Whale-bone-prison, they open a door to Consumptions, with many other dangerous
inconveniences, as crookedness: for Mothers striving to have their daughters
bodies small in the middle, do pluck and draw their bones awry; for the
ligatures of the back being very tender at that age, and soft and moist, with
all the Muscles, do easily slip aside. Thus Nurses, whilst they too straightly do
lace the breasts and sides of children on purpose to make them slender, do
occasion the breast bone to cast it self aside, whereby one shoulder does
become bigger and fuller than the other.

Though I would not have too great a restriction laid on your bodies, yet I
would not have them by inconsiderate looseness run out into a deformed
corpulency, like the Venecian-Ladies, who seldom lace themselves at all,
accounting it an excellency in proportion to be round and full-bodied: and that
they may attain that (merely supposed) comeliness, if Nature incline them not
to be somewhat gross or corpulent, they will use art, by counterfeiting that
fullness of body, by the fullness of garments. Thus you see, that in all things
(except Piety) Mediocrity, or the Golden-mean, is to be observed.

Of a young Gentlewoman's fit hours and times for their Recreation and
Pleasure, and how to govern themselves therein.
THE chief, thing that you ought to consider, is, how to govern and behave your
selves in your Pastimes: Wisdom therein must be your guide; and the chief rule
it can teach you, is, To shun all pleasures which are vicious; and in the
reception of those which are lawful, exceed not the Rule, nor Moderation; which
consist, first, in not giving offense, scandal, damage, or prejudice, to your
associates or others: Next, that it be without injury to your health,
reputation, or business. Lastly, Let your Recreation be with moderation.

You must by no means make pleasure your business, but by the enjoyment thereof
return with more alacrity and cheerfulness to your business: Young Ladies may
use it, but not abuse it, which they never do more than in the excess thereof;
for it softneth and weakneth the vigor both of Soul and Body, it besotteth the
best complexions, and banisheth the principal Virtues.

If pleasure be taken as it was at first provided, it will be taken without a
sting; but if you exceed either in measure or manner, you pollute the purer
stream, and drink your own destruction. The Heathen of old did put a check on
Men and Women, forbidding them to let loose the reins to all the corrupt and
mistaken pleasures of this life, much more should Christians forbear the
inordinate enjoyment of them.

Above all, these pleasures are most to be commended, which in every respect
are so lawful, that they leave in the Conscience no private check behind them
to upbraid the sense for the unlawful using of them. He that plungeth himself
into a puddle, does but engage himself thereby to an after washing, to purge
that filth away he contracted by that imprudent action. Or would you be so mad
to feed on that you are certain will make you sick in the eating? Almighty God
would never have allowed you the desire of pleasure, nor the faculties to enjoy
it, if he had not designed that with decency you should use them. An action of
this kind is but natural, and will not be unlawful unless it be found to run
into excess attended with unlawful circumstances.

There is so much corruption adhering to the use of pleasure, by exceeding the
measure, mistaking the manner, misplacing the time; that although Recreations
be lawful in themselves, yet if they be circumstanced amiss, they are not
expedient.

Recreations and pleasures are indisputably lawful, if you are not irregular in
measure, manner, or time; had they been otherwise our most wise and merciful
Creator would never have made them so distinct in their kinds, nor so many in
their number. All the several tastes in food and fruit were intended to please
the palate, as well as satisfy the appetite. Of all the beautiful and
pleasant fruits in Paradise there was but one only Tree excepted. From hence it
may be concluded, Mankind may enjoy those delights which they have a
well-grounded inclination unto, with this proviso, they abuse them not.

Before you do or act any thing, examine well the sequel; if that be clear the
present enjoyment will be accompanied with content, otherwise it will end in
repentance.

What Recreations and Pleasures are most fitting and proper for young
Gentlewomen.
REcreations which are most proper and suitable to Ladies, may be rankt under
four principal heads, Music, Dancing, Limning and Reading. Of Dancing I have
already leightly treated on in the directions for your deportment at Balls;
however this I shall say further of it, that though the Romans had no very
great esteem for it, as may appear by Salusts speaking of Sempronia, She danced
better than became a virtuous Lady; yet the mode and humor of these times look
upon it not only as a generous and becoming property, but look upon Gentility
ill bred if not thoroughly acquainted therewith; and to speak the truth it is the
best and readiest way to put the body into a graceful posture; behavior must
of necisity hault without it; and how will you blush when you come into a mixed
society, where each person strives to show her utmost art and skill in Dancing,
and you for the want thereof must stand still, and appear like one whose body
was well framed but wanted motion, or a soul to actuate it.

In the next place, Music is without doubt an excellent quality; the ancient
Philosophers were of the opinion, that Souls were made of Harmony; and that
that Man or Woman could not be virtuously inclined who loved not Music,
wherefore without it a Lady or Gentlewoman can hardly be said to be absolutely
accomplished.

Limning is an excellent qualification for a Gentlewoman to exercise and please
her fancy therein. There are a many foreign Ladies that are excellent Artists
herein; neither are there wanting Examples enough in his Majesty's three
Kingdoms of such Gentlewomen whose indefatigable industry in this laudible and
ingenious Art may run parallel with such as make it their profession.

Some may add Stage Plays as a proper recreation for Gentlewomen; as to that
(provided they have the consent of Parents or Governess) I shall leave them to
make use of their own liberty, as they shall think convenient.

I am not ignorant that Stage Plays have been much envied at, and not without
just cause; yet most certain it is, that by a wise use, and a right application
of many things we hear and see contained therein, we may meet with many
excellent precepts for instruction, and sundry great Examples for caution, and
such notable passages, which being well applied (as what may not be perverted)
will confer no small profit to the cautious and judicious Hearers. Edward the
Sixth the Reformer of the English Church, did so much approve of Plays, that he
appointed a Courtier eminent for wit and fancy to be the chief Officer in
supervising, ordering, and disposing what should be acted or represented before
his Majesty; which Office at this time retains the name of Master of the
Revels. Queen Elizabeth, that incomparable Virtuous Princess, was pleased to
term Plays the harmless Spenders of time, and largely contributed to the
maintenance of the Authors and Actors of them.

But if the moderate recourse of Gentlewomen to Plays may be excused, certainly
the daily and constant frequenting them, is as much to be condemned.

There are an hundred divertisements harmless enough, which a young Lady may
find out, suitable to her inclination; but give me leave to find out one for
her which has the attendance of profit as well as pleasure, and that is
Reading.

Mistake me not; I mean the reading of Books whose subjects are noble and
honorable. There are some in these later days so Stoical, that they will not
allow any Books to Womankind, but such as may teach them to read, and the
Bible. The most severe of them do willingly permit young Gentlewomen to
converse with wise and learned men; I know not then by what strange nicety they
would keep them from reading their Works. There are a sort of Religious men in
foreign parts, who do not debar the people from knowing there is a Bible; yet
they prohibit them from looking into it.

I would fain ask these sower Stoics what can be desired for the ornament of
the mind, which is not largely contained and expressed in Books; where Virtue is
to be seen in all her lovely and glorious dresses, and Truth discovered in what
manner soever it is desired. We may behold it in all its force, in the
Philosophers; with all its purity in faithful Historians; with all its beauty
and ornaments in golden-tongu'd Orators, and ingenious Poets.

In this pleasing variety (whatsoever your humor be) you may find matter for
delectation and information. Reading is of most exquisite and requisite use, if
for nothing but this, that these dumb Teachers instrust impartially. Beauty, as
well as Royalty, is constantly attended with more flatterers than true
informers. To discover and acknowledge their faults, it is necessary that they
sometimes learn of the dead what the living either dare not or are loath to tell
them. Books are the true discoverers of the mind's imperfections, as a glass
the faults of their face; herein shall they find Judges that cannot be
corrupted with love or hate. The fair and the foul are both alike treated,
having to do with such who have no other eyes but to put a difference between
Virtue and Vice. In persuading you to read, I do not advise you should read all
Books; advise with persons of understanding in your choice of Books; and fancy
not their quantity but quality. For why should ye seek that in many which you
may find in one? The Sun, whilst in our Hemisphere, needs no other light but
its own to illuminate the World. One Book may serve for a Library. The reading
of few Books, is not to be less knowing, but to be the less troubled.

Of the guidance of a Ladies love and fancy.
I Suppose you, virtuous Ladies and Gentlewomen to whom I direct this
Discourse, yet know, that though you are victoriously seated in the Fort of
Honor, yet Beauty cannot be there planted, but it must be attempted. However I
would have you so constantly gracious in your resolves, that though it be
assaulted, it cannot be soiled; attempted but never attainted.

How incident and prone our whole Sex is to love, especially when young, my
blushes will acknowledge without the assistance of my tongue; now since our
inclination so generally tend to love and fancy, and knowing withal how much
the last good or evil of our whole lives depend thereon, give me leave to trace
them in all or most of their Meanders, wherein you will find such suitable
instructions as will give you for the future safe and sound direction.

Fancy is an affection privily received in by the eye, and speedily conveyed to
the heart; the eye is the Harbinger, but the heart is the Harbourer.

Look well before you like; love conceived at first sight seldom lasts long,
therefore deliberate with your love, lest your love be misguided; for to love
at first look makes an house of misrule.

Portion may woo a Worldling, Proportion a youthful Wanton, but it is Virtue
which wins the heart of Discretion; admit he have the one to purchase your
esteem, and the other to maintain your Estate; yet his breast is not so
transparent as to know the badness of his disposition; if you then take his
humor on trust, it may prove so perverse and peevish, that your expected
Heaven of bliss may be converted into an Haven of insupportable crosses.
Themistocles being asked by a Nobleman, Whether he had rather marry his
Daughter to a vicious Rich man or an Honest poor man? returned this answer,
That he had rather have a man without money than money without a man. Whence it
was that prudent Portia replied, being asked, When she would marry? then said
she, When I find one that seeks me, and not mine.

There is no time requires more Modesty from a young Gentlewoman, than in
wooing-time; a shamefast red then best commends her, and is the most moving
Orator that speaks in her behalf. Like Venus Silver Dove she is ever brouzing
on the Palm of Peace, while her Cheeks betray her love more than her tongue.

There is a pretty pleasing kind of wooing drawn from a conceived yet concealed
fancy-Might they choose, they would converse with them freely, consort with them
friendly, and impart their truest thoughts fully, yet would they not have their
bashful loves find discovery.

Phillis, to willows, like a cunning Flyer
Flys, yet she fears her Shepherd should not spy her.
Whatever you do be not induced to marry one you have either abhorrency or
loathing to; for it is neither affluence of estate, potency of friends, nor
highness of descent can allay the insufferable grief of a loathed bed.
Wherefore (Gentlewomen) to the intent you may show your selves discreetest in
that, which requires your discreetion most, discuss with your selves the parity
of love and the quality of your Lover, ever reflecting on those best endowments
which render him worthy or unworthy of your greatest estimation. A discreet eye
will not be taken only with a proportionable body, or smooth countenance; it is
not the rind but the mind that is her Loadstone.

Justina a Roman Maid, no less nobly descended than notably accomplished,
exclaimed much against her too rigid fate in being married to one more rich
than wise: And good reason had she, being untimely made by his groundless
jealousy a sad tragic spectacle of misery. For the whiteness of her neck was
an object which begot in him a slender argument of suspect, which he seconded
with rash revenge.

Let deliberation then be the Scale wherein you may weigh love with an equal
poize. There are many high consequent-circumstances which a discreet Woman will
not only discourse, but discuss, before she enter into that hazzardous though
honorable state of Marriage.

Disparity in descent, fortunes, friends, do often beget a distraction in the
mind. Disparity of years breeds dislike, obscurity of descent begets contempt,
and inequality of fortunes discontent.

If you marry one very young, bear with his youth, till riper experience bring
him to a better understanding. Let your usage be more easy than to wean him
from what he affects by extremity. Youth will have his swing; time will
reclaim, and discretion will bring him home at last. So conform your self to
him as to confirm your love in him, and undoubtedly this conjugal duty, mixed
with affability, will completely conquer the moroseness of his temper. If he be
old, let his age beget in you the greater reverence; his words shall be as so
many aged and time improved precepts to inform you; his actions as so many
directions to guide you; his kind rebukes as so many friendly admonitions to
reclaim you; his Bed you must so honor, as not to let an unchaste thought
defile it; his Counsel so keep, as not to trust it in any others breast; be a
staff in his age to support him, and an hand upon all occasions to help him.

If he be rich, this shall not or must not make you proud; but let your desire
be, that you both employ it to the best advantage. Communicate to the Needy,
that your Wealth may make you truly happy. That is a miserable Wealth which
starves the Owner. I have heard of one worth scores of thousands of pounds who
bought billets, not for fuel but luggage; not to burn them and so warm
himself, but to carry them on a frosty morning up stairs and down, and so heat
himself by that laboring exercise. Wherefore let me persuade you to enjoy your
own, and so shun baseness; reserve a provident care for your own, and so avoid
profuseness.

Is your Husband fallen to poverty; let his poor condition make you rich; there
is certainly no want, where there wants no content. It is a common saying, That
as Poverty goes in at one door, Love goes out at the other; and love without
harbor falls into a cold and aguish distemper; let this never direct your
thoughts, let your affection counterpoize all afflictions. No adversity should
divide you from him, if your vowed faith has individually tied you to him.

Thus if you expostulate, your Christian constant resolves shall make you
fortunate. If your fancy be on grounded deliberation, it will promise you such
good success, as your Marriage-days shall never fear the bitter encounter of
untimely repentance, nor the cureless anguish of an afflicted conscience.

Now as I would have you, Gentlewomen, to be slow in entertaining, so be most
constant in retaining. Lovers or Favorites are not to be worn like Favers; now
near your bosom, or about your wrist, and presently out of all request. Which
to prevent, entertain none so near your heart, whom you observe to harbor in
his breast something that may deserve your hate.

Carefully avoid the acquaintance of Strangers; and neither affect variety nor
glory in the multiplicity of your Suitors. For there is no greater argument of
mutability add leightness. Constant you cannot be where you profess, if change
you do affect. Have a care, vows deliberately advised, and religiously
grounded, are not to be slighted or dispensed with. Before any such things are
made, sift him, if you can find any bran in him; task him, before you tie your
self to take him. And when your desires are drawn to this period, become so
taken with the love of your Choice, as to interpret all his actions in the best
sense; this will make one Soul rule two hearts, and one heart dwell in two
bodies,

Before you arrive to this honorable condition all wanton fancy you must lay
aside, for it will never promise you good success since the effect cannot be
good where the object is evil. Wanton love has a thousand devices to purchase
a minutes penitential pleasure. Her eye looks, and by that the sense of her
mind is averted; her ear hears, and by it the intention of the heart is
perverted; her smell breathes, and by it her good thoughts are hindered; her
mouth speaks, and by it others are deceived; by touch, her heat of desire upon
every small occasion is stirred, never did Orlando rage more for his Angelica
than these Utopian Lovers for their imaginary shadows.

These exorbitancies we must endeavor to remedy; and that therein we may use
the method of art, we must first remove the cause, and the effect will follow.
Let me then discover the incendiaries of this disorderly passion, next the
effects arising from them, and lastly their cure or remedy.

The original grounds of this wanton fancy, or wandering phrenzie, are included
in these two lines.

Sloth, Words, Books, Eyes, Consorts, and luscious fare,
The lures of lust, and stains of honor are.
For the first, sententious Seneca says, He had rather be exposed to the
utmost extremities Fortune can inflict on him, than subject himself to Slotb
and Sensuality. For it is this only which makes of Men, Women; of Women,
Beasts; and of Beasts, Monsters.

Secondly, Words corrupt the Disposition; they set an edg or gloss on depraved
liberty; making that member offend most, when it should be employed in
profiting most.

Thirdly, Books treating of leight Subjects, are Nurseries of wantonness;
remove them timely from you, if they ever had entertainment by you, lest like
the Snake in the Fable, they annoy you.

Fourthly, Eyes are those windows by which death enters. Eve looked on the
fruit before she coveted; coveting, she tasted; and tasting, she perished;
place them then on those objects, whose real beauty make, take them, and not on
such vanities which miserably taint them.

Fifthly, Consorts are thieves of time, which will rob you of many precious
opportunities. Choose then such Consorts of whom you may have assured hope, that
they will either better you, or be bettered by you. Choose such whom you may
admire when you see and hear them; when you see their living-Doctrine, and hear
their wholesome instruction.

Lastly, Luscious fare is the fuel of inordinate desires, which you must
abstain from, or be very temperate in, if you intend to have your understanding
strengthened, virtue nourished, and a healthy bodily Constitution.

The next thing we are to insist upon, is, the evil effects of this wanton
fancy, many may be here inserted, might I not be taxed with prolixity, and
terrify the Reader with examples of too much horror and cruelty. But if you
would understand them, our late Italian Stories will afford you variety, for
the satisfaction of your curiosity; where indiscreet love closes her doleful
Scene with so miserable an Exit, as no Pencil can express any picture more to
life than an Historical line has drawn out the web of their misfortunes.

Now to cure this desperate malady (though to you, Gentlewomen, I hope the cure
is needless, being void of all such violent distempers) the best and most
sovereign receipt, is to fortify the weakness of your Sex with strength of
resolution. Be not too liberal in the bestowing your favors; nor too familiar
in public converse.

Make a contract with your eyes not to wander abroad, lest they be caught in
coming home. Treat net of love too freely; play no waggish tricks with the
blind boy; he has a dangerous aun, though he has no eyes; sport not with him
that may hurt you; play not with him that would play on you. Your sports will
turn to an ill jest, when you are wounded in earnest; let the Fly be your
Emblem.

So long the foolish Fly plays with the flame,
Till her leight wings are sindged in the same.
Be watchful; there are many snares which students in Loves mysteries have laid
to entrap Female credulity. How many are there can tip their tongues with
Rhetorical protestations, purposely to gull a believing creature, for the
purchase of an unlawful pleasure; which no sooner obtained, then the person
slighted and left alone to bemoan her irrecoverable Iost honor? With more
safety therefore ought you to suspect, than too rashly to affect; and be sure
you check your wild fancy by time, lest a remediless check attend your choice.
Repentance comes too late at the Marriage-night.

And yet I cannot commend your extraordinary coolness in affection, flighting
all, as if none were worthy of your choice. The extremes of these two
indisposed fancies ought to be seasoned with an indifferent temper.

Now the difference betwixt a wise and a wild love is this; The one ever
deliberates before it loves; and the other loves before it deliberates.

There are a sort of wild Girls who compute their riches by the quantity of
their Suitors. I have heard of a couple of Maids of different temper, who
contending with one another, said the one, I have such and such virtuous and
wealthy relations. I but (replied the other) I have more Suitors than thou have
friends. More shameless you (answered the other) unless you mean to set up an
house of entertainment. Such an one as this, never cares for more than to be
married; if she may but see that day, it accomplisheth her content; though she
have but one Comical- day all her life: Yea, it is as well as can be expected
from their hands, if they attain unto that style without some apparent foil.
Such as these I could wish, to prevent the worst, they were married betimes,
lest they mar themselves before time.

To you then kind-hearted, Gentlewomen, am I to recommend some necessary
cautions; the careful observation of which I hope will prevent that danger
which threatens the goodness of your Sex and Natures. The Index of your hearts
you carry in your eyes and tongues; for shame learn silence in the one, and
secrecy in the other. Give not the power to an insulting Lover to triumph over
your weakness; and which is worse, to work on the opportunity of your
leightness. Rather damm up those portels which-betray you to your enemy; and
prevent his entry by your vigilance. Keep home and straggle not, lest by
gadding abroad you fall into Dinah's danger and mishap. Let not a strayed
thought prove the Traitor to your Innocence. Check your roving fancy; and if it
use resistance, curb it with greater restraint.

And now a word or two to you cov (...) dies, whom either coldness of nature
has be numbed, or coyness has made subtle to dissemble it. You can look and
like, and yet turn away your head from what you love most. No object of love
can take you, till it overtake you.

You may be modest, and spare a great deal of this coyness; yet so conceal and
smoothly palliate your love, as your Lover may not despair of obtaining it.
Indifferent courtesies you may show without leightness, and receive them too in
lieu of thankfulness.

Have a special regard to your Honor, which is of an higher esteem than to be
undervalued. Leight occasions are oftentimes grounds of deep aspersions.
Actions are to be seasoned with discretion, seconded by direction, strengthened
with instruction, lest too much rashness bring the undertaker to destruction.

In the Labyrinth of this Life, many are our Cares, mighty are our Fears,
strong our Assailants, weak our Assistance; and therefore we had need have the
Brazen-wall within us, to fortify us against these evil occurrents. The scene
of your life is short; so live then that your noble actions may preserve your
memory long. It was the advice of Seneca to his Friend, Never to do any thing
without imagining a Cato, a Scipio, or some other worthy Roman was present. To
second his advice (which may confer on your glorious actions eternal praise),
Set always before your eyes, as an imitable mirror, some good Woman or other,
before whom you may live, as if she eyed and continually viewed you. There is
no scarcity of Examples of such famous Women, who though weak in Sex and
condition, yet parallels to Men for Charity, Chastity, Piety, Purity, and
virtuous Conversation. It will not be amiss here in this place to insert some
few eminent patterns for your Imitation.

The Gentlewomans Mirror, or Patterns for their imitation of such famous Women
who have been eminent in Piety and Learning.
REvisit those ancient Families of Rome, and you shall find those Matrons make
a Pagan State seem Morally Christian. Octavia, Portia, Caecilia, Cornelia, were
such, who though dead, their actions will make their memories live perpetually:
Nor were Niostrata, Corvina and Sappho, Women less famous for Learning, than
the other for blameless-Living. Neither have our modern times less flourished
with feminine Worthies, as might be illustrated with several eminent instances,
were there not already of them so many Panagyricks already extant.

It is said of Dorcas, She was full of good works and alms which she did. Yea
even the Coats and Garments which she made when living, were shown the Apostle
as arguments of her industry, and memorials of her piety. Hence it was that
Saint Jerome counseled the holy Virgin Demetrias to eschew idleness; exhorting
her when she had finished her Devotion, she should work with her hands after
the commendable example of Dorcus; so that by change of works the day might
seem less tedious, and the assaults of the Devil less grievous. And know, that
this Demetrias was not one whom poverty did enforce to such actions of
necessity, but one honorably descended, richly endowed, powerfully friended.

Devout mention is made of zealous Anna, who made frequent recourse to the
Temple. Of whom to her succeeding memory the Scripture records, that after
her tears devoutly shed, her prayers sincerely offered, her religious vows
faithfully performed, she became fully satisfied: thus sighing she sought,
seeking she obtained, and obtaining she retained a grateful memory of what she
received.

Queen Esther, with what fervency and zeal did she make Gods cause the progress
of her course, desiring nothing more than how to effect it, which was seconded
with a successful conclusion? because begun, continued, and ended with devotion.

Neither was Judith backward in zeal, faith armed her with resolution, and
constancy strengthened her against all opposition: Prayer was her armor, and
holy desires her sole attendants. Nazianzen reports of his sister Gorgonia,
that by reason of the incessancy of her prayers, her knees seemed to cleave to
the Earth. Gregory relates, that his Aunt Thrasilla being dead, was found to
have her Elbows as hard as horn, which became so by leaning to a Desk, at which
she usually prayed. Such as these deserve your imitation, who prayed and
obtained what they prayed for, they lived and practiced what they sought for;
they died and enjoyed what they so long sighed for.

Should you consider what troops of furious and implacable enemies lies in
Ambuscado for you; how many Soul-tempting Sirens are warbling notes of ruin to
delude you; what fears within you, what foes without you, what furies all about
you, you would not let one minute to pass undedicated to some good employment.

The commendable and admired Chastity of Penelope must not be forgot, which
suffered a daily siege; and her conquest was no less victorious than those
Peers of Greece, who made Troy their triumph. Estimation was her highest prize;
Suitors she got; yet amidst these was not her Ulysses forgot. Long absence had
not estranged her affection; youthful consorts could not move in her thoughts
the least distraction; neither could opportunity induce her to give way to any
leight action. Well might famous Greece then esteem her Penelope of more
lasting fame than any Pyramid that ever she erected. Her unblemished esteem was
of purer stuff than any Ivory Statue that could be reared.

Nor was Rome less beholden to her Lucretia, who set her honor at so high a
price, that she held death too leight to redeem such a prize.

Though force, fright, foes and furies gazed upon her,
Those were no wounds but wonders to her honor.
The presence of a Prince no less amorous than victorious, could not win her;
though with him, price, prayer and power, did jointly woo her. Well deserved
such two modest Matrons the choice embraces of two such heroic Champions as
might equal their constant loves with the tender of their dearest lives.

There were seven Milesian Virgins, who at such time as the Gauls raved and
raged every where, subjecting all to fire and faggot, deprived themselves of
life, lest hostile force should deprive them of their honor. I have read of
two Maidens living in Leuctra, a Town in Boeotia, who having in their Fathers
absence hospitably entertained two young men, by whom made drunk with Wine,
they were deflowred that very night; the next morning conceiving a mutual
sorrow for their lost Virginity, became resolute Actors in their own bloody
Tragedy.

We may draw nearer home, and instance this Maiden-constancy in one of our own.
It was not long since there lived within the Walls of London a notable spirited
Girl, who notwithstanding she frequented places of public concourse boldly,
discoursed freely, expressed her self in all assays forwardly, yet so tender
was she in the preservation of her honor, that being on a time highly courted
by a spruce and finical Gallant, who was as much taken with the height of her
spirit, wherewith she was endowed, as he preferred it before the beauty of an
amorous face, wherewith she was not meanly enriched. She presently apprehending
the looseness of his desires, seemingly condescended; so that the business might
be so secretly managed, as no occasion of suspicion may be probably grounded.
In order hereunto a Coach is provided, all things prepared, the place appointed
where they shall meet, which for more privacy must be the Country. Time and
place they observed; but before she would admit him to her embraces, she told
him (calling him aside) that she would never consent to any such thing with any
man, unless she had first tried his valor in the field; and to that purpose
she had furnished her self with a Sword, and therefore bid him draw, he
smilingly refused, as thinking she was in jest, but seeing by her home-passes
how carnestly she prosecuted his life, he was constrained to draw; but this
Virago, which was metal to the back, disarmed him in an instant, and had like
to have made this a bloody combat, instead of an amorous conflict. Our amazed
Gallant not knowing what to think, say, or do, was at last compelled to beg his
life of her; in granting which, she bestowed on him plentifully her Kicks,
advising him ever after to be more wary in the attempting a Maidens Honor.

Excellent was the answer of the Lacedemonian Wives, who being courted and
tempted to lewd and immodest actions, made this reply, Surely we should give
way to this your request, but this you sue for, lies not in our power to grant;
for when we were Maids, we were to be disposed of by our Parents; and now being
Wives, by our Husbands.

Lastly, (that I may avoid prolixity) what singular mirrors of vidual
continency and Matron-like modesty were, Cornelia, Vetruria, Livia and Salvina?
Now what may you suppose did these Pagan Ladies hold to be the absolute end
whereto this tender care of their reputation aspired chiefly, and wherein it
most cheerfully rested? it was not riches, for these they contemned, so their
honor might be preserved: Certainly there was implanted in them an innate
desire of moral goodness, mixed with an honest ambition, so to advance their
esteem during life, that they might become Examples to others of a good moral
life, and perpetuate their memories after death.

Your ambition, Gentlewomen, must mount more high, because your Conversation is
most heavenly. It is immortality you aspire to, a lower orb cannot hold you;
nothing else may confine you.

Of Marriage, and the duty of a Wife to her Husband.
MArriage is an holy and inviolable bond; if the choice on both sides be good
and well ordered, there is nothing in the world that is more beautiful, more
comfortable. It is a sweet society, full of trust and loyalty. It is a
fellowship, not of hot distempered love, but endeared affection; for these two
are as different as the inflamed fit of an high Fever, from the natural heat
of a sound and healthy body. Love in the first acceptance is a distemper, and
no wonder then that Marriages succeed so ill, which have their original from
such disordered amorous desires. This boiling affection is seldom worth any
thing. There are these two Essentials in Marriage, Superiority and Inferiority.
Undoubtedly the Husband has power over the Wife, and the Wife ought to be
subject to the Husband in all thing. Although the Wife be more noble in her
extraction, and more wealthy in portion, yet being once married is inferior to
her Husband in condition. Man, of human-kind, was Gods first workmanship; Woman
was made after Man, and of the same substance, to be subservient and assisting
to him.

Though the power of an Husband in this Kingdom extends it self farther than it
is commonly exercised, yet something more moderate than in foreign parts.
Amongst the Romans the Husband had power to kill the Wife in four cases;
Adultery, suborning of Children, counterfeiting false Keys, and drunkenness.

It is customary among the Indians (but I do not therefore approve of it as
lawful) that when the Husband dies, the death of the Wife immediately follows.
This is not only practiced by the public Laws of the Country, but often times
with such ardent affection, that the Wives (for they allow Polygamy) will
contend one amongst the other who shall first sleep with their departed
Husband. Though this custom I cannot only reject as unreasonable, but cruel and
horrible; so I cannot but applaud those Wives (as they are in duty bound) who
affectionately and patiently content themselves to accompany their Husbands in
all conditions, in adversity as well as prosperity.

Many Examples hereof we may find at home as well as abroad; though in these
late depraved and corrupted times there are not so many as may justly be
desired. Lentulus being exiled by a Decree of the Roman Senate into Sicily, his
loving Wife Sulpitia sold all, and followed him thither. Ipsicrates followed
her vanquished Husband and King Mithridates throughout all extremities,
notwithstanding she was advantagiously persuaded to the contrary.

Theagena Wife to Agathocles showed admirable constancy in her Husbands
greatest misery; showing her self most his own, when he was relinquisht and
forsaken of his own; closing her resolution with this noble conclusion, She had
not only betaken her self to be his companion in prosperity, but in all
fortunes which should befall him.

Conform your selves to this mirror, and it will reform in you many a dangerous
error. Thus if you live, thus if you love, honor cannot choose but accompany
you living; much comfort attend you loving, and a virtuous memory embalm you
dying.

The more particular duties of a Wife to an Husband, are first, to have a
greater esteem for him than for any other person; and withal, to have a settled
apprehension, that he is wife and prudent. That Woman that will entertain mean
and low thoughts of her Husband, will be easily induced to love another, whom
she ought not to affect. On this good esteem depends a great part of the Wives
obedience, who will be apt to run into extravagancies when she is once
possessed of the weakness of her Husbands understanding: She is to give honor,
respect, and reverence to her Husband; so have the wisest ever done; and those
which do it not, betray their indiscretion; with reverence she is to express
her obedience in all lawful things; and apply and accommodate her self (as much
as in her lies) to his humor and disposition.

You must be mindful of what you promised your Husband in Marriage; and the
best demonstration thereof will be in your carriage; honor and obey, and love
no man's company better than his.

Be quiet, pleasant, and peaceable with him, and be not angry, when he is so;
but endeavor to pacify him with sweet and winning expressions; and if
casually you should provoke him to a passion, be not long ere you show some
regret, which may argue how much you are displeased with your self for so
doing; nay bear his anger patiently, though without a cause.

Be careful to keep your house in good order, and let all things with decency
be in readiness when he comes to his repast; let him not wait for his meals,
lest by so staying, his affairs be diorder'd or impeded. And let what ever you
provide be so neatly and cleanly dressed, that his fare, though ordinary, may
engage his appetite, and disingage his fancy from Taverns, which many are
compelled to make ufe of by reason of the continual and daily dissatisfactions
they find at home.

Show respect and kindness to what Friends he brings home with him; but more
especially to his Relations; for by this means he will find your love to him by
your respect to them; and they will be obliged to love you for your own as well
as his sake.

Suffer not any to buz in your ears detracting stories of him, and abhor it in
your Servants; for it is your duty to hide his faults and infirmities, and not
detect them your self, or suffer them to be discovered. Take them for your
greatest enemies who persuade you against your Husband; for without question
they have some dangerous design in it. Those whom God has joined together, let
no man put asunder; Cursed then is that instrument which occasions their
separation.

Breed up your Children in as much or more obedience to him than your self; and
keep them in so much awe that they show no rudeness before him, or make any
noise to his disturbance. Make them show him all awful regard, and keep them
sweet, clean, and decent, that he may delight himself in them.

Let him see your love to him in your care for them; educating and bringing
them up in the knowledge of Religion, with their Learning.

Be careful to manage what money he does trust you with, to his and your own
credit; abuse not the freedom you have of his purse, by being too lavish; and
pinch not the Guts of your Family at home, that you may pamper yours abroad; or
throw away that money in buying trifles, which shall evidence your vanity as
well as luxury.

To govern an House is an excellent and profitable employment; there is nothing
more beautiful than an Household well and peaceably governed; it is a profession
that is not difficult; for she that is not capable of any thing else, may be
capable of this.

The principal precepts that belong to the frugal ordering and disposing
Houshold-affairs may be compremis'd under these heads.

First to buy and sell all things at the best times and seasons.

Secondly, to take an especial care that the goods in the house be not spoiled
by negligence, of servants, or otherwise.

Let me counsel you not only to avoid unnecessary or immoderate charges, but
also with a little cost make a great show; but above all suffer not your
expense to exceed the receipt of your Husbands income. There is a Proverbial
saying, That the Masters eye makes the Horse fat; I am sure the active
vigilance of a good and careful Wise is the ready way to enrich a bad Husband.

Of Women's behavior to their Servants, and what is to be required of them in
the house, or what thereunto appertains.
IF by a thorough inspection and experience, you find you have a faithful
Servant, give her to understand you are not insensible thereof by your loving
carriage, and kind acknowledgment of her fidelity, and frequently find out some
occasions to give her some little encouragements to engage her continuance
therein; do not dishearten her in her duty, by often finding fault where there
is little or none committed, yet be not remiss in reproving where she does
amiss.

If you find you have a bad or unfaithful Servant (as now adays there are too
many, more than ever) whom you cannot either by fair means or foul reclaim: Vex
not nor fret at what you see is remediless, but first making her thoroughly
sensible of her errors, give her fair warning to provide for her self, and
convenient for your own affairs; and do not (as a great many much to blame)
give too ill a character of her, which will raise you little benefit, although
it may lay the basis of her utter ruin; but rather be silent if you cannot
speak good, which course I should think was sufficient to work on the greatest
stupidity for a future amendment. Though a bad Servant, detain not the wages,
nor any part that is justly due, for the Labourer is worthy of his hire.

Be not too passionate with your Servants; and look narrowly to them, that they
wast or lavish nothing, lest thereby you impair your estate, and so purchase
the repute of a carelefs and indiscreet Women.

If you sind that they affect bravery too much, and presume to wear what
misbecomes their present condition, rebuke them mildly into a moderation for
their future advantage, and the credit of the Family wherein they are.

Let not the business of the House take them clearly off the service of God,
but let them so relieve one the other in their duties, that they may be
sometimes hearers of a good Sermon; and do not forget to make enquiry how they
improve by what they hear at Church, and in your own house.

Let every Servant, Men and Women have their daily work appointed them, which
must be duly exacted, and taken account of, either by your self, or some
superior servant constituted by you for that purpose; and let not your constant
and painful care of your worldly affairs exclude your greatest concern, the
things of Heaven, and therefore appoint certain hours, Morning and Evening for
public prayers for the Family, and let not any Servant be absent, unless some
extraordinary occasion hinder.

As near as you can, keep one set and certain time, with good orders observed
for the Table, in which be free, yet frugal. Let there be a competent allowance
for the Servants, that they may have no just cause to complain; nor so much
superfluity as that they may entertain a sort of loose Gossips in corners, the
very bane and spoil of Servants.

Invert not the course of Nature (as too many do of late) by converting day
into night, and night into day; but keep good hours for your repose, that your
Servants may be the better disposed for the next days labor. Observe due times
for washing and smoothing up the Linen quickly, that it may not be thrown up
and down, and be mildewed and spoiled, and so be fit for nothing but the wash
again; and forget not to dearn or mend it every week, that it may not run to
tatters before it be half worn; and do not suffer any Servant to be idle.

If you have a Dairy, see it be kept clean and neat. Let not the Corn in the
Granary must and spoil for want of skreening and turning.

Let your Servant see that your Beasts and Poultry be fatted in their due
season; and that your Stable keep no more Horses than your own.

In the Brew House, that the first Wort be not drunk up by idle people, and so
the smallness of your Beer become a disparagement to your Family.

In the Bake-house, that your Dough which should be for the finest Bread at
your Table, be not half consumed in making of Cakes. That there be always Bread
enough for the Servants before hand, for it is a point of ill Huswifry to eat
hot or very new Bread.

In the Kitchen, that there be no Necessaries wanting, nor no wast or spoil
made, but that the Meat be salted, and spent in due time.

In the Parlour, let the Fire be made, and the Cloth laid: in due time, that
the Cook may have no excuse for the spoiling of his Meat.

In the Chambers, that every thing be kept cleanly; the Beds often turned, the
Furniture often beaten in the Sun, and well brushed.

Every Saturday take an account of every Servants layings out; and once a Month
an account of all the expenses of the whole House.

In the Buttery and Cellars, that the Butler be careful of not making every
idle fellow drunk that comes to the House, and so squander away without credit
the Wine, Ale, and Beer.

Now because you will have frequent occasions for Banquets, in the entertaining
of persons of Quality, I think it not unfit for a Gentlewoman to learn the art
of Preserving and Candying; of which I shall according to the Profession I make
thereof give you an ample account or instruction in some Chapters following.
Frugality will persuade you to learn these cxcellent Arts, for in the constant
use of the product thereof, you will save much for Sweetmeats, you will make
much cheaper than you can buy them, and more commendable.

Other things you will meet withal worthy of your observation, of which this
is no mean one, most requisite and in no wise dishonorable; that is, your
understanding how to dress Meat as well as eat it, that your Servants may be
guided by you, and not you by them.

Gentlewomen, I will appeal to you as persons competent to judge whether the
right understanding of these things be not altogether requisite and necessary;
and as to your divertisements, none carries in it more profit than Cookery; now
to the intent I may be instrumental to the making up a complete and
accomplished Gentlewoman, give me leave here to set you down such A-la-mode
instructions, as may perfectly inform you in every thing that belongs to the
commendable art of Cookery.

Terms for Carving all sorts of Meat at Table.
BEfore we shall treat of the body of Cookery; I think it fit by way of
Prologue or Introduction, to acquaint you with those proper terms in Carving,
which are used abroad and at home, by the curious students in the art of
Carving; take them thus as follows.

In cutting up all manner of small Birds, it is proper to say, Thigh them; as
thigh that Woodcock, thigh that Pidgeon; but as to others say, Mince that
Plover, Wing that Quail, and wing that Patridge, Allay that Pheasant, Untach
that. Curlew, Unjoint that Bittern, Disfigure that Peacock, Display that Crane,
Dismember that Hern; Unbrace that Mallard, Frust that Chicken, Spoil that Hen,
Sauce that Capon, Lift that Swan, Rear that Goose, Tire that Egg. As to the
flesh of Beasts, Unlace that Coney, Break that Deer, and Leach that Brawn.

For Fish; Chine that Salmon, String that Lamprey, Splat that Pike, Sauce that
Plaice, and Sauce that Tench, Splay that Bream, Side that Haddock, Tusk that
Barbel, Culpon that Trout; Transon that Eel, Tranch that Sturgeon, Tame that
Crab, Barb that Lobster.

Quaint Directions for the Carving all manner of FOWL.
IF you will Lift a Swan, slit her right down in the middle of the Breast, and
so clean through the back, from the neck to the rump, and so divide her equally
in the middle without tearing the flesh from either part; having laid it in the
Dish with the slit-sides downwards, let your sauce be Chaldron a part in
Sawcers.

You must Rear or Break a Goose roasted, by taking off the Legs very fair; then
cut off the Belly-piece round close to the lower end of the Breast; lace her
down with your knife clean through the Breast on each side, a thumbs breadth
from the Breast Bone; then take off the wings on each side, with the flesh
which you first laced, raising it up clear from the bone, then cut up the merry
thought, and having cut up another piece of flesh which you formerly laced,
then turn your Carcass, and cut it asunder the Backbone, above the Loyn-bones;
then take the rump-end of the Backbone, and lay it at the fore-end of the
merry-thought, with the skinny side upward; then lay your Pinions on each side
contrary, set your Legs on each side contrary behind them, that the bone-end
of the Legs may stand up cross in the middle of the Dish; and the wing-Pinions
on the outside of them; put under the wing-Pinions on each side the long slices
of flesh which you did cut from the Breast Bone, and let the ends meet under
the Leg-bones.

If you would cut up a Turkey or Bustard, raise up the Leg very fair, then open
the Joint with the point of your sharp Knife, yet take not off the Leg; then
lace down the Breast on both sides, and open the Breast-pinion, but take it not
off; then raise up the Merry-thought betwixt the Breast Bone and the top of the
Merry-thought, lace down the flesh on both sides of the Breast Bone, and raise
up the flesh called the Brawn, turn it outward on both sides, but break it not
nor cut it off; then cut off the Wing-pinion at the Joint next the Body, and
stick on each side the Pinion in the place where you turned out the Brawn, but
cut off the sharp end of the Pinion, take the middle piece and that will just
fit the place. You may cut up a Capon or Pheasant the same way; but be sure you
cut not off the Pinion of your Capon, but in the place where you put the Pinion
os the Turkey, place there your divided Gizard on each side half.

In the dismembring of an Hern, you must take off both the Legs, and lace it
down the Breast; then raise up the flesh, and take it clean off, with the
Pinion; then stick the head in the Breast, set the Pinion on the contrary side
of the Carcass, and the Leg on the other side, so that the bones ends may meet
cross over the Carcass, and the other Wing cross over upon the top of the
Carcass.

If you will Unbrace a Mallard, raise up the Pinion and the Leg, but take them
not off; raise the Merry-thought from the Breast, and lace it down slopingly,
on each side the Breast with your Knife.

Turn the Back downwards, if you unlace a Coney, and cut the Belly-flaps clean
off from the Kidneys; then put in the point of your Knife between the Kidneys,
and loosen the flesh from each side the bone; then turn up the back of the
Rabbat, and cut it cross between the Wings, and lace it down close by the bone
on each side; then open the flesh from the bone, against the Kidney, and pull
the Leg open softly with your hand, but pluck it not off; then thrust in your
Knife betwixt the Ribs and the Kidney, slit it out, then lay the Legs close
together.

In the allaying of a Pheasant, and winging a Partridge, you must raise their
Wings and Legs as if they were Hens.

If you mince your Partridg, sauce him with Wine, powder of Ginger and Salt,
and so set him on a Chafing Dish of Coals to keep warm. Use a Quail after the
same manner.

Display a Crane thus: unfold his Legs, and cut off his Wings by the Joints;
then rake up his Wings and Legs, and sauce them with powder of Ginger, Mustard,
Vinegar and Salt: Dismember a Hern in the same manner, and fauce him
accordingly; so likewise unjoint a Bittern, but use no sauce, but salt.

I shall now proceed to give you some Instructions in the art of Cookery; which
I shall rank in an Alphabetical order compendiously.

Artichoaks Fried.
Boil your Artichoaks, and sever them from the bottom, then slice and quarter
them, having so done, dip them in Butter, and fry them in Butter. For the
sauce, take Verjuice, Butter, and Sugar, with the juice of an Orange, lay
Marrow on them, and having garnisht them with Marrow, serve them up.

Artichoaks Stewed.
Artichoaks being boiled, take out the core, and take off the leaves, cut the
Bottoms into quarters, splitting them in the middle, then put them into your
flat stewing-pan, with Manchettoasts therein, laying the Artichoaks on them,
with an indifferent quantity of Marrow, five or six large Maces, half a pound
of preserved Plumbs with the sirrup, Verjuice, and Sugar; let them thus stew
two hours, if you stew them in a Dish, stir them not thence, but serve them up
in it, laying on some Barberries preserved, and such like, so sippet it and
serve it up; Instead of preserved Plumbs, you may stew those which are
ordinary, and will do near as well, and are much cheaper.

An Almond-Pudding.
Take a pounnd of Almond-paste, some grated Bisket-bread, Cream, Rosewater,
yolks of Eggs, beaten Cinnamon, Ginger, Nutmeg, some boiled Currants, Pistaches
and Musk, boil it in a Napkin, and serve it in a Dish, with beaten Butter and
Sugar scraped thereon.

An Almond-Pudding in Guts.
Get a pound of Almonds blanched, beat them very small with Rose Water, and a
little good new Milk, or Cream, with two or three blades of Mace, and some
sliced Nutmegs; when it is boiled, take the Spice clean from it, then grate a
penny-loaf, and serce it through a Cullender, put it into the Cream, and let it
stand till it be pretty cool, then put in the Almonds, five or six yolks of
Eggs, Salt, Sugar, and good store of Marrow, or Beef Suet, finely minced, and
so fill the Guts.

An Almond-Tart.
Strain beaten Almonds with Cream, yolks of Eggs, Sugar, Cinnamon and Ginger,
boil it thick, and fill your Tart therewith.

Almond-Cream.
Take half a pound of Almond-paste, beaten with Rose Water, and strain it with
a quart of Cream, put it in a Skillet with a stick of Cinnamon, and boil it,
stir it continually, and when it is boiled thick, put Sugar to it, and serve it
up cold.

Apple Cream.
Take a dozen Pippins, or more, pare, slice, or quarter them, put them into a
Skillet, with some Claret Wine, and a race of Ginger sliced thin, a little
Lemon Peel cut small, and some Sugar; let all these stew together till they be
soft, then take them off the fire, and put them into a Dish, and when they be
cold, take a quart of boiled Cream, with a little Nutmeg, and put in os the
Apple as much as will thicken it; and so serve it up.

Apricocks green Baked.
When your Apricocks are green, and so tender that you may thrust a pin through
the stone, scald them, and scrape the outside, often putting them in water as you
peel them, till your Tart be ready, then dry them well, and fill your Tart with
them, and lay on good store of fine Sugar, close it up and bake it, ice it,
scrape on Sugar, and serve it up.

Barley-Broth.
Boil the Barley first in two waters, having first picked it well, then join it
with a knuckle of Veal, and sees them together, to the Broth add Raisins,
sweet herbs, large Mace, and the quantity of a fine Manchet sliced together,
then season it with salt.

BISK.
There are diverse ways to make a Bisk, but the best is this; Take a Leg of
Beef, and knuckle of Veal, boil them in two Gallons of fair water, scum them
clean, and put to them some Cloves and Mace, then boil them from two Gallons to
three quarts of broth; being boiled, strain it thin, put it into a Pipkin; when
it is cold take off the fat and bottom, and put it into a clean Pipkin, and
keep it warm till the Bisk be ready; boil the Fowl in the liquor of the
Marrow-bones of half a douzen peeping Chickens, and as many peeping Pigeons in
a clean Pipkin.

Then have pallats, noses and lips, boiled tender, blanched and cut into pieces
as big as a sixpence; also some Sheeps-tongues boiled, blanched, larded, fried,
and stewed in gravy, with some Chestnuts blanched; also some Cocks combs boiled
and blanched, with some yolks of hard Eggs. Stew all the aforesaid in some
roast Mutton, or Beef-gravy, with some Pistaches, large Mace, a good big Onion
or two, and salt. Then take Lamb-stones blanched and sliced, also sweet-breads
of Veal and sweet-breads of Lamb slit, some great Oysters parboiled, and some
Cock-stones: Fry the aforesaid Materials in clarified Butter, some fried
Spinnage, or Alexander-leaves, and keep them warm in an Oven, with some fried
Sausages made of minced Bacon, Veal, yolks of Eggs, Nutmegs, sweet Herbs, Salt,
and Pistaches; bake it in an Oven in cauls of Veal; and being baked and cold,
slice it round, fry it, and keep it warm in the Oven, with the aforesaid baked
things. Having prepared all these things in readiness, take a great eight pound
Dish, and a six-penny French loaf, chip it and slice it into large slices, and
cover all the bottom of the Dish, then steep it well with your strong broth,
and upon that some Beef-gravy; then dish up the Fowl on the Dish, and round
about it the fried Tongues, with the Lips, Pallats, Pestaches, Eggs, Noses,
Chestnuts, and Cocks-combs, and run them over the Fowls with some of the gravy,
and large Mace. Then again run it over with fried Sweet-breads, Sausages,
Lamb-stones, Cock-stones, fried Spinnage, and the Marrow over all; next the
carved Lemons on the Meat, and run it over with the beaten Butter, yolks of
Eggs and gravy beaten up till it be thick; lastly, garnish the Dish with little
Pyes, Dolphins of puff-paste, Chestnuts, boiled and fried Oisters, and yolks of
hard Eggs.

Gentlewomen, I must crave your pardon, since I know I have tired your patience
in the description of a Dish, which though it be frequently used in Noblemens
houses, and with all this cost and trouble put together by some rare whimsical
French Cook, yet I cannot approve of it, but must call it a Miscellaneous
hodg-podg of studied vanity; and I have here inserted it not for your
imitation, but admiration.

Beef hashed.
In the making of a Hash of Beef, take some of the Buttock and mince it very
small with some Beef Suet, or lard, and some sweet herbs, some beaten Cloves
and Mace, Pepper, Nutmeg, and a whole Onion or two, stew altogether in a
Pipkin, with some blanched Chestnuts, strong broth, and a little Claret; let it
stew softly for the space of three hours, that it may be very tender, then blow
off the fat, dish it, and serve it on sippets, you may garnish it with
Barberries, Grapes, or Gooseberries.

Beef A-la-mode.
Cut some Buttock-beef a quarter of an inch thick, and lard it with Bacon,
having hackt it before a little with the back of your Knise, then stew it in a
Pipkin with some gravy, Clarotwine, and strong Broth, Cloves, Mace, Pepper,
Cinnamon and Salt; being tender stewed, serve it on French bread sippets.

Beef Carbonadoed.
Steep your Beef in Claret Wine, Salt, Pepper, and Nutmeg, then broil it on the
Embers over a temperate and unsmoaky fire, in the mean while boil up the liquor
wherein it was steeped, and serve it for sauce, with beaten Butter.

Beef baked, red-Deer-fashion, in Pies or Pasties, either Surloine, Brisket,
Buttock or Fillet, larded or not.
Let your Surloine be boned, and take off the great sinue that lies on the
back, lard the leanest parts of it with great lard, being seasoned with Nutmeg,
Pepper, four ounces of each, two ounces of Ginger, and a pound of Salt, which
seasoning you must put into the Pie; but first lay a bed of good sweet Butter,
and a bay-leaf or two, half an ounce of whole Cloves, lay on your Beef, then
put on the rest of the seasoning, and a few more Cloves, good store of Butter,
and a Bay-leaf or two, close it up and bake it, it will require eight hours
soaking; if you will eat it hot, half the seasoning will serve, and then let
your paste be fine, otherwise course.

To this quantity of flesh you must have three Gallons of fine flower heapt
measure. But the best way to bake red Deer is in course paste, either Pie, or
Pasty; if Rye-meal, it will keep long, otherwise you may make it of Meal, as it
comes from the Mill, using only boiling-water, without any other stuff.

Beef Collar'd.
In the right making of a Collar of Beef you must take the flank and lay it in
Pump-water two or three days, shift it twice a day, then take it out, and dry
it very well with clean Clothes, cut it in three layers, and take out the bones
and most of the fat; then take three handfuls of Salt, and good store of sweet
Herbs chopped very small, mingle them, and stew them betwixt the three layers,
and lay them one upon another; then take an ounce of Cloves and Mace, and
another of Nutmegs, and beat them well, and strew it between the layers of
Beef, roll it up close together, then lay some splices about it, and with
pack-thread tie it up very close and hard, put it in a long Earthen-pot, which
are made on purpose for that use, tying up the top of the pot with cap-paper;
set it into the Oven, let it stand eight hours, draw it, and taking it out of
the pot, hang it up for use.

Brawn, how to make a Collar.
Take a fat Brawn of two or three years growth, and bone the sides, cut off the
head close to the ears, and cut five Collars of a side, bone the hinder leg, or
else five will not be deep enough; cut the Collars an inch deeper on the belly
then on the back, because the belly will shrink more in the boiling; make your
Collars very even before you bind them up, not big at one end, and small at the
other, but fill them equally, and lay them a soaking in fair water, be sure
that they be watered two days before you bind them up, shift and scrape them
twice a day in that time, then bind them up with white tape; having your Boiler
ready with the water boiling, put in your Collars of the biggest bulk first, a
quarter of an hour before those which are less. Boil them an hour with a quick
fire, keeping the Boiler continually filled up with warm clean liquor, and scum
the fat clean off as it rises. After an hour, let it boil still, but more
leisurely; being fine and tender boiled, so that you may thrust a straw through
it, draw your fire, and let your Brawn remain till the next morning; between
hot and cold put your Brawn into moulds of deep hoops, and bind them about with
packthread; when cold take them out and put them into souce made of boiled
Oatmeal ground or beaten, and bran boiled in fair water, which you must strain
through a Cullender when it is cold, into that thing you intend to lay your
Brawn; then put salt thereunto, and close up the mouth of the Vessel from the
Air. When you use it, dish it up with a sprig of Rosemary on the top, dipped in
the white of an Egg well beaten to froth, sprinkled with flower, or with a
straight sprig of Ew-tree.

Brawn made of a Sucking-Pig, otherwise called souced Pig.
Choose not a spotted Pig for handsomenesssake, but one that is white; scald
him, and cut off his head, parting him down the back, draw and bone him, the
sides being thoroughly cleansed from the blood, and soaked in several clean
waters, dry the sides thereof, season them with Nutmeg, Ginger and Salt, roll
them, and put them up in clean Clothes; then take as much water as will cover
it in the boiling-pan two inches over and above, and add two quarts of
White Wind thereunto. When the liquor boils, put in your Collars, with Salt,
Mace, sliced Ginger, Parsley-roots, and Fennel-roots scraped and picked; being
half boiled, put in a quart of White Wind more, being quite boiled, put in
slices of Lemon to it with the whole peel. Having souc'd it two or three days,
dish it out on plates with Vinegar; or serve it in Collars with Mustard and
Sugar.

A Calves-head roasted.
Take the Head, and cleave it, and remove from thence the Brains, purge it well
from the blood, then steep the Head in fair water warm five hours, in that time
shift it twice or thrice, the last time cleanse the head; then boil the Brains,
and with it make a Pudding with some grated Bread, Beef Suet, and some Veal
minced small together, with some Sage; let the Pudding be seasoned with Cloves,
Mace, Salt, Ginger, Sugar, five yolks of Eggs and Saffron; fill the Head with
this Pudding, then close it up, and bind it fast with pack-thread, spit it, and
bind on the Caul with some of the Pudding round about it; as it roasts save the
gravy; but when you use it for the sauce, blow off the fat, and add thereunto a
little White Wind, a Nutmeg sliced, the juice of an Orange, Salt, and Sugar,
and a piece of sweet Butter; before you take up the head, dredg it with grated
Bread, beaten Cinnamon, minced Lemmon-peel with a little Salt.

Calves-foot Pie, or Neats-foot Pie.
Take two pair of Calves-feet, boil them tender and blanch them; being cold
bone them, and mince them very small, and season them with Pepper, Nutmeg,
Cinnamon, a little Ginger and Salt, and a pound of Currants, a quarter of a
pound of Dates sliced, a quarter of a pound of fine Sugar, with a little
Rose Water, and Verjuice, stir all together in a Dish or Tray, laying a little
Butter in the bottom of the Pie; then lay on half the meat in the Pie; take
then the Marrow of three Marrow-bones, and lay that on the meat in the Pie, and
the other half of the meat on the Marrow, and stick some Dates on the top of
the meat, so close up the Pie and bake it; being half baked, liquor it with
Butter, White Wind or Verjuice, and ice it with Butter, Rosewater and Sugar,
then set it in the Oven again till it be iced.

Capons Souced.
Take a good young fat Capon, finely pulled, drawn, and trussed, lay it in soak
two or three hours, with a Knuckle of Veal well jointed, and after set them a
boiling in a deep Brass-pan, or large Pipkin in a gallon of fair water, when it
boils, scum it, and put in four or five blades of Mace, two or three races of
Ginger sliced, some Fennel and Parsley roots scraped and picked, season all with
Salt. The Capon being tenderly boiled, take it up, and when almost cold put it
to your souced broth which you must boil with a quart of White Wind to a Jelly,
putting this liquor into a convenient Vessel, place your Capon therein, with
two or three sliced Lemmons, cover it close and serve it at your pleasure,
garnishing your Dish with slices of Lemmon, Barberries, and some of the Jelly.

Calves-Chaldron-Mince-Pyes.
Let your Chaldrons or Muggets be boiled tender, and being cold mince them
small, with Beef Suet, or interlarded Bacon, some volks of hard Eggs, Veal,
Mutton, and Lamb cut small, season it with Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg, Pepper, a
little Onion, and minced Lemon Peel, with salt, and Juice of an Orange; then
lay on some slices of interlarden Bacon and Butter, close it up and bake it;
and when you draw it, liquor it with White Wind beaten with Butter.

Capon or Chicken in white Broth.
First boil the Capon in water and salt, then take three pints of strong broth,
and a quart of Whitewine, and stew it in a Pipkin, with a quarter of a pound of
Dates, half a pound of fine Sugar, four or five blades of large Mace, the
Marrow of three Marrow-bones, an handful of white Endive; stew them very
leisurely; having so done, strain the yolks of ten Eggs with some of the Broth.
Before you dish up the Capon or Chickens, put the Eggs into the Broth, and keep
it stirring that it may not curdle, and let it be but a little while on the
fire; the Fowls being dished up, put on the Broth, and garnish the Dish with
Dates, large Mace, Endive, preserved Barberries. You may make a Lere of
Almond-paste, and Grape-verjuice.

Chicken-Pye.
Truss the Chickens, then season them leightly with Pepper, Salt and Nutmeg,
lay them in the Pie, and lay on them some sliced Dates, with the Marrow of two
or three Marrow-bones, some large Mace, a quarter of a pound of Eringoroots,
some Grapes or Barberries, with Butter, close it up and put it into the Oven;
being half baked, liquor it with a Cawdle made of a Pint of White Wind or
Verjuice, the yolks of five or six Eggs, with Sugar and Butter, shake liquor
well in it, which you may color green with the juice of Spinnage: It is proper
to ice these Pyes; or scrape Sugar on them.

Clouted Cream.
Take a gallon of new Milk from the Cow, two quarts of Cream, and twelve
spoonfuls of Rosewater, put these together in a large Milkpan, and set it upon
a fire of Charcole well kindled, (be sure the fire be not too hot) and let it
stand a day and a night, then take it off and dish it with a slice or scummer,
let no Milk be in it, lay it in a Cream-dish, with Sugar scraped thereon, and
so serve it up.

Cabbedg-Cream.
Set over the fire six quarts of new Milk, and when it boils, pour it out into
half a score of Earthen-pans or bowls, as fast as you can without frothing, set
them apart, and when they are a little cold, gather the Cream that is on the
top with your hand, rumpling it together, and lay it on a flat dish; when you
have laid three or four layers one on the other, wet a feather in Rosewater and
Musk, and stroke over it, then searse a little grated Nutmeg, and fine Sugar,
then lay three or four lays more on, as before, thus doing till you have all
the Cream in the bowl, and then put all the Milk together and boil it again;
and when it boils, do with it as you did before; it will yield thus four or
five times seething, with which you must do as before, that it may lie round
and high like a Cabbedg. You will do well to let one of the first Bowls to
stand till last, that the Cream may be thick and crumpled, and that use for the
uppermost lay, and so scrape Sugar in it. This must be made overnight for
Dinner, and in the morning for Supper.

Carp Stewed.
Dress the Carp and take out the Milt, put it in a Dish with the Carp, take out
the Gall, then save the blood, and scotch with your knife the back of the Carp.
If the Carp be large, take a quart of Claret, or White Wind, four or five
blades of large Mace, ten Cloves, two large races of Ginger sliced, two sliced
Nutmegs, with the tops of Time, Marjoram, Savory, and Parsley chopped very
small, four great Onions whole, three or four Bay Leaves, and some Salt; Stew
them all together with the Wine when the liquor boils: put in the Carp, with a
quarter of a pound of sweet Butter; being stewed enough, take a large Dish, and
laying the Carp therein, pour the Sauce thereon with the Spices; lay on sliced
Lemon, with some of the peel cut small, and run it over with beaten Butter;
Garnish the Dish with Manchet grated and searsed, and carved sippets laid round
the Dish. You may, for variety, the Carp being scaled, garnish the body with
stewed Oisters, some fried in white Butter, some in green, made by the juice of
Spinnage.

Carp Marinated.
Take a Carp, fcale it, and scrape off the slime, wipe it clean with a dry
Cloth, and split it down the back, flower it, and fry it in sweet Salletoyl, or
clarified Butter; being fried crisp, lay it in a deep Dish, or Earthen-pan,
then take some white Claret Wine, white-wine-Vinegar, and put it into a broad
mouthed Pipkin, with Rosemary, Time, sweet Marjoram, Parsley, Winter-Savory,
Bay Leaves, Sorrel and Sage, a like quantity of each, with some large Mace,
sliced Ginger, gross Pepper, sliced Nutmeg, whole Cloves and Salt, with as much
Wine and Vinegar as will cover the Fish; boil all these together a little
while, and then pour it on the Fish hot, and cover it close to detain the
spirits from evaporating for an hours, space, and then lay on your Lemon with
Orange-peel. Thus you may marinate Soles, Plaice, or any other, whether Sea or
fresh water Fish; if you barrel or pack it up close, it will be as good, and
keep as long as Sturgeon.

Carp roasted.
Take a live Carp, draw and wash it, taking away the Gall, Milt or Spawn; then
make a Pudding with some grated Manchet, some Almond-paste, Cream, Currants,
grated Nutmeg, raw yolks of Eggs, Sugar, Carraway-seed candied, some Salt and
Lemon; make a stiff Pudding, and put it through the Gills into the belly of the
Carp; then spit it, and when it is roasted, make Sauce with the Gravy that
falls from it, with juice of Orange, Sugar and Cinnamon; beat up the Sauce thick
with the Butter, and dish it up.

Deer, Red and Fallow, roasted.
Take a side or half Haunch, and parboil it; then farce or stuff it with all
manner of sweet Herbs minced with Beef Suet; lay the Cawl over, and so roast
it; when ready, dish it up with a Gallendine-sauce made with strained Bread,
Vinegar, Claret Wine, Cinnamon, Ginger and Sugar, boil up these with a few whole
Cloves, and a sprig of Rosemary.

Deer Baked.
Take a side of Venison, bone and lard it with great lards as big as your
little finger, and season it with two ounces of Pepper, two ounces of Nutmeg,
and four ounces of Salt, then make your Pie, and lay some Butter in the bottom
thereof, then lay in your flesh the inside downward, coat it thick with
seasoning, adding a few Cloves and good store of Butter, so close it up and
bake it, first basting it with Eggs.

Egg-Mince-Pye.
Boil your Eggs hard, then mince and mix them with Cinnamon, Currants,
Carraway-seed, Sugar and Dates, minced Lemon Peel, Verjuice, Rosewater, Butter
and Salt, with these fill your Pyes; when baked, liquor them with Butter,
White Wind, Sugar, and ice them.

Florentines on Paste, or without Paste.
Take a Leg of Mutton or Veal, shave it into thin slices, and mingle it with
some sweet Herbs, as sweet Marjoram, Time, Savory, Parsley and Rosemary; being
minced very small, a Clove of Garlic, some beaten Nutmeg, Pepper, a minced
Onion, some grated Manchet, and three or four yolks of raw Eggs, mix all
together with a little Salt, some thin slices of interlarded Bacon, lay the
Meat round the Dish, on a sheet of Paste, or in the Dish without Paste; being
baked, stick Bayleaves round the Dish.

Flowers of all sorts Pickled.
Put them into a Gally-pot, or Glass, with as much Sugar as they weigh, fill
them up with Wine-Vinegar. To a pint of Vinegar a pound of Sugar, and a pound
of Flowers: so keep them for Sallets and boiled Meats.

Grapes and Goosberries Pickled.
Pick them and put them in Verjuice, and so barrel them up.

Geese Boiled.
Take them being powdered, and fill their bellies with Oatmeal, being first
steeped in warm Milk, then mingle it with some Beef Suet, minced Onions and
Apples, seasoned with Cloves, Mace, some sweet Herbs minced, and Pepper, fasten
the neck and vent, boil them, and serve them with Brewis, and Colliflowers or
Cabbedg, running it over with beaten Butter; thus you may dress any sort of
Sea-fowl.

Hashes several ways.
First, of raw Beef, mince it very small with Beefsuet or Lard, some
sweet-Herbs, Pepper, Salt, some Cloves and Mace, Chestnuts or Almonds blanched,
put in whole, some Nutmeg, and a whole Onion or two, and stew it in a Pipkin
with some strong broth two hours, put a little Claret to it, and serve it on
Sippets, blowing off the fat; and garnish it with Lemon or Barberries.

Otherways.
Cut your Beef, fat and lean, into Gobbets, as big as a Pullets Egg, and put
them into a pot or Pipkin with some Carrots cut into pieces as big as a Walnut,
some whole Onions, some Parsnips, large Mace, a faggot of sweet Herbs, Salt,
Pepper, Cloves, with as much water and wine as will cover them, let them thus
stew three hours.

Hashes of Neats-feet, or any feet, as Calves, Sheep, Deer, Hogs, Pigs or Lambs.
Boil them very tender, and being cold, mince them small, then put Currants to
them, beaten Cinnamon, hard Eggs minced, Capers, sweet Herbs minced small,
Cloves, Mace, Sugar, Whitewine, Butter, sliced Lemon or Orange, sliced Almonds,
grated Bread, Saffron, Grapes, or Barberries, so serve them on fine carved
Sippets.

Hashing of any Feet.
Mince them small, and stew them with Whitewine, Butter, Currants, Raisins,
Marrow, Sugar, Prunes, Dates, Cinnamon, Mace, Ginger, Pepper, and serve them on
toasts of fried Manchet.

Hares roasted without and with the Skin.
Take an Hare and flay him, then lard him with small lard, stick him with
Cloves, and make a Pudding in his belly, with grated Bread, grated Nutmeg,
Cinnamon beaten, Salt, Currants, Eggs, Cream and Sugar; having made it stiff,
fill the belly of the Hare and so roast it. If you will have your Pudding
green, color it with Spinach; if yellow, with Saffron. Let the Sauce be made
of beaten Cinnamon, Nutmeg, Ginger, Pepper, Prunes, Currants, a little grated
Bread, Sugar and Cloves, all boiled up as thick as Watergruel.

If you roast an Hare with the Skin on, draw out the Bowels, and make a
farsing, or stuffing of all manner of sweet Herbs minced very small, then roll
them in some Butter, and make a ball thereof, put it into the belly, and prick
it up close, baste it with butter, and being almost roasted, flay off the Skin,
and stick on some Cloves on the Body, bread it with fine grated Manchet, Flower
and Cinnamon, froth it up, and dish it on Sauce, made of grated Bread,
Claret Wine, Winevinegar, Cinnamon, Ginger, and Sugar, being boiled up to an
indifferency.

Ipocras.
To make good Ipocras, you must take a gallon of Wine, three ounces of Cinnamon,
two ounces of sliced Ginger, an ounce of Nutmegs, a quarter of an ounce of
Cloves, twenty corns of Pepper, an handful of Rosemary-Flowers, three pounds of
Sugar, and two quarts of Cream.

Jellies of several colors for all sorts of Soust Meats, and to be eaten alone.
Take four pair of Calves-feet, a knuckle of Veal, a good fleshy Capon, take
out the bones and fat, and cast them into fair water, shift them three or four
times in a day and night, then boil them in three gallons of fair water till
six quarts be wasted, then strain it into an earthen pan, let it cool, then
take off the fat a top, and pare the bottom; then dissolve it again in broth,
and divide it into four equal parts, every part in a particular Vessel; put a
little Saffron into one of them, into another Cutcheneel, into a third
Turnsole, let the last alone to its own natural whiteness; let each Vessel have
a quart of White Wind, and the juice of two Lemons. To the white Jelly add one
race of Ginger pared and sliced, and three blades of large Mace. To the red
Jelly two Nutmegs, and the like quantity of Cinnamon and Ginger. To the yellow
or Ambercolour the same spices, and the like quantity; and to the Turnsole the
same with a few Cloves. Then take eighteen whites of Eggs, and beat them with
six pound of double refined Sugar, beaten small and stirred together in a Tray,
or great Basin; with a rolling pin, divide it equally into four parts, and
distribute one to each Vessel, being well mixed with Wine, and a little Musk,
or Ambergriece, stir it about with your Jelly. Then set on your Jelly again on
a fine Charcole fire, and let it stew near an hour, then make it boil up a
little, so take it off; being somewhat cold, strain it, and so let it stand for
your use, casting it into what mould you please.

Land or Sea-fowl, how to boil them.
Half roast the Fowls, sticking on them some Cloves as they roast, save the
Gravy, and when they are half roasted, put them into a Pipkin with the Gravy,
some Claret Wine, as much strong broth as will cover them, Mace, Cloves,
Pepper, Ginger, some fried Onions and Salt; stew all well together and serve
them on carved sippets.

Land-Fowl, the smaller sort, how to boil, as Plovers, Quails, Blackbirds,
Rails, Thrushes, Snites, Wheat-ears, Larks and Sparrows.
Take them and truss them, or cut off the Heads and Legs, and boil them, scum
your Pipkin, and put therein large Mace, White Wind, Currants well picked and
washed, Dates, Marrow, Pepper and Salt; being well stewed, dish them on carved
Sippets; thicken the broth with strained Almonds, Rosewater, and Sugar; garnish
them with Lemon, Barberries and grated bread.

Marrow-Pudding in a Dish baked, garnished with Puff-paste.
Take the Marrow of four Marrow-bones, two French breads, half a pound of
Raisins of the Sun ready boiled and cold, Cinnamon a quarter of an ounce beaten,
two grated Nutmegs, a quarter of a pound of Sugar, the like of Dates, Sack half
a pint, Rosewater a quarter of a pint, ten Eggs, two grains of Amber-griece.
Now take a deep large dish, and lay a lay of sliced French-bread therein, and
strew it with Cinnamon, Nutmeg, and Sugar, mingled together, also sprinkle the
slices of bread with Sack and Rosewater, and then some Raisins of the Sun,
sliced Dates, and good big pieces of Marrow, and thus make two or three lays of
the aforesaid ingredients, with most Marrow on the top; then take two quarts of
Cream, and strain it with half a quarter of fine Sugar, with about a spoonful
of Salt, and twelve Eggs, six of the whites taken away, then set the Dish into
the Oven, temperate, and not too hot, and bake it very white, then strew some
Sugar on, and so serve it.

Mutton hashed the French way.
Take a Shoulder of Mutton, and roast it three quarters and save the Gravy;
slice the one half and mince the other, and put it into a Pipkin, with the
Shoulder Blade, put to it some strong broth of Mutton or Beef-gravy, large
Mace, some Pepper, Salt, a big Onion or two, a faggot of sweet Herbs, and a
pint of White Wind; stew them all together close covered, then take away the
fat, and put some Oyster-liquor thereunto; add also three pints of great
Oysters parboiled in their own liquor; these Materials being well stewed down,
dish up your meat, pouring your liquor thereon, and uppermost lay your stewed
Oysters, with sliced Lemon and fine carved sippets.

Marinated Mullet, Bace, Gurnet, or Rochet.
Take a gallon of White-wine-Vinegar, a quart of fair water, a good handful of
Bay Leaves, as much Rosemary, and a quarter of a pound of beaten Pepper, put
these together, and let them boil softly, season it with Salt, then fry your
Fish in the best Sallet-oyl; this done, put the Fish in an earthen Vessel or
Barrel, lay the Bay Leaves and Rosemary between every layer of the Fish, and
pour the broth upon it; when it is cold, close up the Vessel.

Mallets Fried.
Scale, draw, and scotch them, after washing wipe them dry, and flower them,
fry them in Clarified Butter; being fried, put to them some Claret Wine, sliced
Ginger, grated Nutmeg, an Anchove, Salt, and sweet Butter beaten up thick, but
first rub the dish with a Clove of Garlic: Choose the least Mullets to fry.

Mullets or Bace baked.
Scale, garbedg, wash and dry the Bace or Mullet very well, lard it with
Salt-Eel, season it and make a Pudding for it of grated Bread, sweet Herbs, and
fresh Eel minced, put also the yolks of hard Eggs, Anchove washed and minced
very small, some Nutmeg and Salt, fill the belly herewith, or cut it into
quarters, and season them with Nutmeg, Ginger and Pepper, lay them in your Pie,
and make Balls, and lay them on the pieces of Mullet, then put on some Capers,
Prawns, or Cockles, yolks of Eggs minced, Butter, large Mace, and Barberries,
close it up; being baked, cut it up and fill it with beaten Butter, and garnish
it with sliced Lemon. This is a very good way for Tench or Bream.

Mushrooms Fried.
Blanch them and wash them clean; if they be large, quarter them, and boil them
with Salt, Vinegar, and Water, sweet Herbs, large Mace, Cloves, Bay Leaves, and
two or three Cloves of Garlic, then take them up, dry them, dip them in
butter, and fry them in Clarified butter, till they be brown; make your sauce
for them of Claret Wine, the juice of two or three Oranges, Salt, butter the
juice of Horse-raddish-root beaten and strained, sliced Nutmeg and Pepper, put
these into a Drying Pan, with the yolks of two or three Eggs, with some
Mutton-gravy, beat or shake them well together in the Pan, that they curdle
not, then rub a dish with Garlic, and lay the Mushrooms therein garnisht with
Oranges and Lemons.

Mushrooms stewed.
Take them fresh gathered, and cut off the end of the stalk; and as you peel
them, put them in a dish with White Wind; after they have layn half an hour,
drain them from the Wine, and put them between two Dishes, and set them on a
soft fire without any liquor, and when they have stewed a while, pour away the
liquor that proceeded from them, then put to your Mushrooms a sprig of Time, a
whole Onion, four or five corns of whole Pepper, two or three Cloves, a piece
of an Orange, a little Salt, and some sweet butter, with some pure gravy of
Mutton; cover them and set them on a gentle fire, so let them stew softly till
they are enough and very tender; when you dish them, blow off the fat from
them, and take out the Time, the Spice, and Orange, then wring in the juice of
a Lemon, and strew some Nutmeg thereon.

Neats-Tongues boiled.
Salt a Tongue twelve hours, or boil it in water and salt till it be tender,
blanch it, serve it on carved Sippets and Brewis, with boiled Turnips and
Onions, run it over with beaten Butter, and garnish it with Barberries or
Grapes.

Neats-tongues Stewed.
Take a Tongue and put it a stewing between two Dishes, being raw and fresh,
put some strong broth and White Wind to it, with some whole Cloves, Mace, and
whole Pepper, some Capers, Salt, with Roots, as Carrots or Turnips, and stew
them all together leisurely the space of two hours or more, then blanch it, and
put some Marrow to it, give it a walm or two, then serve it on Sippets finely
carved, and strew on some mined Lemon, Barberries or Grapes, and run it over
with beaten Butter: Garnish your Dish with Manchets finely searsed.

Neats-tongues, an excellent way how to dry them.
Take Salt beaten very fine, and Saltpeter, of each a like quantity, rub your
Tongues very well with the Salts, and cover them all over with it; and as it
wastes, supply them with more, then roll them in Bran, and dry them before a
soft fire; before you boil them, lay them in Pump-water one night, and boil
them in Pump-water.

Neats-tongues roasted.
Take a Neats-tongue tenderly boiled, blanched, and cold, cut a hole in the
butt-end, and mince the meat that you take out, then put some sweet Herbs
finely minced to it, with a minced Pippin or two, the yolks of Eggs sliced,
some minced Beef Suet, beaten Ginger and Salt, fill the Tongue and stop the end
with a Caul of Veal, lard it and roast it, make your Sauce with Butter, Nutmeg,
Gravy, and juice of Oranges: Garnish the Dish with sliced Lemon and Barberries.

Neats-tongue-Minc'd-Pye.
Take a fresh Neats-tongue, boil, blanch, and mince it, then mince four pound
of Beef Suet by it self, mingle them together, and season them with an ounce of
Cloves and Mace beaten, some Salt, half an Orange preserved, and a little
Lemon Peel, shred with a quarter of a pound of Sugar, four pound of Currants, a
little Verjuice and Rosewater and a quarter of a pint of Sack, stir all
together, and fill your Pyes.

A Norfolk-Fool.
Take a quart of thick sweet Cream, and set it a boiling in a clear scoured
Skillet, with some large Mace, and whole Cinnamon; having boiled a little while,
take the yolks of five or six Eggs beaten well, and put to it; being off, the
fire take out the Cinnamon and Mace; the Cream being pretty thick, slice a fine
Manchet into thin slices as many as will cover the bottom of the Dish, and then
pour on the Cream; trim the Dish with carved Sippets, and stick it with sliced
Dates, and scrape Sugar all over it.

Oysters Stewed.
Take a pottle of large Oysters, parboil them in their own liquor, then wash
them from the dregs in warm water, and put them in a Pipkin, with a good big
Onion or two, and five or six blades of large Mace, a little whole Pepper, a
sliced Nutmeg, a quarter of a pint of White Wind, as much Wine-vinegar, a
quarter of a pound of sweet Butter, with a little Salt, stew them together on a
soft fire the space of half an hour, then dish them on Sippets of French-bread,
sliced Lemon on that, and Barberries, then run them over with beaten Butter;
and garnish the dish with grated Manchet searsed.

Oysters Fried.
Strain the liquor from them, and parboil them in a Kettle, then dry and roll
them in Flower, or make a batter with Eggs, Flower, a little Cream and Salt,
dip them therein, and fry them in Butter. For the Sauce, boil the juice of
three or four Oranges, some of their own liquor, a sliced Nutmeg and Claret;
being boiled a little, put in a slice of Butter, beating it up thick; having
warmed the Dish, rub it with some Garlic, and lay therein the Oysters;
garnishing the Dish with slices of Orange.

Oyster-Pyes.
Parboil your Oysters in their own liquor, then take them out and wash them in
warm water, dry them, and season them with Pepper, Nutmeg, yolks of hard Eggs
and Salt; the Pie being made, put a few Currants in the bottom, and lay on the
Oysters with some sliced Dates in halfs, some large Mace, sliced Lemon,
Barberries and Butter, close it up, and bake it, then liquor it with
White Wind, Sugar, and Butter.

Otherways.
Take a pottle of Oysters, being parboiled in their own liquor, beard and dry
them, then season them with large Mace, whole Pepper, a little beaten Ginger,
Salt, Butter, and Marrow, then close and bake it; then make a Lear with
Whitewine, Oyster-liquor, and one Onion; boil these with a pound of Butter,
minced Lemon, and a faggot of sweet herbs, and liquor the Pie therewith.

Oysters Pickled.
Take eight quarts of Oysters, and parboil them in their own liquor, then take
them out and cleanse them in warm water, then wipe them dry; then take the
liquor they were parboiled in, and clear it from the grounds into a large
Pipkin, or Skillet, put to it a pottle of good White Wind, a quart of
Wine-Vinegar, some large Mace, whole Pepper, and a good quantity of Salt, set
it over the fire and boil it leisurely, scum it clean, and being well boiled,
put the liquor into Barrels, that will hold a quart or more, and when it is
cold, put in the Oysters, and close up the head.

Ox-cheeks baked in a Pie.
Being first cleansed from the slime, filth and blood, cut them in pieces, take
out the bones, and season them with Pepper, Salt, and Nutmeg, then put them in
a Pie with a few whole Cloves, a little seasoning, slices of Butter and Bacon
over all; bake them very tender, and liquor them with Butter and Claret Wine.

A Calves-head Pie.
Take a Calves-head, soak it well, and take out the brains, boil the head, and
take out the bones; being cold, stuff it with sweet Herbs and hard Eggs chopped
small, minced Bacon, and a raw Egg or two, Nutmeg, Pepper, and Salt; and lay in
the bottom of the Pie minced Veal raw, and Bacon; then lay the Cheeks on it in
the Pie, and sliced Bacon on that, then Spices, Butter and Grapes, or a Lemon,
then close it up, bake it, and liquor it with butter only.

Puff-paste, the best way how to make it.
Take a pottle of Flower, mix it with cold water, half a pound of Butter, and
the whites of five Eggs, work these together very well and stiff, then roll it
out very thin, and put Flower under it and over it, then take near a pound of
butter, and lay it in bits all over it, then double it in five or six doubles;
this being done, roll it out the second time, and serve it as at the first,
then roll it out and cut it into what form you please, and for what use, you
need not fear the curle, for it will divide as often as you have doubled, ten
or twelve times is enough for any use.

Panado's.
Boil fair water in a Skillet, put to it grated bread or cakes, good store of
Currants, Mace, and whole Cinnamon; being almost boiled, and indifferent thick,
put in some Sack or White Wind, Sugar, and some strained yolks of Eggs.
Otherways, with sliced Bread, Water, Currants, and Mace; and being well boiled,
put to it some Sugar, White Wind, and Butter.

Posset of Sack, Claret, or White Wind, the best manner.
Take twenty yolks of Eggs, with a little Cream, strain them, and set them by;
then have a clean scoured Skillet, and put into it a pottle of sweet Cream, and
a good quantity of whole Cinnamon; set it a boiling on a soft Charcolcfire, and
stir it continually; the Cream having a good taste of the Cinnamon, put in the
strained Eggs and Cream into your Skillet, stir them together, and give them a
walm, then have in readiness some Sack or other Wine in a deep Basin, or
Posset-cup, good store of fine Sugar, and some sliced Nutmeg; the Sack and
Sugar being warm, take out the Cinnamon, and pour your Eggs and Cream very high
into the Basin, that it may spatter in it; then strew on Loaf-sugar.

Pumpion-Pye.
Take a pound of Pumpion, and slice; it an handful of Time, a little Rosemary,
sweet Marjoram stripped off the stalks, chop them small; then take Cinnamon,
Nutmeg, Pepper, and a few Cloves, all beaten; also ten Eggs, and beat them all
together, with as much Sugar as you shall think sufficient; then fry them like
a Froise; and being fried, let them stand till they are cold: then fill your
Pie after this manner: Take Apples sliced thin round ways, and lay a layer of
the Froise, and another of the Apples, with Currants betwixt the layers; be sure
you put in good store of sweet Butter before you close it. When the Pie is
baked, take six yolks of Eggs, some White Wind or Verjuice, and make a Caudle
thereof, but not too thick; cut up the lid and put it in, and stir them well
together whilst the Eggs and Pumpions are not perceived, and so serve it up.

Pig roasted with the Hair on.
Take a Pig, and draw out his Entrails, Liver and Lights, draw him very clean
at vent, and wipe him, cut off his Legs and truss him, and prick up the Belly
close, Spit it, and lay it to the fire; have a care of scorching it; when it is
a quarter roasted, the skin will rise up in blisters from the flesh, then with
your hands or knife, pull off the skin and hair; being cleanly flayed, cut
slashes down to the bones, baste it with Butter or Cream, then bread it with
grated white-bread, Currants, Sugar and Salt, all together, and thus baste it
and dredg till it the Body be covered an inch thick, then the Pig being
thoroughly roasted, draw it and serve it up whole, with Sauce made of
Wine-Vinegar, whole Cloves, whole Cinnamon, and Sugar boiled to a Syrrup.

Pigeons boiled.
Being trussed, put them into a Pipkin or Skillet, with some strong broth, or
fair water, boil and scum them, then put in some Mace, a faggot of sweet Herbs,
white Endive, Marigold-flowers and Salt, and being finely boiled, serve them on
sippets; and garnish the Dish with Mace and white Endive-flowers.

Pike boiled.
Take your Pike and wash it clean, then truss it whole, round, with the tail in
his mouth, and his back scotched, or cut it in three pieces, and divide the
middle piece into two; then boil it in Water, Salt, and Vinegar, put it not in
till the liquor boil, and then make it boil apace, and that will crisp your
Pike; but afterward foftly. For the Sauce, put into a Pipkin a pint of
White Wind, sliced Ginger, Mace, Dates quartered, a pint of large Oysters with
their liquor, a little Vinegar and Salt, boil them a quarter of an hour, then
mince a few sweet Herbs and Parsley, stew them till half the liquor be
consumed; the Pike being boiled, dish it, and garnish the Dish with grated
White-bread, or Ginger fine beaten, then beat up the Sauce with half a pound of
Butter, minced Lemon or Orange, and pour it on the Pike with Sippets.

Pike stewed.
Take a Pike, slat it, and lay it in a Dish; when the blood is clean washed
out, put to it as much White Wind as will cover it, and fet it a stewing; when
it boils, put in the Fish, and scum it, and put to it some large Mace, whole
Cinnamon, and some Salt; when thoroughly stewed, dish it on Sippets finely carved.

Pike Souc'd.
Draw and wash it clean from the blood and slime, then boil it in fair Water
and Salt; when the liquor boils, put it to it, and boil it leisurely and
simmering, feason it savourly of the Salt, boil it not too much, nor in more
water than will just cover it. If you intend to keep it long, put as much
White Wind as Water, of both as much as will cover the Fish, some Wine-vinegar,
sliced Ginger, large Mace, Cloves, and some Salt; when it boils put in the
Fish, Spices, and some Lemon Peel, boil it up quick, and not too much; then
take it up in a Tray, and boil down the liquor to a Jelly; lay some sliced
Lemon on it, pour on the liquor, and cover it up close; when you serve it in
Jelly, melt some of the Jelly, and run it over therewith; garnish your Dish
with Barberries and sliced Lemon.

Pike Roasted.
Take a Pike, scour off the slime, and take out the Entrails, lard the back
with pickled Herring, (you must have a sharp bodkin to make the holes to lard
it) then take some large Oysters and Claret Wine; season the Oysters with
Pepper and Nutmeg, stuff the Belly with the Oysters, and intermix the stuffing
with Rosemary, Time, Winter-savory, sweet Marjoram, a little Onion and Garlic,
sow these in the belly of the Pike; then take two sticks about the breadth of a
lath, and with packthread tie the Pike to the Spit, tie also along the side of
the Pike which is not defended with the Spit, Rosemary and Bays; baste the Pike
with Butter and Claret Wine; when it is roasted, rip up the Belly, and take out
the Herbs quite away, boil up the Gravy with Butter, and dish it up.

Quaking-Pudding.
Slice the Crum of a Peny-manchet, and infuse it three or four hours in a pint
of scalding hot Cream, covering it close, then break the bread with a spoon
very small, and put to it eight Eggs (but four whites), and beat them together
very well, then season it with Sugar, Rosewater and grated Nutmeg; if you think
it too stiff, qualify that fault with cold Cream, and beat them well together,
then wet the bag or napkin, and flower it, put in the Pudding, and tie it hard,
boil it half an hour, then dish it, and put Butter to it, Rosewater and Sugar,
and so serve it to the Table.

Quince-Pyes.
Make choice of fair Quinces to make your Pie withal, pare them very thin, and
core them, and lay them within your paste; add thereunto two races of Ginger
sliced, as much Cinnamon broken into bits, and eight or ten whole Cloves, lay
these with the Quinces close packed, with as much refined Sugar as the Quinces
weigh, close it up; and having soaked four or five hours in the Oven, take it
out and ice it.

You may otherways make a Quince-Pye thus: Take a gallon of Flower, a pound and
half of Butter, six Eggs, thirty Quinces, three pound of Sugar, half an ounce
of Cinnamon, the like quantity of Ginger and Cloves, and some Rosewater, then
make it into a Pie or Tart; when it is baked, strew on some double refined
Sugar.

An excellent restorative for a weak back.
Take Clary, Dates, the pith of an Ox, and chop them together, put some Cream
to them, Eggs, grated Bread, and a little white Sanders, temper them all well
together, fry them, and let it be the first thing you eat in a morning. You may
also take the leaves of Clary, and Nepe, and fry them for Breakfast.

A most incomparable broth or drink for a sick person.
Procure a good fleshy Capon, and take the flesh from the bones, or chop it in
pieces very small, and not wash it, then put it in a Rose-Still, with slices of
Lemon Peel, Wood Sorrel, with other restorative herbs, being distilled, give it
the sick person to drink.

Rice-Tart.
Boil your Rice in Milk or Cream; being tenden boiled, pour it into a Dish, and
season it with Nutmeg, Ginger, and Cinnamon, Pepper, Salt, Sugar, and the yolks
of six Eggs; put it in the Tart, with the juice of Orange, close it, and when
it is baked, scrape Sugar thereon.

Rice-Cream.
Take a quart of Cream, two handfuls of Rice-flower, and a quarter of a pound
of Sugar, mingle the Flower and Sugar very well together, and put it in the
Cream, then beat the yolk of an Egg with a little Rosewater, put it to the
Cream and stir them all together, set it over a quick fire, and keep it
continually stirring till it be as thick as Pap.

Another excellent and rare Cream.
Take a pound of Almond-paste, fine beaten with Rosewater, mingle it with a
quart of Cream, six Eggs, a little Sack, half a pound of Sugar, and some beaten
Nutmeg; strain them, and put them in a clean scoured Skillet, and set it on a
soft fire, stir it continually, and being well incorporated, dish it and serve
it up with juice of Orange, Sugar, and stick it full of candied Pistaches.

Several excellent Sawces for several Dishes, and first for green-Geese.
Take the juice of Sorrel mixed with scalded Goosberries, beaten Butter and
Sugar, then serve it on Sippets. Or fill their bellies with Goosberries, and so
roast them, then take them out, and mingle them with Sugar, Butter, Vinegar,
Cinnamon, and served on sippets.

For Land-fowl, take boiled Pruncs, and strain them with the blood of the Fowl,
Cinnamon, Ginger, and Sugar, boil them to an indifferent thickness, and serve it
in Sawcers, with the Gravy of the Fowl.

For roast Mutton diverse sorts of Sawces; 1. Gravy, Capers, Samphire, and Salt,
stew them well together. 2. Water, Onion, Claret Wine, sliced Nutmeg and Gravy
boiled. 3. Whole Onions stewed in Gravy, White Wind, Pepper, pickled Capers,
Mace, and three or four slices of Lemon. 4. Take Vinegar, Butter, and Currants,
put them into a Pipkin with sweet Herbs finely minced, the yolks of two hard
Eggs, some Cinnamon, Ginger, Sugar, Salt, with some of the meat minced very
small, and boiled up with the aforesaid ingredients. 5. Salt, Pepper, juice of
Oranges, and an Anchove. 6. Preserve the liquor of the Oysters you stuff your
Mutton with, and add thereto Onions, Claret, Capers, or Broombuds, Gravy,
Nutmeg, and Salt boiled together. These for a taste, for brevity, I shall omit
a many more for Mutton, which might be here inserted.

For roast Veal several Sawces. 1. Gravy, Claret, Nutmeg, Vinegar, Butter,
Sugar and Oranges. 2. Only Vinegar and Butter. 3. All manner of sweet Herbs
chopped small, with the yolks of three or four Eggs, and boil them in Vinegar
and Butter, a few bread-crumbs, Currants, beaten Cinnamon, Sugar, and a whole
Clove or two, put it under the Veal, with slices of Orange and Lemon to garnish
the Dish.

For Red-deer. 1. The Gravy and sweet Herbs chopped small and boiled together.
2. Whitebread boiled in water pretty thick without spice, and put to it some
Butter, Vinegar and Sugar. 3. The juice of Oranges or Lemons, with the Gravy. A
Gallendine sauce I have already described in the roasting of Red-deer.

For Rabbets several sawces. 1. Beaten Butter, with the Liver, and Parsley cut
very small. 2. Sage and Parsley minced, roll it in a ball of Butter, and stuff
the belly therewith.

For roast Hens diverse Sawces. 1. Take the yolks of three hard Eggs minced
small, Salt, grated Bread, Gravy, juice of Oranges, with Lemon Peel shred
small. 2. Gravy and Claret boiled with a piece of an Onion, Nutmeg and Salt. 3.
Oyster-liquor, an Anchove or two, Nutmeg and Gravy, and rub the Dish with a
Clove of Garlic.

Sawces for roast Chicken. Butter and Vinegar boiled together with a little
Sugar, then make thin sops of Bread, then lay the roast Chicken on them, and
serve them up.

For roast Pigeons, or Stock-doves. 1. Boiled Parsley minced, and put amongst
some Butter and Vinegar beaten up thick. 2. Vine-leaves roasted with the
Pigeons, minced and put into Claret with Salt, Butter and Gravy boiled
together. 3. Minced Onions boiled in Claret Wine almost dry, then put to it
Nutmeg, Sugar, Gravy of the Fowl, and a little Pepper.

An excellent way to roast Salmon.
Take a Rand or Jole, cut it into four pieces, and season it with a little
Nutmeg and Salt, stick a few Cloves, and put it on a small pit, put between it
some Bay Leaves, and stick it with little sprigs of Rosemary, roast it and bast
it with Butter, save the Gravy, and add to it for Sauce some Vinegar, sweet
Butter, and some slices of Orange.

Salmon Fried.
Take a Jole, Chine, or Rand, and fry it in clarified Butter; being stiff and
crisp fried, make Sauce with a little Claret Wine, sweet Butter, grated Nutmeg,
slices of Orange, and Oysterliquor, stew them all together, and pour on the
Sauce, and on that, Parsley, Ellick-sander, and Sage-leaves fried in Butter.

Soust Veal, Lamb, or any joint of Mutton, Kid, Fawn or Venison.
Bone a breast of Veal, and soak it well from the blood, then wipe it dry, and
season the side of the breast with beaten Nutmeg, Ginger, some sweet Herbs
minced small, whole Coriander-seed, minced Lemon Peel and Salt, and lay some
broad slices of sweet Lard over the seasoning, then roll it into a Collar, and
bind it up in a white clean cloth, put it into boiling liquor, scum it well,
and then put in sliced Ginger, sliced Nutmeg, Salt, Fennel, Parsley; being
almost boiled, put in a quart of White Wind, and when it is quite boiled, take
it off, and put in slices of Lemon, the peel of two Lemons whole, and a dozen
Bayleaves, boil it close covered, that the souse may look white.

Taffety Tart.
First, wet your paste with Butter, and cold water, roll it very thin, then lay
Apples in lays, and between every lay of Apples strew some fine Sugar, and some
Lemon Peel cut very small; you may also put some Fennel-seed to them, let them
bake an hour or more, then ice them with Rosewater, Sugar, and Butter beaten
together, and wash them over with the same, strew more fine Sugar over them,
and put them into the Oven again; this done, you may serve them hot or cold.

Venison how to recover when tainted.
Take a clean cloth and wrap your Venison therein, then bury it in the Earth
one whole night, and it will take away the ill scent or savor.

To make Beef, Ram, or Mutton pass for Venison.
Take your Beef, etc. and dip it in Pigs-blood, or any new blood, then take
Small-beer and Vinegar, and parboil it therein, let it steep all night, then
put some Turnsole to it; when it is baked, a good judgment shall not discern it
from Red or Fallow-deer.

Warden-Tarts.
Take twenty good Wardens, pare them and cut them into your Tart, and put to
them two pound of refined Sugar, twenty whole Cloves, a quarter of an Ounce of
Cinnamon broke into little bits, and three races of Ginger pared and sliced
thin; then close up the Tart and bake it; it will require five hours baking;
then ice it with a quarter of a pound of double refined Sugar, Rosewater and
Butter.

Thus Ladies and Gentlewomen I have cursorily ran through the whole body of the
art of Cookery; I have only touched here and there upon some excellent Receipts,
and now much in fashion, leaving it to your industry to supply my deficiency: I
shall now proceed to the rest of those accomplishments which best become a
Gentlewoman.

A Bill of Fare of Suitable Meat for every Month in the Year.
January.
1. Brawn and Mustard. 2. Two boiled Capons in White-broth. 3. A Turkey roasted.
4. A Shoulder of Mutton hasht. 5. Two Geese boiled. 6. Goose roasted. 7. Ribs
or Surloyn of Beef. 8. Minced Pyes. 9. A Loyn of Veal. 10. A Pasty of Venison.
11. A Marrow-pye. 12. Roasted Capons. 13. Lamb. 14. Woodcocks, Partridges, with
smaller Birds.
Second Course.
1. A Soust Pig. 2. A Warden-Pye. 3. Dried Neats-tongues. 4. A Soust Capon. 5.
Pickled Oysters, and Mushrooms together. 6. Sturgeon. 7. A Goose, or Turky-Pye.
February.
1. A Chine of roast-Pork. 2. Veal or Beef roasted. 3. A Lamb-Pye, and
Mince-Pyes. 4. A couple of wild Ducks. 5. A couple of Rabbits. 6. Fried
Oysters. 7. A Skirrot-Pye.
Second Course.
1. A whole Lamb roasted. 2. Three Widgeons. 3. A Pippin-Pye. 4. A Jole of
Sturgeon. 5. A cold Turky-Pye.
March.
1. Neats-tongue and Udder. 2. Boiled Chickens. 3. A Dish of stewed Oysters. 4.
A Dish of young Rabbits. 5. A grand Sallet.
Second Course.
1. A Dish of Soles, or Smelts. 2. Marinate Flounders. 3. A Lambstone-Pye. 4.
An hundred of Asparagus. 5. A Warden-Pye.
April.
1. Green Geese, or Veal, and Bacon. 2. Haunch of Venison roasted. 3. A
Lumber-Pye. 4. Rabbits and Tarts.
Second Course.
1. Cold Lamb. 2. Cold Neats-tongue-Pye. 3. Salmon, Lobsters and Prauns. 4.
Asparagus.
May.
1. Boiled Chickens. 2. Roast-Veal. 3. Roasted Capons. 4. Rabbits.
Second Course.
1. Artichoak-Pye hot. 2. Westphalia Bacon, and Tarts 3. Sturgeon, Salmon and
Lobsters. 4. A Dish of Sparagrass. 5. A Tansie.
June.
1. A Neats-tongue, or Leg of Mutton and Colliflowers. 2. A Steak-Pye. 3. A
Shoulder of Mutton. 4. A fore-quarter of Lamb. 5. A Dish of Pease.
Second Course.
1. Sweet-bread-Pye. 2. A Capon. 3. A Goose-berry-Tart. 4. Strawberries and
Cream. Or Strawberries, White Wind, Rosewater and Sugar.
July.
1. A Westphalia Ham and Pigeons. 2. A Loyn of Veal. 3. A Venison-Pasty. 4.
Roast Capons.
Second Course.
1. Pease or French beans. 2. A Codling-Tart. 3. Artechoaks, or a Pie made
thereof. 4. Roast Chickens.
August.
1. Calves-head and Bacon. 2. An Olio, or grand boiled meat. 3. A Haunch of
Venison roasted. 4. A Pig roasted.
Second Course.
1. Marinate Smelts. 2. A Pidgeon-Pye. 3. Roast Chickens. 4. A Tart. 5. Some
Creams and Fruit.
September.
1. Capon and Whitebroth. 2. Neats-tongue and Udder roasted. 3. A powdered
Goose. 4. A roast Turkey.
Second Course.
1. A Potato-pye. 2. Roast Partridges. 3. A Dish of Larks. 4. Creams and Fruit.
October.
1. Roast Veal. 2. Two brand Geese roasted. 3. A grand Sallet. 4. Roasted
Capons.
Second Course.
1. Pheasants, Pouts and Pigeons. 2. A Dish of Quails, or Sparrows. 3. A
Warden-Pye, Tarts, or Custards.
November.
1. A Shoulder of Mutton and Oysters. 2. A loyn of Veal. 3. Geese roasted. 4. A
Pasty of Venison.
Second Course.
1. Two Herns, one larded. 2. A Soust Turbut. 3. Two Pheasants, one larded. 4.
A Roll of Beef. 5. A Soust Mullet and Base. 6. Jellies and Tarts.
December.
1. Stewed broth of Mutton and Marrow-bones. 2. Lambs-head and White-broth. 3.
A Chine of Beef roasted. 4. Mince-Pyes. 5. A roast Turkey stuck with Cloves. 6.
Two Capons, one larded.
Second Course.
1. A young Lamb or Kid. 2. Two brace of Partridg. 3. Ballonia Sausages,
Anchoves, Mushrooms, Caviare, and pickled Oysters, in a Dish together. 4. A
Quince-Pye. 5. Half a dozen of Woodcocks.
Bills of Fare for fasting days or Lent; Out of these following Dishes you may
compose what Messes you please of several sorts and kinds.
Oysters, if in Season. Pole of Ling. Green-fish and Eggs. Prauns buttered, or
Craw-fish. Pike boiled. Carp stewed with Oysters. Soles fried. Spitchcock Eels
roasted. Fried Smelts. Salmon, Lobsters, and Sturgeon. Buttered Eggs.
Barley-broth, or Rice-pottage. Stewed or fried Oysters. Boiled Gurnet.
Hadducks, fresh Cod, or Whitings. Eel or Carp-Pye. Soust Turbut. Potato's
baked, or Oyster-Pyes. Buttered Crabs. Fried Flounders. Joles of fresh Salmon.
Fried Turbut. Fried Skirrets. Soust Conger; with what else your own judgments
shall think proper for that Season.

Thus Ladies I have given you an Essay, or small pattern of Cookery, not
desiring to tie you too strictly to the observation of those rules I have here
laid down for your imitation; but desire to give your fancy all convenient
liberty in correcting what you may find amiss herein. There are many excellent
Books in Cookery already extant, to which I shall refer you, and your own
ingenious experiments in the amending what in this you find erroneous, and that
you may know (though a Woman) I am not altogether ignorant of that tongue I
have advised you to learn; give me leave to quote an ancient Poet very
applicable to this purpose.

-- Si quid novisti rectius istis
Candidus imperti, si non his utere mecum.
If thou know ought than this more right or wise, Impart it freely, or let
this suffice.

Now because I have promised to give an Essay to every thing which concerns the
virtuous and good Education of young Ladies and Gentlewomen, I shall endeavor
their instruction in the most considerable matters of Physic and Chyrurgery,
Candying, Preserving and Distilling.

An Introduction to Physic and Chyrurgery.
AS it is a very commendable quality in Gentlewomen, whether young or old, to
visit the sick; so it is impossible to do it with that charity some stand in
need of, without some knowledge in Physic, and the several operations of Herbs
and Spices: But since it will take up too much room to insert here what may
make you a complete Herbalists I shall refer you to such who have largely
treated on that Subject; viz. Mr. Gerhard, and Mr. Parkinson, with many more
expert in the knowledge of Vegetables. Wherefore since the knowledge of sundry
sorts of Spices is very requisite both for persons diseased, and in health, I
shall begin with them.

Pepper is a spice of the most common use, hot and dry to the fourth degree
almost. The black is that which is generally coveted; but inconsiderately by
the younger sort of people, it being hurtful to them, though comfortable to old
Age. When you use it, beat it not too small for fear of inflaming the blood,
otherwise it cutteth gross phlegm, dispelleth Crudities, and helps Digestion.

The next thing, which is hotter than Pepper, is Ginger; not that it is really
so, but because the biting heat of Ginger is more lasting and durable. This
spice is not so much used in dressing meat, as the other; however it is very
good for concoction, and opens obstructions, and is very expedient for the
expulsion of Wind. Green Ginger in the Indies preserved, is excellent good for
a watery and windy stomach, if taken fasting, the better sort is unfleaky, and
so clear you may almost see through it; but there is little good made in
England.

Cloves is an excellent spice for the head, heart, stomach, and the eyes, which
are much benefited thereby, and Nature strengthened. In Swoonings and
Fainting-fits they are very good, or against the Plague, or any other
infectious disease whatsoever, or fluxes of the belly proceeding from cold
humors. They are good against strengthening the retentive faculty, and sweetning
the breath; but let young Sanguine and Choleric Complexions use them and all
other spices very sparingly.

Nutmeg is hot and dry in the second degree, and is accounted a spice of the
like nature and property, with what are before mentioned. It is astringent, and
good for Phlegmatic Constitutions, cold Diseases and Fluxes. Nutmegs whilst
green and covered over with an husk or shell like our Walnuts, are preserved in
the Indies as Ginger is, and are very comfortable to the Head and Stomach.

The covering of the Nutmeg is the Mace, which partakes of the same nature with
it, strengthening the animal parts, and it is good against fluxes and spitting
of blood.

Cinnamon is the inward bark or rind of a Tree growing in the Indies, and is
accounted to be hot and dry in the third degree. This spice by reason of its
fragrancy and palatable taste, may justly challenge the pre-cellency of most
other Spices; it comfort the spirits, and opens obstructions both in Men and
Women; it helps a Woman in her delivery, furthereth Urine, and is good for
Concoction.

We have a Spice growing here at home called Saffron, which need not give place
to any of the former; it is hot in the second, and dry in the first degree: It
is a great Cordial, and a help against obstructions; it is good against the
Jaundies, and unstufss the pipes of the Lungs: It is good to bring down the
Menstruum, and facilitates the Birth, if taken moderately. And since I have
spoken of a thing of our own growth, let me add another, which is Honey, hot
and dry in the second degree, and is better boiled than raw; it is very
restorative, and therefore good against Consumptions, and Phlegmatic
Constitutions, but dangerous to be used much by hot Complexions, for thereby it
is soon converted into Choler. The best is very sweet, pleasant of smell, of a
clear and yellowish color, pretty stiff and firm, and yields but little scum
on the top when boiled. Garden-honey is the best, and is clarified by adding a
little water to it, about the fourth part, and so scum it whilst any froth
arises, or till the water be evaporated, which is known by the bubbles rising
from the bottom; if you will have it more pure, put into every pound of Honey
the white of an Egg, and afterward scum it again in the boiling; then use it
against all pectoral infirmities, as the Cough, shortness of breath, the
Pleurisy, etc.

Sugar is the next thing we treat of, which is generally esteemed and used, and
more now than ever; since the Ancients knew not the right way of preparing it
as it is done nowadays.

Sugar is neither so hot and dry as Honey; the brownest or coarsest is most
cleansing, and is good for abstersions in diseases of the Breast or Lungs; but
as it is opening and cleansing, so the immoderate use thereof is dangerous; for
it will rot the Teeth, and taint the Breath, engender Jaundies and
Consumptions; and Physicians verily believe, that the major part of those who
die of the Consumption in the City (the constantly great numbers whereof may be
seen in the Weekly Bills of Mortality) are such who eat Confections, and such
like sweet things immoderately.

And since I have spoken of Sugar, pray take special notice of this remark,
That the most part of our finest Sugar, and which is most coveted, is refined
and whitened by the means of the Lee of Lime; how prejudicial that may be to
the body, I will leave it to the Rational to consider.

Thus I have given you a small touch of the nature of Spices; I think I need
not acquaint you, that we have here at home in our own Gardens many excellent
Aromatical Plants, such as Rosemary, Lavender, Time, Savory, Sage, Mint,
Pennyroyal, Basil, sweet Cerfuel, Avens, Angellica, with many more which you
may find in Culpeper's English Physician, with their nature, use, and
disposition.

The great plenty we have of these excellent Plants has made many judicious
persons admire, that being supplied at home with such admirable Simples, we
should hunt so eagerly after Outlandish Spices, which by difficulty of
transportation, length of way, and carelessness of the Merchant, are frequently
imported rotten, or worm-eaten; or so long before they come to our hands, that
they have lost half their virtue.

What is to be observed by a Gentlewoman before she undertakes the
administration of Physic.
The first inconvenience you must shun (which I have observed in most Physical
Practitioners) is the vulgar error of not suffering the diseased or sick person
to change his linen often; and I know not by what unreasonable prescription
they will not suffer a diseased female to change her head-clothes, till it too
sensibly offend the noses of the Visitants. Their common objection is, That the
sick by that means may catch cold; and next, That there shifting much weakneth
them.

To this I answer, That it is only the foolish conjecture and groundless fear
of some old Dotard of our sex; for a good fire will easily prevent catching of
cold; and in the next place, their often shifting has apparently proved the
means of their strengthening; besides it much discourageth and dejecteth the
sick person to lie in foul linen, making them even loath themselves in that
stinking condition. To make this the more easily understood, take notice, that
in humane bodies there is a threefold Concoction; the first in the stomach,
which is commonly called the Chyle, and has for its excrement that which is
conveyed to Colon or the great Gut; the second concoction is in the Liver, and
has for its excrement the Urine; the last is called Nutrition, and has for
its excrement certain fuliginous vapors, which by insensible transpiration do
breathe out themselves through the pores of the body, and by the sweat, which
is apparent to the eye. Now in times of Sickness, especially in all sorts of
Fevers (which are the usual diseases which invade English bodies) this last
excrement does very much abound, and does extremely and specdily foul the
Linen of the sick person; for which cause reason tells us, that the Linen
should be often shifted, especially if they sweat much, lest the sweat
continuing about the body, it should be drawn in by the same way it had its
passage out. For know, the Arteries of the body have a double motion, one
whereby they expel the Excrements, already mentioned; and the other whereby
they attract into the body the ambient Air to refresh the blood: Now observe,
whatsoever Air is next unto them, whether good or bad, they draw it in; and
therefore if this foul sweaty Linen do lie about, or upon them, undoubtedly
the noisome airs will be drawn in by the Arteries, and so prolong the
distemper. To make further proof hereof, I have heard it reported by an eminent
Physician, that let any person newly come out of the Bath go into a place where
quantity of dust is raised, and he shall instantly feel an universal pricking
over his whole body, which is nothing else but the Atoms of dust drawn in by
the Arteries. By this then you may understand, that the skin ought to be
cleansed from all corruption, and the pores and passages to be kept open and
clean; for which cause it was that the Romans of old had their bodies
frequently rubbed with a coarse cloth. Thus much I have added likewise, to let
Gentlewomen see how much they are abused by their credulous and ignorant Nurses.

Should I add other observables, with the Symptoms of Diseases, I should swell
this small Treatise into a greater volume than is requisite. I shall therefore
desist and give you my collection (with my own observation) of the choicest
receipts in Physic and Chyrugery I could meet with in my strictest indigation.

Choice and Experimental Observations in Physic and Chyrurgery, such which
rarely failed any who made trial thereof.
A most approved Receipt for a Quartane Ague.
PRocure a white flint-stone (for that will best endure the fire without
breaking) and let it lie in a quick fire till it be red hot, then take foam
small beer and quench it therein; when the fit is coming, let the diseased
drink a good draught thereof, and another in the midst thereof; let this be
done four several days both in the fit, and when the fit is coming. This I have
been credibly informed was a receipt a woman had her livelihood from, in curing
several when all other means proved ineffectual.

For a sudden and violent bleeding at the nose.
Take an Egg-shell and burn it to a coal, then pulverize or beat it to a fine
powder, and let the person snuff it up his Nostrils, or take your two thumbs
and press them hard against the Temples of the Bleeder, and you would admire
how speedily it will divert the course of the blood. For those that are
accustomed thus to bleed, let them make an ordinary Posset, taking off the
curd, let the juice of Liverwort beaten be added thereunto, and so drink
morning and evening.

To stop the Bleeding of a Wound.
Take Vervine dried, and reduce it to powder; or take the sole of an old
stocking and burn it, put the ashes of the one, or powder of the other, to the
wound, and it will leave bleeding.

An approved Medicine of London-Midwives to break and heal Women's sore breasts.
Take red Sage and Oatmeal the finest you can get, and boil them together in
Spring Water, till you have boiled them to a consistency, that is as thick as
to make a Plaster; then add thereunto a fit proportion of Honey; having boiled
a little while together, take it off the fire, and whilst it is boiling-hot,
make it indifferent thick with the best Venice-Turpentine, then spread it on
fine leather, or linen cloth, and laying it on the sore breast it will first
break it, and afterward perfectly heal it.

An excellent way to dry up a Woman's breast.
Of Linseed-Oyl and English Honey, take of each a peny-worth, of white-wax half
a peny-worth, and half a quarter of a pound of sweet butter, boil all these
together, spread a Plaster thereof, and lay it on the breast. Probatum est.

An infallible receipt to increase milk in Women's breasts.
Take Chickens and make broth of them, then add thereunto Fennel and
Parsnip-roots, then take the newest-made Butter you can procure, and butter the
roots therewith; having so done let her eat heartily, and her expectations
therein will be speedily satisfied.

Against a Stinking-breath.
To prevent a Stinking-breath, you ought to keep your teeth very clean by
rubbing them every morning with water and salt, which will also cure the
scurvy; you may if you please try Mr. Turners Dentifrices, which are every
where much cried up. But if your breath be tainted, proceeding from some other
cause, take Rosemary-leaves with the blossoms, if to be had, and sees them in
White Wind, with a little Myrrh, and Cinnamon, and you will find the effect to
answer your desires if you use it often.

For a Cancer in a Woman's Breast.
Take Goos-dung and Cellydony, stamp them well together, and lay them
Plaisterwise on the sore; this shall cleanse the Cancer, kill the Worm, and
heal the Sore. For a Cancer in the Mouth take the juice of Plantane-Vinegar,
and Rosewater, mingle together of each a like quantity, and wash the mouth
often with them.

For young Children who by reason of the weakness of their Limbs can neither
stand nor go.
Take Marjoram and Sage, of each a like quantity, beat them very well together,
then strain out the juice, and put it into a double Glass-Vial, filling the
Glass as full as it will hold; stop it then with paste very close all over, set
it into an Oven, and there let it stand the time of an Houshold-loafs baking;
taking it out, let it stand till it be cold; then breaking the paste round
about it, see if the juice be grown thick; if so, break the Glass, and put what
was therein contained, into a Gally-pot, and keep it. When you use it, take the
quantity of two spoonfuls at a time, and as much Marrow of an Oxleg, melt them
together, and mingle them well, and both morning and evening anoint therewith
(as warm as can be endured) the tender parts of the Child's legs, knees and
thighs, chafing them well with your hands; and in a short time (Deo volente)
the child will be able to go and stand; this receipt has been ever found
successful.

An approved China-broth for a Consumption.
Take two Ounces of China-root sliced thin, and let it be steept twenty-four
hours in fair water, let it stand warm all the time close covered in an Earthen
Pipkin, add thereunto a couple of Chickens, or a Cockerel, cleanly dressed, to
these put half an handful of Maidenhair, the like quantity of fine leaved
grass, and Hartstongue; twenty sliced Dates, three or four blades of Mace, and
the bottom of a Manchet, let all these stew together till there be but a quart
of liquor left, then strain it and take all the flesh and bones, and beat them
in a Stone-Morter, then strain out the juice into the aforesaid broth, then
sweeten it with two ounces of powdered Sugar Candy. Take hereof half a pint in
the morning warm, and sleep after it if you can; you will not do amiss to add
two drams of white and red Sanders to steep with your China-root.

A most excellent Jelly for the Consumption.
Take a new killed Cock, scald him, and wash him clean; then take a Leg of
Veal, and take away all the fat from it, and let them lie in water five or six
hours, then seethe them together in a gallon of Spring Water, scum clean the
fat off; thus let it seethe over a soft fire till the liquor be half consumed;
then put in a pottle of White Wind, and let it boil to a quart; add hereunto
the whites of new-laid Eggs, clarify it and let it run through a Jellybag;
then set it on the fire again, and put into it an ounce of gross Cinnamon, and a
pound of fine Sugar, and let it run twice or thrice through a Jelly-bag again;
having made a Jelly hereof, eat thereof cold.

An excellent Comforter of the Stomach, and helper of Digestion.
Take two ounces of good old Conserve of Red-roses, of chosen Mithridate two
dramms, mingle them together, and when you are going to bed eat thereof the
quantity of an Haselnut. This will expel all flatulency or windiness off the
Stomach, drives away raw humors, and venomous vapors; helps Digestion,
dries the Rheum, and strengthens the Sight and Memory.

A well-tried Medicine for the Corns on the Feet or Toes.
Pare your Corns well, then take a black snail and bruise it, and put a drop or
two thereof on the place grieved; adding thereto a little powder of Samphire;
this I can assure with constant use in a little time will take away the Corn.

An excellent Diet-drink for the Spring to purge the Blood, and cleanse it.
Of Scurvy Grass take half a peck, Broodlime, Watercresses, Acrimony,
Maidenhair, Liverwort, Borrage, Bugloss, Betony, Sage, sweet Marjoram,
Sea-wormwood, Tops of green-hops, Fumitory, of each a good handful; of Ivory,
Hartshorn, and yellow Sanders, of each one ounce; Red dock-roots two ounces,
Parsley, Fennel, Asparagus-roots of each an ounce, Raisins half a pound; boil
these very well in a gallon of Beer, then stamp and strain them, and put it
into three gallons of new Beer to work together.

A Remedy for the Dropsy, whether hot or cold.
Take of the tops of red Mint, of Archangel, or blind nettles, and red Sage, of
either a small quantity, stamp them together, and strain the juice of them into
some stale Ale, so much as will serve to drink morning and evening, do this for
ten days together, and (God willing) it will effect the Cure.

Another for the Dropsy, which has cured many a Person when they were left
and forsaken by Physicians.
Take green Broom and burn it in some clean place, that you may save the Ashes
of it; take ten or twelve spoonful of the same Ashes, and boil them in a pint
of White Wind till the virtue thereof be in the Wine, then cool it, and drain
the Wine from the dregs, and make three draughts of the Wine, one fasting in
the Morning, the other at three in the Afternoon, and the other when you go to
Bed, this seldom fails in its desired effect.

For the Web or Pin in the Eye.
Take the Gall of a Hare and clarified Honey, of each a like quantity, mingle
them well together, and anoint the Web with a feather dipped in the same, and
in three or four days it will be gone.

To cleanse the skin of the face, and make it look heautiful and fair.
Take Rosemary and boil it in White Wind, with the juice of Erigan put
thereunto, and wash your face therewith Mornings and Evenings. If your Face be
troubled with heat, take Elder-flowers, Plantane, white Daisie-roots, and
Herb-Robert, and put these into running-water, and wash your Face therewith at
night, and in the Morning.

How to ripen and heal a Felon or Whitclof.
Take some white flower and boil it in Claret Wine to a Poultess, then spread
it very thick, and apply it as hot as you can endure it, this will assuage the
throbbing pain of the Whitclof, break and heal it.

How to cure the bloody Flux.
There are two sorts of Fluxes, the one proceeds from the evil quality or
temperament of the Liver, and is called in Latin, Fluxus Hepaticus; the other
comes from the great heat and distemperament of Nature, and is called
Dysenteria; that is, the distemper of the Guts; some cure this distemper with
repression and restrictives, but many more hundreds are cured by Aromaticum
Leonardi, with three or four doses of his Syrupus solutivus. You may try this
way, which I shall assure you is both safe and good: Take Frogs and distill
them as you do Herbs and Flowers, or any thing else, but put nothing to them
but a little water; take two or three spoonfuls of this distillation in any
thing you drink, and it will give you present ease.

A Cure for every sort of Gout.
The Gout whether hot or cold, or whatever temperature, arises from one and
the same cause, though the effects seem different. As for example, Fat-men have
it with much inflammation, redness, and great pain; in leaner Persons it is
discovered with less inflammation, though not with lesser pain; it afflicts
Choleric and Melancholic men with nodes and tumors. The cause of this
distemper comes from an evil quality engendered in the Stomach, Blood and
Liver, the cure thereof must be then the removal of this ill quality from the
Stomach, and the purgation of Blood and Liver. Wherefore when you perceive the
pain approaching, take two Doses of Pillula Magistrales Leonardi in the morning
fasting one day after another; or if you will intermit a day, then take drams
of Quinta essentia solutiva Leonardi, in half a Pottinger of Veal-broth
sweetened with Sugar; take this five hours before you eat any thing; then every
night after Supper take a little of the Unguentum Leonardi, and anoint your
grief, and you will find your speedy recovery.

How to cure the Green Sickness.
Laziness and love are the usual causes of these obstructions in young women;
and that which increases: and continues this distemper, is their eating
Oatmeal, chalk; nay foam have not forborne Cynders, Lime, and I know not what
trash. If you would prevent this slothful disease, be sure you let not those
under your command to want employment, that will hinder the growth of this
distemper, and cure a worser Malady of a lovesick breast, for business will
not give them time to think of such idle matters. But if this Green Sickness
has already got footing in the body, use this means to drive it away: Take a
Quart of Claret Wine, one pound of Currants, an handful of young Rosemary-tops,
with half an ounce of Mace, seethe these to a pint, and let the Patient drink
thereof three spoonfuls at a time, Morning and Evening, and eat some of the
Currants after.

An Universal Medicine of wonderful use both for Man and Woman.
Take ten ounces of the seeds of Quinces, six ounces of the pills of Citrons;
Balm and Nettles, of each four ounces; beat all these grossly, and infuse them
in six quarts of good White Wind, thus let it remain six days, then distill it
with six ounces of Honey, and fifteen ounces of Sugar, until you have received
a quart of water; then put it in a place to cool, then add thereunto eight
grains of Musk dissolved, with about two ounces of Rose Water put thereunto,
two scruples of oil of Vitriol, and incorporate them well together; then keep
this water in a Glass well closed to keep out the air; and of this take one
ounce in the Morning, and fast thereon two hours. This Experiment is a
wonderful preserver of health, and continuer of life to long age, if constanly
used, which may appear by the excellency of the Ingredients; for the
Quince-seeds are admirable for the removing of ill humors which clog the
Stomach, and are very cordial; the Pome-citron-pills preserve and help
digestion; the Balm purifieth the Blood, heals the Liver, incourageth
Concoction, and comfort the heart; the Nettles provoke Urine, mundifie the
Reins, and correct the malignity of the sinews; as for the Wine, you cannot be
ignorant of its Virtues; Musk purges the Blood of Windiness; the oil of
Vitriol heals all the excoriations of the Mouth, Breast, and Stomach, and is
excellent against malign humors that oppress it.

An admirable Remedy against the yellow Jaundies.
Take an handful of Red-nettle-tops, Plantane, and Saffron, and boil them well
in a pint of Ale, then strain it, and drink five or six days thereof, and you
will find it a present remedy; let not the cheapness of its ingredients
occasion this composition to be slighted.

Against the Itch.
Take sweet Butter, unwrought Wax, Vinegar; Brimstone, a little Rose Water and
red Cloves whole, boil them together till they be like Salve, then anoint the
flesh three sundry nights by the fire therewith, and no more, and you need not
question a cure.

Against Kibed Heels a certain Remedy.
Make a hole in the top of a Turnip, take out some of the pith, and pour into
the hole oil of Roses, then stop the hole close, and roast it under hot Embers;
when it is soft, apply it Plaisterwife to the Kibe as hot as can be endured.

What is best to be administered to one sick of the Measels.
In this distemper, as in the small Pox, it is only necessary to defend the
Heart, and preserve the Stomach from putrefaction and corruption; if young, to
hinder the hands from murdring a good face; and then give the diseased a Julip,
made of two ounces of Violets, four ounces of Rose Water, and four grains of
Oil of Vitriol, mix them and let them be drunk cold: It is as good a receipt as
any for this distemper.

To cure the Fits of the Mother.
Some, nay most use burnt Feathers, or Assafoetida, applied to the Nose of the
distempered person, not without success; but your better way is to take six or
seven drops of the spirit of Castoreum, in the beginning of the fit, in two or
three spoonfuls of Ale-posset, and apply a Plaster of Gavanum to the Navel.

To take away the Heat of a Burn or Scald.
Roast Eggs as hard as a Stone, then take out the yolks of them, then fry the
yolks of these Eggs in a Drying Pan till they turn to an Oil; then strain it,
and anoint the Burn or Scald therewith, then lay on a Bladder anointed with
Sallet-oyl, and this will speedily assuage the pain, and heal the Scald or Burn.

For a Scald-head.
Take a Candle, and let it drop upon it as hot as you can, in so doing it will
scale off; then take the Stale of a Cow, and the furring of Chamber-pots, boil
these together and wash the place, and it will speedily cure it.

A very good receipt for one hurt with Gunpowder.
Take twelve heads of Housleek, one handful of Groundsel, one pint of
Goose-dung, as much Chicken-dung of the newest that can be gotten; stamp the
Herbs very small, then put the dung into a Mortar, temper them together with a
pottle of Bores-grease, stir them together half an hour, then strain it through
a Canvas-bag, and so preserve it for your use; it will keep two years, and be
not the worse.

A very safe Clister to be used by-either Man or Woman, who is much bound or
costive.
Take Mallows and Mercury unwasht, of each two handfuls, half an handful of
Barley; clean rubbed and washed, and boil them in Springwater, from a pottle to
a quart, then strain out the Water, and put it in a Skillet, and put to it
three spoonfuls of Sallet-oyl, two spoonfuls of Honey, and a little Salt, then
make it lukewarm, and with your Pipe administer it.

How to cure old Sores on the Legs, which have been of so long standing that
the Bones have appeared.
Take a quantity of sweet Cream, and as much Brimstone beaten into fine powder
as will make it thick like Paste; then take so much sweet Butter as will work
it into the form of an Ointment, and herewith anoint the place grieved twice a
day, and in a short time the cure will be effected. Probatum est.

An excellent way to dissolve the Stone.
Take a peck of Green-bean-cods without dew or rain, and two good handfuls of
Saxifrage, lay the same into a Still, one row of Saxifrage, and another of the
Green-bean-cods; and so distill in this manner a quart of Water; and then
distill another quantity of Water from the Bean-cods alone, and use to drink of
these two Waters. If the Patient be most troubled with the heat of the Reins,
then let him most frequently drink of the distilled Bean-water, and upon coming
down of the sharp gravel or stone, let him drink the other.

A way not only to prevent but to cure the Toothache, or to make an aking-Tooth
fall out of it self.
Every Month, twice or thrice therein, wash your Mouth with White Wind, in
which Spurge has been boiled, and you shall never be troubled with the
Toothache. If your Tooth be hollow, and paineth you much, take this Herb called
Spurge, and squeeze it, and mingle Wheat Flour with the Milk which issues
thence, with this make a Paste, and fill the cavity of your Tooth therewith,
leaving it there a while, changing it every two hours, and the Tooth will drop
out.

How to order a Woman with Child, before, in, and after her Delivery.
To preserve the Infant, and prevent Abortion, take Coriander-seed prepared two
drams, of the roots of Bistort, the shaving of Ivory, and red Coral, of each a
dram, of white Amber and Crystal, of each a Scruple; Alkermes half a Scruple,
Sugar dissolved in four Ounces of Rose Water; make tables each of them weighing
a dram. Let the Woman with Child take one of them every other day, morning and
evening; between whiles let her sup a newlaid-Egg, thickened a little with
Magisterium of Pearl, or red Coral. But if her Breasts after their filling
should begin to lessen or fall, it is a sign of future Abortion; to prevent
which, let her take root of Bistort and Corianders, of each two drams; of
unripened Gales, and red Sander, and Hippocestidos, of each one dram;
Guin-Labdanum and Mastick of each half an ounce; choice Frankineense and
Bdelium, of each two drams; of Coral, Amber, one dram of each; powder those
which are to be powdered, and with Oil of Turpentine and Wax, make two or three
Cere-cloths, apply them sometimes to her Loins and Sides, and sometimes under
the Navel. She must avoid all violent and sudden motions, both of the Mind and
Body, as Coughs, Sneezings, Frights, also Spices and Wine. Thus much before
Delivery.

In Labor, if you will facilitate the Birth, and give speedy ease, take three
or four drops of the distilled Oil of Nutmegs in a spoonful of White Wind, or
take white Dictamn-root, stones of Dates, and Borax, of each two Scruples;
Cinnamon, Cassia-Lignea, Amber, fine Pearl, of each one Scruple; Saffron half a
Scruple, make a small powder of these, and divide them into two equal parts,
and let her take the one part in a draught of Lilly-water, or Ale-posset made
with Rhinish-wine; and the other part let her take in like manner six hours
after if need require. If she be subject to swooning or fainting before or
after Labor, give her a spoonful of this excellent Cordial following.

An excellent Cordial for Women troubled with Swooning-fits in Travel.
Take Borage-water, Rose Water, Strawberry-water, and Rhinish-wine, of each two
Ounces; Species of Diamargaricum frigidum, one Scruple; make a warm infusion
for the space of an hour, then strain it, and add thereunto Manus Christi, made
with Pearl, four Ounces; Oriental Bezor, Unicorns-horn, and Ambergriece, of
each six Crains; of these make a Cordial-Julip.

Great pains frequently follow Women newly brought to Bed; for which, there is
nothing better than this plain receipt; viz. Drink a good draught of Beer
boiled with a spoonful of Camomile-flowers; and in greater pains let her drink
six Ounces of the Oil of sweet Almonds fresh drawn.

If the Woman delivered have no mind to give suck, and that she will have her
Milk speedily dried up, a quick and safe remedy is, new Spunnges wet in
Vinegar, where a handful of Cummin-seed boiled is bruised, tied close to the
Breasts, anointing them with Unguentum Populeum.

To procure store of Milk, use Posset Drink boiled with Fennel, with the seeds
thereof, and Anniseeds. These remedies are known to be safe and effectual.

Thus much for Physic and Chyrurgery; having given you only some of the
choicest Receipts I could procure; if you defire a larger knowledge herein, you
would do well to acquaint your self with the Composition of Man's Body, and the
Diseases incident to every part; which you may gather from several Books of
Anatomy, either that of Dr. Read, or Dr. Riolanus, I think as good as any
extant.

If you would know the nature of Plants, Gerhard and Parkinson write
incomparably on that Subject, but if they are too bulky, and so may seem
tedious, you may make choice of lesser Herbals, as Adam in Eden; or a small
Manuel, written by Mr. Lovel.

If you would have a Salve for every sore, as the Proverb expresses, and a
receipt for every Distemper, consult the general practice of Physic, Riverius
his practice of Physic translated by Mr. Culpeper; with many more of the like
Subject.

The next Qualifications which accomplish a Gentlewoman, are, Candying,
Conserving, Preserving, and Distilling.

And first of Candying, Conserving and Preserving.
THese are Curiosities which are not only laudible, but requisite and necessary
in young Ladies and Gentlewomen: To represent them at large, would require more
art and time than I have either the ability or leisure to perform; however I
shall give you a Specimen hereof, or an Essay of my own Experiments; and first,

How to preserve Barberries.
Select the largest and fairest bunches, picking off the withered or shrunk
Barberries, and wash them clean, drying them in a clean Cloth. After this, take
a quantity of Barberries, and boil them in Claret Wine till they be soft; then
strain them well through a Strainer, wringing the juice hard through it; boil
this strained liquor with Sugar, till it be thick, and very sweet; let it then
stand till it be cold, then put your branches of Barberries into Gally-pots,
and fill them up with this liquor; by this means you will have both the Syrrup
of Barberries, and their Preserves.

Pears Preserved.
Take Pears that are sound, and newly gathered from the Tree, indifferent ripe,
then lay in the bottom of an Earthen-pot some dried Vine-leaves, and so make a
lay of Pears and leaves till you have filled the pot, laying between each lay
some sliced Ginger, then pour in as much old Wine as the pot will hold, laying
some heavy thing on the Pears that they may not swim.

Green Pippins Preserved.
Take half a score of Green Pippins, (from the Tree if you can) pare them, and
boil them in a pottle of water, till they are like a Pulpe; strain them from
the Cores, then take two pound of Sugar, and mingle it with the liquor or pulp
so strained, then set it on the fire, and as soon as it boileth, put in your
Pippins you intend to preserve, so let them boil leisurely; till they be
enough; when they are preserved, they will be green; in, like sort you may
preserve Quinces, Plumbs, Peaches and Apricocks, if you take them green.

Black Cherries Preserved.
Take them fresh, or as they come from the Tree, and cut off the stalk; take
one pound of Sugar for double the weight of Cherries, seethe and clarify them,
and when they are half boiled put in your other Cherries, and let them seethe
softly together, until the Sugar may be drawn between the fingers like small
threads; when the broth is almost cold, put the Cherries in the pots with the
stalks upwards.

Mulberries Preserved.
Take Mulberries, and add to them their weight of Sugar; having wet your Sugar
with some juice of Mulberries, then stir your Sugar together, and put in your
Mulberries and boil them till they are enough, then take them off and boil the
Syrrup a while, then put in the Mulberries, and let them stand till they be
cold.

Oranges and Lemons Preserved.
Take the fairest you can get, lay them in water three days and three nights,
to take away their bitterness; then boil them in fair water till they be
tender; make as much Syrrup as will make them swim about the pan; let them not
boil long, for then the skins will be tough; then let them lie all night in the
Syrrup, that they may soak themselves therein; in the morning boil the Syrrup
to a convenient thickness, then with it and the Oranges and Lemons, fill your
Gally-pots, and keep them all the year; in this manner you may preserve Citrons.

Goosberries Preserved.
Let your Goosberries be gathered with their stalks on, cut off their heads and
stone them, then put them in Scalding-water, and let them stand therein covered
a little while; then take their weight of Sugar finely beaten, and lay first a
layer of Sugar, then one of Goosberries in your Preserving-pan or Skillet. till
all be in, putting in for every pound of Goosberries a spoonful of fair water,
set them on the Embers till the Sugar be melted, then boil them up as fast as
you can, till the Syrrup be thick enough; when cold, put them up. In this
manner you may preserve Raspices and Mulberries.

Preserved Roses, or any other Flowers.
Take one pound of Roses, three pound of Sugar, one pint and a little more of
Rose Water, make your Syrrup first, and let it stand till it be cold; then take
your Rose-leaves, having first clipped off all the white, put them in the cold
Syrrup and cover them; let your fire be very soft that they may only simmer two
or three hours; then whilst they are hot, put them out into pots or glasses for
your use.

Cherries Preserved.
Take Cherries fully ripe, and newly gathered, put them to the bottom of your
Preservingpan, let the Cherries and Sugar be of equal weight, then throw some
Sugar on the Cherries, and set them over a quick-fire; and as they boil, throw
on the rest of the Sugar till the Syrrup be thick enough; then take them out
and put them into a Gally-pot whilst they are warm; it will not be amiss to add
two or three spoonfuls of Rose Water to them.

Apricocks Preserved.
Let the weight of your Sugar equal the weight of your Apricocks, what quantity
soever you mind to use; pare and stone your Apricocks, and lay them in the
Sugar in your Preservingpan all night, and in the morning set them on the
Embers till the Sugar be all melted, and then let them stand and scald an hour;
then take them off the fire and let them stand in that Syrrup two days, and
then boil them softly till they be tender and well colored; and after that,
when they are cold, put them up in glasses or pots, which you please.

Green Walnuts Preserved.
Take Walnuts and boil them till the water taste bitter, then take them off and
put them in cold water, and peel off the rind, and put to them as much Sugar as
they weigh, and a little more water than will wet the Sugar, set them on a
fire, and when they boil up, take them off, and let them stand two days, then
boil them again once more.

Eringo-roots Preserved.
Take Eringo-roots fair, and not knotty, one pound, and wash them clean, then
set them on the fire, and boil them very tender, peel off their outermost skin,
but break them not as you pare them; then let them lie a while in cold water;
after this you must take to every pound of roots three quarters of a pound of
clarified Sugar, and boil it almost to the height of a Syrrup, and then put in
your roots, but look that they boil but gently together, and stir them as
little as may be, for fear of breaking; when they are cold, put them up and
keep them.

Ennula-Campana-roots Preserved.
Wash them, and scrape them very clean, and cut them thin to the pith, the
length of your little finger; and as you cut them, put them in water, and let
them lie there thirty days, shifting them twice every day, to take away the
bitterness; then weigh them, and to every pound of Roots add twelve Ounces of
Sugar, clarified first, boiling the Roots very tender, then put them into this
Sugar, and let them boil upon a gentle fire until they be enough; having stood
a good while off the fire, put them up between hot and cold.

Conserve of Roses.
Take red-Rose-buds, clip all the white, either bruised or withered from them;
then add to every pound of Roses, three pound of Sugar, stamp the Roses very
small, putting to them a little juice of Lemons or Rose Water as they become
dry; when you think your Roses small enough, then put your Sugar to them, so
beat them together till they be well mingled, then put it up in Gally-pots or
Glasses. In this manner is made the Conserve of Flowers of Violets, which does
cool and open in a burning Fever or Ague, being dissolved in Almond-milk, and
so taken; and excellent good for any inflammation in Children.

Thus you may also make the Conserve of Cowslips, which strengthens the brain,
and is a Preservative against Madness; it helps the Memory, asswageth the pain
of the Head, and helps most infirmities thereof. In like manner you may also
make Conserve of Marigolds, which taken fasting in the morning is very good
against Melancholy; cures the trembling of the heart, and very good against
any Pestilential distemper.

Thus make Conserve of Sage and Scabious, the one is good against Melancholy,
dries and comfort the Stomach, cures an old Cough, and opens the
stopping of the Liver: the other, that is Scabious, cleanses the Breast and
Lungs, takes away old Coughs, and imposthumes of the Breast and inward parts.

How to Candy all sorts of Flowers as they grow with their stalks on.
Take the Flowers, and cut the stalks somewhat short; then take one pound of
the whitest and hardest Sugar you can get, put to it eight spoonfuls of
Rose Water, and boil it till it will roll between your finger and your thumb;
then take it from the fire, and cool it with a stick, and as it waxes cold,
dip in all your Flowers, and taking them out again suddenly, lay them one by
one on the bottom of a Sieve, then turn a joined Stool with the feet upward;
set the sieve on the feet thereof, then cover it with a fair linen cloth, and
set a Chafing Dish of coals in the midst of the stool underneath the sieve, and
the heat thereof will dry your Candy speedily, which will look very pleasantly,
and keep the whole year.

Candyed Eringo-roots.
Take of your Eringo-roots ready to be preserved, and weigh them, and to every
pound of Roots you must take of the purest Sugar you can get two pound, and
clarify it with the whites of Eggs exceeding well, that it may be as clear as
Crystal; it being clarified, you must boil it to the height of Manus Christi,
and then dip in your Roots two or three at once till they are all Candyed; put
them in a Stove, and so keep them all the year.

The best and most approved way to dry Plumbs.
Take Plumbs when they are fully grown, with the stalks on them; however let
them be green, split them on the one side, and put them in hot water (but not
too hot), and so let them stand three or four hours; then to a pound of them
take three quarters of a pound of Sugar beaten very fine, and eight spoonfuls
of water to every pound; set them on hot embers till the Sugar be melted; and
after that, boil them till they be very tender, letting them stand in that
Syrrup three days to plump them; then take them out, and wash the Syrrup from
them in warm water, and wipe them dry in a fine Linen Cloth, then set them on
plates, and let them dry in a Stove; dry them not in an Oven, for then they
will be tough.

Proper Colors for Fruitage.
Saffron is the best Yellow, Sap-green the best Green, Indian-lake the best
Red; all your Colors must be tempered with Gum-water made of Rose Water.

Quince Marmelade.
Take of the tairest Quinces, wash them very clean, grate them very small, and
wring out as much juice as you can; then take other Quinces and cut them in six
pieces, put them into a pot, let them be evapoured with hot water, until they
be thoroughly mellow; then take half a pot-ful of the former juice, and pour it
upon the former, stewed and cut to pieces; break it well together, and put the
rest of the juice amongst it, then wring it through a clean thin cloth; seethe
no more of this juice at once than will fill a box therewith, and put white
Sugar to it, as much as you please.

How to make Syrrup of Violets.
Boil fair water, and scum it, and to every ounce so scum'd and boiled, take
six ounces of the blew of Violets, only shift them as before nine times, and
the last time take nine ounces of Violets; let them stand between times of
shifting twelve hours, keeping the liquor still on hot embers, that it may be
but milk-warm; after the first shifting, you must stamp and strain your last
nine ounces of Violets, and put in only the juice of them, then take to every
pint of this liquor thus prepared, one pound of Sugar finely beaten, boil it,
and keep it stirring till all the Sugar be melted, which you must do, if you
can, before it boil; afterward boil it up with a quick fire.

Syrrup of Roses.
Take Damask Roses, and clip off the white of them, for every pint of water
take six ounces of them, boil your water first, and scum it, then let them
stand twelve hours, wringing out the Roses, and putting in new eight times,
then wringing out the last, put in the juice of four ounces of Roses only, and
so make it up as before.

Syrrup of Coltsfoot.
Take the leaves of Coltsfoot, and wash them very clean, then wipe them with a
clean cloth leaf by leaf, then dry them well with a cloth, then beat them in a
Mortar, and put them in a Strainer, and wring all the juice you can out of
them, and put it into Glasses, and let it stand in them to settle all night,
the next day pour out the clearest of the Juice from the Grounds into a clean
Basin, and take for every pint thereof a pound of Sugar finely beaten, boil the
Juice of Coltsfoot softly on a Charcoal fire, and when you have well scum'd it,
put in the Sugar according to its proportion, and so let them boil together,
keeping it with due scumming, until it will stand on a stiff purl, dropping it
on a Plate; then take it from the fire, and pour it through a Jelly-bag into a
fair Basin, putting first a branch or two of Rosemary into the Bag's bottom,
then keep it stirring with a spoon till it be lukewarm; otherwise it will have
a Cream upon it; so letting it stand all night, put it in what Vessels you
think fit to keep it in, for your future use and service.

Let these forms suffice to furnish you with the knowledge of making any other
Syrrups; you need no better a pattern than this, for the making of a many
others; as to make Syrrup of Wormwood, take the like quantity of Sugar, with
the Juice of the said Wormwood, the Sugar being first clarified, and so make it
up according to art; in the like manner you may make Syrrup of Betony, Borage,
Bugloss, Cardis, Cammomel, Succory, Endive, Strawberries, Fumitory, Groundear,
Purslain, Sage, Scabious, Scordium, Housleek, with many more. But enough of
this; and therefore I shall next treat of Distillation.

Of DISTILLATION.
LAdies, before you come to the knowledge of distilling Waters, you ought in the
first place to be furnished with good Stills, which Stills must either be of
Tyne, or sweet Earth, wherein you may distill all manner of Waters, either for
the health of your own Family or others.

Now by the way observe, you may easily make your waters look of what color
you please, if you will first distill your Water in a Stillatory, and then put
it in a great Glass of strength, and fill it full of those Flowers whose
Colors you desire, then stop it and set it in the Stillatory, and let it
distill, and you shall have their perfect color.

Of precious and excellent Waters there are thousands, wherefore I shall only
set down here some of the choicest and most valuable.

Dr. Stevens his famous Water.
Take a gallon of Gascoin-wine, of Ginger, Gallingal, Cinamon-Grains, Cloves,
Mace, Nutmegs, Anniseeds, Carraway-seed, Coriander-secd, Fennel-seed, and
Sugar, of every one a dram; then take of Sack and Ale a quart of each, of
Camomile, Sage, Mint, Red-roses, Time, Pellitory of the Wall, wild Marjoram,
wild Time, Lavender, Penneroyal, Fennel-roots, Parsley-roots, and
Setwall-roots, of each half a handful; then beat the Spice small, and bruise
the Herbs, and put them all together into the Wine, and so let it stand sixteen
hours, stirring it now and then, then distill it in a Limbeck with a soft fire,
the first pint of the Water by it self, for it is the best.

The principal use of this water is against all cold Diseases, it preserves
Youth, comfort the Stomach, cures the Stone of what nature soever, using
but two spoonfuls in seven days: It preserved Dr. Stevens ten years Bedridden,
that he lived to ninety eight years.

Aqua Mirabilis.
Take three pints of White Wind, of Aquavitae, and Juice of Saladine, of each a
pint; one dram of Cardamer, and one dram of Mellilotflowers, Cubebs a dram, of
Gallingale, Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace and Ginger, of each a dram; mingle all these
together over night, the next morning set them a Stilling in a Glass-Limbeck.
This admirable Water dissolveth the swelling of the Lungs, and restores them
when perished; it suffers not the Blood to putrify; neither need he or she
to breathe a Vein, that uses this Water often; it cures the Heart-burn, and
purges Melancholy and Phlegm; it expels Urine; it preserves a good Color
in the Face; and is an utter enemy to the Palsy; take three spoonsfuls of it
at a time, morning and evening twice a week.

A most approved Water for the Eyes.
Take a new-laid Egg and roast it hard, then cut the shell in the midst, and
take out the yolk and put some white Copporis where the yolk was, then bind the
Egg together again, and let it lie till it begin to be a Water, then take the
white forth from both sides of the Egg, and put the same into a Glass of fair
running-water, and so let it stand a while; then strain it through a fair
Linen Cloth, and keep it close stopped in a Glass, and therewith wash your
Eyes morning and evening.

An admirable Water against the Stone in the Kidneys.
Take of the middle-rind of the Root of Ash bruised two pound; Juniper Berries
bruised, three pound; Venice-Turpentine of the best, two pound and an half; put
these into twelve pints of Spring Water in a Glass-vessel well closed, and
there let them purify in Hors-dung three Months, then distill them in Ashes,
and there will come forth an Oil, and a Water; separate the one from the other;
ten or twelve drops being taken of this Oil every morning in four or six
spoonfuls of the said Water, dissolves the Stone and Gravel in the Kidneys most
wonderfully.

An excellent Water for the Worms.
Take of Worm-seeds bruised, eight ounces; the shaving of Hartshorn, two
ounces; of Peach-flowers dried, an ounce; of Aloes bruised, half an ounce; pour
on these the Waters of Tansie, Rue, Peach-flowers, and of Wormwood, of each a
pint and half; let them be digested in a Glass-vessel three days, then distill
them; cohobate this Water three times. This Water may be given from half an
ounce to three ounces, according to the age and strength of the person. A small
quantity for young Children will work the desired effect; it infallibly kills
Stomackworms, Maw-worms, or any other inwardly infesting the Body.

An excellent artificial Wine like Claret, but much better, and by many degrees
brisker.
Take two gallons of your best Sider, (some esteem Worcestershire Red-streak
the best) and mingle it with six gallons of Water, put thereunto eight pound of
the best Malaga Raisins bruised in a Mortar; let them stand close covered in a
warm place, for the space of a fortnight, stirring them every two days well
together; then press out the Raisins, and put the liquor into the same Vessel
again; to which, add a quart of the juice of Raspberries, and a pint of the
juice of black Cherries; cover this liquor with bread, spread thick with
Mustard, the Mustard-side being downward, and so let it work by the fireside
three or four days; then turn it up, and let it stand a week, and then bottle
it up, and it will taste as quick as the briskest liquor whatever, and is a
very pleasant drink, and much wholsomer than French-Wine.

An Ointment for any Wound or Sore.
Take two pound of Sheeps-suet, or rather Deerssuet, a pint of Candy-Oyl, a
quarter of a pound of the newest and best Beeswax, melting them all together,
and stirring them well; and put to them one ounce of the Oil of Spike, and half
an ounce of the Goldsmiths Boras; then heat them again, and stir them all
together; put it up in a Gally-pot, and keep it close stopped, till you have
cause to use it. This is an approved Ointment for any Wound or Sore, new or old.

A Searcloth for all Aches.
Take Rosin one pound, Perrosin a quarter of a pound, as much Mastick, Deers
Suit the like, Turpentine two ounces, Cloves bruised one ounce, Mace bruised
two ounces, Saffron two drachms, boil all these together in oil of Camomile,
and preserve it for your use. This has done many good when nothing else would.

Now, that I may not seem wholly to apply my discourse and study for the
benefit of young Court-Ladies and City-Madams, I shall descend into the
Country, and find out something worthy the observation of a Rural Gentlewoman.

What things belong to a Country-Gentlewoman: Of Dayries, and making Butter and
Cheese.
GEntlewomen, that you may be delighted with your own experience, as well as
satisfied in the labors of your servants, I shall give you an account of what
must be pre-observ'd in the keeping of a Dayry.

Let your Kine be of the best choice and breed that possibly can be procured;
and the larger the Cow is, the better she is, whereof Lincolnshire and Cheshire
afford great plenty. The reason why I advise you to choose large Cattle, is,
that when they grow old, and will yield but little milk, you may then feed and
fatten them for the Shambles. The common and most known signs of a Cow that
gives good store of Milk, are, a wreathed Horn, a thin neck, and a large hairy
Dewlap, a full Udder, and the Teats long and thick.

The best Black Kine are said to come from Cheshire, Lancashire, Derby-shire,
Yorkshire; the best red Cows (whose Milk is so much esteemed above all other
of that kind for its extraordinary nourishing quality), come from
Gloucester-shire, Somersetshire; the Pied-Kine come commonly from
Lincolnshire, and are little inferior to the rest.

Thus you see England affords variety enough of extraordinary good Cows for the
good Housewife to make choice of as she pleases; but withal let her be careful
that the Bull be of as good a breed as the Kine themselves, otherwise the
increase will degenerate, and your Dairy in time run to ruin.

If at any time you buy any Kine to increase your Dairy, you must be careful
they come not from a Soil that is more fruitful than your own; but rather not
so fertile, or being not so good pasture, for then they will the better prosper
and thrive with you; otherwise it is ten to one they will pine away, and fall
into many Distempers: Cows are said to give most Milk when they have newly
Calved. If a Cow gives a gallon at a time constantly, she may pass for a very
good Milch-Cow; there are some Cows which give a gallon and half, but very few
who give two at a time.

You cannot design a better time sor your Cow to calve in, than at the latter
end of February, or in the Months of March or April, for then the Grass is
coming on, or springing up in its perfect goodness.

The hours or times most approved and commonly used for Milking, are in the
Spring and Summer, between five or six in the morning, and six in the evening.
Some very unprofitably with the pretense of reason, milk their Cows in the
Summer-season, betwixt the hours of twelve and one; but I would not have it to
be a president for any to follow. There is an old Proverb very pertinent to
what is here related; That two good meals are better than three bad ones: It is
the worst point of Huswifry that can be to leave the Cow half milked; for
besides the loss of Milk, it is the ready way to make the Cow dry and so become
unprofitable to the Dairy.

Now the profits arising from Milk are chiefly three; viz. Cream, Butter, and
Cheese; the Cream is the very heart and strength of the Milk, which must be
skimmed very cleanly: Cleanly, I say; for Cleanliness is such an ornament to a
good. Huswife, that if she want any part thereof, she loses both that and all
other good names whatsoever. Cream is not to be kept above two days in Summer,
and not above four in the Winter, if you will be always provided with the best
and sweetest Butter: But before we speak of that, I shall here insert some
excellent Receipts for made-Cream, and Milk made better by art.

How to make your ordinary clouted-Cream.
Take a quantity of Milk from the Cow, and put it into a broad Earthen-pan, and
set it over a slow fire, letting it stand there from morning to night,
suffering it not to boil by any means; then take it off the fire, and set it in
some place all night to cool, in the morning dish off your Cream, for it will
be very thick.

To make fresh Cheese in Cream.
Take a pottle of new Milk as it corneth from the Cow, and half a pound of
blanched Almonds beaten very small, and make a thick Almondmilk, with a pint of
Cream strained; and a little before you go to Dinner make it blood-warm, season
it with a little Sugar, Rose Water, and scarsed Ginger, and put to it a little
Runnet, and when it is scummed, bread it up, and whey it, and put it into a
Mould, and press it with your hand; and when it is well wheyed put it into a
Dish with Cream.

Cream of Codlins.
After you have scalded your Codlins and peeled off the skins, and scraped the
pulps from the cores, with a little Sugar and Rose Water, strain them, and lay
the pulp of your Codlins in a Dish, with as much raw Cream as you please about
them; there are several other ways propounded, but this is most satisfactory to
the Palate.

To make a Junket.
Take Ews or Goats-milk; if you have neither of these, then take Cows-milk, and
put it over the fire to warm, then put in a little Runnet to it; then pour it
out into a Dish, and let it cool, then strew on Cinnamon and Sugar, then take
some Cream and lay upon it, scraping Sugar thereon, serve it up.

Here note by the way, that you cannot keep Cream above three days in Summer,
and six days in Winter without prejudice.

I need not tell you how to make Butter, since there are very few in the
Country that can be ignorant thereof; wherefore I shall only say, that the best
time to pot your Butter is in the Month of May, for then the air is most
temperate; and the Butter will take Salt best; however, it may be done any time
betwixt May and September. In preserving thus your Butter, you may not only
supply your House therewith, but to your profit furnish others.

There is another profit which arises from the Dairy, and that is Cheese; of
which there are three kinds, Morning-Milk-Cheese, Nettle-Cheese, and
floaten-Milk-Cheese: The first is the fattest and best that is made in this
Kingdom; the Nettle-Cheese is so called, because when the Cheese is new-made,
Nettles are put upon it: which Nettles are to be renewed once in two days: The
floaten-Milk-Cheese is the worst of all Cheeses, and indeed so coarse, that as
I like not to feed thereof, so I love not to write of it. What is further to be
spoken of a Dairy, I shall refer it to my advice to that Maid who desires to be
a Dairy-Maid in a great House.

I have hitherto, Ladies, endeavored the accomplishment of Gentlewomen well
extracted; but as you cannot do all things your selves, so you must have
Attendants and Servants about you, such whose good Qualifications may not only
render them fit for your employments, but in the performance thereof they may
credit the House wherein they live, and profit their own selves, to such
therefore I direct my following advice.

And first, to all Gentlewomen, who though well-born, are notwithstanding by
indigency necessitated to serve some person of Quality.
In the first place, I would not have you look upon your condition as to what
it has been, but what it is; learn what ever you can, and slight no
opportunity which may advance your knowledge to the height of your birth, for
want of which, some by reason of their Parents negligence, think they have
enough to maintain their Children in a good equipage, and therefore slight
those arts which may not only be ornamental, but beneficial to their Children
hereafter, vainly imagining that poverty will never approach their Gates; by
which cross mistake their Daughters are often exposed to great hardships, many
times contenting themselves to serve as Chamber-maids, because they have not
the Accomplishments of a Waiting Woman, or an Housekeeper; and so whereas
their own natural and acquired parts might raise in every ones opinion a great
esteem of their worth and merit, and incline Ladies to covet their company, sit
at Table, and have a command in the House, respect from the rest of the
Servants; wear good Clothes, and have a considerable sallary; instead thereof,
the meanness of their qualifications render them only fit companions for Grooms
and Footboys.

Wherefore in the first place I shall advise all Parents (be their Estates
never so good, and their Revenues large) to endeavor the gentile education of
their Daughters, encouraging them to learn whatever opportunity offers, worthy
a good estimation. For riches has wings, and will quickly fly away; or Death
comes and removes the Parents, leaving the Children to the tuition of merciless
and unconscionable Executors or others entrusted, who only study how to rob the
Orphans of their due, and afterward thrust them into the world, giving them
neither their own money, nor half the education they deserved; now if there be
a treasury laid up within by education, by which they may live (without an
Estate their Parents shall leave them) in some honest and creditable
employment, their condition will be so established, that nothing almost but
death or sickness can make an alteration therein, and may boldly defy and
scorn the various vicissitudes of common misfortunes. For this reason I would
have you to lose no time, but improve all you may in learning whatever may
befit a Woman.

If your Father has had large Revenues, and could talk loudly of his Birth,
and so may think this servile life beneath you, yet thank God you can do
something for an honest livelihood, and be never the less submissive; for if
you are a Servant, you must do what becomes a Servant; if your extraction be
mean, and have attained to serviceable preferment, give God the glory, and be
more careful to please.

If you desire to be a Waiting-Gentlewoman, it will be expected that you can
Dress well; Preserve well; and Write well a legible hand, good language, and
good English; have some skill in Arithmetic; Carve well, and let your
behavior be modest and courteous to all persons according to their degree;
humble and submissive to your Lord and Lady, or Master and Mistress; neat in
your Habit; loving to Servants; sober in your Countenance and Discourse; not
using any wanton gesture, which may give Gentlemen occasion to suspect your
levity, and so court you to Debauchery, and so lose a reputation irrecoverable.

If you would be an Housekeeper, it will be required that your behavior be
grave and solid, which will inculcate into their beliefs that you are able to
govern a Family. And as I told you before, you must Preserve well, so you must
have a competent knowledge in Distilling, making Cates, all manner of
spoon-meats, and the like. Be careful in looking after the Servants, that every
one perform their duty in their several places; that they keep good hours in
up-rising and lying down; and that no Goods be either spoiled or imbezel'd.

That all Strangers be nobly and civilly used in their Chambers; and that your
Master or Lady be not dishonored through neglect or miscarriage of Servants.

To be first up, and last in bed, to prevent junketing.

To make Salves and Ointments, to dress the wounds of the poor about you, with
other things of your own composition, with which you may compassionate the sick
and indigent: for commonly all good and charitable Ladies do make this part of
their Housekeepers business.

To all Maidens who desire to be Chamber-Maids to persons of Quality.
IT will be required of you, that you Dress well, that you may be able to
supply the place of the Waiting Woman, should she chance to fall sick, or be
absent from your Lady; you must wash fine Linen well; and starch Tiffanies,
Lawns Points, and Laces, mend them neatly; and wash white Sarcenets, with such
like things.

You must make your Ladies bed; lay up, and lay out her Night-clothes; see that
her Chamber be kept clean, and nothing wanting which she desires or requires to
be done. Be modest in your deportment, ready at her call, always diligent,
answering not again when reproved, but with pacifying words; loving and
courteous to your fellow servants, not gigling or idling out your time, nor
wantoning in the society of men; you will find the benefit thereof; for an
honest and sober man will sooner make that woman his Wife whom he sees
continually employed about her business, than one who makes it her business to
trifle away her own and others time; neither will a virtuous and understanding
Mistress long entertain such a Servant whom she finds of such a temper.

Be not subject to change, For a rouling-stone gathers no Moss; and as you will
gain but little money, so if you ramble up and down you will lose your credit.

It may be a fellow servants may court you; but before you entertain the motion,
consider how you must live; by inconsiderately marrying you may have one joyful
meeting, and ever after a sorrowful living, and have time to repent of your
rash matching.

Instructions for all Nursery-Maids in Noble Families.
YOu ought to be naturally inclined to love young Children, or else you will
soon discover your unfitness to manage that charge; you must be neat and
cleanly about them, and careful to keep good hours for them: Get their
Breakfasts and Suppers in good and convenient time; let them not sit too long,
but walk them often up and down, especially those who cannot go well of
themselves; take heed they get no falls by your carelessness, for by such means
many (the cause at first being unperceivable) have afterward grown
irrecoverably lame or crooked; wherefore if any such thing should happen,
conceal it not, though you may justly incur a great deal of blame therefore.

I knew a Gentlewoman absolutely spoiled by such a concealment; her Nurse by
negligence let her fall (being very young) from a Table, and by the fall her
thigh bone was dislocated: the Nurse fearing the indignation and displeasure of
the Child's Parents, who were rich and potent, concealed it a long time, under
the pretense of some other indisposition; endeavoring in the mean time the
reducing of the bone to its proper place; but by reason of an interposition of
a Jelly between the dislocations, it could not be done, and then when it was
too late the Parents were acquainted with the sad condition of their beloved
Child, and hereupon all means imaginable used for its recovery, but all in
vain, although they had been at some hundreds of pounds charge for the cure.

She is now as lovely a young Gentlewoman as a ravished eye can feast upon; but
it would break the heart of that body the eye belongs unto to see her go; her
back-side-walking would force a man from her to the Indies, and yet her face
would attract him to her twice as far.

But to my purpose; be not churlish or dogged to them, but merry and pleasant,
and contrive and invent pretty pastimes, agreeable to their age; keep their
linen and other things always mended, and suffer them not to run too fast to
decay. Do not show a partiality in your love to any of them, for that dejects
the rest: Be careful to hear them read if it be imposed upon you, and be not
too hasty with them; have a special care how you behave your self before them,
neither speaking nor acting misbecomingly, lest your bad example prove the
subject of their imitation.

Instructions for all Chamber-maids to Gentlewomen in City and Country.
FRom you it will be required that you wash and starch very well both
Tiffanies, Lawns, Points and Laces, and that you can mend what is amiss in them.

That you work Needle Work well, and all sorts of Plain-work, or any other work
with the Needle which is used in such Houses.

That you wash black and white Sarsnets; that you dress well, and diligently
perform what you are commanded by your Mistress; be neat in your Habit, modest
in your Carriage, silent when she is angry, willing to please, quick and neat
handed about what you have to do.

You must know how to make all manner of Spoon-meats, to raise Paste, to dress
Meat well, (though not often required thereunto) both of Fish and Flesh; to
make Sauces, garnish Dishes, make all sorts of Pickles, to see that every thing
be served in well and handsomely to the Table, in due time, and to wait with a
graceful decorum at the Table if need should require.

Keep your Mistresses Chamber clean, and lay up every thing in its due place;
you ought to be skilful in buying any thing in the Market, if you be entrusted
therewith; these things will be expected from you in those Houses where there
is no Head-cook. If there be no Butler, you must see all things decent and
fitting in the Parlour and Dining Room.

In a word, you must divest your Mistress from all the care you can, giving to
her a just and true account of what moneys you lay out, showing your self
thrifty in all your disbursements; be careful in overlooking inferior servants,
that they waste nothing which belongs to your Master and Mistress.

If you are thus qualified, and be of an humble and good disposition, your
merit will deserve a good Sallary, and a great deal of love and respect. If you
have not these accomplishments, endeavor their procuration by sparing some
money from superfluous expense, and over-gaudy clothes; for to see a Maid
finely trickt up, having a fine show without, and not one good qualification
within, is like a jointed Bartholomew-Baby, bought for no other use than to be
looked upon.

Instructions for Nursery-Maids to Gentlewomen, both in London, or elsewhere.
LEt me advise you, first to consider the charge you take in hand, and not to
desire it as too many do, because it is an easy kind of life, void of labor
and pains-taking, thinking also that Children are easily pleased with any
thing; I can assure you the contrary; for it is a troublesome employment, and
the charge is of greater weight than such vainly imagine.

You ought in the first place to be of a gentle and good disposition, sober in
your Carriage, neat in your Apparel; not sluggish nor heavyheaded, but watchful
and careful in the nightseason, for fear any of the Children should be ill; and
keep due hours for their up-rising and going to bed.

Take special care that they eat nothing which may over-charge their Stomachs.
If you observe their Faces at any time paler than ordinary, or complain of pain
in their Stomach, conclude it is the Worms that troubles them; and therefore
give them remedies suitable to the distemper; do this often whether you see
those Symtoms or no, the neglect of which has been the destruction of many
hopeful Children.

Keep them (whatever you do) sweet and clean, and moderately warm; teach them
some good forms of prayer, and to read as they are capable; restrain them from
drinking too much Wine, strong Liquors, and eating overmuch Fruit.

Be loving and cheerful with them, not humping or beating them as many do,
contrary to the knowledge and pleasure of their Parents: That Mother is very un
wife that will give liberty to Servants to strike her Children; and that
Servant is over-sawcy and ill natured who dares do it without her Mistresses
privity and consent.

This is your duty; and unless you can and will do this, never undertake this
charge.

Instructions for such who desire to be absolute Cook-maids in good and great
houses.
IT is a common thing now-adays for Cookmaids to ask great Wages, although they
are conscious to themselves of their inability of performing almost any thing;
which as it is unconscionable so to do, so in the end it will prove disgraceful
to them: I shall therefore tell you what in reason may be required from you,
and what justly you ought to perform.

Your skill will chiefly consist in dressing all forts of Meat, both Fish,
Flesh and Fowl, all manner of Baked-meats, all kind of Sawces, and which are
most proper for every sort of Dish, and be curious in garnishing your Dishes,
and making all manner of Pickles, of all which I have treated of before, as you
will find it in the Chapter of my Instructions for young Ladies and Gentlewomen
in the Art of Cookery, wherein you may be supplied with the Customary and
a-lamode ways of dressing all sorts of Meat.

And as you must know how to dress Meat well, so you must know how to save what
is left of that you have dressed, of which you may make both handsome and
toothsome Dishes again, to the saving of your Masters purse, and the credit of
his Table.

Be as saving as you can, and cleanly about every thing; see also that your
Kitchen be kept clean, and all things scoured in due time; your Larders also
and Cubbards, that there be no bits of meat or bread lie about them to spoil
and stink.

That your Meat taint not for want of good Salting.

That you keep good hours for your Meals, else you put an house quite out of
order; do not covet to have the Kitchen-stuff for your vails, but rather ask
the more wages, for that may make you an ill Huswife of your Masters goods, and
teach you to be a thief, for you will be apt to put that which goes into the
tried suet into your pot.

Lay not all your Wages on your back, but lay up something against sickness,
and an hundred other Casualties; assure your self, it is more commendable for
one of your Profession to go decent and clean, than gaudily fine.

Take this in part of that good counsel I could give you, had I time; which if
you follow, the greatest benefit will be your own at last.

Instructions for under-Cook-Maids.
IT behooves you to be very diligent and willing to do what you are bid to do;
and though your employment be greasy and smutty, yet if you please you may
keep your self from being nasty, therefore let it be your care to keep your
self clean. Observe every thing in Cookery that is done by your Superior,
treasure it up in your memory; and when you meet with a convenient opportunity,
put that in practice which you have observed; this course will advance you from
a drudg to be a Cook another day.

Every one must have a beginning; and if you will be ingenious and willing to
learn, there is none will be so churlish or unkind as to be unwilling to teach
you; but if you are stuborn and careless, who do you think will trouble
themselves with you? Beware of Gossips, for they will misadvise you; beware of
the solicitations of the flesh, for they will undo you; and though you may
have mean thoughts of your self, and think none will meddle with such as you;
it is a mistake, Hungry Dogs will eat dirty Puddings; and I my self have known
a brave Gallant to fall foul with the Wench of the Skullery, when some others
would have hazzarded their life for one sole enjoyment of that incomparable
Lady his Wife, he so ingratefully slighted.

Instructions for Dairy-Maids in great Houses.
HAve a care that all your Vessels be scalded well, and kept very clean; that
you milk your Cattle in due time, for your Kine by custom will expect it,
though you neglect it, which will tend much to their detriment,

Waste not your Cream by giving it away to liquorish persons; keep certain days
for your Chirning, and be sure to make up your Butter neatly and cleanly,
washing it well from the Butter-milk, and then salt it well.

Be careful to make your Cheeses good and tender, by well ordering them; and
see that your Hogs have the whey, and that it be not given away to idle or
gossipping people, who live merely upon what they can get from Servants: That
you provide your Winter-Butter and Cheese in the Summer, as in May; and when
your Rowens come in, be sparing of your Fire; and do not lavish away your
Milk-butter or Cheese.

If you have any Fowls to fat, or Pigs, look to them that it may be your
credit, and not your shame when they come to the Table.

When you milk your Cattle, stroke them well, and in the Summertime save those
strokings by themselves, to put into your morning-Milk-cheese.

Instructions for Laundry-Maids in great Houses.
YOur duty will be to take care of all the Linen in the house, excepting
Points and Laces; whatever you wash, do it up quickly, that it may not stink
and grow yellow, and be forced to the washing again before it be used.

Let all the bracks in the Linen, or rents, be duly mended; and keep your
certain days of washing, and other days for the making clean of such Rooms as
are appointed you.

Be sparing of your Soap, Fire and Candle.

Entertain no Chare-woman unknown to your Lady or Mistress.

Be careful that your Tubs and Copper, or whatever else you make use of, be
kept clean, and in good repair.

That you rise early every morning, but more especially on Washing-days.

Instructians for House-Maids in great Houses.
YOur principal Office is to make clean the greatest part of the house; and so
that you suffer no room to lie foul; that you look well to all the stuff, and
see that they be often brushed, and the Beds frequently turned.

That you do not misplace any thing by carrying it out of one room into
another, for that is the way to have then lost, or you soundly chid for their
being not in their proper places.

That you be careful for, and diligent to all Strangers, and see that they lack
nothing in their Chambers, which your Mistress or Lady will allow; and that
your Close-stools and Chamber-pots be duly emptied and kept clean.

That you help the Laundry-maid in a morning on a Washing-day.

That in the Afternoon you be ready to help the Housekeeper or the
Waiting Woman in their Preserving and Distilling.

To Scullery-Maids in great Houses.
THere are several Rooms that you must keep sweet and clean, as the Kitchen,
Pantry, Wash-house, etc.

That you wash and scowre all the Plates and Dishes which are used in the
Kitchen, also Kettles, Pots, Pans, Chamber-pots, with all other Iron, Brass,
and Pewter materials that belong to the Chambers or Kitchen; and lastly, you
must wash your own Linen.

Thus Ladies, I have endeavored to show your Servants their duties in their
respective places, and what qualifications they ought to have, which may enable
and fit them for your service. I shall now return to the Compleatment of those
Accomplishments which best become your noble and gentile extraction.

I have already declared how you ought to be educated from your Minority to
better Maturity of years, and from thence what your deportment ought to be to
all persons in all places; there remains only some instructions how you may
talk, and that elegantly, to the same persons at a distance, whether relations,
friends or acquaintance, and that is by Letter; having given you some general
instructions how to pen them, I shall lay you down some choice patterns of
Letters upon several occasions for your imitation. I shall conclude at present
this Treatise with some witty Dialogues, or interchangable Discourses between
several of your Sex eminent for birth, worth, and ingenuity.

Some general and choice Rules for writing of Letters.
FIrst, what a Letters is? It is or ought to be the express image of the Mind,
represented in writing to a friend at a distance; wherein is declared what He
or She would do or have done. This excellent use we have of Letters, that when
distance of place will not admit of Union of persons, or converse Viva voce;
that deplorable defect is supplied by a Letter or Missive; and indeed the
necessity of conversing one with another as long as we live, lays an
unavoidable cogency of communicating our affairs each to other, without which
friends at a distance could have no correspondence one with the other.

Though it lies not in the power of every one to make use of these excellent
means for reciprocal Communication; yet we see daily the illiterate and
ignorant will make hard shifts rather than go without the benefit thereof,
applying themselves to friends that can write; or if they have none, to
Scriveners or other strangers, venturing their secrets with them, rather than
their friend shall go without the knowledge of them.

But as for you, Ladies, for whose use this Book was framed, I question not
your writing well; but without inditing well, it will signify but little; to
the intent therefore you may pollish your Epistolical compositions, observe
these two things therein, that is, the Matter and Form.

The Matter of Letters is any thing that may be discoursed of without any
exception; or that which you would freely discover to your Relations, or
discourse to your friend when present, the same you would do by Letter when he
is absent, if it stands with convenience. For sometimes it is not convenient to
trust that in a sheet of paper, which if lost or miscarried may be the great
detriment, if not the utter ruin of the person. This matter you must know
varieth much according to the subject you write upon. I shall endeavor to
treat a little of all the common subjects which are the usual occasions of
Letter-writing.

Of Intelligence or Advice.
THese Letters are the informers of our friends, of our own, or others.
concerns. There is no great matter of invention required in them, for the very
subject will afford you matter enough; all that is required of you in this, are
these two things; the first, that you word your Matter well, and that you write
not any thing unadvisedly, which you cannot justify; but above all, have a
care of News-writing, if it nearly concern the State, or any great person
thereunto belonging.

Of Friend-chastisement.
IF you have a dear female-friend whom you suspect of any youthful excursions,
especially levity, and would reduce her to a better understanding, mildly lay
open her errors; and therein discover what an enemy she has been to God and to
her own reputation; that there is no way to reconcile her self to God and the
World, but by her future exemplary modest carriage. And that she may not think,
your reproofs have their original from malice or hatred to her person, declare,
what a great esteem you ever had for her excellent parts, and rare endowments
of mind; and what a pity it is, such excellencies should be eclipsed by such
foul miscarriages; that it is not your sorrow alone, but the grief of several
of her friends; and then subtly insinuate this, That had it not been a friend
you so dearly loved, you could have been well content to have been filent; but
contrary, the love you bear her, obliged you to reveal the evil reports you
have heard of her, and how troubled you are, to see her commendations so
limited with exceptions, Were it not that she is -- she is absolutely one of
the finest Gentlewoman in Europe. Then conclude, that you hope she will take
all in good part; and that she will highly oblige you, to use the same freedom
as you have done with her, if she hears ought amiss.

Of giving good Counsel.
YOu may in the first place excuse your rash intrusion, in giving counsel
before it be required, but the bonds of friendship were so strong, that you
could not forbear, and therefore hoped she would take all in good part; and
then inculcate this, that you did not doubt the sufficiency of her judgment,
but being tender of her welfare, and knowing of what weighty concern the
business in hand imported, that it was not for a year or a day, but for lise,
you could do no less, being full fraught with a most entire affection, but tell
her, she must consider -- then tell her what your advice is, and be sure you
back it with the best reasons and arguments you can summon together; making it
appear, that your counsel is both honest and profitable, and not
self-interested; and it only tends to her lasting good here, and eternal
hereafter; husbanding your reasons according to the person you deal with.
Conclude with an hearty ejaculation to God, that he may direct her for the
best, following the good advice you have given, etc.

If you are a Mother of Children, and would write to them, or to your Servant,
you need not have rules in so doing, the plainer you write, the better it is,
and they will more readily understand you; you need no more than signify to
them what you would have done, and what undone; as for reasons, you need not
alledg any to encourage them in their duty, your power is sufficient, and your
command is the only reason why they should do so, or so; however, if you see
any refractoriness in your Children, it will not be amiss, to urge how just
your commands are, and how easily performed, adding the promise of a reward, if
they fulfill your desire; but threats and menaces of punishment, if they
disobey; but concluding, you hope to find them so towardly, that they will not
need correction.

Of requesting a kindness.
LEtters of this nature, are of two kinds; the first is, when one Gentlewoman
of quality sends to another, her very good friend, either for some courtesy to
her self, or for another; and then she must begin with an acknowledgment of her
love, and how consident she still remains in the assurance thereof; then make
known your request, and how easily it may be done, and end with a promise of
being sensible of the courtesy, and retalliation.

If the person requesting be somewhat a stranger, but much infcrior to the
person of whom she entreats the kindness, then she must begin with an
insinuation, excusing her boldness in daring to request a favor of a person
whom she never obliged by any former service; yet adding withal, that knowing
her goodness, and the delight her Ladyship takes in bestowing courtesies on the
undeserver, she fears not a denial, If it be upon an urgent occasion, let her
endeavor to move her, to compassionate her misery, exaggerating the greatness
thereof; infisting, that she has no other way to retrieve her misfortune; that
if she cannot hereafter find any way a requital, yet she shall notwithstanding
retain the remembrance of her love or charity fixed in her heart. Conclude with
a Prayer to God, so to increase her relicity here, that she may never stand in
need of a kindness from any, till the Almighty has fixed on her head a Crown
of Glory.

Of Recommendation.
IN the recommending of a person, you must show your motives for so doing, as
first, either as she is a Kinswoman, or Friend, and a person so worthy as
deserving all favor, that were it not for her goodness and virtue, you would
not utter a word in her behalf; and conclude, that what kindness is done her,
is shown to your self.

How elegantly to complain of injuries done.
THis may be done several ways; if you would mildly complain of a friend, and
yet not break with him or her; let your complaint be mixed with praises, saying,
that you are sorry the persons deportment has not been such as your friendship
required; however, you are so charitable, as to believe the offense was not
committed willingly, but rather through misprision or ill persuasion. But let
the offense be ever so great, do not rail in opprobrious terms, though in smart
and significant expressions; saying, that you have connived too long patiently
at the injuries done you; but finding, instead of amendment, the person growing
worse, you would be more senseless than stones if you should not speak;
referring your self to his own judgment, if passion has not quite extinguished
the eye of reason, whether you are not very much wronged; however, upon a just
acknowledgment, you are willing to forget all, and retain him or her still in
the estimation of a friend.

Forms of Address or Visit.
IN the first place, insinuate your contentment in discoursing with your friend
face to face, but since you are deprived thereof, you are happy still in having
the opportunity and convenience of writing: That you desire to hear of her
welfare, both as to health and other concerns; that your desire is earnest to
see her, and that those days wherein you see her not, are years; and those
years seem ages, especially when you receive no Letters from her; that if she
will continue that correspondence, she shall find occasion of finding fault on
your side more of importunity than carelessness or neglect, and so conclude with
a protestation of the continuance of an inviolable friendship.

Forms of Congratulation.
THis is done when we desire to rejoice with our friend for some great good
that has befaln him or her, either by escaping from some eminent danger, or
sickness. There are several other subjects of this nature which you may treat
on as they happen, and therefore I cannot prescribe you exact rules; only you
must testify the great satisfaction you receive in your friends welfare, and
that your joy is not particular, but all in general have it when good and
virtuous persons are advanced, and do prosper.

Of Consolation.
LEtters of Consolation seem to mitigate any evil or adversity that has befaln
a friend, which being various cannot well have one remedy applied to them. If
the evil be but small, alledg they have no such great cause for their
sorrowing, the subject not deserving it; that they ought to have courage; for
pusillanimity wrongs the reputation; or if it be great, insist that it will not
last long: But if the disaster be very great indeed, you must then acknowledge
how much you are concerned in his or her sufferings; and that having so great a
share in her misfortune, you are fitter to condole than comfort her therein,
yet however the interest of alliance or friendship oblige you to apply some
lenitive: That you cannot persuade her from grieving, for that would argue
inhumanity; having sustained so great a loss of a Husband, a Wife, Father,
Mother, etc. but hope she or he will not be so heartless as to be carried away
in the torrent of a fruitless grief; that Reason must be used: for Nature is
not obliged to alter its course to please him or her particularly, and exempt
it self for the sake of one from those Laws to which the whole world is
subject. In short, when a misfortune cannot be withstood, immoderate grief does
but exasperate it; and that being a Christian, there ought to be a submission
to Gods Will, and subscribe with a prayer to the Almighty to give him or her
patience to overcome this great affliction.

Form of thanks for Courtesies received.
THanks we must apply as well to the nature of the Courtesy, as to the quality
of him that has done it. You must begin with a commemoration of the Courtesy
received, acknowledging the receiver not worthy thereof, having never done any
obliging service; or if you have, yet this has made double satisfaction; then
promise that the remembrance of her love shall be deeply engraven in your
heart; and that you will always retain a resentment of her kindness: This you
may write, if the kindness be so highly qualified that the person looks for no
other satisfaction than acknowledgment only.

I have given you several forms of Letters, let me now show you the parts of a
Letter; the common ones are Superscription and Subscription.

The Superscription of Letters is twofold; the one external, the other
internal; the outward Superscription is that when the Letter is folded up, and
contains the name, title, and abode of the person we write unto; but above
all you must have a care that you give proper titles, such as befit the quality
of the person.

The Title of a King is, To His most Excellent Majesty. To the Queen the same,
altering the article. To all Sons or Brethren of the King of England, To His
Royal Highness. To a Duke, To His Grace. To a Duchess the same. To all Earls,
Marquesses, Viscounts and Barons, To the right Honorable. To Marchionesses and
Countesses by Patent, To the right Honorable. To all Lords, To the right
Honorable. To Knights, To the right Worshipful. To all Justices of Peace, High
Sheriffs, Counselors at Law, Esquires, either by birth or place, etc. To the
Worshipful.

The Subscription is placed at the lower end of the Letter; and in writing to
great Persons you must subscribe thus,



My Lord, or Madam, Your most humble, and most obedient Servant.
or Your most faithful, and most obliged Servant. S. G.


To persons of meaner degree, subscribe your self thus,



Your Servant.
or Your Friend and Servant.


If kindred write one to another, the greater may express the relation in the
beginning of the Letter; but she that is of the meaner quality, must be content
to specify it in the Subscription.

Besides Superscription and Subscription, you must set down what year and day
you writ this Letter in, and the place from whence it came; yet it is not
always convenient to mention the place, nor the relation the person has to you
to whom you write.

The beginning of all your Letters ought to contain some small Complements by
way of insinuation, with a short proposal of what you intend to say: this is
only observed in long Letters, otherwise you may fall upon the Matter
immediately.

As for the Matter, that is according to your Concern, and I need not use much
order in the discoursing it, but write what falls under your pen, not standing
much upon connection, unless it be in Letters of Answer, and then you must
follow the order of those Letters, using some small transition. In the
Conclusion it is requisite that you testify your affection with hearty wishes
and prayers for the person you write unto.

For the style of your Letters, let it not be affected but careless, not much
differing from our usual way of speaking. In Letters of Complement supply the
barrenness of your matter with the smoothness of your rhetorical exornations;
but have a care that in striving to avoid affectation you do not run into
improprieties of speech, or barbarisms.

Consider seriously what best befits the things you are to write of, regarding
person, time and place. It would be absurd for any one to write to a superior
as to a familiar, and that which would suit very well with an ancient man, or a
person in Authority, would be ridiculous for to use to a man of mean degree, or
of the younger sort; surely we are not to use the like expressions to a
Soldier, as we do to a Scholar or Lady.

Be not too prolix in your writing, nor too short; but observe a mediocrity or
mean betwixt them: In the avoiding of tautologies, do not omit any thing that
may conduce to the illustration of your matter.

Do not study for hard words, but such as are either plain, or very
significant, this perspicuity of writing is to be measured according to the
capacity of the person to whom the Letter is directed; for some will easily
conceive what is difficult and hard for others to comprehend.

Have especial care of blotting your paper, giving it a large Margent; and be
curious in the cutting your Letters, that they may delight the sight, and not
tire the Reader.

Lastly, be curious in the neat folding up your Letter, pressing it so that it
may take up but little room, and let your Seal and Superscription be very fair.

Having given you general instructions how to compose and indite Letters, it
follows that I here insert some of the best patterns for your imitation.

Letters upon all Occasions.
Of Complement.
Madam,
I Am by so many Obligations yours, that the only want of occasion to give you
testimony thereof, alone breeds in me all my discontent; esteeming my self
unfortunate in nothing so much; and that the passion which carries me to your
service, proves as unprofitable as extreme; which forces me to have recourse
to entreaties, beseeching you to honor me with your commands, that (other
means failing) my obedience may oblige you to believe that I am,

Madam, Your most humble and affectionate Servant.


Another of the like nature.
Madam,
THough I have told you a thousand times by word of mouth how much I am your
Servant; yet my Pen shall once more assure you of the same; I only wait for
some eminent proofs to demonstrate the truth of my profession; I do heartily
wish that you would not longer make me expect an opportunity, but lay your
command, which may satisfy my impatience, to make you know and confess at the
same time, that you may have more powerful and more considerable Servants, but
never

Madam, One more obedient and faithful.


Their Answers.
Madam,
I Will be so presumptuous (since you desire it) as to believe you love me, but
on condition that you will acknowledge the passion I have to serve you. For as
it only makes me merit the honor of your friendship, so I should be very glad
that you would everlastingly conserve the memory thereof. Continue then in
loving me as much as you please, and likewise esteem infallibly that I am more
than all the world besides,

Madam, Your very Servant.


Another Answer.
Madam,
I Am not so unfortunate as I thought I was, since I see I hold some place
still in your memory; yet the grief which I entertain for not deserving the
honor, has reduced my thoughts to such a moderation, that I am in doubt
whether I should complain or rejoice. It remains in you only, to allay the
discontent of my mind, by giving me some employment in your service, which may
witness the passion I have to maintain the quality of

Madam, Your faithful Servant.


A Letter from a Gentlewoman at a Boarding-School in Hackney to her quondam
School-fellow in London.
Indeared Friend,
I Have laid aside the exercise of my Needle, that I may employ my hand some
little time in the management of my Pen, that herein I may assure you, that the
strong inclinations I have to manifest my self your friend upon all accounts,
will not permit me to let slip any opportunity wherein I may evidence this
truth. I am troubled that you are not always as ready to honor me with your
commands, as I am zealous and forward to obey them. That cordial respect I bear
you, has so strongly linked me to you, that into whatsoever condition fortune
shall throw me, I shall still retain the memory of your affection, and must not
live when I cease to love you, whom above mine own welfare I esteem, and
therefore must subscribe my self, dearest friend,

Your most affectionate, etc. M. G.


The Answer to it.
Most Obliging Friend,
I Am ravished with content, to see how your curious art, and delicateness
thereof, can so happily translate your hand and fancy from one flower to
another, the one as the draught of your Needle, the other of your Pen; were I
to be judge, I knew not to which to give the greatest praise or encomium, The
Flourishes of the Pen, or the Flowers of the Needle; the one might make
Arachne's Maids of Honor (I mean those delicate fingered Nunns) to blush, to
be outdone; and from the other, a Secretary to a Queen may gather eloquence
and fancy. You need not make the least question of my love, or the integrity
thereof; for although I want the art of Rhethorick to represent it, yet my
deeds and services shall be the elaborate Elocutors which shall express my self
to be,

Your most cordially affectionate Servant. S. L.


From the above-named M. G. to the said S. L. acknowledging her and her
School-fellows sorrow for her absence, giving an account of the accustomed care
of her Governess.
Dear Friend,
WE remain in the state and condition you left us, there being no access as yet
of any more numbers, but only of our griefs for your absence, which increase,
as our desires do increase, or our daily discourses of you. We understood not
our happiness till your departure from us, being now made sensible of the good
we enjoyed, by being deprived thereof. Our Governess is as active and watchful
as ever, down with the Sun and up with the Lark, and then does her Messenger
summon us to desert our beds; if she perceives any unwilling, she subtly
tempers the unpleasantness of her early importunity; she persuades them
thereunto, by alleging, what benefit thereby will accrue to their healths; nor
is her accustomed care to be discommended, since therein she aims not only at
the benefit of our Bodies, but the eternal welfare of our Souls, in the
performance of our duties to God and our Parents. She continues her former
jealousy, not suffering a Letter to come into the house without her knowledge
thereof; and herein her prudence is highly to be commended, for by her strict
examination of these Papermessengers, she shuts the doors against a great many
which might be the Bawds that might betray the Obedience of some, and the
Chastity of others. Neither are there any Answers returned to any Letters but
what she is privy to; by which means, there is nothing we write we need be
ashamed of, were it legibly written on our Foreheads as well as Papers. I
question not but you have heard your old Bedfellow Mrs. F. G. has lately
entertained a new one, being married to a Gentleman, as deserving in excellency
of parts as nobility of birth; I long to hear of the like in you, whose good
fortunes shall always be attended with the greatest acclamations of joy which
can proceed from

Your most affectionate Friend, M. G.


The Answer.
Indearedly Beloved,
YOU honor me much with the testimony of your affection; and do glad my heart
by giving me to understand, that your Governess continues her vigilance and
accustomed care; if she reap the praise thereof, the profit will be yours, and
yet she will be a gainer too, for this will be the means to increase the number
of her Scholars. Mrs. F. G's. marriage is no news to me, wishing her all
happiness in her choice, and that her fortune may be answerable to her
incomparable virtues; but for your good wishes to me, in the like nature,
(though I am thankful to you for them, yet) I should not be displeased, if you
did forbear to utter them; for if good Husbands are Miacles, why should I
afflict my self with the vain expectation of them, since Miracles are ceased? I
can best content my self with my present condition, having thereby a greater
liberty to express my self to be

Your passionate and most obliged Friend and Servant, S. L.


To a Kinswoman discoursing about Fashions.
Beloved Cousin,
I Thank you for your Papers, and the trouble of that spruce inventory you sent
me, which I desired more out of curiosity than any intention of conformity
thereunto; for indeed the vanity was sufficient to satiate an ordinary
appetite; and besides, mine is no way greedy of such idle kickshaws. I find
fault with most of these Modes, not for their levity only but brevity also,
especially such as are far-fetcht for a fortnights wearing, and leaves not a
good Huswife a relic worth the keeping. I have learned in a great manner,
That the fashion of the world passes away, and therefore I cannot think it but
a piece of great imprudence, to spend so much industry upon a frail and
perishing object; yet I am not against such natural or native decencies, which
may difference persons, and bring not an unprofitable expense upon their
finery; no more than I discommend a sumptuous Feast, when I censure one that is
ridiculous; for I know not what secret power of blandishment there is in an
handsome ornament, even to court beauty it self, and therefore it must be more
advantageous to those, whose small imperfections it conceals. But of all
incongruities, deformity and the fashion, I take to be the ugliest; you know
how indifferently I am concerned in these cases, and therefore will easily
pardon this humor of

Your most humble Servant.


A Letter from one Lady to another, condemning Artificial-beauty.
Madam,
YOU are so absolute in the endowments of your mind and perfections of body,
that I cannot but honor you; having formerly experienced your love to me
particularly, and the greatness of your Wit to all; I hope you will excuse this
rudeness if I desire your opinion concerning borrowed beauty from art; and
whether it may be lawfully used by such as profess Religion and a good
Conscience? I must confess, my own judgment is much unsettled; nevertheless, I
have been informed by many learned and godly men, that it is a great sin, and
undoubtedly inconsistent with a Christian, and a good Conscience. I do find
that washing and painting is condemned in holy Writ, as the practice of loose,
licentious, and lascivious Women; who with the deforming of their Souls, and
polluting their Consciences, do use the Art for embellishing their
Countenances. The New Testament affirms we cannot make one hair of our head
white or black; and if we have neither the liberty, nor are to assume the power
to alter the complexion of our hairs, then much less the complexion of our
Cheeks and Faces. It argues, besides, ingratitude to the Almighty, when we are
not content with what He has made; and the highest presumption in thinking or
daring to mend it. St. Paul and St. Peter prescribed how Women should be clad,
that is with modesty, shamefastness and sobriety, and not with gorgeous
apparel, or with braided Hair, Gold or Pearls; and if these things were
forbidden, how much more is washing or painting the Face; which is suitable
(some think) to none but leight spirits, such who are not yet redeemed from the
vanity of their conversation? So that this Artificial beauty may appear to be
divinely forbidden as an enemy to Truth, which needs none but its own native
complexion; and is so far from being beholding to Art for any addition to
enliven her color, or to put a blush upon it, that she converteth even
Deformities and Decays into Advantages and Perfections. Besides, that this
adding of color and complexion proceeds from Pride, is without controversy;
and should it not reflect on wantonness, yet it does on arrogance; to borrow,
and then challenge that beauty to be ours, which is not but by an adventitious
wealth. Moreover this self-conceit is an enemy to humility and grace, and would
by degrees overtop all virtue. And now grant it were neither scandalously
sinful, nor absolutely unlawful, yet the offense it gives to the true and
strict Professors of Piety is a sufficient argument, that it ought not to be
practiced. Although many things may be permitted in themselves, yet they become
evil and are to be forborne, when others are offended at them. Neither is this
all; for the very name of a painted face is enough to destroy the reputation of
her that uses it, and exposes her to all manner of reproaches. We are taught
to follow things of a good report, that we may not only be good, but that in
all things we may preserve the reputation of a good name. If the light of
Scriptures were not so clear and full against all Artificial beauty, yet the
light of Nature does seem to discover an uncomeliness therein. There is none
but may conclude, if God threatens to punish strange apparel, he will not spare
to punish strange faces.

Madam, pardon the tediousness of my Letter, which I have extended almost to
the length of a Treatise; I was the more large, because I would be the more
fully satisfied in your answer, which in a labouring-expectation I attend; if
your Ladyship will deign me this favor, you will infinitely oblige her, who is

Madam, Your most humble and affectionate Servant.


The Answer of an ingenious Lady.
Madam,
YOU have been pleased to impose a great task upon me, which I am resolved to
discharge, not so much to show any wit or knowledge in my self, as your power
over me, by my obedience to your commands; what I shall say on this subject in
the defense thereof, I shall be obliged thereunto by the rules of Reason, and
not the liberty of practice. I cannot deny but that several reverend and
learned persons are of a judgment opposite to mine, which have prevailed on the
credulity of many young Ladies, and did at first upon my own, until I began to
examine the grounds of their opinions, and to value more the weight of their
reasons than the gravity and numbers of their persons. I do not find that these
persons can produce out of Scripture any reasons of force which expressly forbid
the using any Art in the imbellishing the Counnance: The opinions of men are
not of any power to charge the Soul with sin in things of outward use and
custom; neither in this particular are the Divines themselves all of one mind;
for I know many excellent persons, who wisely sorbear to condemn the use of
these things as sin, that are innocently helpful to the beauties of modest
women; for indeed they are as far from sin, or not from sin, as the minds of
those that use them are disposed either to a modest decency, or to pride and
vanity. Now where it is objected, that Jezabel was devoured by Dogs, because
she painted her eyes; if your Ladyship be pleased to look again on the History,
you shall find that the painting of her face or eyes was thirteen or fourteen
years before the Prophet Elisha presaged her ruin; and it was no more a cause
of her dreadful death than the dressing her head, or her looking out at the
Window, which was at one and the same time, and one of them as innocent as the
other. If all 'that Jezable did is to be avoided as a sin, we may not call a
solemn Assembly, or keep a Fast, because she did so, as appears by the same
History: We may not embrace or kiss a friend because Joab did so when he killed
Abner; and Judas, when he betrayed his Master. And as for Herodias dancing,
which was the cause of John Baptists death, you shall find in the Gospel that
she danced alone, which is allowed by our austerest Divines, and by the precise
Matrons in the education of their Children. She danced not with Herod, but
before him; and it was not the decent motion of her feet, but the disorderly
motions of her heart, and the perverseness of her spirit to the Doctrine of St.
John, that was the cause of his murder. And as for those places in the
Prophets, from whence scrupulous and censorious persons do infer that the
painting of the face is a sin; we may truly answer, it is not therefore
unlawful because we find it there sometimes condemned as unreasonable; or
because vain and loose Women do practice it, therefore the modest must
altogether disclaim it. Believe me, Madam, in the whole Scripture there is not
any Moral command to be found that does expressly forbid this artificial
adorning the face. We may read that Queen Esther made use of sweet perfumes, of
gorgeous habillements, and beautiful colors; nay whatsoever was then in
fashion, the more to attract the eyes and affections of the King unto her; and
this was in her so far from a sin, that it had been almost a sin in her not to
have done it. We find that Rebeccab almost in the infancy of the world,
received ornaments for her hands, her neck and ears; and certainly she thought
it no disparagement to her modesty or her piety to wear them. Neither is it any
new invention for Ladies to use Artificial helps for the advancement of their
beauties; it is as general as ancient, and there is no Nation but does practice
it without any reproach of vanity or pride. And although in this Nation a
commendable discretion is used in powdering, curling, and gumming the hair, and
quickening the complexion, yet in foreign parts it is every where frequently
done, and as sreely owned. It is strange methinks that supplies should be
allowed of for bodily defects and deformities; the Shoo-maker is employed and
commended for making the body higher; and the Tailor for making it straighter;
and must we account it a sin or scandal to advance the beauty of the face? Much
more might be alleged to prove the truth hereof, but I have been already too
tedious, and have punished your expectation with the length of my Letter, which
notwithstanding the innocence of the subject, is a sin or fault in her, who is

Madam, Your most devoted Servant, etc.


A Lady to her Daughter, persuading her from wearing Spots and Black-patches in
her face.
Daughter,
THE indulgent care of a loving Mother makes me keep my eye continually on you;
it has been my great comfort hitherto in that you have seemed a professed enemy
against the vices of this present age; but now it is no small grief to me that
I hear you are too much addicted to its fashions; and that lately you have been
seen with those deformities which are commonly called Black-patches. A fashion
till of late never practiced by any, nor your half-Moons used in the Turkish
Seraglio; no nor ever read of in all the Histories of the vanities of Women. It
appears strange to me, that young Gentlewomen should lose their reason with
their modesty, and think that they add to their beauty by substracting from it.
I must deal plainly with you, I am afraid that the black Oath of God-damn-me in
the mouth of a Ranter, and the Black-patch in the face of a Gentlewoman, are
near of kin one to another. I shall therefore assume the freedom of power which
is due unto me, and command you to wear them no more till I am better satisfied
in their decency or lawfulness; thus not doubting of your obedience, I commit
you with my blessing to the blessed Protection of the God of all blessings, and
rest

Your tenderly loving and careful Mother, M. N.


The Answer of a dutiful Daughter.
Madam,
IT is as well Religion as Duty in me, To render you all observances, which I
shall make my delight as well as employment. My greatest blessing is the
continuance of your love, which obliges me to increase my thankfulness as well
as my obedience. I perceive some censorious tongue has been too busy with my
face, and has endeavored to throw dirt on it, because it has been lately
spotted in the fashion; a fashion that has as much innocence to plead for its
excuse, as custom for its authority. Venus the Goddess of beauty was born with
a Motticella, or natural beauty-spot, as if Nature had set forth a pattern for
Art to imitate. You may see every day some little clouds over the face of the
Sun, yet he is not ashamed of his attraction; nay, some of late with an
Optick-glass have discovered some maculae or spots in the very face of the Sun,
yet they are not attributed as his deformities. The Moon when she is at Full
and shining in her greatest luster, has in her face some remarkable spots, and
herein is placed her chiefest glory; as being in every thing inconstant but in
this. When I put on my Mask, which is no more nor better than one great patch,
you do commend me for it; and will you be displeased with me for wearing a few
black patches? which if they are cut into Stars, do represent unto me whether I
would go; or if into little worms, whether I must go; the one of them
testifying in me the sense of my unworthiness to increase my humility, and the
other the height of my meditations to advance my affections. It is the
unhappiness of the most harmless things, to be subject to the greatest
misconstruction; and on the same subject from whence others draw their
suspicions of curiosity to accuse our pride, we derive the greatest arguments
of discipline and instruction to defend our innocence; neither is the ignorance
of antiquity in relation to them, any argument of weight to condemn their
novelty; for the Black-bags on the head are not much older than the Black-spots
on the face, and much less may be said for them, only they have had the good
luck in the City not to meet with contradiction, although in the Country they
are much cavil'd at, unless worn by Gentlewomen of eminent note and quality.
Nevertheless, according to the obligation of my duty, to give you in all things
satisfaction, I am determined to wear them no more; not that I find any such
vanity in them, but that by the fruits of my obedience, you may perceive what
an absolute power your commands have over her, who is

Madam, Your most humble and most obedient Daughter, S. N.


Love protested, with its Repulse.
Madam,
IT has pleased Heaven you should have the sole command of my affections, with
which I am joyfully, content and stand disposed to obey you in every thing,
when you shall be pleased to count me worthy of your service. Enjoying you I
must account my self the happiest man in the world; but being deprived of you I
shall not only live, but die miserably; either then reward him who adores you,
or chastise him who idolizeth you. Yet must I confess all my good to proceed
from you, and that all the evil I can endure must come from your disdain;
however hoping that you will commiserate my languishing condition, I shall
greedily subscribe my self,

Entirely Yours, etc.


The Answer.
SIR,
IF it has pleased Heaven you should love me, you cannot blame me though you
suffer by it; should I except the tenders of affection from all such amorous
pretenders, I might be married to a whole Troop, and make my self a legal
Prostitute. My inclinations lean not your way; wherefore give me leave to tell
you, That you would do better to bestow your affections on some Lady who has
more need of a Servant than I have. And if you think your affection ought not
to go unrewarded, receive the persuasion which I give you, never to trouble me
more, lest you run a worse hazard by persevering in your intentions. Be
advised by her who is

Your faithful Monitor and humble Servant, etc.


I shall swell this Volume into too great a bulk, should I give you patterns of
Letters for all occasions; let what I have here set down suffice, referring you
for your better information and instruction to the incomparable Letters of
Monsieur Voiture, translated into English; Mr. Howel, and Mr. Lovedays
ingenious Letters, with a many more; every Booksellers-shop affording great
plenty. And now to conclude, pray accept of these ingenious Dialogues, which
will tend as well to your further instruction, as recreation.

Pleasaut Discourses and witty Dialogues between Males and Females, as well
gentiliz'd by Birth as accomplished by generous Education.
The Resolute Lover: A Pastoral Dialogue.
Amyntas. STay, dearest, stay.


Amarillis. Shepherd, why do you thus follow me?


Amynt. I needs must follow, Sweetest, for you have my heart.


Amar. Who, I! prithee tell me where it is, and how I shall restore it?


Amynt. It hangs upon your eyes; but being there scorched with disdain, and
dazzled with their luster, it flys for ease unto your rosy lips; but being
repulsed thence with harsh denials, it hovers still about you, hoping to rest
it self within your breast; but all its endeavors have been fruitless, for
your hard heart would not give it entertainment.


Amar. Well, if my heart be so hard as you would make it, I rejoice in my
safety, it being then strong enough to be a fence to my honor.


Amynt. You make a fence in vain to guard the Sheep where no Wolf ever came.


Amar. O but my fears, Amyntas! How shall I cherish the man that would undo my
Chastity?


Amynt. Then cherish me, who never attempted any thing to cast a spot on that
white innocence to which I am a most religious Votary.


Amar. And can thou love, and yet be chaste in thy desires?


Amynt. Yes, fairest, I could be content to love, and have our souls united,
though we are not conjoined in our persons.


Amar. Let me contain thee then within mine arms; the force of greatest winds
that shake, nay root up the aged Oak, shall not divide us.


Amynt. My joys do overflow! my happiness is too great to survive the
enjoyment: O let me vent my grateful heart, or else it bursts! Here, here is a
spreading Poplar, under whose cooler shade thou shall seal thy promise
Amaryllis.


Amar. It Is done, not to be repented of; and now methinks I here could stay, my
dear Amyntas, till death moved his cold dart, and beckned us to follow him to
the lower shades; and by his angry power, make these my warm embraces cold.


Amynt. May we never, never part, That thy delight I may prolong, Dear
Amarillis hear this Song.

I.
Come my sweet, whilst every strain
Calls our Souls into the ear,
Where thy greedy listnings fain
would run into the sound they hear.
Lest in desire
To fill the Quire,
Themselves they tie
To harmony.
Let Us kiss and call them back again.
2.
Now let us orderly convey
Our Souls into each others Breast,
Where interchanged let them stay,
Slumbring in a melting rest.
Then with new fire
Let them retire
And still present
Sweet fresh content.
Youthful as the early day.
3.
Then let us a tumult make,
Shuffling so our Souls, that we,
Careless who did give or take,
May not know in whom they be.
Then let each smother
And stifle the other,
Till we expire
In gentle fire;
Scorning the forgetful Lake.

Addresses of Love and Service, from Erotus to Aurelia.
Erot. MAdam, invited, or rather forced, by the just commendations which
Englands Metropolis and other famed places attribute to your merits, I here
prostrate my respects and service, which I shall desire you to esteem obedient
to your will, until the time of my perseverance manifest them to be constant
and faithful.


Aurel. Sir, report is commonly a Liar, and now proves more favorable to me
than truth; you know I am flattered, and you add thereunto by presenting
feigned love and fervice to the honor of this imaginary merit.


Erot. Madam, you seem ungrateful to overkind and indulgent Nature, in wronging
that incomparable beauty she has prodigally bestowed upon you, which is so
Paramont, it can produce no other effects but fervent desires, and passionate
endeavors to serve you.


Aurel. Sir, your Rhetoric may work Miracles, but it can never alter my belief.


Erot. Then, Madam, I see there nothing remains but my future obedience and
affection, which must condemn your misbelief, and authorize this truth.


Aurel. Such expressions float commonly on the streams of this Ages affection,
which usually produce nothing but Artifice, although they pretend to the
greatest service.


Erot. I know it is ordinary for some to confirm Promises with Oaths, when at
that instant they never intended to perform them; but that which will infuse a
belief that I follow not the common custom of the times, is and will be the
sincerity of my love, and constancy of my service.


Aurel. Sir, your enterprise will not be worth your pains; and should you
obtain your desire, I know not how you will bear with the loss of being cheated
in your hopes.


Erot. However, Madam, my resolution is fixed; and although you should make the
end of it unfortunate or successless, yet it shall be the glory of my courage
that I fell from high attempts.


Aurel. Seeing you thus ground your hope on misfortune, hope can no way harm
you; for if it deceive you, it makes you not withstanding happy.


Erot. May I be so happy


Aurel. I shall never advise a soul of your generosity to rest upon such a
design, the resolution being so mean that it must needs be followed with sorrow
and repentance.


Erot. My encouragement will be the gaining of as much honor in the enterprise
as difficulty in the worthy atchieving.


Aurel. If you made but half the proofs of these many proffers of service, you
would be famous throughout the whole Empire of Love.


Erot. Madam, have patience to see the guidance of my love by the light of that
fire your fair self has kindled, which when your Luminaries are by death
extinct, shall never be extinguished.


A merry Dialogue between an ingenious Gentlewoman and a Poetaster or Rimer.
Poet. MAdam, I Am come to tell you I have writ Your praise and glory wrapped up
in my wit. Then pray accept and grace it with a smile, Your humble servant I my
self shall style.


Gent. After she had read his Verses, thus she speaks; Now prithee tell me, are
these lines of your own composition?


Poet. They are indeed, Madam.


Gent. Now beshrew me if I did not think so; the conceits are as poor as thy
habit, and the whole matter like thy self, hunger-starved; prithee leave off
riming, and beg some other way, in the ancient manner of such who haunt
Moorfields on Sundays; if thou had but a sore leg or arm, with a Partner, the
structure of whose body is built on timber, (in plain English) a wooden-leg;
thou would thrive on it.


Poet. Accept pray Madam, what I here have writ. Pay first your Poet, and then
show your wit.


Gent. Then I see you are a Mercenary Scribler: Come tell me truly, how many
have you presented with this Encomium with no other alteration than the name; I
dare lay my life an hundred; your Verses are great Travelers; and yet I dare
engage my life they have never been as far as Parnassus; but there is not a
Gentleman's house in the whole Kingdom in which they have not been conversant,
and yet I wonder how they came to have such universal entertainment as for my
own part, I must confess plainly they are too lousie and beggarly to lodge
underneath my roof; they will infect my Footmen.


Poet. If these do not like you, Lady, fair and bright, Here Is more I do
present unto your sight.


Gent. Did you make them your self?


Poet. Did I not? what a question is that? how do you think I should come by
them, unless I bought them? Some I know can buy Verses cheaper than they can
make them; but I am no Sales-man in one respect, though in another I may be
said to be so; Sales-men use to have Clothes in their shop which Tailors make,
and yet they own the work.


Gent. I marry, Sir, these savor of raptures and Poetical fancies!


Poet. Do you smell them, Madam? I hope they do not offend your Ladyships nose.


Gent. But hold Sir, how comes this about? here is one Verse is running a race
with another, and has the start of him, three feet at least?


Poet. I did it on purpose to see which would run fastest; or in imitation of a
Hare, who is swifter of foot than a Dog, and therefore is commonly beforehand
with him.


Gent. I, but Sir, here is another has ran too much, has pricked his foot, and
halts downright?


Poet. Why, look you, there lies a conceit, my invention is rare by way of
imitation; lame halting Verses are commendable, or Magnum Jovis incrementum had
never been writ; herein lies the greatest art, and herein I express no small
courage, making my enemies come home short by a leg; and to tell you truly, I
am a sow'r Satyrist, ( alias) an Iambographer.


Gent. In the name of goodness, what was that you mumbled! I hope you are no
Conjurer; there is a word with all my heart!


Poet. Why, this it is to be ignorant; or as we Latins say, Ars nullum habet
inimicum nisi ignorantem; it is my pride and glory that I speak beyond the
reach of Phlegmetick feminine capacity; but I will condescend so low as to
explain this significant word of my own composition, Iambographer; in the first
place, know it is partly Greek, and partly I know not what; but the
signification in short, is a keen and sharp Versifier, whose lines prick worse
than Spanish Needles; or in short, you may hang your self in a pair of them.


Gent. I thank you, Sir, for your good advice; but if you and your lines are
such dangerous company, pray let me have no more of their society; and so
farewell.


Poet. Nay, one word more; I cannot only hang with Iambicks, but I can fetch
blood with Asclepiads; cudgel and bastinado with Sapphicks, and whip to death
with Phaleuciums.


Gent. Pray practice, Sir, first on your self; it is no matter which of them you
take to free the world of such an insufferable burden. Adieu.


A form of Discourse at a casual meeting between Silvester and Sylvia.
Silvest. MAdam, I see your inclinations to virtue so powerful, that you are
ever restless but when you are in the society of such who make the greatest
proof thereof.


Sylvia. Sir, your judgment concerning the company is most true; for there
cannot be more accomplished persons, nor any honester content found in any
society whatever; but your courtesy exceeds in attributing praises to her who
least deserves them, and comparatively to the rest, has no considerable
perfection.


Silvest. Your modesty and humility (which is the crown of your excellencies)
makes you speak disadvantagiously of your self, which I must not connive at,
lest I run into an unpardonable error; and I should look upon my self as most
unworthy to look upon so fair an object, and not to admire its perfections, the
luster whereof can never be eclipsed by your undervaluings.


Sylvia. Sir, the higher you strain your eloquence, the more reason I have to
shun those Elogies whereof you are as liberal toward me, as Heaven is sparing
to me of those gifts you so much commend; wherefore pray desist, and in this
company select some better subject to exercise your wit and language on.


A method of Courtship on fair and honorable terms.
Inamorato. Lusippe.
Inam. I Shall ever account this, Madam, the happiest day I ever had in all the
course of my life, which has given me the honor and satisfaction of your
acquaintance.


Lufip. Sir, if I knew ought in me worthy your merit, I should readily employ
it in your service; but being fully sensible of my imperfections and weakness,
I believe the knowledge of me will yield you less happiness than you imagine.


Inam. Madam, I wonder you should wrong so much perfection.


Lusip. I wrong not any thing in my possession; but it is your courtesy and
rhetoric that would willingly excuse my defects, to make your own sufficiency
to appear so much the more.


Inam. Pardon me, Madam, it is the charming-power of your virtues and merits,
which oblige me not only to honor and serve you, but also to desire some part
and interest in your affections.


Lusip. Sir, whatsoever a Maid with honor may do, you may request of me; I
should be as void of judgment as defective in beauty, did I not respect your
quality, admire your virtues, and wish you a happiness equal to your demerit.


Inam. Madam, I assure you, my affections are real, and I hope sincerity does
wait on your good wishes; but if you will extend your favor, I cannot but be
the happiest of all men.


Lusip. Sir, as I cannot persuade my self you will fix your affection on a
person so little deserving; so I wish with all my heart your happy Stars may
guide you to a Match that may become your worth.


Inam. Do not entertain so palpable a mistake: I have proposed to my self an
unfeigned resolution to honor and serve you to my uttermost endeavor; and
your refusal cannot lessen my affection; suffer me then to bear the honorable
title of your servant.


Lusip. Sir, I have absolutely rendered my self up to the disposal of my dear
Parents, consult them; if you prevail on their consent, you shall not doubt the
conquest of my affection.


Inam. You oblige me infinitely, and I must thank you as heartily; I will not
rest a minute till I know my sentence of life or death, which consists in the
refusal of my love, or its acceptance.


An impertinent and lying Travelers Discourse with his witty and Jocose
Mistress.
Erraticus. Constantia.
Errat. MAdam, your Seat is so incomparable, that I have not seen a better in
all my Travels.


Constant. It seems then you are a Traveller.


Errat. I am no less: Did you never travel, Lady?


Constant. I hope, Sir, you do not take me for a Lady-errant; however, Sir, I
shall acknowledge I have traveled through the Universe, and yet was never out of
my own Country.


Errat. Hey day! how can that be?


Constant. I pity your want of apprehension; why, Sir, this is no such
notorious contradiction, if you consider that the Cosmographers of these latter
times have taught us in their Books to surround the world, and yet never stir a
foot; I have read of some Countries.


Errat. And you may hear talk of many wonderful passages; but pish, talk is but
talk; give me the man has measured those Countries you have heard talk of; and
can readily recount you the names of all the petty Towns as well as Cities in a
whole Kingdom.


Constant. You have seen many Cities abroad, I prav what think you of London?


Errat. London! ha, ha, ha, like a Cock-boat to the Royal-Soveraign,
comparatively to Cities I have seen.


Constant. I pray name one, Sir.


Errat. Why, Madam, I took shipping in the Downs, and had no sooner arrived to
the height of the Cape of Good-hope, but passing by the Grimanians, Hungarians
and Sclavonians, I came to Vienna, a pretty Village, and for situation much
like Hamsted, its distance is about seven leagues from Civil, from whence we
are stored with Oranges.


Constant. Sir, I have read that Vienna is in Germany, and Civil in Spain.


Errat. Pish, what care I for reading; however as you say, I cannot but
acknowledge the people in Spain are as much or more Civil than any other; but if
Civil be not in Germany, than I was neither in Civil or Vienna in my life; I
have been in Paris too, and do know the founder thereof.


Constant. Pray, Sir, inform my curiosity with the name of the Founder.


Errat. His name was Parismus the son of Palmerin of England, and hence the
City was called Paris; some would have it called Lutetia, because the women are
so well skilled in an instrument called a Lute.


Constant. Good Sir, proceed; what observations did you make whilst you were in
that famous City?


Errat. In the first place there is a famous University called Pontneuse, whose
Students ply their business very notably; studying most part of the night, and
are such notable disputants, they confute all that come that way after ninc at
night.

Here are excellent Comedians, the Women are the best, who act their parts
notably, and take great pains to do things to the life. In the Summertime
Foot-boys and Lacquys do here swarm as flies in August; and that season is so
sultry hot, that the fiery heat continues with the people all the Winter
following.

Riding one day in the street, a dust arose so thick and great that I lost my
way; that way I rid, the wind drove the dust, and did not leave me till I was
within a league of Naples, and then I found where I was.


Constant. What a loss had England sustained had you never been found!


Errat. Entering this City I found the people all clad in silk, too soft and
effeminate for me to converse withal. From hence I went to Florence, from
whence we borrow the art of making Custards, which are therefore called
Florentines. From hence I went to Milan, famous for Haberdashers, from thence
called in London Millaners. Thence to Padua, hence come our Padding or stroling
Doctors, vulgarly called Mountebanks.


Constant. You report wonders! go on, Sir.


Errat. Of all the Champane Countries in the world, Venice for my money. What
lofty Mountains and pleasant Valleys! what spacious Downs for the merry hunt!
Oh how I have made the Woods ring there with the Dukes dogs! And now I talk of
him, I had never left the place had it not been for the excessive love of his
chief Concubine toward me; who being discovered stealing the Piazza to carry
with her in her Journey with me for England, was secured, and I forced to fly
for it.


Constant. Is It possible?


Errat. I took post from thence to Genoa, from thence to Madrid, and so to
Leyden.


Constant. Excellent; and how were you entertained by the Dutch?


Errat. We were drunk together every day; but I Will say this for them, the Devil
is but a Dunce to them when they are in their drink. The last thing I heard
there, was a design to charm the Indies, and bring it to Amsterdam in
Butter-firkins. Had I staid longer in Holland I should have dyed on a surfeit of
Bore; but I washed it down with a fox at Flushing; here I met with a bucksome
Froe, with whom I went to Middleburgh, and left her as drunk as a bitch at
Rotterdam; and so taking shipping, from thence I landed at Trig-stairs.


Constant. Well, Sir, I see the difference between you and truth is so great,
that there cannot be expected a reconcilement; wherefore I shall leave you.


A Gentleman accidentally happening into a room where a Company of Ladies were
well known to him.
Gent. YOur pardon, Ladies; let not my coming interrupt your Discourse, but
rather give me the freedom that I may participate in the satisfaction.


Ladies. Our discourse is of no great concernment; we can take some other time
to continue it, that we may now give way to yours, which we doubt not will
prove every whit, if not more agreeable.


Gent. My invention, Ladies, cannot want a subject for Discourse, where the
company so overflows with wit and ingenuity; but my tongue will want
expressions to answer your Critical expectations.


Ladies. Sir, we acknowledge no such thing in our selves, and therefore let not
that we pray be the subject of your eloquence lest we suspect you intend to
laugh at us.


Gent. Ladies, you must suffer me, not withstanding all this, that though
modesty interdicts you the acknowledging a truth, yet the respect I bear to
Ladies, commands me not only to acknowledge it, but also to divulge and maintain
it.


Ladies. We confess, Sir, the frailty and weakness of our Sex requires some
support; and for my own part I cannot look upon any person so worthy as your
self to be our Champion.


Gent. What power I have to vindicate your person, is derivative from your
virtues; and were I so feeble that the supporters of my body were no longer
able to support that burden; yet one propitious glance of any of your eyes
would dart heat and vigor through my whole body, and so my feet would be
enabled to run in your service.


Ladies. Have a care, Sir, you do not strain your invention above the reach of
an Hyperbole; but lore your fancy to the meanness of our capacity; if you
cannot perform it at present we will give you time.


Gent. Ladies, I am fearful my company may be troublesome, or interrupt you
from more agreeable conversation, wherefore your Servant, Ladies.


FINIS.
BOOKS sold by Dorman Newman at the King's-Arms and Bible in the Poultry.
Folio.
THe History of King John, King Henry the Second, and the most Illustrious King
Edward the First; wherein the ancient Sovereign Dominion of the Kings of Great
Britain over all persons in all Causes, is asserted and vindicated: With an
exact History of the Popes intolerable Usurpation upon the Liberties of the
Kings and Subjects of England and Ireland. Collected out of the Ancient Records
in the Tower of London. By W. Prin, Esquire of Lincoln's Inn, and Keeper of his
Majesty's Records in the Tower of London.

A Description of the Four parts of the World, taken from the Works of Monsieur
Sanson, Geographer to the French King; and other eminent Travelers and
Authors; to which is added the Commodities, Coins, Weights and Measures of the
chief places of Traffic in the World; illustrated with variety of useful and
delightful Maps and Figures. By Richard Blome, Gent.

Memoires of the Lives, Actions, Sufferings and Deaths of those Excellent
Personages that suffered for Allegiance to their Sovereign in our late
intestine Wars, from the year 1637, to 1666; with the Life and Martyrdom of
King Charles the First. By David Lloyd.

The Exact Politician, or Complete Statesman, etc. By Leonard Willan, Esquire.

A Relation in form of a Journal of the Voyage and Residence of K. Charles the
Second in Holland.

The History of the Cardinals of the Roman Church, from the time of their first
Creation to the Election of Pope Clement the Ninth, with a full account of his
Conclave.

Mores hominum, the Manners of Men described in sixteen Satyrs, by Juvenal;
together with a large Comment, clearing the Author in every place wherein he
seemed obscure, out of the Laws and Customs of the Romans, and the Latin and
Greek Histories. By Sir Robert Stapleton, Knight.

A Treatise of Justification. By George Downham, Dr. of D.

Fifty one Sermons, Preached by the Reverend Dr. Mark Frank, Master of
Pembroke-Hall in Cambridg, Archdeacon of St. Albans, etc. To which is added a
Sermon Preached at Pauls-Cross, Anno 1641, and then commanded to be Printed by
King Charles the First.

Bentivolio and Urania, in six Books. By Nathaniel Ingelo, D. D.

The third Edition, wherein all the obscure words throughout the Book are
interpreted in the Margent, which makes this much more delightful to read than
the former.

De Jure Uniformitatis Ecclesiasticae, or three Books of the Rights belonging
to an Uniformity in Churches, in which the chief things of the Laws of Nature
and Nations, and of the Divine Law concerning the Consistency of the
Ecclesiastical Estate with the Civil, are unfolded, by Hugh Davis, Ll. B. late
Fellow of New-Colledg in Oxon.

Quarto.
A Letter from Dr. Robert Wild to his Friend, Mr. J. J. upon occasion of his
Majesty's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience. Together with his Poetica
Licentia, and a friendly Debate between a Conformist and a Nonconformist.

Merry Andrew, and poor Robins Dialogue.

The Dutch Remonstrance concerning the Proceedings and Practices of John de
Wit, Pensionary, and Ruwaert Van Putten his Brother, with others of that
Faction; Translated out of Dutch.

Brevia Parliamentaria Rediviva, in thirteen Sections. By W. Prin.

A Plea for Indulgence. By W. Prin.

The Christian Man's calling; or a Treatse of making Religion ones Business:
wherein the Christian is directed to perform in all Religious duties, Natural
Actions, particular Vocations, Familydirections; and in his own recreations in
all relations, in all conditions, in his dealings with all men, in the choice
of his Company, both of evil and good, in solitude, on a weekday, from morning
to night; in visiting the sick, and on a dying-bed. By George Swinnack.

Mr. Caryl's Exposition on the Book of Job.

Gospel-Remission; or a Treatise showing that true Blessedness consists in the
pardon of sin. By Jeremiah Buroughs.

An Exposition of the Song of Solomon. By James Durham, late Minister in
Glasgow.

The real Christian; or, a Treatise of effectual calling; wherein the work of
God in drawing the Soul to Christ, being opened according to the holy
Scriptures; some things required by our late Divines as necessary to a right
Preparation for Christ, and a true closing with Christ, which have caused, and
do still cause much trouble to some serious Christians, and are with due
respects to those worthy men brought to the balance of the Sanctuary, there
weighed, and accordingly judged: to which is added a few words concerning
Socinianism. By Giles Firmin, sometimes Minister at Shalford in Essex.

Mount Pisgah, or a Prospect of Heaven; being an Exposition on the fourth
Chapter of the first Epistle of St. Paul to the Thessalonians. By Th. Case,
sometimes Student in Christ-Church, Oxon, and Minister of the Gospel.

The virtue and value of Baptism. By Za. Crofton.

The Quakers Spiritual Court proclaimed; being an exact Narrative of a new high
Court of Justice; also sundry errors and corruptions amongst the Quakers, which
were never till now made known to the world. By Nath. Smith, who was conversant
among them fourteen years.

A Discourse of Prodigious abstinence, occasioned by the twelve Months fasting
of Martha Tailor, the famed Darbyshire Damsel; proving, that without any
miracle the texture of humane bodies may be so altered that life may be long
continued without the supplies of meat and drink. By John Reynolds.

The Life and Death of that Excellent Minister of Christ, Mr. Joseph Allin.
Also his Christian Letters, full of spiritual instructions. Published by
several Ministers.

Death Unsting'd: A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of Tho. Mowsley an
Apothecary, who died July 1669; with a brief Narrative of his Life and Death,
also the manner of Gods dealing with him before and after his Conversion, drawn
up by his own hand, and published by James Janeway, Minister of the Gospel.

Memorials of Gods Judgments, Spiritual and Temporal; or, Sermons to call to
Remembrance. By Nich. Lockier, Minister of the Gospel.

A Plat for Mariners, or the Seamans Preacher; delivered in several Sermons
upon Jonah's Voyage. By J. Ryther, Preacher of Gods Word at Wappin.

The Life and Death of Cardinal Wolsey.

The present State of Russia. By Dr. Collins.

The fulfilling of the Scriptures, or an Essay, showing the exact
Accomplishment of the Word of God in his Works of Providence performed and to
be performed.

Small Octavo.
The Life and Death of Mr. Tho. Wilson, Minister of Maidstone, in the County of
Kent. Drawn up by Mr. George Swinnock.

Hieragonisticon, or Corahs Doom; being an Answer to two Letters of Inquiry
into the ground and occasions of the Contempt of the Clergy and Religion.

The Comparison of Plato and Aristotle, with the opinions of the Fathers on
their Doctrine, and some Christian Reflections; together with Judgment on
Alexander and Caesar, as also on Seneca, Plutarch, and Petronius, out of the
French.

Observations on the Poems of Homer and Virgil: a Discourse representing the
excellency of those Works, and the perfection in general of all heroic
Actions, out of the French.

The present State of Russia, in a Letter to a Friend at London; Written by an
eminent person residing at the Great Tzars Court at Mosco, for the space of
Nine Years: Illustrated with many Copper Plates.

Misterium Pietatis; or the mystery of Godliness, wherein the mysteries
contained in the Incarnation, Circumcision, wise Men, Passion, Resurrection,
Assension of the Son of God, and coming of the Holy Ghost, are unfolded and
applied. By W. Annand.

Fellowship with God, or 28 Sermons on the first Epistle of John, chap. first
and second. By Hugh Binning, late Minister in Scotland.

The mystery of Faith opened, or some Sermons concerning Faith: By Andrew Gray
late Minister in Glasgow.

Lazarus Redivivus; or, a discovery of the Trials and Triumphs that accompany
the work of God in and about his people; with an Essay tending to clear up
those mistakes men have about it; Laid open in several Sermons: By Nicholas
Blakie, Minister of the Gospel.

Octavo and Twelve.
Vindiciae Pietatis, or a Vindication of godliness from the imputation of folly
and fancy; with several directions for the attaining and maintaining of a godly
life. By R. Allin.

Heaven on Earth, or the best Friend in the worst times; to which is added a
Sermon preached at the Funeral of Thomas Mowsley Apothecary. By James Janeway.

A Token for Children, being an exact account of the conversation, holy and
exemplary lives and joyful deaths of several young Children. By James Janeway.

Justification only upon a Satisfaction. By Rob. Ferguson.

The Christians great Interest, or the trial of a saving interest in Christ,
with the way how to attain it. By William Guthry, late Minister in Scotland.

The virtue, vigor and efficacy of the Promises displayed in their strength
and glory. By Tho. Henderson.

The History of Moderation; or the Life, Death, and Resurrection of Moderation,
together with her Nativity, Country, Pedigree, Kindred, and Character, Friend,
and also her Enemies.

A Guide to the true Religion; or, a Discourse directing to make a wise choice
of that Religion Men venture their Salvation upon. By John Clappam.

Rebukes for sin, by God's burning anger; by the burning of London; by the
burning of the World, and by the burning of the wicked in Hellfire; to which is
added a Discourse of Heartfixedness. By T. Doolittle.

Four Select Sermons upon several Texts of Scripture, wherein the Will Worship
and Idolatry of the Church of Rome is laid open and confuted. By William Fenner.

The Life and Death of Dr. James Usher, Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of
Ireland.

A most comfortable and Christian Dialogue between the Lord and the Soul. By
William Cooper Bishop of Galloway.

The Canons and Institutions of the Quakers, agreed upon at their General
Assembly at their new Theater in Grace Church Street.

A Synopsis of Quakerism; or, a Collection of the Fundamental Errors of the
Quakers. By Tho. Danson.

Blood for Blood, being a true Narrative of that late horrid murder committed
by Mary Cook upon her Child. By Nath. Partridge; with a Sermon on the same
occasion.

The welcome Communicant.

Six several Treatises. By Nich. Lockier Minister of the Gospel.

Bonasiis Vapulans; or, some Castigations given to Mr. Durel for fouling
himself and others in his English and Latin-book: By a Country Scholar.

A Discourse Written by Sir George Downing, the King of Great Britain's Envoy
Extraordinary to the States of the United Provinces: Vindicating his Royal
Master from the Insolences of a Scandalous Libel, Printed under the Title of [
An Extract out of the Register of the States General of the United Provinces,
upon the Memorial of Sir George Downing, Envoy, etc.] And delivered by the
Agent de Heyde for such, to several Public Ministers. Whereas no such
Resolution was ever Communicated to the said Envoy, nor any Answer returned at
all by Their Lordships to the said Memorial.

Whereunto is added a Relation of some Former and Later Proceedings of the
Hollanders: By a meaner Hand.

The Assemblies Works in 120, with the larger and smaller Catechisms.

Scotch Psalms alone, or with the Bible.

FINIS.

