Imprimatur,

H. London.

Justification Evangelical: Or a Plain Impartial SCRIPTURE-Account OF GOD's
Method in Justifying a SINNER.

Written by Sir CHARLES WOLSELEY, Bart.

Hosea 14.9. Who is wise, and he shall understand these things? prudent, and he
shall know them? for the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in
them: but the transgressors shall fall therein.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Ponder, at the Peacock in the Poultry near Cornhill,
and in Chancery Lane near Fleetstreet, 1677.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
WHoever Treats upon this Weighty and most Important Subject of Justification,
I acknowledge ought to do it with great Caution, with great Humility, and with
great Sincerity. First, with great Caution, for it is a point, about which, not
only the best Learned, but the most Holy and most Sincerely Religious have
considerably differed, and in all such contests both Grace and Discretion will
instruct a man not to rush in violently, or suddenly to declare against any one
side; or yet easily to suppose the truth wholly appropriated to any one party:
But in every advance to proceed with Moderation and Circumspection. Secondly,
with great Humility, it is not a sit Subject for Proud and Disdainful Pens; the
thing in its own nature is of a stupendous and humbling Consideration, and
ought to be discoursed* of accordingly; that an Apostate creature in open
Rebellion against the Great God, should not only be forgiven by an Act of
Sovereignty; but that it should become a righteous thing with God to forgive
him, and that he should be Justified in his sight, be brought to stand rectus
in curia before his Tribunal, and at the Bar of his infinite Justice, and his
discharge be an Act Judicial, and as much the effect of Justice as Favor, is
that which nothing less then Divine Wisdom could have contrived or effected,
and when we duly reflect upon it, we find no less cause for mortifying
Adoration, then humble Thanksgiving, and Infinite for both. Thirdly, with great
Integrity, the supreme interest of mankind (their Eternal condition hereafter)
is so bound up herein, and the true notion of this point so inseperably
necessary to it, that as men regard the souls of others, or have any value for
their own; they ought with the utmost Sincerity, when they discuss this point
to design themselves entirely to the service of Truth, and casting off all
Bias of Interest and Party; and all respect to the Pleasures of men, Alone
endeavor to arrive at a clear and full Discovery of what God has revealed to
us in his Word about this matter: These Rules I proposed to my self when I
first engaged in theste Meditations, and I hope the Reader will find nothing in
the following Discourse that will occasion him to think I have wilfully
transgressed any of them.

Many Books I know there are extant upon this Subject, but to deal freely with
my Reader, the consideration thereof has been so far from diverting the
publication of this discourse, that it has rather been the occasion of it: It Is
apparent to all that are conversant herein, how greatly this point has been
obscured by multitude of words; and I considared that many who want leisure, or
Inclination, or happily Ability to travail far into Polemick Intricacies, will
yet think an hour or two not ill spent to read over a plain short Scripture
account of this matter.

I will no farther attempt to pre-engage my Reader, but only to assure him I
have omitted no necessary diligence that I thought might capacitate me for this
service: I have carefully and Impartially perused what the Popish Doctors have
urged in defense of their Doctrine, and with what Exactness I could, have
considered over all the eminent Protestant Writers upon this Subject; and
although I highly value the Works of many of these latter both Dead and yet
living, and have learned much from them, yet I have purposely forborne to
mention their Names for the same reason I find given by Grotius, in the Preface
to his Famous Annotations upon the Gospels: Peperci autem plerumque recitandis
nominibus quod ea videam factioso hoc saeculo magis ad oblimandum quam ad
defaecandum judicium valere.

Should this endeavor succeed so well as to inform any that were before
ignorant of this most essential part of Divinity, or to unite any good men who
have differently conceived hereof, it will turn much to my satisfaction; if any
that are Judicious and Learned shall express their dislike of any part of this
Discourse, I shall upon all occasions endeavor by a just defense to render it
more acceptable to them; but if I find my self at any time attacked by such as
delight in Contention, and love to turn all Polemick Discourses into
impertinent Squabble. I resolve not to be engaged by them, nor upon any terms
be brought (to use the modern Expression, serram reciprocare; and indeed to all
that sort of men, that sullen answer beforehand, may be proper enough and
sufficient: What I have Written, I have Written.

ERRATA'S
PAge 11 line 21 for By that read By Christ, p. 15 l. 27 for prevailing r.
Prevalency, p. 29 l. 6. after were add not, p. 32 l. 19. after were add in, p.
48 l. 25 after saw add sit, p. 51 l. 26 after that add be, p. 52 l. 28 after
high add what, p. 54 l. 4 for require r. repaired p. 58 l. 9 after Believer add
of, p. 71 l. 23 for disobedience r. obedience, p. 79 l. 16 after mentions add
were, p. 82 l. 23 after each add other, p. 86 l. 22. after truth add of, p. 86
l. 23 for imployes r. implies, p. 87 l. 2 after works add as, p. 90 l. 28 for
an r. any, p. 99 l. 24 for principle r. principal, p. 101 l. 12 after grace add
the, p. 104 l. 8 for pregnant r. regnant, p. 107 l. 19 after go ad no, p. 109
l. 9 for carefully r. fully, p. 116 l. 26 for ache r. make, p. 121 l. 10 after
righteousness add imputed, p. 129 l. 27 for men r. man.

JUSTIFICATION Evangelical.
IN discoursing the point of Justification, these three things shall be first
and chiefly considered. First; What is meant in Scripture by Justification.
Secondly, What is the material procuring Cause of Justification before God.
Thirdly, How do we come to partake of the benefits of Justification, and arrive
at a Justified state.

Not to obscure the meaning of the word Justification by nice Distinctions, and
hard and troublesome Terms: The word Justification comes immediately from the
Latin Justificare, which is not a word of Ancient use amongst the best Latin
Writers, but is of a Later Edition; has been introduced since by Divines, to
express the sense of the Greek Verb (...), so often used by the Septuagint in
the Old Testament in rendering the Hebrew Verb Hitzdik, and so often in the New
Testament, especially by St. Paul. The meaning of it, is, to Justify, and make,
Just by way of Vindication, Defense or in Judgment. Not by infusing a habit,
for it is evident, that both the Hebrew and the Greek Verbs, (from whence we
must fetch the true sense of the Latin and English,) are Judicial and
Forinsical words, and arc scarce ever taken throughout the Bible to Juslify, by
making inherently Just, or Just by Infusion. The natural and primitive
signification of them both, is, to justify Legally and Judicially, to make
just by Plea, and in Judgment. And in that original sense, or in a sense
relative to it, and derivative from it, are the words generally taken in
Scripture. When either God is said to Justify man, or man is said to justify
God, or one man is said to justify another, or one and the same man to
justify himself, (for all these ways we read of Justification in Scripture)
it is still without any signification of infusing righteousness, or making just
that way: But that which is intended by the word, is, to make just
defensatively, declaratively, judicially, and not qualitively. To give some
instance of many, Romans 2. v. 13. Not the hearers of the Law but the doers of
it, (...) shall be justified; That is, pronounced and declared Just in
judgment. In the 11 Chap. of Job v. 2. Should a man full of talk be justified?
that is, should he be defended and acquitted upon that account, because he is
full of words? Shall that be a sufficient Plea for him? So when we are told
Pro. 17. v. 15. that, To justify the wicked is an abomination to the Lord,
it is meant to justify them by pleading for them, and defending them, or to
justify them in judgment, while wicked. For, to justify them in the other
sense, to make them inherently just and righteous, is no abomination to the
Lord, but a thing he has every where declared himself to be well pleased with.
In the 8 of the Romans St. Paul puts this question, Who shall lay any thing to
the charge of Gods Elect? (...), It is God that justifies: (...), Who shall
condemn? where, by Gods justifying, is meant, his acquitting and clearing in
judgment; It Is evident to be such a justifying as stands in opposition to
charging and condemning. Of the same import are the words most generally
wheresoever we find them used by the Holy Ghost either in the Old or New
Testament. And this we have acknowledged by many of the Papists on the one
hand, and some of the Socinians on the other, though both of them endeavor to
prove that Gods justifying men, is not his pronouncing them just, and his
declaring them so in a judicial way, but his infusing of habits and making them
in themselves actually and habitually righteous.

Justification in general may be considered as it may relate to two sorts of
men: First, to righteous and innocent men, and Secondly to Offenders.
Justification in both cases supposes Charge, and Accusation, and stands in
opposition to Condemnation. A Righteous person when he is accused and found
faultless, that is, inherently Righteous, and Just, he is, by his righteousness
made evident, thereby justified, that is, declared and approved to be just,
acquitted and cleared both from accusation and condemnation. David has an
expression to this purpose of God, Psalm. the 51. That thou might be
justified when thou speak: That is, be justified by being manifested to be
really righteous and just. So Good men are sometimes said to be justified by
their works, that is, defended and vindicated against false accusation and
charge, approved and declared to be just thereby. A person so qualified, is
justified, because he appears to be in himself righteous and just, not
righteous and just because justified. Secondly, an Offender when he is accused,
he can be no other way justified, that is, defended against accusation, and
acquitted in judgment, but by pleading ample and proportionable satisfaction
made for an offense, and an acceptance of that satisfaction as such, and
procuring a remission of the offense thereupon. It Is not possible to contrive
any other way of Justification in that Case; For free and absolute remission of
an offense cannot well be called Justification. The more freely a man is
pardoned without any sort of satisfaction, the less he can be properly said to
be justified. Such a man now is not justified, because he is found to be
inherently just, and without fault, but he becomes Just, is brought into the
state of a just man, because he arrives at a Legal Justification, and upon
satisfaction made, obtains an acquitment in judgment. Justification in
scripture, as it is an act of God relating to Men, is ever spoken of in this
later way. It Is never meant to excuse or justify a Sinner from being a sinner,
but to justify a sinner, supposing him a sinner to the utmost: All
Gospel-justification being founded upon Satisfaction as the grand fundamental
of it.

But to come more nearly to the Scripture-sense, and meaning of Justification,
by which we are generally told, that all Sinners unpardoned are under Divine
Wrath, and stand Condemned at Gods Bar: and that such whom God is pleased in
the method of his Grace judicially to pardon, and receive into favor, he is
thereby said to justify. To be justified therefore in Scripture sensee, is, to
be Cleared and Discharged before the Tribunal of God from the Guilt of sin,
resulting from the breach of his Laws, and Absolved from the Punishment due
from Divine Justice thereunto. This, without any obscuring Speculation about
the nature of Justification in general, is that practical account we find the
Scripture to give us of it suitable to its nature, as it relates to sinful
offending Man, (for it must still be remembered, that Gods justifying in
Scripture, is, his giving sentence with the Guilty party, and so we can only be
righteous, because justified, and justified by being pardoned,) and according
to what it Operates and effects upon the subject, by which also it is best
understood, and becomes most accountable to every Capacity. I include not
herein the Cause of Justification, nor the Condition of it, but speak of it in
its own proper form, and simply in it self considered: For, had I so done, I
would after this manner have expressed my self. Justification is an act of God
whereby he does, for the sake of Christ's Satisfaction to his Justice; upon men's
sincere Belief of the Gospel, account their faith for righteousness, pardon
their sins, and Acquit them in Judgment.

That this Description I have given of Justification, and our being justified,
is that which ought to be given, and the direct account we have of it in
Scripture, will evidently appear from these four considerations.

Fist, Sin being a transgression of Gods Law, and so an Offense accountable for
to Him, nothing less can justify a sinner then the Supreme judgment of God
Himself, as the Sovereign Lord and Judge of all the Earth. The Apostle tells us
that in few words, It is God that justifies. And He does it as an act and
exercise of his Supreme Justice; according to that passage Romans 3. v. 26. That
God might be just, and the iustifier of him that believes in Jesus.

Secondly, Gods justifying men, stands in opposition to Accusation and
Condemnation, which we have plainly expressed in the forementioned 8th. to the
Romans where the Apostle opposes Gods justifying, to Charging and Condemning.
Who shall lay any thing to the Charge of Gods elect? It is God that justifies,
Who is he that condemns? So that if you know what it is to Charge and
Condemn, you will know what it is to justify, it being naturally evidenced by
its Contraries. And as Condemnation is the result of a Law, so is
Justification. We stand Condemned by the Law of works, and are justified by the
Law of faith. Now, what is it that Mankind is publicly accused of, and charged
with in Scripture? It Is Sin. What is it that men stand condemned for at Gods
Bar? It Is Sin. And therefore their Justification must needs be a Clearing and
Discharging some way or other from it. And that which the Scripture every where
intends by Justification, is the Remission of Sin, and Gods acquitting us in
Judgment from the Charge, Guilt, Condemna^ion and Punishment of it. This is
judiciously observed by Grotius, Justificatio ut notum est passim in sacris
literis sed maxim in Paulinis Epistolis, Absolutionem significat, quae
presupposito peccat^ consistit in peccatorum remissione, ipso Paul semet clare
explicante pr s^rtim, Romans 4. Pe Satis. Chris chap. 1. pa 38. And this I shall
endeavor to prove these several ways. First, by producing diverse Texts,
wherein the Folly Ghost speaks expressly of Justification, and Forgiveness of sin
in the Gospel way, as one and the same thing. Secondly, by showing that the
whole Advantage of that satisfaction, upon which (as the Ground of it) we are
justified, is generally issued in Scripture into the Forgiveness of sin.
Thirdly, by showing that whatever other expressions the Scripture at any time
makes use of to signify and Explain Justification to us by, they all tend to
give us this sense and signification of it, and to express it to us as
consisting in the forgiveness of sin. And fourthly, by showing that the Grand
Blessing that God still promised the world should partake of by the Covenant to
his Grace, and the sending of his Son, (from whence our Justification has its
rise,) was the Pardon and forgiveness of sin. And when I have done this, there
will be no need I hope to say more for the satisfaction of any, under this
Consideration.

For the first. In the 4. chap. to the Romans where St Paul treats more fully and
more Critically of Justification then he does in any other place, he there
describes it in a Quotation out of the Psalms by the forgiveness of sin, and
the non imputation of iniquity. But to him that works not, but believes on
him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness: Even
as David describes the blessedness of the man unto whom God imputes
righteousness without works, saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sin is covered: Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will
not impute iniquity. Comes this blessedness then upon the circumcision only,
or upon the uncircumcision also? Where it is not to be fairly denied, but that
he describes the blessedness of a Justified person by the blessedness of a
Pardoned person, as being one and the same. In the 9 ver. Comes this
blessedness (says the Apostle) upon the Circumcision only, or upon the
uncircumcision also? What blessedness? Why, the Blessedness he is treating of,
the Blessedness of being justified before God: which he proves, descends both
upon Jew and Gentile in the Gospel way of faith, and believing. And what is
that blessedness of being justified before God? Wherein lies it? Why, it is the
Blessedness he tells us that David describes, of having our iniquities
forgiven, and our sins covered, the Blessedness of having God not to impute sin
to us. It Is plain, the Apostles whole scope and drift, is, to prove that
Abraham's justification was his pardon; upon which acccount the Gentiles, though
great sinners, might be justified, as well as he: and that Justification before
God, is not by works, and so not from the merit of any inherent righteousness
of our own, but by Gods gracious Imputing righteousness without works, which he
makes to consist in the Pardon of sin, and Not imputing of iniquity, and to be
the same thing with it. In the 13th. of the Acts the 38 and 39 verses, we find
the Apostle again expressing himself to the same purpose, Be it known unto you
therefore men and brethren, that through this man is preached unto you the
forgiveness of sins, And by him all that believe are justified from all things,
from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses. Where he speaks of
remission of sins, and Justification Equivolently, as terms importing the same
thing. In the 18th. of Luke, where the Publican is said to smite upon his
breast, and seek for pardon and forgiveness, in that expression, God be
merciful to me a sinner; our Savior says, He went home to his house Justified,
(that is, Pardoned) rather then the proud Pharisee. The one justified himself,
and asked no forgiveness, the other condemned himself, and sought for the
pardon of his sins: And by our Saviors own determination, took the right
method of attaining Justification thereby. In the 5th of the Romans v. 16. The
Apostle treating of the difference between Adams sin, and the condemnation
introduced thereby, and the Salvation we have by that, tells us, And not as it
was by one that sinned, so is the gift, for the judgment was by one to
condemnation, (...), but the free gift, is, of many offenses unto
justification. By the free gift of many offenses, is meant the pardon of them,
and the pardon of them is unto Justification, that is, pardon of sin amounts to
Justification, and upon pardon we are actually justified. We are often said in
Scripture to have pardon and remission of sins by Christ's blood: And in the
5th. of the Romans and the 9 verse. we are there said to be justified by his
blood: Much more now being justified by his blood, shall we be saved from wrath
through him. By all which we are told, that the scripture generally intends by
justification and pardon, one and the same thing.

Secondly, The whole advantage and benefit of that satisfaction upon which we
come to be justified before God, is often issued into the pardon of sin, and by
the Scripture comprised therein. If we look to the Types and Prefigurations of
that satisfaction under the Law, the grand end and signification of them, was
the removing and purging of sin. This the Apostle tells us, Heb. 9.22. Without
shedding of blood is no remission. And in the 26 ver. (he says,) Christ had
once appeared in the end of the world to put away sin by the sacrifice of
himself. That was the grand thing typified and intended by the sacrifices to be
done, and that which our Savior by his coming actually did do, as we are told
in the 1st. chap. of the same book, in that expression, When he had by himself
purged our sins, he sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high. That
is, When he had fully accomplished that great End for which he came into the
world, which was to procure pardon of sins, he then ascended to his Mediatory
Throne, and the exercise of that Authority. If we look into the Gospel, in the
26 of St. Matt. where our blessed Savior first instituted, and solemnly
himself administered that Sacrament, wherein Himself, and all the saving
Advantages appurtenant to him, are represented, and conveyed, He there calls
his Blood the blood of the New Testament shed for many for the remission of
sins. Declaring that to be the grand Effect of his purchase, and the great
attainment of the Gospel, from whence all our happiness is derived. In the 1st.
of the Ephesians v. 7. the Redemption we have by Christ, is called the forgiveness
of sin: In whom we have redemption through his blood the forgiveness of sins.
In the 2d. of the Acts verse. 38. St. Peter there persuades the Jews to embrace
the Christian-religion in these words, Repent and be baptized for the remission
of sins, as the great End attainable by the Gospel and all the Institutions of
it. St. John in the 1st. chap. of his 1st. Epist. tells us that, If we walk in
the light as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the
blood of Jesus Christ his Son Cleanses us from all sin: That being the great
End of all Gospel faith and obedience (to be cleansed from all sin) and the
inlet to all happiness. And it is that which all the Saints, the whole Church
unitedly do, una voce, adore the Mediator for, as the grand Effect of his
undertaking, That he has washed them from their sins in his own blood, and
thereby made them Kings and Priests unto God, and entitled them to all
happiness, and Glory. In a word, our Savior himself sums up and Epitomizeth
all those blessings he came to purchase for, and confer upon the world, and
seems to be in the Supreamest exercise of his Mediatory Authority, in
pronouncing that Benediction, Thy sins are forgiven thee.

Thirdly, Whatever other expressions the Scripture makes use of to signify and
represent Justification to us by, they all relate to the pardon of sin, and
give us this sense and signification of it. The Scripture expresses our
Justification by three other Terms; Sometimes it is called Redemption, sometimes
Remission, and sometimes Reconciliation: And all these have a reference to sin
and its forgiveness. It Is called Redemption with respect to that captivity and
bondage that is in sin. Remission, with respect to that guilt and obligation to
punishment that is in sin. And it is called Reconciliation with respect to that
enmity and opposition to God that is in sin. All which we are freed from by the
pardon of sin, as the great privilege of a justified state, and that wherein
it consists.

Fourthly, The great Blessing that the Scripture foretold, and held forth to
the world in the coming of the Messiah, and that Covenant of Grace, that God
would graciously enter into with Mankind, was the Remission of sin, and
blotting out of iniquity. Instances of this kind the Scripture abounds with.
The great effect of Christ's coming, we are told, should be, To save his people
from their sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity: And in diverse of the
Prophets God declares the Grace of his Covenant to lie per eminentiam in this,
The pardoning of our iniquities, and the remembering our sins no more. So St.
Peter declares, Act. 10.43. To Him give all the Prophets witness, that thorough
his name whosoever believes in him shall receive Remission of sins. And when
God was pleased to make the Attributes of his Mercy and Goodness in an especial
manner to pass before Moses, and to reveal it to him, as it relates to Mankind,
it is expressed by That, as the Grand and Transcendent Effect of it, the
pardoning iniquity, transgression and sin.

A third consideration to clear up the truth of this Definition I have given of
Justification, (and which is of great prevailing in the case) is this; That
whenever God pardons any man's sin, He looks upon him as a Righteous person,
does cerstitute him so thereby, and deal with him accordingly. Where he sees no
iniquity, there his Countenance is as upon the righteous. This I shall make
out. First, from the Reasons of the Thing in it self abstractedly considered,
that it ought so to be. Secondly from plain and positive Scriptures in the
case, whereby it appears to be Gods ordination that so it should be. And
thirdly, from the Method God is pleased in his wisdom to take in the pardoning
and justifying Offenders, and the manner of his procedure therein, whereby his
Righteousness and his Justice become very evident in so doing.

There be these five Reasons result from the Thing in it self abstractedly
considered for the proof of this point. First, Man in his primary Make, was
righteous, and just, that was his Original constitution; Sin is but an
Accidental Deprivation: And therefore when all Sin and Guilt contracted, is
Legally removed, and wholly obliterated, it is but reasonable he should be judge
d of by his first state, and it falls in naturally so to be. Sublata privatione
ponitur habitus, is a firm Axiom in Logic. Not that I am here about to prove
that a man is restored barely to the state of Adams Original innocence by the
Redemption and Forgiveness of the Gospel, for by Gods gracious Ordination we
are instated in much more; I urge this only to evidence thus much, That man
being made Righteous, and having made himself a Sinner, his sin being pardoned
and obliterated, were there nothing else in the case, 'twere Just with God to
account of him according to what at first he made him. Nor can we, with any
good Reason, abstractedly considering him so circumstanced, judge of him
otherwise, then as in a righteous, and so happy condition. Secondly, Remission
of all sin is in its own nature constructively, and properly enough so called,
a Righteousness, According to that noted saying among the Ancient Christians,
Hominis justicia est Dei Indulgentia; He that is chargeable with no offense at
Gods Tribunal, as he is not that has all his sins both of omission and
commission judicially and authoritatively forgiven, must needs be Reputed upon
even terms with an Observer of the whole Law, and have a right to all the
advantages appurtenant to an innocent person. To want any of them were paena
damni, and a part of punishment, which can have no place where there is no Sin
nor Transgression. Thirdly, Man is a Subject in which righteousness, or
unrighteousness do necessarily inhere, and to which by virtue of his
Constitution and Relation they are inseparably appertaining: Just as light and
darkness necessarily relate to Air, health and sickness to our bodies: And
they are contraryes that expel each other, and from a necessity in their own
Natures succeed each other in their Existance in such Subjects. Air perfectly
free from all darkness, must of necessity be supposed to be light. If a body be
free from all sort of sickness, it must needs be supposed in perfect health: So
if a Man be freed wholly from all sort of unrighteousness, he ought not, nor
cannot be otherwise judged of then as a Just and a Righteous person; there
being no third state imaginable in such cases. Fourthly, If Gods Pardon of all
a man's sin should not ipso facto, instate him in a Righteous condition, and
render him perfectly a Righteous person, one of these two things would
unavoidably ensue; Either that there must be some third state of a man that is
neither Righteous nor Unrighteous, which is in the nature of the thing utterly
Impossible to be, or else that God might fully pardon an unrighteous man, that
is, a man after his pardon Continuing still so to be, and that a man might
remain unrighteous, and so obnoxious to Punishment, miserable and unhappy,
(contrary to what the Psalmist so often says, That he is blessed that has his
sins forgiven,) after all his sins are Pardoned, and he has reaped the whole
benefit of Gods Forgiveness: To imagine either of which, were either extremely
Impious, or Foolish, or Both. Fifthly, The Apostle tells us, that All
unrighteousness is sin, (the Scripture carries us no farther) and all sin is
some way or other a breach and transgression of some Law. Now where all sort of
sin is Forgiven, both of Omission and Commission, a man is in the same state as
if he had never offended, and if so, capable of no charge of sin, and so of no
charge of unrighteousness, and so cannot by strict rules of Justice, be
otherwise adjudged and accounted of then as a Righteous person. Freedom from
all unrighteousness (which Pardon of all sin necessarily includes) does ipso
facto constitute a man Righteous, and denominate him from the Reason of the
thing, so to be. And the truth is, a person whose Fault is remitted, and he
judicially acquitted upon plenary satisfaction made, is (in point of true and
legal Justification, and being accounted Righteous thereupon) upon even terms
with him that is Accused, and Justified by being found innocent; Because the
Rule of Righteousness and Justification is the Law and the Judgment resulting
from thence; Most especially when we are acquitted at the infallible Tribunal
of God according to His righteous Laws. The Apostles Question (so pregnant
Negative) may very well be asked, If God justify, who shall either Charge or
Condemn?

Secondly, It appears by several Texts, that whomsoever God pardons, he reckons
as Righteous, and is in the Scripture-acceptation said to justify thereby. In
the 4th. of the Romans where the Apostle is proving, that Righteousness and
Justification is not by works and merit, but by free forgiveness in the Gospel
way of Believing: he says in the 6. ver. Even as David also describes the
blessdness of the man to whom God imputes righteousness without works. Here
the Apostle: gives you David's sense in his own words, and then quotes David's
words, saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins
are covered, Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute iniquity. By
which it is plain past all denial, that imputing righteousness without works,
and free forgiveness of sin, and not imputing iniquity, are the same, if this
be but admitted, that St. Paul know how to interpret the words of David. In the
2d. Epist. to the Corinth. chap. 5th. the Apostle there tells us, that God is
in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses.
God, upon not imputing sin, is reconciled. Now it upon Not imputing sin, He did
not account of us as Righteous, 'twere impossible he should be so Reconciled:
God cannot be reconciled to any man continuing unrighteous, and under the
notion of a Sinner. In truth, Throughout the Scripture, all the characters of a
righteous person, of a Happy and Blessed person, are still given to a Pardoned
person. As all misery was introduced by sin, to manifest Gods extreme hatred of
it. So all happiness is attained by the forgiveness of it; to tell us of what
value Gods forgiveness is, and what an inestimable price it cost. In the sense
of the Gospel (which is a Law Enacted that peculiarly provides for the
Justification of an Offender) a righteous person is a pardoned person, to
Calvin observes. Cum veniam peccatorum fuerimus consecuti Justi habemur coram
Deo. Instit. lib. 3. chapter 17. And a pardoned person is a justified person, and a
justified person is blessed person. Pardon, Justification, Righteousness,
Blessedness, are inseparably Conjoined: The 4th. of the Romans and other Texts
are a sufficient Proof of it.

Thirdly, From a due consideration of that Order and Method God is pleased to
use in the Pardoning of Sinners: 'This truth will be farther manifest, and
appear to be immoveably sixed upon these two foundations. First, Every sinner
is pardoned upon the soore of such a Satisfaction made as honor, and satisfies
the Law as much as if it had never been broken; or as if being broken, the
utmost penalty had been inflicted: Now such satisfaction is in it self
vertually Righteousness, and when accepted in judgment, is Actually so.
Secondly, Every sinner is in fact pardoned (and not before) upon the
performance of such a Condition as God is pleased by the Covenant of his Grace
to account for righteousness, and so to accept: And that is Believing, and
being possessed of Gospel-faith; Which Faith we are often told is imputed for
righteousness. Whoever believes, is Righteous in the Judgment of the Gospel-
Law; for it is performing the condition required by it on our part to be
performed, and is our Covenant-Keeping. Now, whosoever is so Circumstanced in a
judicial pardon obtained from the Great and Infallible Judge of all the Earth,
upon such a satisfaction made, and such a Condition performed, is certainly
well entitled to a Righteous state and condition.

A Fourth consideration to make good the Definition I have given shall be this.
Gods Justifying a sinner is as has been said, his giving Sentence with the
guilty party. Now God, whose Judgment is ever according to Truth, cannot give
Sentence with a Guilty person upon the score of Innocence; His Justification
therefore of such a one, (consider it which way you will) must needs be
included in his Forgiveness of him. He must of necessity be restored to a
righteous condition in a way of pardon, and cannot be so upon any other
account. That which some say [That Justifying, and bare and absolute Forgiving,
are, in themselves considered, two distinct things: One being a voluntary act
of Grace, the other a necessary effect of Justice] will not at all reach this
case, supposing it to be true: For a sinners Justification results not from
free and absolute Pardon, nor consists in it; but a sinner is pardoned and
justified in a way judicial, in pursuance of a Law, by pleading an ample
satisfaction made: The greatest exercise of favor in such a case seems to lie
in the acceptance of the satisfaction. Now God, who is the Party offended, and
the Judge, declaring himself to be abundantly satisfied concerning the sins of
the world, by what Christ has suffered and done, (and it being perhaps highly
requisite, the Nature of Christ's satisfaction considered in point of Justice
too, that he should so be) the Pardon and Justification of a sinner are eminent
effects of his Justice, as well as of his Grace and Mercy: And it becomes a
Righteous thing now with God to pardon and justify an offender, so qualified
in Judgment. For, it must be considered, that although the Ground and
Foundation of our Salvation, and the whole of it in its contriving and
effecting, is nothing else but free and absolute grace and Divine goodness, yet
in such a Method, and after such a Manner is Grace dispensed, that in every
Step that is taken toward the Salvation of a sinner, God appears Righteous as
well as Gracious, and Justice and Mercy do kiss each other. But still the
Justification of such a one must exist in his Pardon, by which he obtaines a
Legal Discharge from all obligation to Punishment, stands rectus in Curia, no
charge from the Law can be brought against him, and he is upon even terms in
the eye of the Law, with those who never offended. Nor can it be otherwise: For
no satisfaction, be it never so Great, can put an Offender out of need of
forgiveness, nor can it operate farther then to obtain forgiveness, and so free
him from condemnation, and constitute him judicially righteous. It Is true, that
this is not such a Justification as an innocent person obtains in Judgment: But
it is such a one as an offender is only capable of, and has all in the effects
and advantages that the other has, and may be as truly and properly termed
Justification: And whoever denies it, makes the Justification of an offender
utterly Impracticable, and Impossible.

SECT. II.
ANd thus I have gone through the first Promise I obliged my self to, which
was, to give an account of what is meant in Scripture by Justification. We are
not Justified as righteous and innocent persons, by having Christ's
righteousness personally imputed to us as our own, and we accounted in Judgment
to have done what He did, and acquitted as sinless thereupon: Such
apprehensions are vain, and have no bottom in Scripture. But we are Justified
(as in indeed and in truth we are) as Sinners, that is, By pleading ample
Satisfaction made for our sins in Christ, and our own performance of that
Gospel-condition which God has made necessary to our participation of the
Benefits of it: Upon which Plea God is graciously pleased judicially to pardon
our sins, to account of us as Righteous thereupon, and to deal with us
accordingly; that is, Legally to entitle us to all the grace and glory promised
in the Gospel.

Diverse Objections are raised against these Conceptions of Justification, the
value whereof seems to me to result rather from the Authors of them, (sundry
Learned and Worthy men) then from any weight in themselves. The most Material
are these three.

First, It is Objected, That when the Scripture describes Justification by
Forgiveness of sin, it speaks Synecdochically, and expresses the Whole by a
Part. So in the 4th. to the Romans and other Texts. And that Text Romans 4. v. 25.
is much insisted on to prove that Justification implies more then Forgivenness
of sin.

This Objection, it will be acknowledged, can be of no force, unless it be
proved that the Scripture does in other places ascribe some other distinct
parts to Justification. There can he but one more with any color pretended,
and that is [Adjudging Righteous upon the score of some righteousness.] Now it
has been before proved, That Pardoning of sin upon Christ's satisfaction
contains in it imputing righteousness without works, and that in the Apostles
sense they are all one. When we are told in some Texts that we are justified by
Christ: in others, That we obtain forgiveness of sin by Christ: and in others,
That we are made righteous by Christ: By an impartial comparing the Scripture
with it selt, it appears that one and the same thing is intended: For whoever,
upon the performance of the Gospel-condition, is legally Interested in Christ's
satisfaction, and thereupon actually Pardoned, is also thereby Justified and
adjudged to be Righteous by the order and appointment of God in that case; and
in this the Scripture is every where very positive and plain. That when the
Scripture describes Justification by Forgiveness of sin, it describes it
Synecdochically, expressing the whole by a part, there is no good reason at all
to believe, but quite the contrary, That it describes it comprehensively. For
it appears by Scripture-evidence, that the whole form of Justification is
comprised therein; and the Scripture describes it most generally by pardon of
sin, and most fully in those places where it treats most largely and expressly
of it. In the forementioned 4th. chap. to the Romans 'twill appear very plain to
any impartial Reader, That the Apostle there without any Synecdoche, describes
Justification in its full latitude, if we consider these things. First, that he
there fully and completely sets out the Justification of Abraham, who in the
manner of his Justification, was to be the great pattern of Justification to
all succeeding ages; and the whole business of Gospel-Justification was
comprised in the way and manner of his Justification. Secondly, he there states
and determines the Grand and Deepest point about Justification, whether it be
by faith or works. Now if he had not described it in its full extent and
latitude, and taken in the whole of Justification in that Quotation out of
David, by which he proves it is not by works but by free forgiveness, his
Reasoning had not been Cogent: For the Jews might well have replied, you speak
but of one part of Justification, and so conclude not about the whole: That
part indeed you prove to consist in the forgiveness of sin in the way of says,
but it appears not but that there may be other parts also in Justification, and
they may result from works: And so a man may be in part justified by free
forgiveness and grace, and in part by works. Thirdly, the Apostle very plainly
makes the blessedness that David describes (which in the blessedness of pardon
and not imputing iniquity) to be the blessedness of Justification: For in the
9th. ver. Comes this blessedness upon the circumcision only, or upon the
uncircumcision also? that is, the blessedness of Justification by faith, which
is David's blessedness of pardon. Now 'twere absurd to imagine that the Apostle
should tell us that the Blessedness of Justification (which must needs relate
to the whole of it) does consist in imputing righteousness without works, which
he makes to be all one with the pardon of sin, and not imputing iniquity,
unless Justification were fully comprised therein, and if it were so the form
of it, that it did as we say, dare esse to it: For nothing else can properly
contain the Blessedness of it.

If it be meant by those that thus Object, That by Pardon of sin the Scripture
does not express the whole Effects that accrue by Justification: That will be
readily granted; for our Pardon and Justification is but our Title in Law to
the Grace and Glory of the Gospel, is not the very things themselves, though
they are all virtually contained therein, and inseparably conjoined to it by
the institution of God: For, Whom he justifies, them he sanctifies, and whom he
sanctifies, he glorifies. And the Apostle in the 26 of the Acts, conjoynes, as
inseparable, forgiveness of sin, and having an inheritance amongst them that
are sanctified. But if the meaning be, That the whole form of a sinners
Justification properly taken, and as we find it spoken of in Scripture, be not
comprised in the Forgiveness of sin, 'twill appear to be a Mistake. Those that
thus Object, tell us our Justification consists of two distinct parts. First,
Remission of sin, Secondly, Adjudging to be Righteous: Each standing upon a
distinct bottom, the first upon Christ's passive obedience, and the other upon
his Active (though in the Scripture we read not one Syllable of any such
thing.) These two I have proved before are in the Scripture-method conjoined:
Whoever is by God, upon the belief of the Gospel, for the sake of Christ,
judicially pardoned, is thereby Justified and accounted as Righteous, and the
satisfaction of Christ is reckoned and imputed by God to all Believers, in
those effects, and for those ends and purposes; nor can it be rationally
supposed to be otherwise imputed: For no other persons Righteousness performed,
or Satisfaction made on my behalf, can come to be any other way justly
accounted mine, then in the effects and advantages of it. It can never be a
Just Judgment to adjudge me to have Personally performed my self, what was
actually done by another, though it was done on my behalf, and be reckoned to
my account. There is no other possible way by which any man can come to be
accounted Righteous in Judgment, but either by a righteousness inherent in our
selves, (which does constitute us innocent,) or by the Righteousness of Christ
made ours in a way of personal imputation (which must make us also to be
justified as innocents, and not as offenders.) The first is affirmed by the
Papists, and the later by many Learned Protestants; The Overthrow of both which
opinions, I shall hereafter endeavor in this Discourse, and thereby fully
return Answer to this and all other Objections of this nature.

That Text Romans 4. v. 25. is much pressed and insisted on; But upon great
Mistake, as will easily be made to appear. The words are, Who was delivered for
our offenses, and was raised again for our Justification. Which words are not
to be taken as if there were two distinct ends in Christ's Death and
Resurrection, the one to obtain pardon of sin, and the other to justify, (And
so to divide between them two, whereas in truth the Apostle makes them one and
the same thing) But the natural meaning and intendment of the Holy Ghost in
that text is this, That, All that Christ did, and suffered, was upon our
account: He was delivered to death upon the account of our sins, (...), for our
greatest sins and utmost Apostasy, (for that sense is included in the word
(...)) and rose again upon the same account, to justify us from the condemning
power of them. By being delivered for our offenses, and rising again for our
Justification, the Apostle intends the same thing, which is, to justify and
save us from our sins: And the latter expression is exegetical of the former.
It Is to instruct us that Christ's Death and Resurrection, the whole that he
transacted, had one tendency, and was all in order to one and the same end. For
in some Texts we are said to be justified by his Death, and by his Blood; so
that he Dyed for our justification, as well as rose again for it. The Scripture
no where affords us the least warrant to assign one distinct end to Christ's
death, and another to his resurrection. Nay, the Apostle himself upon another
occasion, Romans 14. ver. 9. positively conjoyns them as inseparable in their
ends; For this end (says he) Christ both dyed and rose again. Whatever Christ
dyed for, he rose again for. His Rising again did not induce any farther, or
other ends, then were his Death, but only complete and perfect the whole Design
and Intendment thereof. For although Christ dyed for our sins, yet if he had
not Risen again, we could not have reap't the Fruit and Effect of his Death.
His own Justification, as Mediator, and so ours, depending upon his
Resurrection as the supreme and Glorious Effect of his Deity, and that whereby
he was declared to be the Son of God mightily from heaven.

Secondly, It Is Objected, That Remission of sin does only take away the guilt,
or ordination to punishment, but does not remove the Sin it self; and therefore
Justification cannot consist in it. Although pardon of sin do make as if sin
had never been in respect of the guilt of it, yet not in respect of the
denomination of the Subject. Although David was pardoned, yet his pardon did
not make him a Just man in those acts of his Murder and Adultery: He was truly
a Murderer and an Adulterer notwithstanding. Justification does not denominate
a man to be Just, and a righteousness is requisite unto it. A man is not
Justified, and therefore Just; but must be Just, and therefore Justified, in
the order of Justification.

To this I Answer in these three things. First, by Gods forgiving of sin in a
Judicial way, as much is done to obliterate and extinguish it in its proper
denomination as is possible; and nothing but Gods forgiveness could have done
so much. For he forgiveth as the Supreme Sovereign and Lord of all: And his
forgiveness is not only the effect of his mercy, but the result of all his
infinite Attributes. He is pleased with a redundancy of Grace to express
himself in Scripture to us about this matter, that we might have a strong
consolation therein. As first, That he will turn his face from our sins, Psalm.
51. Secondly, That he will remember them no more, Isa. 42. Thirdly, That he
will not impute them, Psalm. 32. Fourthly, That he will cast them into the
depths of the sea, Mica. 7. And fifthly, that he will cast them behind his
back, Isa. 38. Now I say, Where God has so forgiven sin, all the effects and
consequences of it as such an Action are utterly extinguished; and so it self
cease after a sort to be. And he that has committed Acts of sin, when he is
Legally pardoned, is no more a Sinner, nor ought he in Justice so to be
accounted: For, 'twas the judgment of the Law by which he is Acquitted, that
^^^de him so to be. It Is true, those sinful Acts do not naturally cease to be,
but all that was in those Acts obnoxious to the Law, from whence their
sinfulness arose, upon Judicial pardon, legally cease to be; and that is
sufficient in this case: For we are not, in the discourse of this point, making
inquiries into a natural, or metaphysical existence of things, but only into a
judicial and legal.

Secondly, Let it be thus farther considered, that nothing can more extinguish
the denomination of sin and sinner, then Legal and Judicial pardon. As, take it
in the present instance of David, in those sinful Acts of his: The Acts, it is
true, were the same, naturally considered, after his pardon that they were
before: but legally and forensically considered, they were not: And how is it
possible to be otherwise, but that the very acts must be still naturally the
same? For suppose the righteousness of Christ to be personally imputed to
David, (as those that thus Object would have it to be,) to denominate him a
Righteous person, and so render him a fit subject for Justification; such
Imputation will not make the Actions of his own sin to be naturally otherwise
then indeed they are, nor the Obliquity of them more cease to be then it does
by Forgiveness. There being no other possible way to bring an offender in the
judgment of the Law into a righteous estate and condition, but by Judicial
pardon. And if after such pardon, what is here objected be true, that the
denomination of sin and sinner as such, notwithstanding remain; it will
unavoidably follow, by the strict Doctrine or personal imputation, that a man
may be under the proper denomination of a righteous man and a sinner at one and
the same time, (which implies a loud Contradiction:) For a man may be accounted
righteous in respect of Christ's righteousness, personally made his own by
imputation, and yet he may be justly denominated a sinner however: For although
his sins be pardoned and cease to be, in respect of the guilt of them, yet not
in respect of the denomination of the subject, as it is here Objected. Whoever
that was once an offender, comes to be justly accounted righteous, must first
be fully cleared from the denomination of an offender, for those two are
visibly inconsistent in one subject. And nothing else can more Effect that,
then forgiveness.

Thirdly, To the latter part of the Objection, [That Justification does
denominate a man to be just, and a righteousness is requisite to it: A man is
not justified, and therefore just; but just, and therefore justified, in the
order of Justification.] I Answer, The first thing affirmed herein; That
Justification does denominate a man to be just, and a righteousness is
requisite to it, is thus true: That Justification necessarily supposes a man
to be just, and it includes the notion of his being so one of these two ways,
either inherently, or legally and judicially; the one relates to an innocent
persons Justification, the other to an offenders: And when justified, they are
both alike just in Law-sense, though differently to be considered in the manner
of their Justification, and in their antecedent condition to it. He that is not
justified upon inherent righteousness, but is an offender, he can only arrive
at the state of a just man by Legal acquitment in judgment, and by having a
sentence in law pass for him: For whatever satisfaction he makes, (though it be
true, that there is virtually contained a righteousness in satisfaction,) yet
being actually an offender in the judgment of the Law, till the Plea of his
satisfaction be accepted, and he thereupon judicially acquitted, he can never
be accounted of as righteous, and so can never be righteous previously to his
Justification. To speak of a previous righteousness, properly so called,
requisite to an offenders Justification, such as will justify and defend him
in Judgment, has no tolerable sense in it: For it supposes a man to come under
the notion of an offender, and a righteous person at the same time. This only
is true in that case, that a sufficient reason must be pleaded for the pardon
and Justification of an offender before a righteous Tribunal: And that alone
can be plenary satisfaction, and cannot be any thing else. And that, upon
acceptance, must needs produce Pardon. And the natural End both of satisfaction
and pardon, is to re-instate an offender into a righteous condition.

The second thing affirmed, That a man is not justified, and therefore just;
but just, and therefore justified, is a great Mistake: For it relates
Justification solely and singly to innocents, and renders the Justification of
offenders (about which the Scripture is only conversant) utterly impracticable
and impossible. Persons inherently righteous are justified because found so,
and their Justification is but affirmative and declarative of such inherent
righteousness; But offenders are brought into the state of Just men upon legal
pardon and discharge: Nor can any Satisfaction in its nature operate farther.

Thirdly, It Is Objected, That God requires a positive righteousness of us,
conformable unto his Law in the perfect obligation of it: And therefore it
follows, that mere remission of sin, under what distinction soever, cannot be
our righteousness. Remission of sin frees from punishment, but it is perfect
obedience that entitles us to eternal happiness.

To this I answer, Legal sinless-righteousness which the Law requires, God
accepts satisfaction for in Christ: It Is Gospel-righteousness we are now to
enquire after. If God had not accepted Christ in our stead, and his
satisfaction to answer for all our obligements to the law, as a Law of works,
and super-induced a better covenant thereupon; this Argument had been good: But
seeing he has, it is of no force at all. The Apostle tells us, Romans 10.4. that
Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes. To
understand which expression of the Apostle aright, we must consider, Finem
alicujus rei (as the Schoolmen speak) dici dupliciter, in quem tendit res vel
naturaliter, vel ex ordinatione Agentis. The End to which the Law naturally
tended, was such a particular personal sinless-righteousness in each man as he
might justify himself upon, and claim the reward promised as a debt due. This
end the Jews pursued and sought after, and the Apostle rejects, as appears in
the 3d ver. But the end to which the Law tended by the ordination of God, was
Christ's righteousness to make satisfaction for our disobedience, and thereby to
introduce another method of Justification in a way of says and believing, that
we might no longer be under a Law of works, but under a Law of grace. The Law
could not attain its natural end, by reason of man's impotency; and so 'twas a
schoolmaster to bring us to Christ. Nor did it in Christ, for the Law required
an unsinning righteousness from every particular person, and not from Christ to
satisfy for all others: That depends purely upon Gods ordination. To all
unbelievers the Law remains still in force as it was first given, and the wrath
of God abides upon them thereby: but to those that believe, and so are within
the Kingdom of the Mediator, the Law is not in force, as a Law of works, but
reestablished by Him as part of the New Law, and upon the same gracious terms
that all other gospel-precepts are: For the Apostle tells us, we are not under
the Law, but under grace; and yet tells us also, the law is established by the
Gospel. All that discuss this point, ought still to consider, that our
Justification is not Legal but Evangelical: For we are justified with respect
to the Law that is interested in Christ's satisfaction, upon performance of the
Gospel-Condition, and not otherwise. It Is not by the Law of Works, any way
considered, that we are Actually and Personally justified. The Apostle so
concludes, Romans 3.38. A man is justified without the deeds of the law: But it is
by the law of faith. Whatever the Law of works requires, God has accepted of
satisfaction for our nonperformance of it, in our Surety and Representative,
and has empowered him to offer salvation upon the terms of a better covenant.
And the righteousness of God (the Apostle tells us) is now manifested without
the law. Our Justification is now upon the terms of a new recovering law of
grace: And it is the righteousness of that we are now only obliged to perform.
When we are impleaded at the Bar of the Law, we plead satisfaction in Christ
for our Nonperformance; when we are impleaded at the Bar of the Gospel, and
put to prove our personal interest and propriety in that satisfaction, then we
are obliged to manifest our performance of the Gospel-condition, and evidence
the truth of our faith, by which we are entitled to it: Our Plea must then lie
there. So that with reference to the Law we are Justified, that is, Judicially
pardoned and acquitted in judgment, upon satisfaction made; with reference to
the Gospel, upon performance of the condition. And faith looks both ways,
respects both the Law and the Gospel, and comprizeth all that is requisite to
our Justification, with reference to both. All the Charge of the Law it
Answers, ratione Objecti, in respect of its Object, which is Christ: And all
that is required by the Gospel, ratione sui, as being it self the performance
of the Condition annexed thereunto. To suppose that every Justified person, as
necessarily requisite to his Justification, must be actually and personally
possessed of all that unsinning obedience, the strict rules of the Law
required, is a great mistake; for none was ever so but Christ himself, who
became a Public Satisfaction and Ransom for the whole. Should any man now be
Justified under the law of faith, upon a strict performance of the law of
works, any way considered, the Law would not then be relaxed, but still
strictly executed. Now the truth is, the Law is neither executed nor abrogated,
but relaxed and dispensed with. Executed it is not, for who then could be
saved? And the Apostle tells us, Romans 8. There is no (...), no condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus. And abrogated it is not: For it is in full force
(a dreadful consideration to the wicked unbelieving part of the world!) with
all its rigor against all those that do not believe and obey the Gospel; and
under the Gospel it self, though we are freed from the curse of the Law, yet we
are still under the government of the Law in the sense before mentioned: The
condemning power is only taken off, the commanding power is still continued:
And, as some say, (though I think such ought well to consider what the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. chapter 3. v. 22.) not all the condemning power neither in matters
temporal, for the best men are still subjected to death natural and many
sorrows. And besides, either a man must be possessed of such Legal
Righteousness inherently, or imputatively; Inherently he cannot, for the
Scripture tells us, that by the works of the Law no man living can be
justified: Nor can he be by way of imputation personally possessed of it: For
Christ himself did not, nor could not, in person, perform all those individual
acts the Law requires from every person that is Justified by it: For, when
Christ is said to fulfill all righteousness, it is meant all made necessary by
the law of his Mediatorship for himself to perform, and not what every
individual man was bound to perform. And therefore no such imputation can ever
be supposed, unless we will suppose God to account me, to have done that in
Christ, which Christ never did himself, and in the Nature of the thing 'twas
impossible he should do: Or else to account me to have done in mine own person,
all that Christ himself did in his person, and so to be righteous in the very
same spotless way, and to the same transcendent degree that Christ was. The
only difference between those that assert the form of Justification to consist
in the pardon of sin, and those that say it is requisite besides forgiveness of
sin, farther to take in the righteousness of Christ by imputation, and that we
should be pronounced righteous in judgment therein, is this, Whether Christ's
righteousness shall be reckoned and imputed to us in a way of Satisfaction made
for our sins and disobedience, upon a sincere belief of the Gospel, and we
reckoned righteous upon that account, or whether it shall be so imputed, as to
be personally reckoned our own, and to be adjudged righteous by God, not for,
but in that very righteousness: In both cases, our Justification is bottomed
upon Christ's alone righteousness, and the imputation of it to us. If the first
be true, then it is undeniable (contrary to what is objected) that our
Justification is our pardon; and our pardon upon satisfaction made and
accepted, and the condition performed, is that upon which we are constituted
personally righteous: For satisfaction made for an offender naturally and
necessarily operates that way, and cannot operate any other in judgment: the
virtue of it must needs be issued in pardon. Now that the first is much
likelier to be true, and has much more of rational probability in it, (besides
Scripture-testimony, where we are said to be Ransomed, Redeemed, Purchased,
Bought with a price, which all relate to satisfaction) then the Later, does
from hence appear; by that we are Justified as Sinners, upon compensation made
for our sins, and are brought into a Righteous state by the pardon of them,
which is plainly the truth of our case, and a thing easy to be understood. By
the other, we are made to be justified as Innocents, which is not the truth of
our case, unless we will suppose God to account us to have done all that Christ
did, that is, to have performed all righteousness without sin, which in fact
was not so.

This Objection therefore is wholly grounded upon a Mistake. We obtain not
Heaven as the reward of the Law, but upon the promises of the Gospel. Our
concern is not upon what Terms the Law does justify, but how the Gospel does
justify: Our own sins have rendered impracticable the justifying power of the
Law, and Christ's righteousness and satisfaction has superseded the condemning
power of. it.

SECT. III
I Come, in the second place, to consider, What is the material procuring Cause
of Justification before God? And the Answer to it in general, is this, it is a
Satisfaction made, suitable to his Justice, for the breach of his Law. And this
satisfaction consists in the whole Active and Passive obedience of our Savior,
entirely taken together, and the infinite merit thereof, with which God
declares himself so abundantly satisfied and well pleased, that he Relaxeth the
Law of Works thereupon, dispenses with the rigor of it, and superinduceth
another Covenant, upon the terms of which we are justified and saved. God does
not, upon satisfaction made for the breach of the Covenant of Works, thereupon
immediately pardon and save us by that: But he relieves and releaseth us from
the obligation we lay under to it, and proclaims a new Law, and enters into
another Covenant; And it is upon the terms of that we are actually pardoned and
justified. The Righteousness and Satisfaction of Christ fully answers for us,
in respect of the Law: We stand no more obliged to it, a it is a Law of Works;
and it is the procuring Cause and formal Reason of the new Law of the saving
Covenant, upon the terms of which, we are pardoned and justified, and which is
in its nature but a method of forgiveness, and that place the Righteousness of
Christ bears in point of Justification: So that the whole is Originated in our
Redeemers Satisfaction, and purchased thereby; the inestimable value and merit
whereof, results from these four things, the dignity of his Person, the
freeness and spontaniety of his undertaking, the undertaking it self, and the
ordination of God in the case; had there not been a concurrence of all these,
the satisfaction had been defective and ineffectual, the Gospel had never been
published, Death and Condemnation had still reigned, and the Law had continued
still in its full force and virtue.

First, What a stupendous dignity was there in Christ's Person, in whom the
fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily? It Is no wonder we should be redeemed by
his blood, when it was the blood of God, and that the righteousness of this one
should redound to All, for the Justification of life, as it is expressed Romans 5
18. when in him dwelt all fullness. The Actions and Sufferings of such a person
must needs be of unspeakable value, because of his own transcendent Eminency
above all creatures, yea even Angels, for he is Gods Fellow, and was in the
form of God. Whatever was done and suffered by a person so qualified, in whom
concentred all the perfection both of the Humane and Divine nature, must needs
be of infinite value, and of desert and merit beyond all bounds of imagination:
It Is no wonder we should be bought with such a price: and yet nothing less then
this can we suppose (without impeaching the wisdom of God, who saw to bring it
about this way) could have answered for man's disobedience, have stopped the
current of Divine Justice, and made a satisfaction for that Eternity of
punishment that became due to us.

Secondly, How free and voluntary, what a mere act of Choice was Christ's
sufeeption of his Mediatory work! How far was he exalted beyond the reach of
all obligation, or possibility of any Addition! No Creature could oblige him
that was God, nor could the Divine nature lay a Constraint upon it self; it is
an essential property of the Godhead to act freely. It Is true, when he was man
he was obliged as a man; but he was under no engagement to become man. A
Servants work and a Creatures homage was due from him indeed, when a Creature
and a Servant; but 'twas his own free choice that brought him into the state of
either. Nothing but the workings of his own infinite bowels of Compassion over
the fallen posterity of Apostate Adam, could bring him to Tabernaclo in flesh,
and take up his abode with the children of Men. In a word, he freely and out of
choice became man, and lived a life Natural: And as freely resigned up his life
unto death, and became a free-will-offering to God: So himself declares, Joh.
10. ver. 17. I lay down my life, no man takes it from me. And Mark. 10.25. he
tells us, He came to Give his life a ransom for many. And had not this been so,
God who is infinitely just, could not have punished him in whom there was found
no guilt: Nor had it been Equal with God to accept him on our behalf, unless he
had freely espoused our interest.

Thirdly, How admirable is the undertaking of Christ in it self. First, to
assume humane nature, from the very first moment of which assumption began the
state of his humiliation, and in that nature to yield a perfect obedience to
all the Laws of God, to which mankind were obliged, and in the same to undergo
the penalty due upon their breach, submit himself to become a Curse for us!
What an amazing consideration is it, that the Lord of all, should become man,
in the form of a servant, and subject himself to an obedience to all his own
Laws, yea even of those that were but the shadow (as were the Ceremonial) of
which he, as man incarnate, was the substance: And that he that was without all
sin, should submit to those Institutions that were grounded upon the
supposition of sin, and whose End and Tendency had a direct relation to it;
such was Baptism and Circumcision. And yet so he was pleased to fulfill all
righteousness, to do all the Law required, and yet to suffer what it threatened.
Now considering that he lay under no obligation, with respect to himself for
the doing of any of this, what a vast stock of Merit must needs be treasured up
for those to whom He and the Father shall please to impute it! It Is this
undertaking of Christ, that could alone face divine Justice, and at the
dreadful Tribunal of the great and eternal Jehovah, be admitted as a sufficient
Plea and Satisfaction for an open Rebellion from dust and ashes against Him.
His obedience to the Law qualified with such infinite perfections, and
representing us in our nature, being both the Son of God and the Son of man,
redintigrated the honor of the Law to as great a degree, as if it had never
been broken: And his voluntary subjecting himself to the Curse and penalty of
it, made as great and honorable a satisfaction to it, as if, being broken, the
utmost penalty had been insticted upon every particular Offender.

Fourthly, That which completed, perfected, and crowned this satisfaction, was
Gods ordination: A Statute made in Heaven, that so Christ being himself freely
willing, should do, and that should be accepted in so doing, obtain his End,
and see the travel of his soul, and be satisfied. In the 10th. of the Heb. we
find this fully expressed by a Quotation out of the Psalms, where David speaks
in the person of Christ: Then said I, lo I come, in the volume of the book it
is written of me to do they will O God. And in the 10th. ver. the Apostle tells
us, By that Will we are sanctified, by the offering up of the body of Christ.
In the 3d. of St. Mat. upon Christ's being baptized, a voice came from Heaven
and declared, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: Not only with
his Person, but his Office, with his mediatory work and employment, as being of
mine own ordination and appointment. Upon Christ's voluntary undertaking to
assume our nature, and in that nature to represent us, and to subject himself
to a Law of Mediatorship, such a Law, as the performance whereof, would contain
a complete satisfaction to Divine Justice, God was pleased to ordain it so to
be, and that all that he Did and Suffered in that Nature, should be accepted on
our behalf and reckoned and accounted to our advantage, and that Mankind should
obtain salvation thereby. This Ordination of God was the Broad Seal of Heaven
affixed to all Christ did. This ratified on high, was done here below, and made
all the transaction of Christ on Earth to pass current in Heaven: Had not this
been coincident, nothing could have prevailed: Had not God determined above,
that what Christ did and suffered on earth, should be that satisfaction to his
Justice for the sins of the world, in which he would acquiesee and be well
pleased, and upon which he would ordain the Blessing, even Life for evermore,
No pardon had been proclaimed, we had been yet in our sins, and the state of
all mankind had been no better then that of the fallen Angels, and final
Impenitents, even a fearful looking for of Judgment.

Two great Mistakes have arisen in the minds of many, and of many Worthy and
Good men, about this matter, the rectifying of which is of great and necessary
importance. First, Some have supposed, that The whole of Christ's satisfaction
for our sins consists in his Passive obedience: And that his Active obedience
is imputed to us, to constitute us Personally righteous in God account --. And
so Disjoyn the Active and Passive righteousness of Christ, and apply them to
Distinct ends and purposes.

This will appear in it self no way Reasonable, and without the least warrant
from Scripture. First, Each of these have their proper Interest in, and do
respectively contribute to the repairing the honor of Gods injured and
violated Law, and do jointly complete Christ's satisfaction. The honor of the
Law is in a twofold respect to be required; in the preceptive part, and in the
threatening part. To what a degree is the Law honored in the first respect, by
the perfect obedience of God-man! How is the Justice, Holiness and Goodness of
it proclaimed and solemnized thereby, when he disdained not to become obedient
to it! And to no less a degree is it honored in the other respect; for by his
dying and suffering, it is eminently declared what sin deserved! And the Justice
of the Law is highly evidenced in its threatening and penalty: So that these two
are by no means to be severed, for they contribute inseparably by their
Effects, to the great work of making one entire satisfaction for the sins of
the world, and procuring our Pardon. Secondly, They are in their own nature
conjoined, and mutually participate of the qualities each of other: For Christ's
active righteousness was all passive: His coming from Heaven in the form of a
Servant, and yielding obedience to the Law here upon Earth had all vast
humiliation and suffering in it: And he himself was active also in all he
suffered, to the highest degree, for 'twas an act of his own free choice,
without the least constraint so to do. No man could have taken his life, had
not himself made choice of death. Thirdly, To disjoyn these two, and ascribe to
them Distinct and Different ends; to say, (that Christ's passive obedience is
imputed to us, to procure pardon of all sin; and his active obedience is
imputed to us, to constitute us righteous,) seems dangerous in its consequence,
and tends to make one of them appear altogether useless: For if all sin,
original and actual, of omission and commission were fully answered for and
pardoned, what need we more? We must needs be brought into a righteous
condition thereby: Because the least defect of righteousness, is some degree of
sin; and where there is no degree of sin, there must needs be perfect
righteousness. So if all the active righteousness of Christ were personally by
God in judgment reckoned to be ours, we could not at the same time be
accounted as sinners, but in the utmost perfection of innocents: And if so,
What need were there of Christ's suffering, or of any expiation for sin? The Law
did not require suffering and obedience both, but obliged us either to obey, or
else to undergo the penalty. How much better is the plain Scripture-account of
this matter, where these two are by God, and Christ himself in their end every
where conjoined; By which we are told, that the whole of what Christ did, and
suffered, in all its circumstances unitedly considered, is as one entire price
of inestimable value, by way of satisfaction and valuable consideration paved
unto God, and by him so accepted, for the redemption and Salvation of all such
who submit to the terms, and perform the condition of the Gospel.

A second Mistake about this matter, is this: Some have conceived, that both
the Active and Passive righteousness of Christ are so made ours by a personal
imputation, that we our selves are accounted by God in judgment to have done,
and suffered those very things, that Christ himself in his own person, did, and
suffered.

This conception is so Gross, that it is not only to be reckoned amongst such
things as are hard to be understood, but amongst such things as are impossible
to be accounted for to any common understanding. The notion of imputation in
general, is no way to be opposed (though we are no where told in Scripture, in
terminis, that Christ's righteousness is imputed to us,) that is, it is
impossible for us to partake of the benefits and advantages of what was done by
another, as done in our stead, and upon our account, without some sort of
imputation. God is pleased that the whole of what Christ did, and suffered, in
the effects and advantages of it, should accrue to us and our account, because
he accepted him on our behalf, and in our stead, and that we should reap all
the fruit and benefit of his Mediatorship. And in this sense God is pleased to
impute his whole Mediatory transaction unto us, but no otherwise. The whole of
Christ's satisfaction is imputed to us, as made For us, (and so he is the Lord
our righteousness) but not as made By us, but actually made by him. And what
can be more desired, then to reap all the benefits of Christ's whole
undertaking, and upon the account of it, and its being accepted of God on our
behalf, to be pardoned, justified, sanctified and saved; and as the Apostle
expresses it, to have Christ made to us of God (that is, as the Fundamental
cause, procurer, and spring of them, a common head from whence they are all
derived to us as his body) wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption. Those that will press the point farther, and insist upon personal
imputation to every believer what Christ did, ought well to consider these
things.

First, If every believer be personally righteous before God in the very
individual Acts of Christ's righteousness, one of these two things will thence
ensue: Either that Christ in his own person did perform all the particular acts
of righteousness required, as due from each saved person; or else that every is
saved persons righteousness before God, is identically and numerically the same
with Christ's in his public capacity, as Mediator, and so every saved person is
personally righteous, with a righteousness that has a stock of merit in it,
sufficient to save the world) unless you will say Christ had some righteousness
that belonged to him as Mediator, and some that did not, which is absurd to
affirm; for it is plain, all he did, he did as Mediator, nor had he any any
concern in the world but as Mediator, and none of his actions can be separated
from his Office, being all pursuant of it. (The first will be granted was not,
nor had a possibility to be; and yet no man can be personally righteous with
respect to the Law, but by an exact performance of every tittle and iota the
Law required from him. And the other has two very gross absurdities in it.
First, That we should be accounted to have done that which was done long before
we were in a capacity to do any thing: And secondly, That we should be reckoned
personally righteous with the righteousness of Godman. When first, There is not
a possibility that Man, or Angel could perform any one Action, with the
Circumstances, or in the Manner as he did. Secondly, Much of what he did, was
in its nature unlawful for any else to undertake. And thirdly, The Whole of
what he did was peculiarly appropriated and appurtenant to his Office, as he
was Mediator, and cannot be suited to any other person, nor is any part of it
transferrable, or imputable to any creature otherwise then in its operations
and effects: For he neither did nor suffered the very idem that we are obliged
to; for then he must have particularly done all the Law required from us, and
have suffered to eternity. But he mad such a satisfaction to God for our
Nonperformance, and on our behalf, as became him as Mediator, and such as that
God is pleased thereupon to suspend the strict and rigorous execution of the
Law, and to bring us under a better Covenant. Our case is not strictly that of
a Debtor, but of Rebellious Subjects, nor stand we in our sins related to God
as a Creditor, but as a Supreme Sovereign and Judge: Nor did Christ sustain
properly the place of a Surety to pay individually and identically our Debt,
but of a Mediator tomake reparation to divine Justice by another way, then
putting the Law in execution against us.

Secondly, If every justified person be justified in judgment by the very acts
of Christ's personal righteousness, accounted to him as his own, it will then
follow beyond any good answer, that every man is justified by the works of the
Law: For Christ's personal righteousness, with respect to which he was justified
as Mediator, and approved of God to become a sufficient Savior, was a Legal
righteousness and not an Evangelical. This if sincere, though imperfect, will
be accepted from us for Christ's sake, but would not so have been accepted from
Christ for our Justification, nor can it be well affirmed that Christ believed
and obeyed his own Gospel. That lies on our part to perform. Now that we should
be justified by the works of the law, is confuted by many Texts: Romans 3.28. the
Apostle says, Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by faith without
the deeds of the law. And Galat. 3.11. But that no nun is justified by the Law
in the sight of God, is evident, for the just shall live by Faith; and so in
many other Texts: And the whole scope of St. Paul, in his discourses of
Justification, is to establish this point, That no man is justified by an
unsinning obedience performed to the Law, and so Not by works, but by
believing, and in the way of Gospel-faith, which God is pleased out of Grace to
accept and account for righteousness. Nor will it be to any purpose to say [it
is one thing to be justified by our own obedience to the Law, and another thing
to be justified by Christ's obedience imputed.] For, if his obedience be so
imputed, as that we are accounted by God in judgment personally to have done
what Christ did, it is all one as to this matter, and we are as much justified
by the Law, and do as much live in the works thereof, as if we had in our own
proper persons performed an unsinning obedience to it.

Thirdly, if the rigid notion of imputation should be admitted as true; then
every particular person that is saved, did merit his own salvation. For, if the
very Acts of Christ be reckoned as ours, and so imputed as if done by us, the
effects must needs be imputed so too. If I am reckoned by God in my own person
to have performed that righteousness that does merit my Justification, I must
of necessity be accounted to have merited my Justification. And besides all
this, many the most dangerous and unsound principles of Antinomianism have
their rise from this Doctrine; I choose to express it in the words of Reverend
Mr. Gibbons, in his Discourse of Justification. I infer (says he) that they
are dangerously mistaken, who think that a believer is righteous in the sight
of God, with the self-same Active and Passive righteousness wherewith Christ
was righteous; m though believers suffered in Christ, and obeyed in Christ, and
were as righteous in Gods esteem as Christ himself, having his personal
righteousness made personally theirs by imputation. This is their fundamental
mistake, and from hence (tanquam ex equo Trojano) issues out a throng of such
false and corrupt Deductions as these as, That God sees no sin in his Children:
That a believer need not pray for the Pardon of fin, but only for the
Manifestation of it: That God loved Noah when Drunk, and David when acting
Murder and Adultery. -- And many more such consequences that worthy person
mentions.

Those passages of Scripture that seem most to countenance this opinion, and
are chiefly insisted on for the proof of it, are these three. 2 Cor. 5.25. He
has made him to be sin for us, that knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. From whence it is thus urged. How did Christ
become sin for us? Not by inherency, but by imputation: So do we become the
Righteousness of God in him.

In answer to which, I say, Christ became (...) for us, that is, a sacrifice
for sin: For so it signifies, as well as barely Sin; as also the Latin piaculum
which is often taken for a sacrifice of expiation, as well as Sin: And in the
Septuagint (...) is frequently used to signify a sacrifice for sin: And this
is an expression relating to the sacrifices under the Old Testament. And the
proper rendering of (...) is a sin offering. So that the plain meaning of the
Text seems to be this, Christ that was without all sin, was made (that is,
ordained of God) to be a sacrifice for sin, that we might be made thereby
righteous with the Gospel-righteousness: For that is the general meaning every
where of the Righteousness of God: It Is opposed to man's righteousness and the
righteousness of works, which is by the Law. If it be pressed farther, and
affirmed [That sin it self was so imputed to Christ, as that God in judgment
did reckon him guilty and a sinner,] (which the Scripture no where tells us,
and it is great impiety to assert,) He is then excluded from all possibility of
merit, for the suffered but what was his due, and so the whole of Christ's
satisfaction is subverted. But he freely suffered the punishment of sin that
was infinitely removed from the guilt and desert of it, and thereby redeemed
us; became sin, in that sense, that so we might be made the righteousness of
God in him. Now by the righteousness of God, sometimes is meant in Scripture
the Personal righteousness of the Mediator who was God-Man, and sometimes the
righteousness of Faith, that righteousness that faith is accounted for, and
which in the Gospel is conditionally required of every saved person: And this
is so called, because it is a righteousness of Gods contriving, of Gods working,
and of Gods accepting, in and through Christ, and for the sake of his
satisfaction. If you ask me for a Text to prove this latter, there are many: I
will only instance in one: For they being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and
going about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves
to the righteousness of God, Romans 10.3. By the righteousness of God here, is
not meant the Personal righteousness of the Mediator, but the
Gospel-righteousness of faith and believing by which we are Justified, in
opposition to the Law, (which in the next ver. the Apostle tells them Christ
was the end of, for righteousness by his satisfaction) so the Apostle expressly
calls it in the 6th. ver. But the righteousness which is of faith, speaks on
this wise: And if you read to the 9th. ver. he there fully describes this
righteousness of God, and tells you in other words what it is, That if thou
shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart
that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. And the whole Context
puts it out of all doubt, that by their own righteousness is meant the
righteousness of the Law, which Moses (the Apostle says in the 5th. ver.
describes in those words. That the man that does those things shall live by
them: And by the righteousness of God, is meant the Gospel righteousness on our
part to be performed, which the Apostle says in the 6th. ver. Moses does
otherwise describe; But the righteousness which is of faith (says he) speaks
on this wise: Say not in thine heart who shall ascend into heaven, that is, to
bring Christ down from above, etc. The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth,
and in thy heart, that is, the word of says which we preach. If we take it in
the first sense, then the meaning of this Scripture, is this, Christ became a
sin-offering for us, and freely underwent the suffering and punishment due to
sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, that is, that the
Righteousness of Christ as Mediator in a way of satisfaction, might be
appropriated unto us: And as he underwent the consequences of our sin, so we
might reap the effects of his righteousness, that we might be interested in his
righteousness, just as he was in our sins. He suffered the penalty of our sins,
and we reap the fruit of his righteousness, and so there is a mutual
transferring of our sins and Christ's righteousness in the effects and
consequences of both, but no otherwise. If we take it in the other sense,
(which is, I believe the sense intended by the Apostle) then the meaning is,
That Christ became a sin-offering for us, that we might in pursuance thereof
and as an effect of it, be made Righteousness in the Gospel-righteousness, that
is, that we by believing in him, might be accounted for righteous, and so
accepted of God. The Apostle does not say, that we might be made His
righteousness, or that his righteousness might be made personally ours, but
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him: And the phrase In him,
is not to be taken personally and literally. For when we are said to abide in
him, it is to continue steadfast in the doctrine of the Gospel; to walk in him,
is to walk according to the rule of the Gospel; to Sleep in him, is to die in
the says and hope of the Gospel; to marry in the Lord, is to marry according
to the rules he has prescribed. So, to be Righteous in him, is to be righteous
according to the rule of the Gospel, to be righteous in the righteousness of
his procuring and appointing. When we read of Christ in the Gospel, we are not
always barely to understand his natural Person, but to consider him mystically
and politically, to consider him circumstanced as Head, King, and Lawgiver to
his Church; and upon that account his Name is often taken in a large and
comprehensive sense.

Another Text of Scripture much insisted on for the proof of Personal
imputation, is, Romans 5.19. For as by one man's disobedience, many were made
sinners, so by the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous.

This text, upon due consideration, will be found to make nothing at all for
any such Imputation and Transferring of righteousness as is pretended. The
Apostles scope from the 12th. ver. of that Chapter to the end of it, is
evidently to prove these two things. First, That as sin came first into the
world by Adam's disobedience, and death by sin, and did not only seize on him,
but descended upon all his Posterity, (even upon them that had not sinned after
the similitude of Adam's transgression, that is, against a Law promulgated, as
he did) he begetting them in his image after his Fall, in his apostate state,
and not in his innocncy: So from Christ's obedience and satisfaction for sin,
came righteousness, life and salvation. In three things the Apostle makes the
Feadship of Adam and that of Christ to run parallel. First, As Adam had a
public Station, and stood so related to others, that he had power to involve
them in his own condition: So had Christ. Secondly, the Effect of Adams sin was
Universal, came upon all: The Effect of Christ's obedience is so, comes upon
all, that is, both upon Jews and Gentiles without distinction (which is the
grand point the Apostle is all along making good;) Thirdly, the first Adam, by
his disobedience was the general Author of death: Christ the second Adam, by
obedience, is the Great Introducer of life. And secondly, That there is not and
exact equality and even proportion, between the Headship of Christ, and the
Headship of Adam. So the Apostle tells us, in the 15 and 16 ver. But not as the
offense, so also is the free gift: For if through the offense of One Many be
dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, by one man Jesus
Christ has abounded unto many. And not as it was by one that sinned, so is the
gift I or the judgment was by one to condemnation, but the free gift is of many
offenses unto Justification. The Advantage lies much on Christ's side in the
comparison, and that in three respects. First, Christ's spiritual seed,
Believers, are not so like him in degrees of holiness, as Adams natural
posterity are like him in degrees of sin: And yet Life reigns as triumphantly
amongst them, as Death did over the posterity of Adam. Secondly, it was one sin
of Adam that introduced Death: But Christ's obedience, and the gift brought in
by him, was not upon the occasion of that, or any other one sin, but of many,
is the abundance of grace, and procures forgiveness, not only for that sin, but
for all other sins whatsoever that have ensued thereupon. And thirdly, there is
a disparity between Adam and Christ in this; (and the advantage lies much on
Christ's side) That one sin, one act of disobedience was enough to condemn; But
more the one act of obedience was requisite to procure our pardon. And so,
although Christ do not save by his obedience so many as Adam condemned by his
disobedience; yet the second Adam is much more potent then the first, because
there is much more efficacy required in the Saving of One, then there was in
the Condemning of Many. As the restoring of One dead to life, is much harder
then the destroying of the lives of many.

Now, How by one man's disobedience were many made sinners? Why, Adam (who had
all mankind vertually in himself) turning a Rebel and an Apostate, his natural
state was thereby changed, his nature was attainted, and became sinful, and so
fell under the sentence of death; and that was included in the penalty
threatened: In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye: Thy Natural state
shall be changed and subjected to death. And this falling out before he had
propagated any of his kind, he begat all his posterity in the same sinful
Mortal state with himself: So the Apostle tells us, that in Adam all dye. That
is, he becoming Mortal; all were so propagated, and Death reigned upon that
account. So on the contrary, by one man's ^^^obedience many are made righteous.
As all mere men sinned in Adam, being all in him, and undergo the Effects of
that sin. So all Believers have virtually satisfied for sin in Christ: By
Christ's obedience and satisfaction we come to be pardoned, accounted of as
righteous, and saved: But still it is as an effect of Christ's obedience that we
come to be made righteous; for the Apostle does not say, In one man's obedience
many shall be made righteous, but By one man's obedience (as a consequent and
Effect of it) many shall be made righteous. As the effect of one man's
disobedience, many come to be shapen in iniquity and brought forth in a sinful
condemned nature, so as by the Effect of one man's obedience, many come to be
new born, and brought forth in a righteous and a saving sfate.

A third Text insisted on, is that in the 3d. chap. to the Philip. ver. 9. And
be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the Law, but
that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by
faith.

To this Text a short Answer will suffice. No more is requisite then to read
from the 4. v. where the Apostle is discoursing of his Seize under the
Law. Though I might (says he) have confidence also in the flesh, if any other
man thinks he has whereof he might trust in the flesh, I more, circumcised
the eighth day, etc. and so he goes on: And in the 7th. ver. But what things
were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ, yea doubtless I count all
things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord,
for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung
that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own righteousness
which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the
righteousness which is of God by faith. By which it is as plain as words can
make it, That the righteousness he desires Not to be found in, was his own, as
he was a Jew and a Pharisee. And to be found in Christ, was no more then to be
found ingraffed by Faith into the Christian Church, to be found in that
righteousness which is of God by faith, which is the Gospel-righteousness. No
sober minded man can imagine the Apostle did not desire to be found in
Gospel-righteousness, or that by his own righteousness he meant that: For it is
that alone can entitle us to the benefits of Christ's righteousness; And he
himself every where so earnestly presses men to strive for it as indispensably
necessary to salvation, and rejoyeeth in it, telling us what comfort he had
took to conling sider, that he had fought a good fight, had finished his
course, had kept the faith, and that as a reward of so doing, a crown of life
was laid up for him in Heaven. Nor is there any one passage of St. Paul's
Epistles against works, but it is very plain from the context, he intends the
works of the Law, and no other: For, as he opposes faith to works; so he also
opposes faith with Gospel-obedience to works. As Galat. 5.6. I or in Christ
Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision avails any thing, but says
that works by love, or, that is wrought and perfected by love: For so it is
best rendered; and sometimes opposes evangelical obedience, alone to the works
of the Law, as Galat. 6.15. Circumcision is nothing, nor Uncircumcision, but a
new Creature. And in the 1st. of Cor. 7.19. Circumcision is nothing, (says he)
and Uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping the commands of God; where, by
the commands of God, is meant the Law of the Gospel. And Circumcision (as it is
often in other places) is put for the whole Law: For whosoever was circumcised,
the Apostle declares he was obliged to the whole Law. By which it plainly
appears, that whenever St. Paul speaks against Works, in the matter of
Justification, it is the works of the Law, and not of the Gospel that he
intends, and so he is to be understood: For by the works of the Gospel we come
to have a right and title to Justification and Salvation, as appears Rev.
22.14. Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to
the tree of life. That Gospel Works are never excluded, but are equally
interested with faith in the matter of Justification, will appear true beyond
any good denial by these two considerations. First, That faith that is said to
justify, and does only so, is a faith that works by love; which is in other
words to say, it is a faith that works by a sincere obedience, and keeping all
the Commands of God. Secondly, the promises of the Gospel are as well made, and
the rewards thereof equally annexed to our Gospel obedience, as they are to our
faith, which plainly shows, that faith and obedience are inseparably conjoined
in this matter; and that faith is always so to be understood as comprehensive
thereof, without it, it is dead, is but a Karkass of faith, and not such a
living faith as the Gospel intends when it speaks of a justifying faith.

SECT. IV.
I Proceed to the third and last inquiry, which is this, How, do we come to
partake of the benefits of Justification before God, and arrive at a justified
estate? To this the Scripture gives us a plain and ready Answer; By peforming
the Gospel-Condition: For all the advantages that accrue to the world from
Christ's satisfaction are proposed, conditionally to us, and no man is actually
justified till the condition be performed; For whom he called, them he
justified. And upon that account it is, that we read in the New Testament of
being justified by our faith, of being justified by our words and works.
Gospel-faith and obedience being the condition required on our part to be
performed, and upon the performance of which we are justified, and come to give
up our account with joy; at the great Judgment day men will be justified and
condemned upon their performing, or not performing the Gospel condition, as we
find by our Saviors own words, Mat. 25. v. 35. That the Covenant of Grace is
in the proposal of it conditional, and that Christ, with all his saving
benefits, is by the Gospel offered to us upon terms, that we stand obliged
personally to perform, there needs no other proof then our Saviors own summary
words about that matter. He that believes shall be saved, he that believes not
shall be damned. And we find Genesis 17. v. 1. When God first proposed the
Covenant of Grace to Abraham, he annexed sincere obedience to it as the
condition of it. Walk before me, and be thou upright, and I will make a
Covenant with thee. Nor do we find our Savior ever encouraging any to come to
him, but upon the terms of taking his yoke, and bearing his burden. And indeed
the Gospel is every where so express in this point, and so very many Texts do
affirm it, that no man but one extremely intoxicated with the phrenzy of
Antinomianism, can deny it; and it were labor lost to prove it.

Now in regard the whole Conditionality of the Gospel is comprised in
believing, and in that one word Faith, upon which account we are so often said
to be justified by faith. It Is of great concern to arrive at the Scripture
sense of this word, and its intendment by it. And to me it appears very
evident, That to be justified by faith in Scripture, is generally taken to be
Justified upon the terms of Christianity and the principles of the Gospel in
opposition to Legal and Jewish Justification: And by faith is comprehended
whatever the Gospel requires of us in order to Justification. The Gospel is
styled the Law of faith, and whatever is required of us by it, is called the
obedience of faith.

Two Extremes are with great caution to be avoided in our conceptions of
Gospel-faith.

First, We must not, on the one hand, imagine that by faith and believing is
meant only in the Gospel a bare Crediting of God, and giving our assent to the
Revelation of Jesus Christ, and acquieseng therein. For to be a Believer, and
to be a sincere practical Christian, is all one in Scripture sense; and When we
are told, that He that believes shall be saved, and are told in many other
places by our Savior, and the Apostles, that it is those only that Obey him
also, and keep his commandments, subduing their corrupt lusts and affections,
and working out their own salvation with fear and trembling, that shall be
saved; and are generally told by the Gospel, that without holiness no man shall
see God: It Is a natural and necessary Inference, that all that, and whatever
else is made conditionally necessary to a justified saving state, and our
continuance therein, must be comprised in Faith and Believing: Or else we shall
make the Gospel not to be Correspondent with it self. And indeed, Faith is
never spoke of in Scripture as bare believing and assenting, in opposition to
acting, but as the grand principle of Action, and so it is in it self: The
power of Belief is such, that often it works physically, and with great
efficacy does it operate morally. In the 11th. to the Heb. the Apostle tells us
All the great Actions of those noble Worthyes he mentions done before by faith,
God being not an object of sense, since the world began. Since Abels time, the
spring of all Religious and Godly actions, has been faith. But the world were
never under the Law of faith till the Gospel was published. That faith was
nothing else, and contained nothing farther then a bare Assent to the
Revelation of the Gospel as true, was that gross Delusion that led so many
aside in the first publication of the Gospel. Especiallly of St. Paul's
Epistles: For the Gnostics, and others unlearned and unstable, as we find by
Hegesyppus in Eusebius, wrested the Scriptures, and held, That barely believing
the truth of Christianity, and professing it, was enough, without any thing
farther done, to save a man. Against this it is, That both St. John and St.
James so fully then wrote: And St. John tells us positively, That he that Does
righteousness is only truly righteous: And not he that reckons himself so
without righteous Doing upon the score of believing. And St. James expressly
sets himself to confute this dangerous Error, and to prove these two things.
First, That Christianity, Believed and Professed, will profit no man, unless
the Ends of it be pursued and prosecuted. And secondly, That that Faith that
the Scripture calls a Justifying faith, is an operative working faith, a Faith
that includes in its nature a suitable acting and obedience. Speaking of
Abraham's faith, and his Justification, which the Scripture makes to be the
pattern of Gospel-faith and Justification; and the one to run parallel with the
other: And which St. Paul had made so much use of, to prove Justification by
faith against the Jews: See thou (says he) how faith wrought with his works,
and by works was faith made perfect, and the Scripture was fulfilled which
says, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for Righteousness. Where
it is as plainly expressed as by words it can be; That that faith that was
accounted to Abraham for righteousness, was such a faith, as contained in the
bowels of it a suitable obedience, and subjection to all Gods revealed will and
pleasure. By works (says the Apostle) faith was made perfect. That is, faith
was in order to action, and a suitable acting and obedience in pursuance of it,
was included in it, and was that, which when performed, did complete and
perfect it, and without which, faith is altogether imperfect, and is not such a
faith as in the Scripture is said to be accounted for righteousness. And
therefore it was upon Abraham's suitable obedience in prosecution of his faith,
by which the Scripture was fulfilled, when it says, Araham believed God, and
that belief was accounted for righteousness. By which it is plain, that
Abraham's faith was counted for righteousness, with reference to that obedience
that was virtually comprised in it, and not otherwise: And that his faith and
his works wrought jointly together to obtain the same end. And this is no way
contradicted by St. Paul, who tells us that Abraham was not justified by works:
For, the works that St. Paul means, are plainly such as the Law required, such
perfect sinless works as would in strict rules of Justice make the reward to be
Debt: And therefore when he opposes faith to works, it is but in other words,
to oppose the Gospel to the Law. St. Paul's business is to prove Justification
in the way of the Gospel, against the Jews, by faith, in opposition to
Justification by the works of the Law. St. James, his province is to prove,
that the faith that does justify us under the Gospel, is not a bare naked
Assent, but such a faith as Abraham's was, that contains in it a suitable
obedience. The one Apostle asserts in opposition to the Jews, Evangelical
Justification against Legal, under the general term faith: The other Apostle,
for the confutation of Heretical Christians, explains that term; and tells us,
it imports not only believing of God, but an obedient Acting in prosecution
thereof. That the Apostles do very well agree with each in their Doctrine, that
Abraham was justified by such a faith as was accompanied with works, and not by
faith only, according to St. James: And yet that Abraham was justified by faith
and not by works, according to St. Paul, may be this made to appear. First,
That Abraham's faith that was counted for righteousness, included his suitable
obedience according to St. James, and that his works did complete and perfect
his faith: And that the Scripture was thereby fulfilled, that tells us the Act
of his Believing, was counted for righteousness, is plain from the story it
self in Genesis, which St. James quotes. Had not his Believing compriz d a
suitable obedience, instead of being counted for Righteousness, it would no
doubt have been esteemed of God, as it had indeed been a great piece of
hypocrisy. For Abraham's upright walking, was the terms upon which God at first
proposed to enter into a Covenant with him. Secondly, That Abraham was not
justified by works, according to St. Paul, though his faith that was counted
for Righteousness included his obedience, is thus evident: St. Paul's business
is to prove against the Jews, that Abraham who came first under the Law of
Circumcision, and from whom they derived themselves, (for it appears by their
discourses with our Savior, when they cried out, We have Abraham to our
Father, that they went no higher) was justified before he came under the Law of
Circumcision, before he was obliged to the oeconomie of the Law, upon
Gospel-principles (and so those had the precedence of legal, even in Abraham
their Father) upon the terms of another Covenant, the Condition of which was
Faith, upon such terms as both Jews and Gentiles were to be justified then
under the Gospel: Upon which account the Scripture styles him the common Father
of all the faithful. Abrahant, before that faith of his that was accounted to
him for Righteousness, had lived for some time in Heathen Idolatry, and was a
great sinner, and so could not pretend to be justified by a sinless perfection,
which the Law required, and the Jews insisted on, and so not by works in that
sense: He was one of the ungodly St. Paul speaks of in 4th to the Romans who had
not Legal perfection, had not such works to plead as would make the reward, in
strict rules Justice, to be of debt: His Justification was upon the very same
terms that the Gentiles then might be justified upon, though they had lived in
the grossest Idolatry; and that was by believing the revelation of God in
Christ, charging their course of life, and becoming obedient to what God should
require of them. In short, Abraham's faith and obedience was not such
Righteousness, as in its own nature, and by its own intrinsic worth, would
justifle any man from the guilt of all his sin, and denominate him perfectly a
Righteous person; for had it so been in it self, it needed not any favor to
have been accounted for Righteousness: But God was pleased out of grace so to
reckon and account it. Abraham having blelieved God about the promises of the
Messiah that was to spring out of his family, by whom himself and all the world
were to be saved, (for the sum of all Gods converse with Abraham was to show
him Christ's day, and reveal to him the Salvation that was to come by him) God
was pleased to give the world an instance in his imputing that faith of Abraham
to him for Righteousness, how, and upon what terms men should be saved by the
Messiah when he did come! (in a word, what should be the condition he would
require of us to perform by the Gospel) that is, By believing the revelation of
Christ, and acting suitably thereunto by a sincere though imperfect obedience:
This God would impute and account for Righteousness: This is all that he would
require on our part conditionally to perform: This should constitute us
righteous upon the terms of the New Covenant: This should legally entitle us by
the Gospel to all the Advantages of Christ, and to a righteous end justified
state; and this is so far from such a Justification by works as the Jews rested
in, and St. Paul disputes against, that it is a Justification that results
wholly from grace and favor, is the Effect of Christ's purchase, and of the
terms of another Covenant: And all merit, and all reward that can be claimed
out of debt, is utterly excluded thereby. And thus the two Apostles appear
perfectly agreed in their doctrine: Abraham was not justified upon terms of the
Law and sinless perfection, but he was justified as an ungodly person, one that
had sins and failings about him, that needed forgiveness, was justified by
faith in way of the Gospel: And that faith that justified Abraham then, and
justifies every person under the Gospel now, and is by the tenor thereof
accounted for righteousness, is not a naked assent to the truth what God
reveals, but such a faith as implies in its nature, and comprizeth a suitable
obedience to all he requires of us. There is a wide difference (as much as
there is between the nature and terms of the two Covenants) between such works
as by an inherent virtue in themselves constitute just, and so justify from an
innate perfection as to make the reward to be of debt, and such works are in
their own nature altogether imperfect and faulty, and are accepted only
thorough grace and favor, and made but conditionally necessary to our
Justification another way. Works, it is true, there are in the case both ways;
but of very different natures, upon very different Accounts, and to very
different Ends.

Secondly, On the other hand, we must carefully avoid so to apprehend faith,
supposing it to comprehend all that the Gospel requires of us to believe and
practice, as if it had in it self any justifying virtue, or were of any innate
worth to acquit us before God from the guilt of sins. The value of it is wholly
from Gods gracious ordination, as it is all the condition that is required on
our part to be performed by the Law of grace. And it is not of our selves
neither, but it is the gift and bestowment of God. We obtain the precious faith
of the Gospel (St. Peter tell us) through the righteousness of God, and our
Savior Jesus Christ. Whenever we read of our Justification by faith, it is
meant of our being justified in the Gospel way; and that is, by Christ alone
meritoriously, and by what he has done and suffered (for, the Apostle tells us,
that God for Christ's sake has freely forgiven us: Nothing has the least
meritorious interest in our forgiveness, but Christ, Grace, and free
forgiveness, in Scripture, is still opposed to our merit) and by faith only,
with respect to its conditional relation to him, and that Covenant which he
has purchased and proclaimed, and in the method whereof we come to be actually
pardoned and justified upon Believing. To think otherwise, is to subvert the
grand design of the whole Gospel, which we are often told, is to declare
Christ's Righteousness for the remission of sins, and to sot forth him as a
propitiation through faith in his blood: Faith is no part of the Propitiation,
but it is he himself and his blood that is the Propitiation, and faith but the
conditional means by which we come to reap the fruit and benefit of it. The
whole Fabric of the Gospel is bottomed upon satisfaction made to the Justice
of God on our behalf, upon a (...). Our Savior says, he came down to lay down
his life (...) a ransom for many; And St. Paul to Timothy calls it (...) a
price of redemption. We are every where in Scripture said to be ransomed,
redeemed, purchased, bought with a price: And that must needs be by a valuable
consideration paid, and by satisfaction made. And St. Peter tells us what that
price of redemption is that was paid for us, and by which we were purchased
and ransomed; 'twas not corruptible things, such as gold and silver, or any
thing we had to offer to God, but 'twas with the precious blood of Christ as of
a Lamb without spot. No works nor performances of our own could ever have
reached this purchase, or so prevailed as to have been accepted for a
satisfaction in this case: For then a Justifying Righteousness might have
subsequently resulted from the Law of Works, which St. Paul denies, and tells
us expressly, Galat. 2.21. that it could not be that way, it could not come by
the Law: For, had there been a possibility of it, he tells us, it should so
have been: That is, could men either pefectly have kept the Law, or have
sufficiently answered for the Breach of it ex post facto, Righteousness would
have been that way, and Christ had not dyed, for his death had been then in
vain.

Two things still may be remembered about Faith, by which we may receive some
account of the use that is made by the Holy Ghost of this word in Scripture.

First, By faith the Gospel is often denominated in opposition to the Law, and
the whole of it signified thereby. And the Reason of this seems to be because
the Gospel is in its nature a Revelation from God proposed to our belief; and
all that we are required by it to do, flows naturally from what we are first
obliged to believe. Belief is the spring of all Gospel- obedience, and does in
its nature comprize all other Gospel-graces; they being at first produced, and
ever after upheld and increased thereby.

Secondly, by the tenor of the Gospel and Gods peculiar Ordination therein,
the whole condition required by it, is at the first virtually performed by the
bare act of believing, as the representative of all other Graces, and root of
universal obedience. It Is all that at the first is made conditionally necessary
to constitute a Justified state, though to the after-continuance in it, the
exercise of every other grace is equally requisite. He that sincerly believes
in Christ as he is proposed, is truly in a Justified state by such an Act of
Faith (and herein Faith has the preference of all other Graces, in point of
Justification) if we never live to perform any subsequent Act of Obedience: And
the Reasons of this, may be these two. First, The grace of Faith has in its
nature a Nearer relation to the satisfaction of Christ, wherein the Essentials
of our Justification consist, then any other Grace whatsoever: For all we can
do with reference to that, and the nearest approach we can make to it, to
receive the benefit and advantage of it, is to believe it, and to rely upon it.
Secondly, A true and sincere faith and belief of the Gospel, supposes and
includes a firm resolution to act accordingly; that is, to pursue the Ends of
that Faith in all such acts of obedience as are subsequently required of us:
And this God sees virtually contained in the first Act of true Faith, and the
seeds of all future sincere persevering obedience therein: And upon that
account accepts thereof at first, as the performance of the whole condition
required by the Gospel legally to entitle us to the privilege of a Justified
state.

SECT. V.
ANd now the last thing proposed to be inquired after, [How and upon what terms
we come to arrive at the benefits of a Justified state] having been thus
resolved; that we arrive thereunto by coming up to the terms proposed by the
Gospel, and performing the condition therein required, which is briefly
comprised by our Savior in Believing: It will turn much to our account in this
present Discussion, to inquire with some farther particularity, what is
intended and comprehended therein! And of that, we may be much informed by the
consideration of these three things.

First, The way and method that God takes to justify a sinner, being
originated in the depths of his infinite Counsels, no way ever to be found out
or discovered, but by Revelation; a great mystery hid from ages, and a thing
very incredible to a carnal mind, and no way suited to the corrupt Reasonings
of Flesh and Blood: God expects, in the first place, that we should fully
credit it; and firmly give our assent to its veracity: And this is in it self a
very Righteous Act and so accounted of God, firmly to believe him in what he
reveals to us. And herein the faith of the Gospel, and that of Abraham in whose
steps we are bid to tread, do perfectly resemble each other. For, he believed
God about diverse things in their own nature very hard to be credited: He
staggred not through unbelief, but hoped against hope, and still relied upon
Gods veracity and all sufficiency.

Secondly, God requires of us, That he having revealed from Heaven such a
glorious and extraordinary way of Justification and Salvation, so far out of
our own compass and span, as is the sending of his Son to assume our nature,
and in that nature to perfect and complete all that concerned our present und
future welfare: He expects upon this, that we should adore this Revelation, bow
before it with the greatest acknowledgments we are capable of making, rely upon
it, acquiesce in it; and be perfectly silenced to all attempts our own Wisdom
can suggest to us about this matter. And herein the faith of the Gospel,
answers punctually to that of Abraham: For, he wholly quitted all those methods
carnal and corrupted reason would have directed him to. He left his Country and
his fathers house, and went he knew not whither. In a word, he forsook the
conduct of his own wisdom, Believed whatever God told him, Did all he bad him,
and Went whithersoever he called him, whatever Difficulties appeared to
himself, and whatever Censures he lay exposed to from others in his so doing.

Thirdly, God and the Mediator require of us, that we should become Obedient to
a New Recovering Law of Grace, as the condition of our Pardon and
Justification: In a word, That we should subject our selves to all the precepts
of the Gospel: For, Christ as Mediator erects a Kingdom; His exaltation is to
be a Prince, as well as a Savior; a Prince in being a Savior, and whosoever
will be saved by him, must become one of his Subjects, must submit to the
regiment of his Kingdom, and subject himself to his Laws. And herein the faith
of Abraham, and the faith of every Believer, answer one to another, as face
answers face in a glass: For Abraham's Justification was upon performance of
the terms and condition of the New Covenant. The Apostle proves he was
justified by faith, which was to be justified upon the terms of another
Covenant, and not that of the Law: For the law is not of faith, nor faith of
the Law, there was no relation at all between faith and law, the law made no
promise to faith, the promises of the law were to perfect obedience. And as the
Apostle with convincing evidence urges against the Jews Abraham was justified
by a faith he had before he was circumcised, or had any thing to do with the
Law. And that faith of Abraham was more then a bare fruitless assent to what
God revealed to him: 'Twas such a faith as put him upon Action, and approved
its own truth by a suitable obedience: And of this we are sufficiently informed
by the Story it self in Genesis, and by St. James his Comment upon it.

Some things there are to be remarked in this Disposal of God, that highly
exalt his Wisdom, Holiness and Justice: And some things that to a very
stupendous degree do magnisie his Mercy.

First, How is the Wisdom, Holiness and Justice of God, made very transparent
by such a dispensing Pardon and Justification as this! How suitable is this
method to himself! He forgives not as the Greatest of men often do, and think
it an effect of the most supreme sovereignty so to do; as if in forgiveness
nothing were to be done, but singly to exercise an act of sovereignty. But he
forgives like the Lord our Maker: That eternal Jehovah who is wonderful in
counsel, and excellent in working, with whom are inherent infinite Attributes,
none of which in the least can be Denied, or in the least Oppose, or Contradict
each other; He proceeds in all he does in methods chalked out by his infinite
Wisdom, wherein they are all attempered together, and do after an admirable
manner harmonize each with other. He annexeth such conditions to his
forgiveness, as no way lessen the grace and bounty of it, and yet at the same
time record his immutable holiness and justice.

Secondly, The greatest righteousness that ever was extant, the holiest state
of man that he is capable of in his lapsed condition, is introduced by the
gospel and the precepts thereof; and the greatest homage from Earth to Heaven
that can be: And yet all flesh put to silence in the performance of it. We
stand justified at Gods Bar in a way of Gods providing and contriving; and we
perform the Condition required of us solely by the power of his grace freely
conferred upon us: The glory of all redounds to God alone. No Reward can be of
Debt; (...) for all the Rewards of the Gospel are but Gods gracious
remunerations of his own gifts and graces. Free grace, and Divine bounty is the
Root that bears all; nor can there be any boasting against that Root. The
holiest man that lives upon earth has the greatest occasion, as having received
most, to abase himself, and lie lowest in the dust before God in the Sense
thereof, in his best performances.

Thirdly, By this method of forgiving, these two great Ends are attained.
First, Gods solemn hatred and dislike of sin, is made very evident. He save no
man in his sin, but from his sin. Whom he justifies, he sanctifies: No man's sin
is so forgiven, as that the least allowance is vouchsafed to it. How impossible
were if for God openly to tolerate a Rebellion (as all sin is, for it is a
disobedience to some Law) against himself! How inconsistent were it with his
Holiness and his Sovereignty! By the Conditions God has annexed to his
Forgiveness, 'twill evidently appear before men and Angels, what a Contrariety
and Opposition there is in God to all sin, resulting from the essential Purity
of his nature: And that none but such as are sanctified can be accepted of him.
Secondly, By the performance of these conditions we are made meet for Glory,
it is approaching Heaven gradually. It Is impossible without holiness to see God.
And it is our great happiness, that so great a stress is laid upon our attaining
to it: That we are under so solemn an obligement to our greatest Interest.
Doubtless, the most effectual way to introduce sanctity, was to make it
conditionally necessary to our Justification: and to oblige us to forsake our
sins upon our utmost Peril, and greatest Penalty.

Some things there are also observable in this Gospel method, of Pardon, by
which the grace and mercy of God are made greatly evident, and appear in their
highest elevation.

First, The Precepts of this new recovering Law of Grace, the commands of the
Gospel; our obedience to which is made conditionally necessary to a justified
state: They are such as appear to be wholly calculated for our advantage and
welfare. The yoke of Christ, it is (...) a gracious, benign, bountiful yoke,
and his burden is a light burden. His commands are in no sort Grievous to any
man truly and rationally informed* of his own welfare. God has not arbitrarily
commanded us, as he might do, (for, we owe him all conceivable subjection,) but
singly obliged us to such precepts as are in their own nature absolutely
necessary to our present and future welfare. In short, he has only bid us live
a sober, righteous, religious life here, such as is rationally Best for our
selves, and others, and be gradually preparing for those Eternal fruitions that
are to come. Whoever comes short of Heaven by not performing the
Gospel-condition, denies his own present as well as future Interest: And 'twill
be a black Reflection hereafter to consider, That whatever brought us to a
state of Misery in the Next world, made us also unhappy in This: That God
requited no more of us to qualify us for future Felicity; Then that we would
live wisely and profitably to our selves, and usefully to others here.

Secondly, Whatever is by the Gospel Conditionally required of us, is all
freely and fully given to us. Faith at first, and every other Grace in
pursuance of it, is the gift of God. Whatever we are commanded to do, as a
peculiar and principle effect of Christ's purchase by the Law of Grace, we
receive a power to perform. The Holy Ghost upon Christ's ascension was eminently
sent from Heaven for that very purpose, and will not cease in his operations,
till all the members of Christ's Body are fully enabled to perform the Whole of
what the Gospel requires at their hands: This is an apparent Effect of the
highest Grace and Goodness, and renders Christ as free a Gift to the World, as
if no Condition had been annexed to the proposal of him, since the power of
performing all is Freely conferred upon us, when from the Greatness, Holiness,
and Justice of God, and our own present and future welfare, it became necessary
that such holy Conditions there should be. God in his boundless Grace,
undertakes in Christ, and obliges himself by his Covenant to furnish us with
ability for their utmost performance. By which method the whole will appear
perfectly made up of free grace. The Satisfaction contrived, provided,
accepted, and the condition performed: And every saved person will appear
righteous both before God and the world, and 'twill be very apparently a
righteous thing with God to bring such unto Glory, who have Christ's
righteoussness by way of satisfaction, and compensation, to answer for them
with respect to the Law, and their own faith, and sincere (though imperfect)
obedience to answer the terms of the Gospel.

Thirdly, This gracious recovering Law of the Mediator; It Is not given as God
gave the first Law to Adam, and as he after gave the Law upon Mount Sinai,
requiring exact and punctual obedience in every circumstance of it upon the
greatest penalty: But it is given from the hand of a Mediator upon far more
gentle and mitigated terms. It Is required by it, that we be deeply and
thoroughly sensible of the ill of our former state and conversation, while
without God and Christ in the world, and strangers to this grace of Gospel, and
of our utter inability to procure acceptance with God any other way: be
rationally satisfied of the excellency of that life the Gospel calls us unto,
of the glorious reward that will ensue; And so make a solemn choice of it to
our selves, and sincerely resolve, as men of Truth and Fidelity ought,
strenuously to endeavor to attain to it, to live in the practice of every duty
the Gospel annexes to our state and condition, and to depart from every
Gospel-sin. This conviction and resolution the Gospel makes indispensibly
necessary, and it is comprised in all sincere and true Faith. But it is thus
qualified for the advantage of an offender; That that which constitutes and
preserves the union between Christ and a Believer, the thread that ties a man to
Christ (as I may so express it) in the whole performance of the
Gospel-condition, is sincerity of Intention and endeavor, (and what could the
Great God require, and accept less from the hand of an Apostate Creature) and
not perfection of Action: And this sincerity too reckoned as much to our
advantage as possible may be; That is, Whatever can, upon the utmost
allowances, be truly so called, shall be so reputed: And he that can enter a
just claim to the lowest degree of sincerity, that is, when all the Infirmities
that can accompany sincerity, and not overwhelm and extinguish it, that can
consist with its denomination so to be, are admitted, shall yet be accounted a
sincere man, and numbered amongst those that are truly so. Till this thread of
sincerity be utterly broke, the union between Christ and a Believer is never
Dissolved, but he still remains in a justified state before God. Though a man
sin often through infirmity, and strength of Temptation, (and the best men so
sin very often) if his Resolution abide firm and sincere for obedience to
Christ, and holy living, he is still reckoned to perform the Gospel-condition,
and abide in a justified state: Such a man is in the first Latitude of
Gospel-forgiveness. But if a man through the power and prevalency of his Lusts,
and the violent impetuous assaults of temptation, have an invasion made upon
his sincerity, that is, that a man often fails in point of sincerity, sins
against his own Light, and his Resolutions, and Knowledge, repeats this again
and again; does it often, (for, such is man's apostate state by his Fall, so
fertile is it of all sort of sin, that if Christ in this new Law had not
considered our frame, and remembered with infinite compassion what we are, and
so dealt with us, we had still come short of happiness) yet, if such a man by
the strength and efficacy of grace, renew himself again by continued acts of
Repentance, revive and reinforce his resolutions, return back to his first
stated sincerity, be in his rational and most Deliberate choice still for
Christ, and Obedience to his Laws, (for Christ will not sinally judge of us by
our passionate choice, but by our rational choice) and so carry himself upon
the whole matter, that Christ is not deposed his soul, but still continues his
Government there, if Satan and the Flesh prevail but by sits, and are still
dispossessed by an habitual sincerity; If a man be always either at the
present, or upon second, and after reviews, full of deep and heart-affecting
trouble, and sorrow, whenever he so miscarryes, and the fixed state,
acquiescency, and rest of his soul is in living to Christ in a sincere
obedience to his Laws, and his rational and most undisturbed choice is to do;
in short, if he never comes to be bowed down, and subjected to pregnant
hypocrisy, even in all cases of this nature, the Scripture gives us good ground
to believe, that Christ, and his saving benefits are to be had, Justification
before God attained, and future glory possessed (upon such gracious principles
of condescension, is this New Law of the Gospel erected.) Though it must be
withal acknowledged, that sins of this nature, sins tinctured with
insincerity, are of all under the Gospel the most dangerous, border most upon a
breach of the Condition required, are the most destructive to our present Peace
and Comfort, the most productive of any of temporal and spiritual Judgments in
this life: And when they arrive to such a degree, that the whole of a man's
condition truly and evenly considered, (for, we shall all be weighed in the
perfect Balance of Gods righteous judgment) they turn the Scale against
sincerity; are the more Predominant and Prevailing part, they are perfectly
Ruinous, a Nonperformance of the Gospel-condition, is returned upon us, and no
such man will ever have the advantages of Christ's satisfaction accounted to
him, let him have made never so great a progress in all other Gospel
seize.

Two Fundamental Failures there are in reference to the Conditions required by
the Gospel, upon the performance of which, begun, and continued, we come to be
primarily and finally justified. First, When men wholly reject the Gospel, or
with a careless, unconcerned, unactive Indifferency, (which comes, in the
effects, all to one) barely assent to its veracity, but never prosecute the
Ends of it: And secondly, when men prove false and perfidious in that
subjection and obedience Christ requires from them in a Christian course.
Christ will answer for no man that will not receive him when offered as worthy
of all acceptance, and as an inestimable Jewel of an Infinite value, or that
does not sincerely intend to obey his Laws, and act suitably to such an
intention. 'Twere a mean and unworthy conception of our Savior, to imagine he
should account the Precious Effects of his most Precious Blood to any man that
would not be thoroughly sensible of that sin, and rebellion against the Highest
Sovereign that occasioned his sufferings, and to expiate which he became a sin
offering, and was sacrificed; and in the most sincere and solemn manner resolve
for the future, as the worst of all ills, (the Wound of Life, the Sting of
Death, and tormenting Plague to Eternity) to avoid it: And especially, that
should pretend to do, and yet lie against the Holy Ghost, and prove false in so
gracious a Covenant. In a word, Nothing keeps men from the good things of the
Gospel, the blessedness of a justified state, but a positive Refusal of Christ,
(or a sloathful, careless, unconcerned neglect of him, (which comes in effect
all to one) or a prevailing unconquered falseness in the course of
Gospel-obedience, and that Conformity to his Laws which Christ requires from
us. And who can imagine that such a Savior as our Lord is, who is God and Man
after a stupendous manner united, should be provided by the Almighty for any
persons in either respect so qualified?

SECT. VI.
FRom the consideration of all these things, diverse material Questions do
naturally result; To which a due Answer ought to be given.

First, This Question will be asked: Does not this diminish the Grace of the
Gospel, and lessen the free donation of Christ, to say he is offered
conditionally, and that no man can be justified by him but upon terms to be
performed by himself?

Answ. If it appear in truth so to be, that no man can be saved by Christ, nor
be said in the Gospel-Sense to love him, that does not keep his Commands, if we
go further in this matter, then to those Limitations the Gospel evidently puts
upon it self; then this Objection ought not to be made: For, Gods pleasure is
the rule of his own Grace. That the Gospel is Conditional, is apparent beyond
denial: If we live after the flesh, we are told, we shall certainly dye, and if
we mortify the deeds of the body, we shall live: If we overcome, we shall have
the Crown, if we do not we shall lose the Reward: And If we faint, we are told,
we shall not reap: It Is he that holds out to the End, in a Christian course,
that shall be saved, And is not this all Conditional? And this Conditionality
of the Gospel, the offer of Christ upon terms, does no way Extenuate the grace
and mercy of God in the free donation of Christ: We are justified freely by his
grace, through the redemption that is in Christ, though we are justified
conditionally by faith, and that Faith includes all Gospel-obedience, and the
whole duty of a Christian. Our Salvation is entirely purchased by Christ's
blood, and an ability to perform every Condition required of us, is purchased
for us, and by him freely conferred upon us. So that he, as a gift of
inestimable value and bounty from Heaven, is a spring of all Grace, and freely
supplies us with what ever we stand in need of: And the proposal of him to the
world upon terms and conditions, is but that method the only wise God has seen
fit to make use of, in the accomplishment of so glorious a work of Grace, and
so free a Redemption, as that which tended most to his own glory; and will
appear at last to be eminently best for us: For, it is but first to oblige us,
and then to enable us to be holy and like Himself, in whose image lies the
perfection of all Happiness. It Is but to save us here in part, and that we
might gradually possess that Gift of God, which is eternal life through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Quest. Secondly, By this Doctrine, how can we ever come to know we are
carefully and completely Justified, till we have fully performed and
accomplished all the conditions made requisite to a justified state? That is,
how can we, upon good ground be assured of our Justification till our faith and
obedience be consummuated: Which is not till we dye?

Answ. Every man is then Actually justified according to the Gospel-Law, and
Completely so, when he believes in the Lord Jesus Christ with all his heart.
Because no more is at the first required Legally to constitute a justified
state. But Justification is a continued act of God; and the constant
performance of all those duties which a sincere reception of Christ as he is
offered in the Gospel, implies, are indispensibly necessary to the continuance
of it. It Is in this case, as it is in Marriage: A Marriage is perfected by a
mutual consent; But the performance of all matrimonial duties is employed in
that consent: The Marriage continues valid till somewhat be done (as it is very
possible there may be) that does vertually Null and Revoke such consent, and
what was employed therein, and does ex natura rei, Dissolve, the Vinculum
matrimonij. It Is plain the Apostles did look upon such as declared a firm
assent to the Gospel, and a sincere and hearty reception of Christ as he is
there proposed, to be in Christ: That is, to be in a Justified saved state,
admitted them to all Gospel-priviledges, and never esteemed them otherwise,
till by their Lives, or Professions, they contradicted, and denied what by such
a faith and consent they had before affirmed, and thereby Apostatized from it:
And of such tergiversation the Gospel every where warns men; That they should
take heed of an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God. And
St. Paul tells the Corinthians: I am jealous over you (says he) with a godly
jealousy, for I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as a
chaste Virgin to Christ: But I fear least by any means as the serpent beguiled
Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity
that is in Christ: Whoever avows the faith of the Gospel, and a sincere closure
with Christ upon the Terms thereof, and does after fall into an open Rebellion
against him, and lives in an allowed disobedience to his Laws, such a man is,
as the Apostle speaks of an Heretic, (...), a man condemned by himself: For he
that in his Baptism, and at his first admission into the Christian-Church, had
made a solemn Profession of the true Christian Doctrine, and did after
degenerate into Corrupt and Heretical Opinions, contrary and destructive to it;
passed sentence upon himself. So, He that declares to close with Christ as a
Prince and a Savior, which supposes a general submission to all the Laws of
his Kingdom, and shall after Indulge himself in a course of open disobedience,
and choose a continued practice of sin against that grand fundamental Law of
Christ: That, he that names his name, must depart from iniquity; gives Judgment
against himself in this case, Disowns Christ and the Gospel, Dissolves the
Relation that seemed to be between them, and publicly retracts what he before
obliged himself to: So that a man is at the first actually and legally
according to the tenor of the Gospel justified by a true and sincere Faith: But
a constant prosecution of such a faith in all its proper Ends and Tendencies by
an universal submission to all the Laws of Christ's Kingdom, is of absolute
necessity to our continuance in a Justified state.

Quest. 3. Do not diverse Scriptures in the New Testament seem to establish
Justification solely upon believing, and upon Faith, only as an instrument
receiving, and no more, in opposition to all sort of working? Especially that
Text, Romans 4.5. But to him that works not, but believes on him that
justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness?

Answ. We are said to be justified in the New Testament by faith alone, upon
these three accounts. First, as faith intends the Gospel and the Principles of
Christianity, in opposition to the Law and the principles of Judaisme.
Secondly, As it is a comprehensive word for all that the Gospel requires at our
hands: For, by Believing in Christ, the Scripture intends such a closure with
him, as receives him in all his offices, and sujects us to all those
obligations, which (...) Prince and Savior he thinks fit by the Gospel to lay
upon us: And upon that account, to Believe, and to obey, are often in Scripture
put one for the other promiscuously, and so are unbelief and disobedience. All
obedience and subjection to Christ is originated in, and flows from our Belief
of that Revelation God makes to us of him, and is naturally employed, and
comprised in it: And so it has by Gods appointment the precedence and
preferrence of all other Graces in point of Justification, and we do not find
any other grace so related to Justification as this. And upon that account it
is, that we are not said in Scripture to be justified by repentance, or by
love, or any other single grace, but only by Faith, as comprehensive of all the
rest. And thirdly, because we are actually brought into a justified state at
first, solely by Faith without the actual exercise of any other grace: The very
act of sincere believing, by Gods peculiar and gracious ordination, intitles us
to Christ, and all his Benefits: And the reason of that Ordination is evidently
this; That who ever believes in Christ, receives him as he is by God proposed;
and whoever does so, obliges himself therey to all the duties of Christianity.
But upon no one of these accounts can Faith be said to justifi^ (...) barely as
an Instrument, but as it is comprehensive and productive of all other
Gospel-duties; and by the subsequent performance of them, Faith (as St. James
tells us) is perfected. 'Twas the fear many good men had of interesting any
Works, or any thing of our own Justification, and Ecclipsing free grace
thereby, that made them that they would neither allow Faith to be a condition,
nor a work, (When they ought to have considered, that Gospel works are never
opposed to Grace, nor can any thing done by Divine assistance be so; and when
the Apostle opposes Works to Grace, he means such Works as are inconsistent
with Grace, and so justify by their merit, as to put us out of need of Grace,
and render it useless) but invented that unscriptural notion of its
instrumentality (of no other use, but to make way for metaphysical subtilties,
and to obscure a plain point) when indeed Faith is both a work, and a
condition. First, It Is a work; so our Savior himself calls it, Joh. 6.29. This
is the work of God that you believe. Indeed, it is the chiefest part of
Evangelical obedience, the greatest work the Gospel requires at our hands, and
that which produces all other; and it is plainly made as such, every where in
Scripture the Condition of the New Law, and that which it requires on our part
to be performed, in order to our Justification and Salvation. And so the
Apostle declares when he says, We have believed that we might be justified:
That is, We have performed the Condition required by the Gospel in order to
Justification, that so we might be justified thereby upon the terms thereof:
And for that reason, as it is the Condition of the New Law, it is accounted for
Righteousness. And so when God justified Abraham upon the terms of the New
Covenant, his Faith is said to be accounted for Righteousness, because it was
the performance of the Condition thereof: And God was pleased to give an
Instance in him what was to be the Condition of it, which was, a sincere Faith,
including a suitable obedience: So far different was Abraham's Faith in its
Nature, and so far is all true Gospel-Faith from that Idea some men frame of
it, who ascribe no more to it then a Bare naked notional instrumentality.

Nor is there one Text in all the New Testament that excludes Gospel- Works,
Evangelical obedience from being Conditionally necessary to our Justification
and Salvation, but they are universally made so, as has been proved before:
For, Whatever is requisite to constitute a man a good Christian, is
conditionally necessary to his Justification; and no man can be interested in
the Salvation purchased by Christ, that does not subject himself to an
universal obedience to all his Laws. To distinguish, as some do, between
Justification and Salvation, and say, that Gospel-works are necessary to the
Latter, but not to the Former, is to distinguish where the Scripture makes no
difference: For, The Apostles speak of a Justified person, and a saved person
as the same, and of Justification and Salvation as so; and they are both
promiscuously promised to Believing. St. James when he is discoursing of
Justification, asks this question, can faith without works save you? Where he
means the same thing as if he had said, can it justify you? Nor does it any
more derogate from free Grace to make Gospel-works necessary to Justification,
then it does to ache them necessary to Salvation: For, they are both inseparably
included each in other: No man can be saved that is not Justified; for
whosoever is not justified at Gods Bar, is condemned, and whoever is justified,
is also glorified. That Text of St. Paul Romans 4. v. 5. duly considered, does no
way counenance any such Doctrine; for the right understanding of which it will
be necessary to consider the whole Context. In the first ver. What shall we say
then (says the Apostle) that Abraham our father (from whom we derive our
selves, and who first received the Law of Circumcision, the father of our
Persons, and of our Religion) as pertaining to the flesh, has found? It Is an
Interrogation importing a Negation, Abraham did find nothing as pertaining to
the flesh. By flesh in Scripture (besides the Corrupt acceptance) it sometimes
is meant the strength of natural abilities: So Ismael is said to be born after
the flesh; that is, by the mere and sole efficacy of nature, in opposition to
Isaacs being born (...), according to the spirit, and after the promise: And
sometimes by Flesh is meant the Legal external privileges of the Jews. So in
the 3d. of the Philip. it is taken: St. Paul says there, If any other man
thinks he has whereof he might trust in the flesh; I more: Circumcised the
eighty day, etc. But it is plain what St. Paul means here by flesh: For, what he
calls flesh in the first ver. he calls works in the second: For if Abraham were
justified by works, he has whereof to glory, but not before God. If Abraham
were justified by the worth and value of his own performances of any works
wrought in his own Strength, and by his own Ability, he had whereof to Glory;
But not before God; which last clause is a positive Negation, and comes in as a
Minor proposition: And so the the Apostles Argument is thus framed, If Abraham
were justified by works, he had whereof to glory before God; For it is faith
only that excludes glorying before God (his reward would have been a debt) But
he had not whereof to glory before God: Therefore he was not justified by
works. And that this is his meaning in those words, But not before God; is
plain: Because in the next words he applies himself in the proof of it: For,
what says the Scripture, (says he) It does not say that Abraham was justified
before God by works, but Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for
Righteousness. God, out of favor and grace, accepted his Faith for
Righteousness, which is employed in the word Counted, when: he might justly have
Refused so to do Abraham could not have claimed it from any merit in strict
rules of Justice Now to him that works (in the 4th ver.) is the reward not
reckoned of Grace, but of Debt: That is, he that has any thing due to his for
what he has himself in his own strength done, that Reward is a Debt, and is not
a reward of Grance: And so if Abraham had been a man of such merits, had done
such works as would in their own nature have justified him, and constituted him
Righteous in the sight of God, Gods justifying him, and adjudging him
righteous, had been a debt due to him: But Abraham was not so, he was (...) a
Sinner, and could claim nothing of Debt; And God was pleased out of favor and
grace to Reward Abraham's Faith and suitable obedience, with an accounting it
for Righteousness; and to justify him thereupon: But to him that works not,
but believes on him that justifyeth the ungodly, his faith is accounted for
Righteousness: That is, Depends not upon the strength of his own
performances, and such a sinless innocence as will in strict rules of Justice
acquit him before God, as Abraham did not, but Believes on God that justifies
the ungodly: That is, a man that has not a Legal sinless perfection, (for, that
is meant by the ungodly) his Faith is counted for Righteousness: That is, his
Faith through Grace shall avail him as much to all intents, and stand him in as
much stead as a perfect sinless Righteousness would do. Abrahm's Justification
was not upon the terms of the Law, or by perfection of Works, (which is
inconsistent with Pardon) for he was a great sinner, and had lived for some
time in Heathen Idolatry: But he was justified upon the terms and conditions of
another Covenant; that is, upon his believing God, and reforming his Life, was
Pardoned and Accepted: and his Faith and sincere reformation, though the Grace
of another Covenant, was accounted to him for Righteousness: Even so as the
Idolatrous Gentiles though never circumcised, may now also be justified; that
is, have their sins forgiven, if they believe the Gospel, and Reform their
lives: And that by Justifying and Imputing Righteousness, is meant the pardon
of sin, and that Abraham was justified as an ungodly person, by being Pardoned,
and not as an Innocent person, the next words declare, ver. 6. Even as David
also describes the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes
Righteousness without works, (whcih was Abraham's case) And how is that? Why,
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered:
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin. The scope of the
Apostle in this Chapter is to prove, that Abraham was not Justified by any
original Innocence, or such a sinless perfection of life, as would make the
reward to be of Debt: And so not upon the terms of the first Covenant; but he
was justified by having Righteousness without Works, upon the terms of another
Covenant. He was justified as an ungodly person, as a Sinner; That is, was
Pardoned upon his sincere Faith and suit able obedience; and so arrived at the
Blessedness David describes, who takes it for granted, that Blessedness comes
not by unsinning perfect obedience, (which is inconsistent with Pardon) For
then he would have said: Blessed are the sinless perfect persons that never
offended. But he says, Blessed are they to whom God will not impute sin, and
blessed are they whose sins are pardoned. The plain intention of this great
Apostle of the Gentiles, is by the instance of Abraham to establish Evangelical
Justification, of which the Gentiles were as capable as the Jews, in opposition
to Legal: By works he intends all along the Law and the first Covenant, and
what was required to justify a man therein: And by Faith he intends the
Gospel, and all that is conditionally required of us thereby, which is a
sincere belief accompanied with suitable obedience. And Abraham who was
justified by performing the Gospel condition, (and not the condition of the
Covenant of Works) had such a sincere Faith accompanied with such obedience, as
the Story it self, and the Holy Ghost by St. James positively tells us: His
Works wrought with his Faith; that is, to obtain the same End with it, and by
his Works his Faith was perfected. It Is absurd to imagine St. Paul ever intended
to exclude Gospel-works, such a sincere obedience as is naturally appurtenant
to Faith, and is included in it, and supposed by it, and which is accepted out
of mere Grace, and cannot pretend to the least merit: But he speaks only
against such works as might claim Justification as a reward of Debt, in
opposition to Grace; such as the Jews insisted on, which would utterly exclude
the Gentiles from all possibility of Justification, and establish it upon a
Legal bottom, and thereby subvert the whole design of the Gospel. By justifying
therefore the ungodly upon believing, he means no more then the justifying a
person that has not sinless legal perfection (which the first Covenant made
necessary to Justification) by his performing the condition of the second
Covenant, which condition performed, is through Grace accepted for
Righteousness, and procures actual Pardon.

Quest. 4. Has Christ satisfied for our Gospel-sins; For the breach of his own
Laws as Mediator, or not?

Answ. This Question is resolved by one Text of St. John, who tells us, that
The blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses from all sin: Against whatever Law
committed, if we perform the Gospel Condition. Ever since the Fall and sin of
man, Christ has been extant in Promises and Types till his full Appearance:
And all Pardon and Forgiveness has some way or other come through Him. He has
been the great medium, by and through which all Divine favor and Grace has
been in all times dispensed. Under the Gospel, whoever perform the Condition,
and comes within the compass of that Latitude Christ by his New Law allows, his
sins of partial unbelief, and all other sorts of Gospel-disobedience, are
Pardoned upon the terms thereof; by the tenor of this New Covenant which Christ
has purchased by his blood, whose blood is called the blood of the Covenant:
By this gracious Covenant a renewed pardon is still granted to all believers
for every sin at any time committed, upon sincere repentance and reformation:
And Christ proposes himself to the world upon those gracious terms; That if
they cordially close with him, and receive him as Lord and Christ, as their
King and Savior, all their past sins shall be forgiven: And whenever they
shall sin for the future, and come short of that Duty they are to pay to him,
upon their Repentance they shall be renewed, and God through and by Him, and
for His sake will exercise continual acts of Pardon toward them in all such
cases. And this day of Grace is for ought we know, of the same duration with
every man's life. Every man while he lives has an Opportunity of embracing the
Gospel: And whoever falls by Temptation and the power of Corruption, after he
has so done, has yet a continued possibility while God spares him in this world
to be restored to a Pardoned, Justified state by Repentance. But whoever fails,
and comes short in performing the Gospel-condition; Whoever closes not with
the Redeemer (who has all power put by the father into his hands) upon his own
Terms, not one of that man's sins will he ever Remit, or Account for to the
Father: But is he left to answer to that most dreadful Charge of the Law; and
besides, by neglecting so great salvation, falls under the utmost condemnation
of the Gospel: Is left to God as supreme Judge of the World in the highest
exercise of Justice, having refused the terms of his mercy: Is left to God
without the interposition of a Mediator; the terror of which condition the
Apostle thus expresses: It Is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God: Where he means without a Mediator. For it is spoken in terrorem to
the Converted Jews, who were in great danger of Apostatizing from the Gospel,
and the faith of the Mediator, and returning back to the old Cancelled
dispensation of the Law, the end of which was Christ.

To conclude this whole matter. The making and redeeming of a man is originally
founded in an eternal transaction of the blessed Trinity. God saw it fit to
Create man at the first with a mutable Will, with an inherent freedom of
choice; though he perfectly knew and foresaw all the consequents, and what use
man would make of it. The Reason of this is not to be inquired into: For
although God is pleased in Scripture to permit us to Treat with him about his
Justice, and to Discourse with us about the equity of his proceedings, whether
his ways be not equal toward us, and ours unequal toward Him: Yet he never
admits us to any conference with him about his Wisdom, never suffers any humane
inquiry to be made Whether he does Wisely or no in what he does, but still puts
us to silence in that point with his absolute Sovereignty over us, and brands
that man with a Woe that so strives with his Maker, and shall dare to say, Why
have thou made me thus? Whatever God does, we have these two prevailing Reasons
to Acquiesce in it, First, That it is done by him that has the supreme Right of
disposing All: He that made all, is sit to dispose all, and must needs be
best entitled so to do. Secondly, That it is the result of infinite Attributes,
such wherein is inherent the utmost possible Perfection we are able to conceive
of in every kind. Whatever opposes, or questioneth such Wisdom, must needs be
the highest Folly. Whatever opposes or thwarteth such Justice must needs be
the greatest Injustice; and so in all other instances. God, in this case, saw
it best to make man Free, and leave him to the utmost exercise of that freedom,
that so Man might appear to be what he would be, and God might appear to be
what his is. Evil had never been but that 'twas infinitely better it should be
then not to be: For when the Creature has sinned to the utmost, God overrules
that sin to excellent Ends; and from the depths of Divine Wisdom we see it so
brought about, that glorious effects result from it: Though the commission of
sin is no way excused thereby, and the guilt of it rests at every man's own door.

From created freedom all sin and all misery the adjunct of it had their first
rise, and from thence they were originally produced. This created freedom of
will, was in it self and its own nature, as first framed, excellent, and a
bright beam of Divine perfection, being of a Noble Faculty capable of a
continual choice of what was best; and it is far more excellent freely to choose
what is so, then from any outward necessity to become obliged to it. It was
also suited in its nature to Gods giving a Law, and man's Obedience: Of the
fitness of which we may easily conceive, when we reflect upon that Relation
there is between the Creator and a Creature, from this Root of created freedom
so adequate an adjunct to so noble a creature as Man, and in its right exercise
always centering in God as the supreme and chiefest good, and most proper
object of choice. From hence sprang up the evil and apostasy of humane nature:
For no man can, or from the beginning could say when he is tempted: I am
tempted of God; for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any
man: But every man is tempted when he is led aside of his own lust, and
enticed. This freedom in man declining to disobedience, puts a period to all
his happiness, Disorders, and Disjoynt's all his Faculties, and straight way
renders him obnoxious to that supreme and dreadful Attribute of his Maker, his
Justice. God upon the first declension of this freedom, upon man's first
disobedience, inflicts the utmost penalty of his Law: Nor can we suppose it
otherwise, but that God in the first instance of that kind, would give his
Creatures to know what sin was! That a Rebellion against Him the Highest, most
Absolute, and most Perfect Being, was of all things the most Intolerable,
contained in its bowels the utmost Evil, being an opposition to the Greatest
Good, and must needs expose to the Worst of Conditions: For nothing can oppose
God, and be happy, or prosper. Nor would it consist either with the Justice, or
Wisdom of such a Sovereign as God is, to give Laws, but upon the most perfect
and unalterable Reason, and upon that account, to adhere to their punctual
Execution: And of this we are sufficiently informed, when we see that nothing
less then a satisfaction made by the Death of our Savior, (that stupendous
and Miraculous expedient of Divine Wisdom, beyond the ken of Angels or Men,
whereby God receives a redundancy of compensation) could relieve or release us
from the severity and strict execution of the Law of Works, and introduce that
better Covenant, the Law of Grace, by which we are now justified and saved. We
must not imagine God dallyes when he gives Laws to the world, or that he will
connive at the breach of them, or repeal them as men do; It Is otherwise with
the supreme Lawgiver and Judge of all the earth, to whom all things that are
to come, are fully and certainly known, and before whom all future events are
ever present.

Man, by this chosen disobedience to the Law of his Maker, stands before him
thereby by as an object of his Justice, who being also essentially good,
gracious and forgiving, and acting nothing but in a perfect compliance with
himself, those two Attributes of Mercy and Justice (So far as we are able to
reach) remain in such a juncture utterly irreconcilable, till by a Miracle of
Divine Wisdom (which can never be sufficiently adored) a way is found out to
make those two Contending Attributes both triumphant: Justice is fully
satisfied, and Mercy brought into its utmost exercise, and all the Floodgates
of Divine Goodness let open upon the world: This is all effected by the
glorious and gracious undertaking of our blessed Redeemer; by whom life and
immortality is brought to light, our Salvation proclaimed, and stands for ever
established upon these three fundamental points. First, That Christ perfectly
performed all that was necessary for him to perform, to constitute him a
sufficient Mediator between God and Man, exactly fulfilled all the Law of his
public Mediatorship, and was approved of God so to have done: A sufficient
Instance whereof he gave to the world in raising him from the dead, and
exalting him at his own right hand. Secondly, That by reason of the Dignity of
Christ's person, his obedience and sufferings were infinitely of more intrinsic
value and weight then all the obedience and sufferings of Mankind ever were, or
possibly could be; and so they are accounted of before God. Thirdly, That being
performed in our Nature, and wholly upon our Account, God by an infinitely
gracious Statute in Heaven accepts them for us (though not as done by us) and
reckons all the effects and advantages of them by way of imputation to us.

The Lord Christ having made such a satisfaction to God for the sins of the
world, and thereby reversed that sentence of Condemnation that by the Law was
Recorded against us, has as Mediator the power of dispensing Pardon wholly
committed to Him. For, the Father now judges no man, but has committed all
judgment unto the Son. That is, Christ as Mediator is established King. And the
world is now to be judged by a Law of Grace: And two things in the exercise of
this Mediatory Dominion are Eternally stipulated between the Father and the
Son. First, that all pardon and Forgiveness shall be dispensed upon such
Conditions; that is, upon the terms proclaimed by the Gospel, whereby the glory
of all the Divine Attributes, as well as of Mercy and Forgiveness, is highly
displayed. And Secondly, That that power, Christ as Mediator is vested withal,
to empower and enable whom he pleases, by the sending forth of the Holy Ghost,
to perform the Gospel-Condition, shall be exerted toward those alone to whom
God in his Eternal Counsels (who had all things in prospect and foreknowledge,
and the whole of all men's circumstances before him from Everlasting) designed
present Grace, and future Glory.

Those who through Divine Grace and Assistance receive Christ as he propounds
himself to us in the Gospel, are by the tenor thereof justified before God: And
he so propounds himself, that whoever Receives him, is thereby obliged to the
performance of all Gospel-Righteousness: And when the whole of Christ's
undertaking to bring many sons to glory shall be perfected and completed, we
shall then see that (...), as the Apostle calls it, that multiform^s sapientia
Dei, that manifold wisdom of God in curious variety aabout this matter, and the
glorious Excellency there is in a Sinners Justification, in its contrivance, in
its procuring cause, in its condition, and in its final effect; And thence will
result Everlasting Adoration and Hymns of praise and thanksgiving to him that
sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever.

FINIS.

