Pyrologia Mimica, OR, AN ANSWER TO HYDROLOGIA CHYMICA of WILLIAM SYMPSON
Phylo-Chymico-Medicus; In DEFENSE of SCARBROVGH-SPAW.

WHEREIN The Five Mineral Principles of the said Spaw are defended against all
his Objections by plain Reason and Experiments, and further confirmed by a
Discovery of Mr. S. his frequent Contradictions and manifest Recantation.

ALSO A Vindication of the Rational Method and Practice of Physic called
Galenical, and a Reconciliation betwixt that and the Chemical.

Likewise a further Discourse about the ORIGINAL of SPRINGS.

By ROBERT WITTY Doctor in Physic.

LONDON; Printed by T. N. for J. Martyn Printer to the R. Society, at the Bell
without Temple Bar, 1669.

To the Right Honorable JAMES Earl of Suffolk, and JOHN Lord Roos Son and Heir
to the Earl of Rutland.
My Lords,
BEing necessarily engaged to appear again in Public, in Vindication of what I
formerly writ upon the Subject of Scarbrough-Spaw, and the asserting of the
Mineral Principles thereof, it reminds me of my Obligations to Your Lordships,
to whom of right belongs from me what ever Product that Spring affords. What
there I had said about the Principles of that Spring, I have here further made
good by convincing Arguments, answering all Objections to the contrary. My
Lords, Here is also a Defense of the Rational Method and Practice of Physic,
which a fierce Chemical Pretender has designed to blast, to which I have added
my Endeavors of a Reconciliation between the Galenists and Chemists, in
Reference to some Differences started up among them, through the perverseness of
some late Upstarts. The Honorable Testimony I have heard Both Your Lordships
give of your sincere Affection to Your respective Physicians, and the Art of
Physic, does justly challenge this Acknowledgement, and renders Your Lordships
most fit Patrons of This, that designs the Peace of the Faculty. Be pleased to
accept this as a Symbol of Thanks and Service due to Both, from

My Lords, Your Lordships Most humble Servant R. Witty.
York, May 25. 1669.
To the Judicious and Impartial READER.
WHen I published my Book of Scarbrough-Spaw, I thought it was the most
acceptable service I could do for my Country, since I found it even in Twenty
years experience to be eminently successful in the Cure of very many Diseases,
which had resisted all Rational Methods, that had been used either by my self,
or others of my Faculty. In that Book I treat of the Constituent Principles of
that Water, viz. Iron, Vitriol, Alome, Nitre, and Salt. And then for Methods
sake, I discourse concerning the Original Cause of every sort of Water, as Sea,
Rain, Snow, Lake, Pond, Fenne, Spring, and River Water, and more at large I
handle the Controversy among Philosophers both Ancient and Modern about the
Original of Springs. I then proceed to treat of Mineral Waters, with the
property of the Minerals which that Spring has imbibed; and conclude with a
Description of the Nature and Virtues of that Spaw, and of the Cures done by
the Water; which I did recite upon my own Reputation in my First Edition. And
that being sold, the Report of the Virtues of the Spaw, I thought fit to
confirm in the Second Impression by the Attestation of several Persons of
Honor and Quality yet living, on whom the like Cures were done in their
several Cases, who for Public Good, did willingly allow the mention of their
Names: not doubting but it would find acceptance among Ingenuous Persons; and
indeed so it did, for I have had hearty thanks from many of the best Rank, both
Philosophers, Physicians, and Others.

But of late I have met with a Check in a Book called Hydrologia Chymica set
forth by William Simpson, Philo-Chymico-Medicus; which I rather think merits
the Title of PYROLOGIA MIMICA, since his main business is to treat of Chemical
Experiments prepared out of Fire, which he borrows from Others; besides that he
spits Fire in every Page. He pretends to deny the said Principles of the Spring
(though he asserts the Virtues thereof) and engages in the Dispute about the
Original of Springs. All which if he had managed like a Scholar by dint of
Argument, for the discovery of Truth in each particular, it might have been for
his Credit, and should never have been disgusted by me. But instead of that He
sets his Wits on the Rack on every account to bespatter me with rude and
uncivil Language, even without any Ground or Reason, wherein I willingly submit
to the Judgment of the Reader.

But who am I that I may not bear it, when the most Famous Universities in the
World, and all the Learned Men in Europe, do not escape a severe Censure
concerning their Studies, from the malevolent Pen of this bare Batchelour of
Arts: and all the Learned Physicians in the World, and their Rational Method of
Physic, must be undervalued as trivial and successless, merely to make way for
a few Chemical Medicines of his own.

I confess I have been advised by several Learned Gentlemen of my Friends, to
let him alone, and not to honor him with an Answer; who urged to me that
Example of Scaliger, who being told that a mean Fellow had writ saucily against
him, answered, Relatum est mihi, Scarabaeum quendam contra me scribere, cui
respondere nec dignitatis est nec Otii. I have been told (said he) that a
certain Scarabee has writ against me, to whom it does neither become me, nor
have I leisure to give Answer. But I could not be so satisfied, to let the
young man go on in such a Carier without a Curb, since I have writ nothing but
what I am assured to be true, and am well able to defend against all his
Objections. Although I confess I am not at very good leisure to do it, in
rega^d of my other Occasions; especially since I am hereby interrupted in my
Latin Copy upon the Subject of the Spaw, which I thought should have seen the
light this year. Nor do I know of any one else, that is so much concerned to
undertake it.

I therefore took his Book into Consideration, concerning which I must say as
once Julian did upon a better thing, (...), in which sunt bona, sunt quaedam
mediocria, sunt mala plura. Or as Homer (...). Besides his words, which are his
own, stuffed with bombaste, I see nothing in it, but what is vulgar. Those indeed
are such and so affected, wherein I find him constantly incircled, as if like
Faustus he went about to conjure up Mephistophiles. Or as if the Chemical
Spirits were like the Infernal, that they will not be raised without hard and
big words. His Experiments which are not a few, are pillaged out of Kircher,
Helmont, Zwelfer, Sennertus, Mr. Boil, Sendivogius, and Dr. French his Book of
Knaresbrough Spaw, and several others, though he is rarely so candid as to own
them. The Inferences which thence he deduces are most what upon mistaken
grounds, drawing general Conclusions from particular Premises. His Philosophy
is not at all to be liked, being altogether novel and precarious. His Candor
and Ingenuity less; Defamation being the main Topic of all his Discourses. I
wish for (his own sake) his Divinity may be better; for I have seldom seen any
one so Skeptical in Reason, but the same has been Heterodox, if not Heretical
in Religion.

My Lord Cook says there are two things that marres many a Lawyer, to wit
Praepostera Lectio and praepropera Praxis. Give me leave to apply it to
Physicians, and particularly to this my Antagonist. It does appear he fell
among ill Books, and read unwholesome Authors in Physic, or else he began at
the wrong end; reading the Therapeutick part, before he understood Physiology
and Pathology; otherwise his parts well laid would have rendered him far more
useful in his Country, than now he is likely to be; as for the later, viz.
Praepropera Praxis, he is at leisure enough for that, save only in his
Laboratory. I confess I never saw any man so big with himself, that like the
Frog in the Fable he is ready to burst, either through Pride or Envy; if I
could now help with a piece of good Midwifery, and bring him to a safe
Delivery, he would have great cause to thank me.

But as to his Book more expressly thus, In the beginning he stiffly denies all
the Principles of the Spaw, (which I mentioned) save Alome, and disputes
against me with Dunghill Language, such as the Schools know not, and all
ingenuos men abhor; and yet (would you think it) before he has done he yields
them all to be there; viz. Iron P. 39. and P. 44. and 45. So Vitriol, P. 359.
And Nitre P. 360. and 364. where he is put to a sore pinch to fumble at
Expressions, on purpose to blind some capacities from discovering his
Contradictions. To say no more than truth, I never met with any Author so
unstable in his Writings, even to say and unsay, as this my Antagonist, which I
shall point at as I pass along.

Then he goes on to tell what Diseases the Spaw cures, and what not, wherein he
is altogether Mimical; being wholly confined to what I have said in my Book, or
what in Reason may follow therefrom; for otherwise I am assured he is a mere
stranger to it, almost as he that never saw it; to which yet I can add some
eminent Cures, that I have not already expressed.

He next passes on to treat of the Causes of several Diseases, which he refers
to some Fault in his Five Digestions (I wonder he did not make 50.) This Notion
is purely Helmonts, though he curtails his number, of which he has a peculiar
Tract, called Sextuplex Digestio alimenti humani, P. 166. But for want of the
right understanding of Anatomy Sir S. grossly mistakes, which our Modern Authors
since the happy Discovery of the Circulation of the Blood, and some Vessels
lately found out in the Contexture of the Parts, by some of our own ingenious
Countrymen, have more intelligently proposed.

In his Discourse about the Original of Hot Springs, he determines the heat to
proceed from a Mine of Vive Calx; which Notion he grounds upon a Relation that
I made in my Book of a most Ingenuous Observation of a Noble Lord of this
Kingdom, near the City Bathe, though he has not so much ingenuity as to own
it, To say what I find, he is resolved to do me no right.

Where he undervalues the Rational Method of Physic, and extols his own
Medicines as more Noble and Successful, I shall join issue with him in weighing
his Arguments, and examining his Medicines which he himself has described,
together with some matters of Fact, as they relate to him. Here I would not be
thought as if I were an Enemy to the Chemical Way, or those that are Learned
Professors thereof. I am serious I account it a singular Additament and
Ornament to the Noble Art of Physic and the most useful Part of Experimental
Philosophy; and such as the Old Princes in Physic would have rejoiced to have
known. And I do sincerely love and honor those that employ their Talents in a
genuine preparation of wholesome Medicines, out of the Minerals and Metals; and I
have not been idle altogether in those Operations my self, having sometimes had
a Laboratory of my own, wherein a very Learned Gentleman of this Kingdom, and
my self did employ some time and money; and of late I have not been wanting to
make several Experiments out of the Minerals of this Spaw, as I have mentioned
in several places of my Book, though not with such Noise and Cracks.

Besides in my Practice near 30 years (wherein on this sudden I can scarce
think on any Disease which has not been under my Cure) I have not been wanting
to use them according as I saw cause: wherein what my success has been, I choose
rather to let my Country report; only this I may with modesty affirm, it has
been like others of my Faculty. And I must also declare that what ever my
success has been, I must rather ascribe it to the Blessing of God upon a
Rational Method, than Chemical Preparations.

But why any that addict themselves to that Study, should go about to make
Chemistry an Art of its own kind, or like a Viperous Brat to eat through the
Bowels of its Dam, and so to cry down that wholesome Method, and those
Medicines, that in the hands of Artists, have in all Ages proved successful for
the good of Mankind, I see no reason in the world. And I am sure there is no
cause, why this Man should so magnify his own Preparations in comparison of
others, as I shall with satisfaction have occasion to make out anon.

Touching his Project for an Universal Character (which a man would wonder how
he should bring into this Discourse, save that he would be a Sir
Positive-At-all.) He has all his hints from a very Reverend Person of this
Nation, who before his Book on that Subject came out, was frequently free in
discourse concerning the thing, and had given out several Essays.

As to his Discourse about the Constitutive Principles of all Concretes, which
he fetches from Helmont, quarrelling at the Three Ordinary Principles of the
Chemists, to wit, Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury, and the Five of others, he
resolves all into Water, which certainly is a Mixed Body, and consists of the
Four Elements. And (I pray) may not that again be easily resolved into nothing,
and so become an Argument to prove the Creation?

In his Appendix concerning the Original of Springs He is most disingenuous,
and shows himself to be a man that can blush at nothing; pretending to have
answered all the Arguments in my Book, which I have urged for Rain and Snow
Water to be the Original of Springs; when he leaps over no less than three or
four whereon the stress of the Opinion does most lie, and only touches upon
something that I brought in by way of Illustration, not of Proof. I am ashamed
that any man that pretends so highly, should respect his Credit no more, but
impose upon the Reader, who perhaps not seeing my Book, would be induced to
give him Credit. ( viz. Scarbrough Spaw Second Edition, from P. 97. to 119.)
Besides that being pinched with an Argument of Demonstration, which I deduce
from Dr. Heylin in his Cosmography, he calls in Question the Honor and Honesty
of that Learned and Reverend Gentleman (P. 301.) In the mean time he
establishes his own Opinion upon a mere naked Supposition (P. 317.) which he
ought necessarily to have proved, or else his Superstruction will fall to the
ground, for want of a Solid Foundation. Yet in that Discourse all he has is
from Kircherus in his Mundus Subterraneus.

Concerning his Ternary of Medicines, which next to his opposing of me, is the
grand Design of his Book; there is great cause to suspect he will fall short of
his aim. Those are his Scorbutic Pills for Purging, his Cordial Elixir, and
his Diaphoretick. Can any Rational Man think that all Diseases are so easily
cured? I am afraid these Pills may at length prove like his Lunar Pills, which
he mentions (P. 120.) sometimes as highly extolled by him, and used as his
Catholicon, which upon trial some poor men probably smarted for; for he
declares them unsuccessful, and advises against the further use of them* being
made up with Aqua fortial, and other Corrosive and Poisonous Medicines.

As to the Elixir Proprietatis, doubtless its a good Medicine being duly used.
Now there are several ways of preparing it mentioned by Paracelsus, Helmont,
Crollius, Amynsicht, and others, all of them magnifying their own Preparations.
But it is a Medicine very hot, whose Vehicle is the Tartarised Spirit of Wine,
and so not likely to suit as a Cordial in all Diseases; notwithstanding there
are some that use it, till they are even come into a Proverb among the Vulgar.

Touching his Diaphoretick, it is to be doubted, he makes it of the Corr^sive
Oil of Antimony mentioned (P. 180.) which he tells (P. 188.) is a more
desperate poison than Mercury Sublimate it self, which all men know will
corrode Iron. I suspect we shall shortly see his Bills upon the Posts of the
City, after the manner of Quacks, proclaiming this Ternary, as sometimes he did
with his Amulet for the Plague, unless he suspect I have marred his Market.

And lastly he concludes with an Epilogue, wherein he most gallantly recants
all that he had said in his Hydrologia, concerning the Principles of the Spaw.
For whereas he denied Vitriol to be there, and abused me for asserting it, he
confesses upon further trial, that there it is in its Body, to wit Terra
Vitrioli (P. 359.) then he confesses Nitre (P. 360.) yea and (P. 364.) he
yields it to be of all the Minerals the most predominant, even as I had
affirmed in my Book (P. 13.) And he is forced to come off with a woeful excuse
at the lower end of that (P. 364.) That he only meant that its not the Nitre of
the Shops, which is vulgarly sold. To say the truth, he was forced to make this
Recantation, as I shall make out afterward.

By this time I suppose the Candid and Judicious Reader discerns the folly of
the young man, whose wrath and envy against me, have excited him to abuse the
World with an ill premeditated piece of work. Insipientis est dicere non
putaram. But what satisfaction have I now for the injuries he has offered me,
in his causless endeavor to blast my Reputation; I most willingly submit all
to the Ingenuity of the Judicious and Impartial Reader, being ready to receive
him when he shall make his Acknowledgment.

And now I suppose I might very well spare my self any further labor, but I am
not so minded, let me beg thy patience a little (Gentle Reader) till I lay down
the grounds of this man's quarrel against me, and enlarge my Epistle with a few
Notes upon his, and then I Will proceed to his Book.

About four or five years ago at the most, Sir Simpson began to set up for
himself in the Practice of Physic; and about the same time another also, whom
he glances at somewhere in his Book. These had a Project to overturn the
Rational Practice of Physic in this City and County of York, and reduce all to
the Chemical Way. In order to which, in all Companies, and more especially at
the Coffee-Houses, they were constantly declaming against the Medicines of the
Shops, which are prepared according to the Dispensatory established by the Law
of the Land; and magnifying their own Medicines, by which they pretended to be
able to do wonders. (How far this took with some of our Faculty, I shall not
now mention.) But there were not wanting others of my Learned Brethren, who
together with my self, did judge it our duty Rem populi tractare, and to stand
up in defense both of the lives of our Friends, and the Rational Method, being
yet no Enemies to the Chemical Way, and such Medicines as therein we knew to be
useful and safe.

Especially I my self did more frequently and publicly appear among the
Ingenious Gentlemen, that meet at the Coffee-Houses to countermine their
design, and did speed accordingly; on which account they give out, that I am a
Discourager of Ingenuity, which yet those that kn^w me will testify to be
false. They to requite me, call in further Assistance, as I shall by and by
make out; and combined to fall upon me in reference to my Book of the Spaw;
where though they wanted just matter of Exception, as I shall (no doubt)
clearly evince, yet they designed like Hannibal upon the Alps, aut invenire
viam, aut facere; ever and anon jerking at my words, and wresting my sense,
pretending to understand the Water both in its Principles and Virtues; whereas
in truth they could, nor have said any more, than I had done in more
compendious and intelligible words. And to make the Book more taking among the
Vulgar, they have stufft it with Experiments fetched from all Modern Writers,
that have treated of Experimental Philosophy (very few of them being their own)
which they have confusedly drawn into this Farrago, as Cacus did Hercules his
Oxen inversed or reversed, to amuse the Reader, and on purpose to palliate
their Theft. In the mean time they were all of them bolting out several
Expressions against me and my Book this year and an half, which now are come to
light, through my sides aiming to wound the Rational Practice of Physic, which
even now they think they have effected, in this City; or at least they were
lately in hope they had done it.

Another difference there happened betwixt Sir Simpson and my self. One Robert
Beford a very ingenious Lock-Smith about 3 or 4 years ago, was my Patient in a
Dropsy, which I had managed about 10 days, not without great hopes of a Cure:
In which Disease (I thank God) I have often performed many good Cures. On the
sudden he told me, he would take no more Physic, saying, he was weak, and
Physic would kill him; I told him he must assuredly die of his Disease, if
there he left off. At length I understood that Sir Simpson was called to him
(by a good wife) who had put this whimsie in his head, and promised a Cure
within a Fortnight, by his Chemical Medicines, which he said were not Physic.
But the Patient grew every day worse, I having a respect for such an ingenious
Workman, sent to Mr. Simpson (whom I had not seen before) desiring him to meet
me at the Apothecaries Shop, and demanded wherefore he had disparaged my
Medicines, having not seen my Bills, which were extant in the Apothecaries
Shop. He said he did not disparage my Medicines but my Method, to wit, the
Galenical Way, in which it was not possible to cure a Dropsy. I told him I had
cured many a Dropsy in that Method, before he knew what was Latin for the
Word. And withal I told him, that if ever he intended to take any Degree in
Physic in the University of Cambridge, I expected he should visit me, and then
he should give an account of that unjust Calumniation. I also told him that the
man would assuredly die, which came to pass within 3 weeks after his first
Call; complaining of a most horrible heat and corrosion in his Belly, from the
heat of his Medicines (as the man himself did conceive) especially from some
Pills, that he gave him, bewailing the time that he had left me.

Some Reflections on Sir Simpson's Epistle.
The Design of this Author as he expresses in this Epistle, is to examine the
Principles of Scarbrough Spaw, whether they be such as I have described them in
my Book, which if it had been really for the discovery of Truth, he would have
modestly carried on his Work without Personal Reflections, which are exceedingly
ill becoming any man, especially one so young, who like a Cockerell but newly
hatched out of his Shell, begins to crow fiercely. It is not Victory that I
value, but Truth that I serve, which does prompt me to stop his Carier.

I shall therefore take what liberty he has given me, to examine his Book,
especially in those things that relate to my self, and the common Cause of
Physic in the Controversy, as it is by him stated betwixt the Galenists and
the Chemists, not troubling my self with his other impertinent digressions
(further than what I have already glaunced at) because I study brevity, and
would neither trifle away my own time, nor the kind Readers with matters on the
by. What I see amiss in him, I shall endeavor to prevent in my self, and will
therefore use plain and intelligible Language, being desirous to be understood
by all that know but their own Mother Tongue. My Method shall be that of his,
for I Will trace him in his steps.

He says, If any Writings of his shall be found as equally naked and fenceless
as mine are, he will be content with the same measure he has meted to me. To
which I reply, my Book was sent abroad in a plain and modest Dress, according
to the commendable Fashion of the Times for things of that Nature; without
gawdry, being guarded with Reason and Verity, which I expected would have been
its sufficient security. If its fortune in its passage was like that of the
Samaritane to heal and clothe it, though perhaps some body else may pay the
Reckoning in the Conclusion. As for his Writings, they appear (methink) like
the Crow that Horace tells of in his Epistles, that was gawdily attired with
the Feathers of other Birds, which became a Laughing Stock, when every Bird
came for its own. Movit Cornicula risum, Furtivis nudata coloribus. Its
probable I may let him see he is at my mercy, and not so well fenced as he
imagines.

He brags much of the Chemical Way gaining ground in the World, and that at
length it will worm out the Galenical Method. I am glad it is a Method; I
suspect he cannot so call the Chemical Practice. Nothing does better conduce to
duration than Method and Order. This Galenical Method has stood these 1500
years, ever since the Reign of the Emperor Antoninus the Philosopher; whom
Galen had the Honor to serve as his Physician; and I see no Reason why it may
not hold out 1500 years more; since it does not grow to decay through Age, but
take deeper Root. Let no man startle at this his Prognostic, since it is not
founded upon solid Indications. I am certain it cannot be from any hints he can
take from his own growth of Practice or Success. His project is now like to be
more frustrated as to the former, by being more known; and for the latter I
appeal to the Inhabitants of this City of York.

As to his own Chemical Authors, he says, there are not many that he values,
and quarrels at such of them, as extol their petit preparations for Panacea's.
The truth is he would have all men modest but himself. He will not allow
Amynsient, Crollius, Beguinus, or Libavius to cry up their Receipts, for fear
his Market be marred when he comes by and by to magnify his Ternary. He abhors
that fault in others, of which himself has more guilt. May not we have more
reason to suspect his Ternary he magnifies so much, for the Cure of all
Diseases, than he has those Authors, whose eminent learning and labors made
out in their Writings, has gained them a good Reputation in the World;
especially when we come to discern by and by the property of the matter out of
which they are made. To say the truth, he likes none of the Chemists well, but
Paracelsus, and Helmont, and Zwelfer, and Himselt, whom he accounts most able
to judge of them all. He commends Helmont for pulling down the Galenical
Theory, and says, he rears up a better. This is but in his judgment which is
not very great.

Scilicet ante pilos rerum prudentia velox.

Methinks he might have staid till his beard had been grown, before he had been
so definitive. He says, Helmonts best Arcana's are but darkly set down, and
commen^s him for obscuring his Expressions. How then does he know that he
understan^s him aright? Si non vult intelligi debet negligi. The Galenists in
their Writings are far more candid, using such perspicuity of Expressions, as
if they would make the things they treat of to speak out themselves; and
certainly they that have a true value of the lives of men, will speak plainly
out to prevent all mistakes.

He most uncivilly throws dirt in the Faces of those Learned Gentlemen my
Friends, that have made Verses before my Book, calling them Pedantick
Rapsodists, etc. Is any thing more ordinary than Verses upon graver Subjects
than that is? Have not some of his own Authors five times as many Verses as
there are? Might it not have been sufficient that this young man had a design
to wreak his wrath upon me, but he must let fly at those Worthy Gentlemen my
Friends, who are all of them of such Eminent Learning and Worth, that W. S. is
not worthy to carry their Books; who out of their Real Respects to me, and the
satisfaction they took in the faithfulness of my Design, in acquainting the
Kingdom with the Usefulness of the Spaw, were pleased to humble themselves to
make a few Verses, which yet had never been printed, if it had not been for the
importunity of the Bookseller. Poets in all Ages have been allowed the liberty
of their Fancy. Pictoribus atque Poetis, Quidlibet audendi semper, etc. -- I
say, would neither the Honor of some, nor the Learning and Gravity of them
all, put a Curb upon his petulant Spirit, but he must bespatter that innocent
Design of theirs? I can hardly contain from Passion on those my Honored
Friends behalf. I shall only say, I am sorry they had no better fortune than
that of the Nightingale to be judged by an A --

He concludes his Epistle with telling what pleasure he had in writing his
Book, supposing with himself it will be so approved of, that it may come out in
a Second Impression. He wants no confidence indeed, while some Learned Men are
of another Opinion. As for his writing, I believe it was the greatest part of
his Task, for he wanted not other help (as I hinted before) to fetch in the
Farrago of Experiments out of Variety of Authors, but himself was best fitted
to be the Amanuensis. Moreover the Independency of his Subjects, and the Chinks
and Flaws that are in the Juncture of the Discourse, together with the plain
Contradictions that do frequently occur, wherein he says and unsays, do clearly
evince it to have been a Combination.

ERRATA.
Page 2. line 20. read natalls, p. 6. l. 1. r. acuated, p. 6. l. 22. r.
Gustatilibus, p. 13. l. 12. r. Minera, ibid. l. 24. r. 364, p. 14. l. 21. r.
fossile, p. 18. l. 25 r. alumini, p. 22. l. 6. r. effluvium, p. 23. l 8 r.
Hippocrates, p. 24. l. 4. r. into, p. 27. l. 7. r. qua, ibid. l. o. r. Meteor,
p. 29 l. 19. r. compenitur, ibid. l. 24. r. Iron, p. 3^. l. 20. r Chalybeat,
ibid. l. 26. r. then, p 36. l. 25. r. c r. p. 38. l. 1. r. lib. sem. p. 39. l.
7. r. Vitrioli, p 40. l 1. r. Chalybeat, p. 42. l. 5. for in r. vi, ibid. l 7.
r. Diaphanam, p. 43. l. 6. r. matter, p. 59 l. 3. r. wherewith I pinch, ibid.
l. 11. r. or that, p. 62. l. 3. r. correct these his, p. 64. l. 4. r. horum, p.
66 l. 7. r. illa, ibid. l. 9. r. in Sale, p 67. l. ult^r. laminae ferreae, p.
73. l. 7. r. there, p 74. l. 17. r. necet, ibid. l. 18. r. edulia, p. 82. l.
23. r. is meant, p. 84. l. 21. r. roche, p. 99. l. 2. r. demonstrate. p. 123.
l. 2c. r. and heat, p. 124. l. 13. for 59. r. 56.

Thus far the Errata is collected, and what faults have since passed the Press,
(the Author being at great distance) the Reader is desired to amend.

Pyrologia Mimica, OR, An Answer to a Book entitled Hydrologia Chymica, writ
by William Simpson Philo-chymico-medicus.
I Shall begin with a passage out of this Book of Mr. Simpson's in his own
words ( Page 214.) Few there are (says he) who busy themselves to write, but
they have some Novelty either in History, Theory, or Practice, to present the
World with; yet they commonly do so wiredraw and spin it out at length, with so
many circumstantial, and often impertinent Notions, that they fill up a Volume,
with that that they might have comprised in half a dozen Pages: All the rest
are mere Flourishes and Appendices, which being tedious, few men will cumber
their heads withal; and therefore in effect they signify nothing. Certainly
nothing can be said in Few so apposite, to discover the design of this man's
writing this Book, and his manner of doing it. Here we have a Hodg-potch of
Novelty in the Theory and Practice of Physic, wire-drawn and spun out at
length, with a company of impertinent Notions, that signify nothing but to
fill up the Volume and raise a great dust. The rest are mere Flourishes and
such a sort of Appendices and Fragments, as I never read the like; which indeed
do signify nothing, but to spend precious time that might be far better
employed. I shall here apply that passage of Natales Comes, which he has
concerning Zenophanes his introducing a new Philosophical Notion, viz. Nonnulli
ne nil scisse videantur, aliqua nova monstra in Philosophiam introducunt, ut
alicujus rei Inventores fuisse appareant. Some there are who lest they should
seem to know little, will bring in monstrous absurdities in Philosophy, that
afterward they may be famed for the inventing of somewhat.

Five Principles in Scarbrough-Spaw.
The Author ( Page 1.) tells that he has seen my Book of Scarbrough Spaw,
wherein I mention 5 Mineral Principles to to be in that Water, to wit, Iron,
Vitriol, Alome, Nitre, and Salt: And he declares it is his Design to examine
whether I have made a true Report or no; and he endeavors to make the World
believe I have not. Truly then I must say it is through mistake, not wilfully
done. It had been both more Christian and Civil in Mr. S. if he had suspected I
was in an Error, to have come to me (since we are Neighbors) and to have
discoursed with me about it, and so convinced me of my mistake, or else
received satisfaction from me. And indeed I think it had been but reasonable
for him to have laid his Foundation in a private Discourse, before he had
appeared so severely in Public against me. But Truth seeks no shade; I am very
well content to be brought to the Test, although I do neither think him sit to
be my Judge, nor value him as a Witness, nor fear him as an Enemy. Nil magis
Certum, quam quod ex duhio Certum.

Of Vitriol.
He begins first to examine Vitriol. Here let him know that Scarbrough Vitriol
will not blush, being brought to the Trial it will be found clear. Let the
Reader take notice that in this Dispute about the Minerals, I intend to engage
him at his own weapon, to wit, the Chemical Writers, whom I find to abound in
my Senfe all along.

He says ( Page 2.) The Doctor might have done well to have distinguished,
whether he meant it Vitriol of Iron or Copper. First, I wonder Mr. S. does not
take care to distinguish aright, as if there were no sorts of Vitriol but
these; when as Fallopius ( De Therm. Aq. cap. 11.) tells him that all sorts of
Metals have their Vitriols, and all Chemical Authors agree in it. Especially
there are three sorts eminently so called, to wit, Vitriol of Iron, of Copper,
and White Vitriol, all which he himself reckons up ( P. 5.) To me (says he) all
natural Vitriols seems to be reducible to Three, viz. to that of Iron, Copper,
and Vitrielum album. Why then does he enquire which of the two I meant, since
possibly I might mean the third, or some other? Really here is an ill
beginning. Ti^u^are in Vestibule malum omen. To stumble at the Threshold is a
sign of ill luck. Did not Mr. S. say ( P. 1.) he had seen my Book; I wonder
then how he could overlook what I say ( P. 10.) since here is the Card^
Controversiae, the state of his quarrel turns upon this hinge. My words are
these, I take it to be the Iron Mineral with a Touch of the Vitriol; Or if you
please Ferrum Vitriolatum, or Vitriolum Ferrugineum.

Here I desire the Reader to take notice, that he does frequently leave out my
words, or matter, wherein the main scope of my business consists; on purpose to
make himself Elbow-room to abuse me. Although I intend not hereby, as if I
meant this Vitriol in the Spaw to be made out of Iron; for what have we to do
with factitious Vitriol? But this is a natural Vitriol generated in the Veins
of the Earth, through which the Spring runs, which has by its ^^idity or
Esurine Salt, actuated the Waters; which thereby is enabled to corrode a Vein
of Iron, which is there also; and likewise some other Minerals, of which more
anon. Now this Water thus impregnated with a Vitrioline Odor or Vapor, since
it has no Emetick or Vomiting Quality joined with it, I account it to be of the
Nature of that which is made out of Iron (not of Copper) and therefore I called
it Vitriolum Ferrugineum. But I do affirm, that common Spring Water it self, is
a Menstruum proper enough to take in any of the Minerals we are treating of,
and will not fail to do it if they lie in its way; although if it meet with any
Acid Salt, as this is of Vitriol, it will do it the more freely. And this a
grees with that which Paracelsus himself has said, provided the Minerals or
Metals be not come to Maturity ( Lib. 3. de Nature. Aquis, cap. de Aq.
Gustabilibus.) Yea and Mr. S. himself confesses it ( P. 59.) Number 10, 11, and
12. Dr. Jordane asserts the same concerning Simple Waters, that by reason of
their tenuity they may imbibe either Spirit, or Juice, or Tinctures, from
Metals before their Consolidation ( Not. Baths cap. 14,) Yea and Kircherus, who
in his Mundus Subterraneus treats at large of this Subject, accounts Simple
Spring Water a Menstruum fit enough to imbibe a Mineral or Metal; for he
mentions not any Primum Ens or other Mineral Acidity.

I say by its Esurine Salt it more freely corrodes the Iron, and carries it in
gremio out with it; which is the more easily done, because the Iron is not here
a perfect Solid Metal, but in solutis principiis, and in some tendency to it;
being yet of the same nature with Iron: And this Vitriol is not so properly
said to be made by an Esurine Salt, as to have an Esurine Salt or Spirit in it
self. And this does agree with the general Suffrage of all Learned Writers, as
well Chemists as others; as Libavius in his Syntag. Geber, Caesalpinus, Dr.
Jordan; and not only Vitriol, but Nitre also, they say dissolved in Water will
enable it to corrode Metals; and to this also consents Fallopius ( cap. 7. de
Thermal Aq.)

This being premised, that Supposition of Vitriol of Copper to be dissolved in
the Water, is not to be supposed, and what follows thereon is altogether
impertinent.

However ( B. 3.) he says, This being granted in FAVOR of his Mineral
Ingredients or Principles, etc. Iron will be found impertinent and
insignificant as to the body of it. Sir, Keep your Favors for others.

Timeo Danaos etiam dona ferentes. I look for none of your Favors, nor need
them, I suspect your very mercies are cruel; what I would have in this Dispute,
I shall by and by force you to grant me, and have no cause to return you any
thanks. But whereas he says Iron is not here in its body. What would Sir S.
have? A Horseshooe Nail? It is not here indeed to be found, nor will 100
Gallons of the Water afford so much Iron as to make one. But here is a palpable
Powder, which when a little Gall is put into the Water, by which it turns black
(which Color it takes from the Vitriol) there will settle after some hours
upon the agitation of the Vessel, a black Powder near a Dram in a Gallon, which
by pouring the Water gently from it per inclinationem, will be found in the
bottom; which if you dry in the Sun, or over the Fire, has a Stiptick or drying
taste like Crocus Martis, and being taken inwardly in any form whatsoever, does
tinge the Excrements with a blackish Color, as all our preparations out of
Iron do. Besides if this Water be carried abroad to York or Hull, which is 30
mile off, there will be found in the Vessel a yellowish Sediment, according to
the quantity of Water, which being dried, has the same taste with Crocus Martis
or prepared Steel, and surpassing it in virtue and efficacy; and this
separation or precipitation of this Metalline Substance, is furthered by
Agitation in the Carriage; especially if in Oaken Vessels: although I have also
observed the same in Glass Bottles, which were carried abroad.

But Mr. S. objects (as he thinks) strongly against these two Minerals Iron and
Vitriol to be there imbibed, because says he ( P. 3.) The Esurine Salt which
goes to the dissolving of Vitriol, of what sort soever (and he supposes Copper)
is thereby terminated in its action; and though the Water of the Spring so
impregnated, should afterward meet with a Vein of Iron, yet it can take
nothing thence, being already satiated, and having lost its sting.

Of Ens Primum.
To this I reply, The Esurine Salt is that which ( P. 5.) he calls Ens Primum,
out of Helmont, which he says gives the Medicinal Virtue to Vitriol. I do not
at all like the use of that Name Ens Primum in this sense, which the Old
Philosophers, that wanted better light, gave to some thing of a higher Nature,
even to God himself; from whom doubtless both Vitriol, and all Minerals,
Metals, and Vegetables, have received whatever Medicinal Virtue they have in
them; for it is he that created Medicine out of the Earth.

Secondly, This is Petitio Principii, to suppose such a thing to impregnate
this Water, where we can without any Hypothesis at all, directly point at the
Water it self as a proper Menstruum, as I have made out already; and if that
will not serve, then here is the Esurine Spirit of Vitriol, of sufficient
Efficacy, in the Judgment of Reason, to do the work we expect, and indeed find
to be done; and this agrees also with what Helmont himself says in his fourth
Paradox; where he says, That which is volatile, viz. a Spirit whether is be
Concrete or Liquid, may corrode other Mineral Bodies. Besides the Novelty of
the Notion of his Primum Ens gives ground of suspicion, the whole Current of
Learned Authors that have written of Medicinal Waters, mentioning no such
thing, whether Chemists or others: All accounting the Esurine Spirit or Juice
of Vitriol, enough to impregnate a Water with an Acidity, that shall make it to
corrode other Minerals or Metals by which it passes. So as we may very well lay
aside this Esurine Salt or Primum Ens Salium, as wholly precarious.

Entia non sunt multiplicanda nisi ex necessitate. Again (I answer) it is both
repugnant to Reason and Experience, and the Judgment of all Learned Writers,
who have treated of these Matters. What should hinder but Salts of several
kinds will dissolve in Water impregnated with one single kind? As suppose a
Quart of Sea Water, which has two Ounces of Salt in it; (as I have tried by
Evaporation) will not this receive Nitre, suppose a Dram, and after that as
much Al^ome, and after that Vitriol as much, and so become an Emetick, and last
of all Arsenick; so as it shall become poison? If Mr. S. shall dissolve Vitriol
in Water, of any kind whatsoever, whether Natural or Factitions (which he
cannot deny must be stronger of Vitriol than any Spaw) and then shall pass that
Vitrioline Water through three or four Cap Papers; wherein several sorts of
Powders are put, the same Vitrioline Water shall receive an alteration, or some
taste, from every of them; and after they are so mixed per minima, it will be
easy to separate the Salts from the grosser parts, but one Salt from another
will be very difficult.

But further I reply, If this be true infallibly, A Contradiction.
as his confidence does seem to import; for he says ( P. 4.) If one of the
Principles be made by this Esurine Acidity. Nature is not at leisure to make
another; which were such an Indulgence as she never granted her self. How does
this agree with that Mr. S. himself says ( P. 45.) in the beginning of the
Second Section? viz. Thus far I assented, viz. That an Aluminous Salt from a
Mineral Acidity had dissolved a slight touch of the Mineral of Iron. and both
dissolved in the Current Spring of Water, makes up the Spaw. Are not here two
Minerals made, viz. Iron and Alome, by his own Confession? The like Confession
he makes ( P. 61. N. 16.) Nay further, I Will see if I cannot find two more. Look
( P. 359.) and there he says, Upon a farther Trial of the Spaw Water, he found
a Body of Vitriol, which he calls Terra Vitrioli. Then turn but over leaf to (
P. 360) and he tells you he found Nitre: And so again ( P. 361.)

How now (Mr. S.) how will these things hang together, can all your Philosophy
reconcile this Contradiction? What now will become of your Inference you deduce
from the former Assertion in ( P. 4.) viz. So then we find a flaw in the main
Timber of his Building; an Inconsistency of two of his Chief Principles of the
Spaw, Iron and Vitriol. Certainly an Inference drawn from both ends of a
Contradiction ^sinvalid.

But I must not thus pass it over. He has told us here ( Page 3.) That the
Primum Ens or Esurine Salt having dissolved one Mineral, is thereby terminated,
so as if it should meet with another, it can take nothing thence. Now let us
cast our Eye upon ( P. 59.) where Mr. S. has quite forgotten what he said
here; for speaking of this Sulphurious Esurine Salt (he says) It becomes
determined and specificated, according to the difference of the Mineral Glebes
it meets with, into this or that Fossible Salt or Mineral Mixture; which he
illustrates by an Instance which he has verbatim from Sendivogius, Lumen Chym.
Trac. 2. As suppose several Colors and Salts placed at a distance one from
another upon a large Marble, and common Simple Water is conveyed to each of
them, this Water although the same to all, yet as it comes to every of them, is
differently tinged and tasted, according to the Color and Taste of those
parcels it meets with. So (says he) this Esurine Sulphurous Spirit, meeting
With variety of Mineral Earths, though the same in it self to every one, yet
becomes altered and tinctured according to the different property of the
Mineral Earth.

And from this Contradiction he has other Inferences which he mentions, not
worthy here to be recited. -- Here is an able Philosopher indeed, that can
assert Contradictions, and draw quidlibet ex quolibet. But I shall leave this
to the Readers Contemplation, because I study to be short, and shall only say
at present, I never found any man so inconsistent with himself; only he aimed (
P. 3.) to persuade the unwary Readers, that it was impossible that Iron and
Vitriol could be both in this Water, as I had asserted.

I could now bring in the Testimony of Learned Writers, who tell of several
sorts of Springs in Europe, that have imbibed two or three sorts of Minerals.
As at St. Lucas in Italy there is one that has imbibed Iron and Alome. Another
in Germany which is impregnated with Alome and Nitre; so as Ernestus a Chemist
can hardly determine which of the two is more predominant. So in Sweden one
that has both Lead and Copper. And thus also the ordinary Spaws in Germany have
imbibed Vitriol, Iron, and Ochre, as Dr. Heers relates in his Spadacrene. And
Fallopius mentions several such as have partaked of several Minerals, in his
Book De Therm. Aquis. Among all whom yet I find not any mention of this Primum
Ens. But above all, the profoundly Learned Kircher is most full and plain to
our purpose ( Lib. 5. Sect. 2. ad finem.) accounting not only Spring Water a
proper Menstruum to take in the Virtues of Minerals and Metals, but one and the
same Current to take in several as they lie in its passage; for which purpose
he has a Scheme ( P. 259.) whereby by he demonstrates it to the Eye. As suppose
upon a Table a Subterraneal Channel of Fresh Water enters at one end, and runs
out at the other end of the Table in one Spring, in its passage from one end to
the other it is divided and divaricated into several smaller Channels, by
crooked turnings; in one passage it meets with Salt, Vitriol, Iron, Galx, and
Silver; in another Meander it meets with Sulphur, Salt, Nitre, Ochr^, Gadmi^;
in another it meets with Alome, Bit^^^an, Lead, etc. By this time these several
streams meet in the Spring at the other end, this Spring he says, shall be
rep^^^she with the preperties of them all. In some o^^nes canales dicti
corrivati, ex ^^^^bus per quae transcunt Mineralibus, fonte^^ istum omnibus
Mineralium speciebus viribusque compositum constituunt. And therefore we may
with very good reason reject his Objection as idle and frivolous.

But I proceed, Of Iron.
Mr. S. ( P. 3.) cannot find out what is the dissolvent in this Water, that
should dissolve Mars ( viz. Iron) to make it appear in the form of a Liquor?
Why, I Will tell him what will do it besides the Alkabest of the Chemists; Vitriol
imbibed at the first, does by its Esurine Salt make the Water corrosive, and
fit to take in that, or any other Mineral that is in its way, and so will
Nitre, as I made out before, or Alo^e. If it will please him I'^ refer him to
his Grand Master Paracelsus (De N^tur. Aq^is, lib. 3. cap. de Aquis
Gustatilib^^s) wh^^ ^^^ting of Acide Waters, Har^^^ (...) (^^quit) ex
^^solutione (...) maturitatem (...) produced by the (...) before they come to
(...) By which he hints as if simpl^ (...) alone were ^^^^ent to imbibe a Metal
(as Iro^^) while it has not attained to i^perfection, which is the case of the
Tr^^^ Scarbo^^gh, ^s I shall have occasion to point out afterward. And
presently after P^^^c^isus adds, Interdum ex Vitri^^^ and Alu^^n^ hujus-modi
Aquae promanant. viz. Sometimes these Waters come from Vit^^ol and Alome. And
again I find him to the same purpose (De Nature. Baln. cap. de Thermis) treating
of Natural Baths, Quod sunt resoluta Minera ex corpor^ eo, quod simile est
Aluminis, Vitrioto and Sali, and tamenid non est, to wit, they are resolved out
of that Body which is like unto Alome, Vitriol, and Salt, and yet they are not
that. As if he would say, they are not perfectly Alome, Vitriol, and Salt, but
only initially, not instatu and perfectione, but in Embrione; in fieri, not in
f^^to, and this is the case of these Minerals in this Spaw-Water, they are but
i^ s^lutis principli^e, and in their Concrete J^^^^, and not perfect Minerals
or Metals.

And yet Pa^acelsus adds, that whatsoever Virtue those Ba^hs had, they were to
be judged of according to the propd^^es of those* Simples. Ita B^^g^^^ ip^ar^^
Virtu^^s, sec^^du^^ hor^m tri^^ simplicium ^^^^tias. And so may I say
^on^erning these Waters of the Spa^^, they have the Ve^^ned of all those
Minerals we have mentio^^d to be in them.

From what has been said, I suppose it will follow, that ou^ Foundation as to
these two Minerals Iron and V^tr^^l, stands sure, and the Building (...) li^^ly
to suffer, by such Vapor, that can^^^ther be hot or cold, say and unsay, (as
may best suit a present Design.

(...) his second Section ( P. 4.) he says, The Doctor undertakes to discourse
of Vitriol, not such as he had seen, but such as (he says) Learned Writers
name, viz. 3 sorts, Roman Vitriol or Copperas, which two I do not understand to
be Synonima's; the second Cyprian, and the third Ligurian, etc. He seems to
envy that I discourse about Vitriel, as if it were a Prerogative of the
Pseudochymists, and not to be undertaken by me; as if I knew not Vitriol as
well as himself, and have not as much liberty to treat of it as He. Not will he
give me leave to cite my Authors, that from their own Knowledge and Autopsy
discourse of Vitriol; (I speak of that which is natural, such as this at
Scarbrough) for my own part I have not such a conceit of my self as he has, as
that I should impose in this thing my own (...) as sufficient Authority, and
therefore I cite my Authors as need is. He quarrels that I call it Roman
Vitriol or Copperas, whereas I am warranted by good Authors. Weckerus (in his
Antid. spec. lib. 1.) says, That which the Italians call Victriolo, the
Spaniaras call Copparofa: So Adrianus Tol. (in Stocker. lib. 1. cap. 9.)
Vitriolum simpliciter (inquit) aut Vitriolum Romanum, nihil aliud est quam
Copparosa. As for the Romas its nothing but Natural Vitriol, brought for the
most part out of Cyprus or Germany, which they dissolve and cast into forms, to
which they add some pleasant Color, usually of Blew, which yet diminishes much
of its efficacy.

Of the Vapors of Minerals
In his third Section ( P. 6.) He proceeds to examine the four ways whereby I
say Water may imbibe the Nature and Virtue of a Mineral or Metal. And the first
was by receiving its Vapor. Thus Water standing some while in a Brass or Iron
Vessel, will taste of the Brass or Iron. Here he cavils at the word Vapor, as
improper; which to me does imply that he is little versed in any solid Authors
that treat of this Subject. It Is needless to spend time to prove to him, that
the best Writers do rather choose to express their sense of the imbibition of
the Vapors of Minerals than Odors, which he rather espouses. Fallopius (in
There. Aqu. cap. 8.) uses the term Vapor above 40 times in the sense I am
speaking of, even in one leaf side ( P. 214:) So Kircher ( lib. 5. de Virt.
Aqu. cap. 3.) reckons this as one way whereby a Water imbibes Minerals and
Metals, and says Vitriol is thus imbibed in its Vapor. Whence is this O^^r but
from the Offlu^ium of minute parts out of the odorable body to the Sensorium,
and what is that but a Vapor? I observe ( P. 46.) he allows an Aporrhaea
^^^eralis, which word either he understands not, or must not deny the word
V^^^ur.

But to go on, he says ( P. 6.) That no Metallic body does or can give a
Vapor to a simple Elementary Water, as long as the Water is Homogeneal in its
parts. I answer, This is quite from the point in hand, we are not treating here
of Simple Elementary Water, but of ordinary Water, which is neither so Simple
nor Elementary.
But where is W. S. his Philosophy, he calls it Simple and Elemantary, and yet
says, as long as it is Homogeneal; as if Water could be Simple and Elementary
and not Homogeneal. Really the very Freshmen do not reason at this rate. What?
A BATCHELOVR OF ARTS, and reason th^^^ I must let you know in charity to your
Degree, that you never saw Simple Elementary Water; not ever shall while you
breath, and that its not indeed capable of receiving a Vapor or Odor from any
Mineral or Metal Galen will tell you (8. de placit. Hypoc.) that it is, Minima
pars ^jus cujus est Elementum, quae lynceis cujusvis oculis non est obvia; and
yet the same Galen will tell you, that, Elementum per t^tum alterabile est.
(lib. de Constit. Art. Med. Reconcile these Ridd^es if you can. But if he means
that no Metallic Body can give a Vapor, or Odor, or Sapor (I matter not which)
to Spring Water; it is a shrewd Argument, he has not much conversed with Ladies
in his Practice of Physic, whose accurate Tastes are wont frequently to
dis-relish their Water, if it has stood but a while in a Vessel of Brass or
Iron, especially if it be at all warm. And for that which he says concerning
L^ad, that if pure Spring Water were boiled a whole Age in it, it will not
contract any Saturnine Impression from it. Fallopius is quite of another
Opinion, severely declaring against those Waters that have imbibed Lead, least
the Nature of the Lead be converted in Litharge, or some such thing, and so
kill a Man; and therefore several good Authors, particularly Paulus Zachias (in
Quest. Med. Legal.) forbids to keep Water in Leaden Cisterns, because its apt
to contract an Impression, which disposes the Body to Dysenteries; especially
such as are Consumptive, whose Bodies are subject to Colliquation. And whereas
he says, That Broths and other Liquors are boiled in Iron, Copper, or Brass
Vessels, without the least taste of any of the Metals. I cannot but wonder to
find this assertion; it appears he is neither Vir emunctae naris, nor exquisiti
palati. His frequent Contradictions do evince that he is weak in his Memory or
Intellect, and here I am afraid he has lost two of his Senses. Paracelsus was
of another mind ( lib. 3. de Natural. Aquis cap. 13.) Videmus Aquam in Cupreo
vase stantem Cupri saporem asciscere. We see (says he) if Water stand but a
while in a Copper Vessel, it will taste of Copper: and much more certainly if
it be boiled in it. I am informed by some Persons of undoubted integrity on
their own knowledge of some Carps, which were taken out of Ponds newly drained;
these being put with Fresh Water into a Copper Brewing Vessel, to be preserved
but for one Night, they were all found dead in the Morning: which must
certainly proceed from the Vapors of the Copper, which here was communicated to
the Cold Water.

He says further, That all compact Metalline Bodies must have proper and
peculiar Menstruums to unlock them, if any Medicinal Arcanum be thence
expected. Why! I can assure him upon trial; that the filings of Steel (suppose
a Pound) set to infuse in a Quart of clear Spring Water for a few days, the
Water upon Evaporation afforded a clear Salt of greenish color; which I
suppose he cannot deny to have a Medicinal Virtue.

As for what he says concerning the boiling of Gold in broth for those that are
in Consumptions, to make it more cordial and nourishing, I think with him it is
in vain; since Gold and Silver are not (...), by reason of the compactness of
their Bodies, they cannot he turned into our Nature, so as to nourish. And I
judge it to be a far better Cordial in the Purse than in the Stomach.

Of the Vapor of Vitriol.
That Vitriol may dissolve in Water (he says) he denies not, but that it should
give, a Vapor he understands not. To make a Body resolve it self into Vapors or
minute parts of like nature with the whole, is required either an intrinsic or
extrinsick heat, and he apprehends not, which way so ever it be done, that yet
the Carcass of Vitriol should remain. ( P. 7.) By this it appears he is a
stranger to Scarb. Spaw, or else (as we have observed even now) he has lost one
of his Senses, that he cannot smell the Vitrioline Vapors thereof; there being
nothing more ordinary, than to hear those that come there at the very first, to
observe it to smell like Ink. Fallopius tells him that Vitrioline Waters may be
discerned by their smell as well as by their taste. ( De Therm. Aq. cap. 9.).
Aqua chalcanthosa cognoscitur gustu and olfactu. And so says Kircher too in
the place before cited. Linguam acredine quadam, olfactum vero putentissima
mephiti percellunt. So again (cap. de Thermis) Vix acidulae reperiuntur, quae
ex Vitriolo aliquid non participent, non quidem quoad little esse sensibile, sed
quoad spirituosam vaporosamque substantiam quae subtiliter and perfect
tinguntur. If he will but lay his Nose to his Ink-Bottle, which I find had
Vitriol enough in it, he may easily discern a Vitrioline Vapor, while yet upon
Evaporation, the substance or Carcass of the Vitriol would be found in it. And
so it is with the Water of this Spring, which by the intrinsic heat of the
Earth imparted to the Water, it does imbibe more freely. And that this may be
done by the heat of the Earth alone, is agreeable to the Opinion of Aristotle,
( lib. 2. Metor. cap. 3.) as also of Empedocles, as Seneca reports ( lib. 3.
Not. Quest.) also of Vitruvius in his Eighth Book; and of Fallopius ( De Therm.
Aq. cap. 4.) Besides that he himself is forced to own it ( P. 59.) where he
admires at the Chemistry of Nature, which by its own proper Menstruums extracts
the Essential innate Virtues of Mineral Glebes, and that by intrinsic
invisible fire, in the digesting Vessels of the Earth.

Of the the Vapor of Iron.
But to proceed, in ( P. 8.) as he has denied Vitriol to communicate its Vapor
to Water, which I have sufficiently proved, and do refer to the judgment of
the Intelligent Reader. So he says Iron cannot give it self by a Vapor to the
Water, because it is a Compact Body; for no Solid Body is at all apt to Vapor.
To this I have answered in part already, and shall now further add. The Iron
that is imbibed in this Spring, of which we discourse, is not a Solid or
Compact Body of Iron, but like an ordinary Earth to look on, when it is newly
dug, or when through the Surges of the Spring Tides in storms, it falls from
the Cliffe; yet it is so strongly impregnated with the Concrete Juice of Iron,
that in a short time, it turns through the heat of the Sun to an Iron Stone; of
which within Six score Paces of the Spaw, there is as much fallen from the
Cliffe as would load four or five Carts, some of which I have put into a Smiths
Forge, where I saw it fusible, and melt in the Fire. This I have shown to
several Physicians, who know it to be true; besides that there are Thousands of
Gentlemen that have observed it; among which one Mr. William Cotton, who is
Overseer, of the Iron Mines in the Edge of Derbyshire, was present when Mr
Simpson was at Scarbrough and affirmed it to be Iron, and that he would
undertake to make Solid Iron out of it. Now this Earth having the Spring
passing through it, may very easily be supposed to impart something of its
Mineral Essence as also of its Vapor to the Spring. If he will but consult
profound Kircher, he will tell him that Iron yields a Vapor to the purpose;
Observantur (says he lib. 10. cap. 10. P. ^19.) in fornacibus, in quibus ferrum
in mass^s componetur, vapores quidam a materia ferrea exhalantes, qui in
lanuginem parietibus and tectis Officina adharentem convertuntur; to wit, in
the Iron works where it is smelted Vapors arise out of the Iron which turn
into a Downyness, which cleaves to the Walls and Roofs of the House. He also
says that of all Metals, Iron sends out the most fetid smell. But to return to
Mr. Simpson's Objection, wherein he says, That Iron or other Metals being Solid
Bodies, are not at all apt to send forth a Vapor, and yet keep their Body. A
man would have thought he should have shown some solidity in this point, but I
find him playing with a Shadow. Do not Metals yield an Aporrhad while yet they
are firm? Has he never seen a Wiseman (as for himself he has lost his smell)
put a counterfeit Coin to his Nose, and averr that it smelt of Copper? The like
may be said of Iron and Brass, which a man of an indifferent Nose may
distinguish by their Vapor. But he says, The Compact Body of Iron will not
impure a Vapor to a Liquor; wherein the Apothecaries Boys will laugh at him;
when we prescribe Chalybet Drinks, which is ordinary in Hypochondriack
Maladies; the Liquors receive a Vapor from the Iron, and yet the Compact Body
of Iron still remains. I wonder his Chemical Apothecary did not better instruct
him in this.

Of the Concrete Juice of Minerals
But when he takes notice ( P. 9.) that I did not only in my Book assert a
Vapor to flow from Vitriol and Iron, but also something of their Concrete
Juices and Substance to be imparted to the Water; Here (says he) the Dector
would almost make us believe that he was inclinable to Philosophise, for he is
got as far as the Concrete Juices, viz. The Metals in solutis principiis or in
fieri. Why W. S. I was Master of Arts before you were born, when doubtless I
had been wont to philosophise, and yet not at your rate; and I have since
appeared several times in the Schools, according to the Obligation of thy last
Degree, and the Statutes and Customs of the University of Cambridge, which I
suspect you will scarce adventure to do; and really I have not been altogether
i^^e since then in that Study. Had you read Ethics you would have learned more
Manners and Modesty, which the difference of our Two Degrees might justly have
c^alenged. Let the Ingenious Reader judge betwixt us. The truth is my Design
was not to amuse the Common Readers with any dark or abstruse Notions in
Philosophy, but so discourse of that Medicinal Spring as I might best be
understood; and yet s^^lso, (...) that (I think) I have said nothi^^ (...)
^^^tine^^^r absurd, in the judgment of true and candid Philosophers.

I confess when I writ that Book, I did not expect such a return as this, and
yet I shall say, if I could have foreseen it, I would not have desisted from
that Enterprise; (for I think it would not have been according to my duty (...)
have concealed from my Country, (...) thing so generally useful) lest wanton
wits should trouble me with starting vain and frivolous questions about it: nor
cerminly should I have found such measure, if any well-bred Scholar, had
through difference from me in any particular und^^^aken it. Notions in
Philosophy are but Entia Rationis, and so do vary according as men apprehend
them; and thereupon it is, that oftentimes by ca^illing wits, they become
Subjects of Dispute; yea and sometimes among the Ingenious and Learned. Yet it
is ever the safest, to adhere to the most Learned and Famed Men that treat of
those Subjects, especially if there be a consent among them, and they such as
could not conspire to deceive the World, nor get advantage by it. And this was
my care in the compiling of that Book (wherein notwithstanding this return, I
repent NOT ONE Sentence) to hold close to the Authority of the most Learned or
Right Reason, in all things submitting to the more Wise and Learned. And in
Truth I profess, I did not at that time consult these Chemical Authors, I have
now an occasion to revolve in this Dispute about these Minerals; whom yet I
find concur with me in all I have said concerning them.

But to return to my Antagonist, who ( P. 6, and 7.) is forced to confess, That
a Mineral or Metal, while young and in solutis principiis, or in fieri, and in
its Concrete Juice, may be imbibed by a Current of Water, especially if it has
been acuated by an Esurine Salt; which is the same I have said in my Book, and
have now again proved concerning this Spring.

Yet ( P. 10.) where he has been referring to what I say concerning the Vapors
of Vitriol, and the Acidity which from thence the Water has imbibed (he says)
he cannot pass the Notion over without a smile; I am glad W. S. is so merry, I
suspect by and by he will be found to be ridiculous. But in truth, when he comes
in that Page to be serious, he appears a Fool in earnest, while he will have
the addition of Galls to be that which gives the Inky smell to the Water, when
indeed the Water yields that smell, while it is clear and new-drawn out of the
Fountain. A scrious Definition of Ink.
And seeing Mr. Simpson tells us he is serious, let us a little more observe
what he says, for probably we may find somewhat worth hearing. Here he gives us
a gallant Definition of Ink in these words: viz. It is a solution of Vitriol
precipitated, or made opacous by the addition of Galls, whose stipticity makes
the DIAPHANEOUS Texture of the Particles in the Vitrioline solution desert
their former posture, and muster in a confused OPACOUS manner, filling those
interstices with solid Particles, which before were kept transparent, by the
fluid parts of the Water, equally contempered. Is not here good sport? This
brings to my mind the Definition of a Window, which another Son of Rhombus gave
forth in a Pulpit, on occasion of St. Paul's being let down out of the Window
in a Basket. A Window, which he styled a Fenestre, is a Diaphanous part of an
Edifice, erected by the manual operation of an Architect, for the Introduction
of Illumination through an Opake Body into the Concavity of the Unequal Organ of
the Intellestual Animal.

But that which next disgusts him, is, That I discourse of Vitriol and Iron
apart, and have not included one of them in the other, which he would have
looked upon as a point of Philosophy in good earnest. ( P. 10.) It had not been
so in earnest; nor do I at all believe him if I had done so, neither I think
will any rational man that reads him, since it is apparent he was resolved to
quarrel right or wrong. I pray Sir Simpson are Iron and Vitriol all one? I
think they do as really differ as your Knife and your Ink: Vitriol and Iron not
the same thing.
I speak not of Factitious Vitriol, but Natural, which is in Scarbrough Spaw,
or which you saw break out of the Cliffe near the Well, having an eminent
Acidity whereby it bites the Tongue, and never came under the hands of a
Chemist, or into any furnace save that of Nature. Do not all Authors as well
Chemical as others that treat of them, do it severally? It Is needless to cite
them, and indeed it would be endless. And their Virtues are as several, and
therefore this Water having imbibed them both, has Virtues from them both, and
on that account necessarily exacted the Description of them both.

Generat natura salem, says Paracelsus (cap. de Vitriolo) Vitriolum dictum. Hoc
genus peculiare est, a caeteris salibus separatum, diversas etiam a caetero
sale virtutes possidens. Nature produces a Salt called Vitriol, being a
peculiar kind differing from all other Salts, and having Virtues diverse from
them all. After the same manner do speak all that treat of it. As Galen lib. 9.
de Simp. Med. fac. and Mathiolus l. 5. c. 74. Sennert. Epit. Not. Scient. l. 5.
c. 12. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 34. c. 12. Renodaeus de Mat. Med. lib. 2. c. 5. And
Paracelsus treating of Medicinal Water ( lib. 3. de Nature. Aqu. c. ult. p.
270.) He says great care should be taken that the Nature of Stones, Metals, or
Minerals, etc. which are imbibed by the Water should be exactly observed; for
so only shall the quality and virtue of the Waters that run through them be
well understood. His words are, Summum ergo studium esse debet, ut Natura
Lapidum, Metallorum, etc. exact teneatur, sic enim fiet ut Aquarum ex illis
genitarum, conditio ac vis probe cognita sit. Now if I had described the
Virtues of the Water from Iron only, or from Vitriol alone, since that Vitriol
which we have here, is not that which is made out of Iron, but produced by
Nature it self; discovering it self both in the Water to the Taste and Smell,
and in the Cliffe to the Eye, being a Mineral of its own kind, and Iron a
Metal, I had not done it according to reason.

Moreover Paracelsus ( lib. 1. de praepar. P. 194.) treating of several
preparations of Iron, viz. one with Salt, a second with Alome, and a third with
Vitriol, lays down his Receipt, viz. Rec. Limatur. ferri, lib. 2. Aqu. Vitrioli
lib. 3. Reduc. in digestionem, etc. and he makes 3 Virtues to arise out of
them; viz. Virtus Styptica, Constrictiva, and Exiccativa. How different these
are among themselves let Sir S. examine. But certainly he must draw its Virtues
from its composition with Vitriol, having something from the Vitriol, and
something from the Iron; or else he might as well never have joined them.

So Scroderus (in his Pharmac. Med. Chym. lib. 3. cap. 11.) de ferro having
laid down several preparations of Crystal of Mars, with Spirit of Salt and
Sulphur; after the same manner (says he) Fiunt and Crystalli Martis cum Spiritu
Vitrioli, sic habes Magisterium Chalybis Vitriolatum.

So Sennertus (cap. de Tinctur.) in the Extraction of the Tincture of Iron
joins Vitriol, p. 1394.)

Thus Mattaeus Martinus de Scorbuto, puts them both together into one Recipe. (
Intent. 3) And so Riverius (in his Praxis Med. (cap. de Fluxu Hepatico) joins
them together. And again (cap. de Hepat. obstructione.) Sed prae caeteris
omnibus Medicamentis, ad delendas obstructiones inveteratas maxim conferunt
remedia ex tartaro, vitriolo, and chalybe conflata. Then he goes on to tell of
several preparations made out of each of them, as distinct: and further adds,
Vitriolo autem Efficaciam ostendunt Aquae naturales acidae and vitriolatae,
quarum usus frequentissimus and utilissimus est, in omnibus morbis ab
obstructionibus Oriundis. That is to say, The Efficacy of Vitriol is best
discovered in the Natural Vitrioline Waters, whose use is most frequent, and
most effectual in all Diseases that arise from Obstructions.

Indeed nothing is more ordinary than to find our best Authors joining Vitriol
and Iron together, which certainly upon Mr. S. his Principle, they should not
do, if they be both one thing. From all which it is to be inferred, that they do
differ in kind; and since I find them both here, I ought in all reason to treat
of them accordingly. Had I mentioned Iron alone, I had done little; for what
would it have been better than a meet Chalybeath Water, which might have been
of some virtue indeed to open Obstructions, but not so penetrative; like a
Rasor, good Metal, but had wanted an edge, besides that it had not been full to
the point. And if I had mentioned Vitriol alone, it had been like an edge
indeed, but without the Metal wherein it was set.

But what have I done herein more than others that treat of such like Waters?
Dr. Heers says (in his Spadacrene P. 34.) That the German Spaws consist of
Iron, Vitriol, and Ochre, thereby making Iron and Vitriol distinct as I have
done. So Frambesarius and Ryetius, etc.

But he accounts, This Vitriol to be so near of Kin to Iron, as that it is
produced out of it. I reply, that hitherto he denies them both, and therefore
his Objection is impertinent, while I am proving them both. Besides if this
were so, then they would differ as Materia and Materiatum, which sure are not
the same, but may be discoursed of severally; or else the whole Current of
Philosophers are in a great Error, and must learn of Sir Simpson.

That this Spring is of an Azure or Sky. Color it is plain to the Eye; from
whence has it taken it, but from the imbibed Minerals, among which I say (I
think) it is the Vitriol, Iron, and Alome; and my reason for it is, Because
these being infused, do contribute such a Color to Water (but especially I
judge it to be from the Vitriol.) But this man is so severe he will not allow
me to say what I think, but cries out on it as Precarious Philosophy, and want
of Chemical Experiments. In the former I assure him, I own nothing but what is
grounded in sound Reason or Sense, nor do I in the particulars we are treating
of: And as for the latter, I know as much as I need, and perhaps he will think
by and by I know too much in knowing him. However I have other necessary
employment for my time, so as I cannot have leisure to lay it out in making
Mechanical Experiments: I shall leave that to others or him, who has little
else to do.

But yet that Mr S. may know that this is not precarious, but others are of the
same mind, I refer him to Kircher ( lib. 6. de Vitriolo) who says, That
Vitriol does give such a pure Limpid and Azure Color to Water; and he gives a
reason for it; viz. Quod grossiores aquae paries in Chalcanthi incisiva and
subtiliativa dissipatae subsideant, atque ob corpusculorum vitriolatorum
diaphoenam and vitream substantiam, aqualucidior splendidior limpidiorque
reddatur.

How to discern Vitriol in the Spring.
But Mr. S. queries still ( P. 11.) How came the Doctor to know that Vitriol and
Iron were ingredients, seeing the Badges of distinction clash? etc. To this I
think I have said enough already to satisfy any intelligent man, and yet
further thus briefly.

First, As to Vitriol, I knew this to be there from the Eminent Acidity of the
Water; and though I did not learn this out of Paracelsus, yet I find him
concurring with me in judging by this Token: ( De Nature. Baln. Tract. 3. c. 9.)
Thermae nonnullae sunt quae acetositatem and dulcedinem babent. Hae si ex
nativa constitutione tales sunt, ex vitriolo oriuntur. Id enim si ex prima sua
materia resolvitur, acetosas aquas profert. To wit, There are some sort of
Baths or Waters that have an Acidity and Sweetness in them (I suppose he means
a pleasant Acidity) these if from their Natural Constitution they are so, do
arise from Vitriol; for if it happen to be resolved: from its first matter in
Waters, it makes them to become Acide. Vnde Vitrioli virtutes illis assignandae
sunt, and therefore, says he, the properties of Vitriol are to be ascribed to
the Waters. ( P. 189.)

So Fallopius counts the Acidity to be a sufficient token of the imbibition of
Vitriol ( De Therm. Aq. cap. 7. p. 217.) who treating of the Spaw in Germany,
and that at Rome (concerning which I have met with several Gentlemen speaking,
That they are not so Acid as this at Scarbrough.) He says, Arbitror eas esse
acidas, quia habeant in se Chalcanthum purissimum, therefore I think them Acid,
because they have pure Vitriol in them.

Another token of Vitriol is that Aporrhaea Mineralis or Vitrioline Vapor,
which any one of an indifferent smell may observe, which is somewhat like that
of Ink, though more pure.

A third Argument is that deep Tincture that the Water takes from Gall, more
than any other I have seen or read of, which cannot come from the Alome
(notwithstanding Mr. Simpson's persuasion, as I shall evince in its due place)
nor any other of the Minerals.

And lastly, There is in this Cliffe within Six score Paces of the Spring a
Vitrioline Salt, which sweats out of the Cliffe, of Dark Yellow Color, very
sharp to the Taste, even far beyond Nitre or Alome; which affords good ground
of probability that it is in the Spring.

Iron in Scarbr. Spaw.
Touching Iron, it is (me think) plain that here it is in its Body, which is
precipitated to the bottom of the Vessel, after it has stood some hours
tinctured with Gall, there being in every Gallon near a Dram, when the Water is
evaporated; which being calcined yields a scoria like Iron, and of Reddish
Color, as I shall have occasion to make out by and by. Besides that there is a
Body of the like Nature and Virtue, that falls to the bottom of the Vessels;
wherein this Water is carried abroad into the Country; the like to which falls
to the bottom of the Vessel, wherein the Water is set upon the Fire for
Evaporation, upon the first approach of the hear.

Again, The Blackish Color, which is imparted to the Excrements of those that
drink of these Waters, denotes Iron, it being peculiar to all the preparations
of Iron, which we have occasions to use.

And lastly, The Cliffe out of which this Spring flows, is plainly Iron, which
though at the first when it falls it be like ordinary Earth, yet at length by
the weather it becomes hard as Iron and heavy, and is fusible in the Fire. To
all these I might add, the singular Virtues which are evident in the Water for
Hypocondriack Diseases, the Stone, and advancing the Tone of the Stomach, both
in point of Appetite and Digestion, do sufficiently make out the presence of
them both.

Thus much may suffice to be said concerning the Exceptions made by Mr. S.
against the first way I mentioned, whereby a Water might imbibe the Vapors of
Minerals. The second is, when some of their Juice is dissolved in the Water,
and that is while the Minerals are young, or in solutis principiis. This he
passes over. Is it not kindness I can please him in any thing? Of the Corrosion
of the Substance of Metals.
But he quarrels at my third way, and that is by corrosion of the substances of
the Minerals mentioned by Galen ( lib. 1. de Simpl. Med. fac. cap ult.) and
this I said is done by the help of the Concrete Juices, which extract and
corrode Mineral substances. Here we find a Galenical way (says W. S.) of
Selution, it is out of their road to discourse of these Mineral Solutions, for
want of Chemical Experiments, which they are not at leisure to take notice of.
Ay! this is the Choak-Pear, the very Name of Galen is a Bugbear to W. S. I find
him ever running into a rage, where I had occasion to name him. This is that
which frets him, that the Galenists meddle with these Notions; and I confess I
am not at very great leisure now to trouble myself with them, save that I am
willing to step out of my Road to curb the Cracks of a Thraso.

Nor is there any Contradiction in what I say in this Assertion, viz. That the
Concrete Juices corrode, and extract Mineral and Metallic Substances. For the
Concrete Juice of Vitriol which is of a Corrosive property, being imbibed in a
Spring Water, will corrode other Minerals or Metals; (so says Helmont himself
in the place before cited) that it passes through, as Iron and Alome, whose
Bodies are firmer, especially before Consolidation, which is the case of Iron
here, as now I made out, and also of the Alome: for the Solvent and Agent is
Vitriol, the Soluble and Patient is Iron. And in this Water upon Evaporation,
or otherwise (as I have newly made out) we have the very Substance of Minerals
and Metals. And to this agrees Fallopius who was Chemist enough ( de M^tal. P.
216.) who treating de Balneo Aponitano, and that which is at Co^sena, says, In
istis Aquis dispersa sunt ramenta and minimae particulae lapidis; In those
Waters are dispersed some Shreds and small Particles of Stone; and afterward
in the same Chapter he gives an account how it comes to pass that they imbibe
Metals, viz. Quia non sunt adeo dura and solida, ut in hac terrae superficie;
viz. because they are not so hard and solid within the Earth, as they are upon
the Superficies. And thus also say Galen, Vitruvius, and Livius.

In ( P. 13.) he repeats what he said before of his Esurine Salt, or Ens Primum
( P. 3.) and how that it cannot imbibe any more Minerals than one, which I have
there with good reason exploded, and sufficiently confuted. And these will
appear much more frivolous, when I shall by and by discover him confessing,
that This very Water at Scarbrough has imbibed four Minerals or Metals, viz.
Vitriol, Iron, Alome, and Nitre.

But he frets at the Example I mention concerning Aquafortis, which corrodes
the substance of a Metal put into it, and converts it to its own nature;
whereby it is become all liquid, the solid Metal being become fluid as its
Menstruum. This Example does sufficiently illustrate what I am designing it
for, notwithstanding the Metal upon the Evaporation of the Menstruum, may be
found in the bottom. A thing I no more doubted of, then I do the residence of
the Minerals of this Spaw, upon the Evaporation of the Water.

In ( P. 15.) he proceeds to examine the fourth way, Minerals joined to Water
by Confusion.
whereby I say a Water may imbibe the Nature and Virtue of a Mineral or Metal,
and that is by Confusion, changing the Substance of the Mineral into Water, and
this I say in my Book is, when the Mineral is of so liquable a Nature, as that
it is capable of being converted into Water.
Here W. S. is extremely severe and abusive, calling it a Rustical Notion, with
a parcel of base language against me, unbecoming a Scholar or a Sober Man.
Indeed in my Second Impression I had thought to have left out this, because of
its near coincidence with the former, but I was outrun by the Printer, having
been abroad some days. Nevertheless I can defend it to be agreeable to reason
and the expressions of the Learned.

It Is plain that a Mineral that is dissoluble in Water, as Vitriol, Nitre,
Salt, may be so sully taken into the Water, as that the Water and Mineral are
confusedly joined together, every drop of the Water having something of the
Mineral Particles, and every Particle of them mixed with the Water. And thus
any sort of Mineral Earth dissolved in Water, may be said to be confusedly
joined to it, so as one cannot see to the bottom, though with standing a while,
or filtration, or evaporation, they may be separated. And thus a little Gall
put into this Spaw Water, makes it become confused, while yet the Minerals are
in it.

Proved by Authority of Learned Writers.
Let me now produce the Authority of Learned Writers. Fallopius treating of this
Subject of Water taking in Metals and Minerals, mentions several ways, and one
is by Confusion ( De Therm. Aq. cap. 7. p. 212.) His words are these,
Alter vero est, quod quaedam Aquae sunt, quae habent quidem Metalla suscepta
pariter in Terrae concavitatibus inter fluendum; tamen Metalla illa non sunt
cum Aquis istis been commixta, -- sed sunt potius cum Aquis CONFUSA. To wit,
Another way is, that there are some Waters, which have in them Metals, which
they have taken in as they pass in the Cavities of the Earth, yet those Metals
are not well mixed with those Waters, but are rather CONFVSED with the Waters;
then he goes on, Aquas autem quae hoc modo non vere mixta, sed CONFUSA habent
in se Metalla, plures habemus, and inter alias est Aponitana, etc. And we have
many Waters, which after this manner have not the Minerals properly mixed, but
CONFVSED in them; of which sort is that which he calls Aqua Aponitana, which he
says is of great use and esteem, and has been so of old; and in the same Page,
Secundus igitur mixtionis modus est, quando Metalla non vere commiscentur, sed
CONFUNDUNTUR cum Aquae substantia. To wit, The second way (says he) whereby a
Water takes in a Metal, is when the Metals are not properly and truly mixed,
but CONFOVNDED with the Substance of the Water. And this way he interprets to
be, when the Substance of the Metal falls to the bottom of the Vessel wherein
the Water is, of it self, and without any Art.

Thus the Aqua Aponitana has imbibed Lime Stone, and that of Corsena he says
has shreds of Marble. Yea and the profound Kircherus himself (in his Mundus
Subter. P. 347.) speaks to the same purpose, and almost in the same words;
making this one way whereby a Water Spring may take in a Mineral or Metal;
Nonnullae Aquae medicatae sant, quae non perfecta sed CONFUSA mixtura
constituuntur, id est, quae sensibilibus variorum Mineratium corpusculis
scatent, and nullo negorio ab eis separaeri possunt. And a little after, Sunt
qu^dam Aquae, quae partim vera rerum, quas continent mixtura, partim confusa
constant. And again, Hoc pacto m^ltae sunt thermae quae calcarium lapidem a se
separant, utpo^e CONFUSANEA quadam ratione lis i^di^um. And after the very same
manner has this Water of Scarbrough imbibed Iron, which either by a little
Gall, or Carriage at distance, will fall to the bottom; while yet the rest will
require Evaporation to separate them from the Water, except the Vitrioline
Spirits which are so volatile that they soon fly away. -- After the same manner
does Dr. Jordan a Learned Chemist discourse in his Natural Baths.

I can also confirm the use of this term out of Galen, if my Antagonist can
have patience to hear his Name ( Lib. 1. de Elem. ad finem) where treating of
the Four Elements meeting in every Mixed Body. Ea tota per se CONFUNDI, and suis
little substantiis misceri docet. He says, They are all CONFOVNDED and mixed
with one another substances; which he illustrates by the similitude of the
mixture of Wine and Water; both whose parts are so confusedly broken into
Minute Particles, as that there is a mutual action and passion, and
participation of the qualities of each other. By this time (I doubt not) the
Reader sees the weakness of the Young Man in this particular, wherein he lays
so much stress; and how unfit he is to be Judge in matters of this Nature, who
is so great a stranger to the expressions of Learned Writers and sound reason.

A severe Censure.
And because speaking of the solution of Nitre and Salt in Water, I said they
are of so liquable a Nature, as that they are capable of being converted into
Water, as if they were nothing but Water, he would infer ( P. 16.) That
therefore I will have them to be perfectly turned into Water it self. Can any
man think that I am so void of sense as to intend any such thing; however it is
enough for him to fall upon me with base and bitter invectives. The Reader may
judge my purpose was to speak in all things to Vulgar Capacities, and therefore
I was necessarily to be plain, and to refer them (in this thing which is not so
material) rather to the external senses and outward appearance, than to the
intrinsic nature of the thing it self. I endeavor that I may not return any
railing accusation, yet cannot but admire at the malicious spirit of the man.


I find himself using the very same expression concerning Iron and other
Metals, which by force of fire become liquid and fluid in the Crucible like
Water. ( P. 22.) Does not he think, that no man that is short of a mad man,
would believe that he intends the Metals are turned into Water? And so when
there he says again, The Metals flow together with it by the actuation of their
Mercurial part, as if it were nothing but Mercury; does it follow that he
intends it is perfectly turned into Mercury? Why should Sir S. cavil at my
expression, and infer that from it, which the most ordinary capacity cannot but
take in a right sense; when he himself within three leaves uses the very same
liberty of expression, which needs the same Candid Interpretation? This brings
to my mind a merry story which I know to be true. A Country Wife complained to
a Justice of Peace of her Husband, that he wasted their Estate in Ale: The good
man answered the Justice, that whereas he spent a Groat, his Wife spent two;
hereupon the Justice sent for her, and told her what her Husband had said; O
Sir, (said she) it never angers me what I do my self, but that he should spend
any thing it vexes me to the heart.

(Page 18.) Dissolve Vitriol in Water, filtre it so as it becomes a clear
solution -- Then he goes on, and after some small process, he says, The
Sediment gives a Terra Vitrioli, or Metalline Earth of Vitriol. I desire here
the Reader to take notice, how this Terra Vitrioli comes from Vitriol dissolved
in Water. Now look into ( P. 359.) and there Sir Simpson tells us, that for
farther satisfaction, he made more Trials of the Water of Scarbrough Spaw, and
the first precipitation was a Reddish Sediment, which he calls Terra Vitrioli,
and whence that, but from Vitriol which is dissolved in the Water, the very
thing which I had asserted in my Book, and which he has all this while been
contending against, with so much vehemence and bitterness of Spirit against me.

Now I appeal to the Judicious Reader, whether thus far I have not defended
these two Principles of the Water, viz. Iron and Vitriol, against all the
allegations Sir S. has brought against them. He has ( P. 19.) one Argument
more, Mr. S. his Main Fort.
wherein he thinks he thrusts home; the rest probably he might supect would not
hold me, and therefore he has here one which is worth them all; He says it is
instar omnium, as being demonstrative and confirmed by Autopsy; and this is it,
His Friend the Chemical Apothecary at York, took some Minerals, which I had
taken out of the Water of Scarbrough after Evaporation, and gave him; these he
put into a Crucible, and calcined for the space of almost three hours, and all
this while without the least appearance of any Red Color, or the least
foot-step of either Colcotar of Vitriol, or Crocus of Iron; it became fixed and
permanent in the Fire, and lost little of its weight, it also became whiter in
Color. Now for certain (says Sir S.) if there had been any thing of Vitriol or
Iron in it, the discovery would have been made, and it forced to confess its
Nature, by its Yellow, Red, or Purple Color, with so great force of Fire.

Here we see where Sir Simpson's strength lies, even in a Hair, Battered to the
ground.
which I shall as easily snap, and so put this proud Fencer by his best Guard.
Now if I prove that Vitriol will calcine White; then his Argument is invalid,
and this I shall do, both by the heat of the Fire, and also of the Sun.

First, By the heat of the Fire it will be found to calcine White, if he will
believe the Testimony of his own beloved Zwelfer, who is indeed one of the
Principal Writers in Chemical Matters; in his Pharmacopoea Regia ad finem,
describing the Composition of a Cerate, which he calls Ceratum magis durabile
ad Hernias, he has these words,

-- Vitrioli Veneris pulverizati, and ad albedinem parumper calcinati 1 b.
Secondly, It will calcine White by the heat of the Sun, if he will believe the
Virtuosi of France, who in their Conference 238, treating of the making of
Sympathetical Powder, do say it is made with Roman Vitriol, which they beat not
over small, and lay it in the Sun upon Papers for the space of fifteen days,
during which time (say they) it is calcined into an exquisite whiteness. If he
will not trust them, let him ask his Chemical Apothecary, if he have not of it
in his Shop, who I believe can let him see it; so as now there is left him no
way to evade, but by questioning the Authority and Verity of these Authors, as
afterward we shall find him in an Argument I pinch him from Doctor Heylin, in
my Discourse about the Original of Springs.

But I shall not rest here, I do very much wonder that Mr. Simpson or the
Chemical Apothecary (whom of the two we account the better Chemist) could
expect that these Minerals, being so much diluted with Water, should calcine
either into a Colcotar or Crocus, that they should discover any other color
than White; for upon their dissolution in this Water-Spring, they must
necessarily deposite what other Color they had, if they will believe their
Grand Master Paracelsus, whose Authority in this matter is Authentic enough.
He (in lib. 4. cap. 1. p. 271. de Aquis crescentibus) treating of this very
Subject; Videtis (inquit) Metalla and Mineralia similitudinem nullam habere cum
corporibus illis, ex quibus generata sunt: You see that Metals and Minerals
(dissolved in Water) have no resemblance with those Bodies out of which they
are generated; and presently after he explains himself more particularly to my
purpose, Videtis Vitriolum aliud viride, aliud ceruleum, ac probe coloratum
esse: Id si in Aquam resolvatur colorem omnem deponit. That is to say, You see
one sort of Vitriol is Green, another Blew; but if it be resolved in a Spring
Water, it lays down all its Color. And he goes on to illustrate this by Gold,
Similiter and auri color flavus est, qui tamen in transmutation fit purpureus;
si autem per transmutationem hanc resolvatur, tunc Aquam nullam tingit amplius,
nec colorem in se continet. In like manner (says he) though the Color of Gold
be Yellow, and in transmutation it becomes Purple; yet if it be resolved by
this transmutation that is in Spring Water (for that is the Subject he is
treating of) it tinges the Water no more, nor does it keep its own Color. Now
I wonder these Gentlemen being so great Chemists, should not be better read in
Paracelsus.

Had these been perfect Minerals in their kind (I mean this Vitriol and Iron)
they might with good reason have expected they should have calcined of a Red or
Purple Color; as we see if perfect Vitriol, whether White Vitriol or Copperas,
be dissolved in Water, and that Water be filtred never so clear, the Water
being evaporated leaves a Reddish Sediment, and that will calcine Red, as I
have tried; but if the Mineral, viz. Vitriol, or the Iron be imperfect, and
only in succo primitivo, no such thing can be expected; for they admit thereby
of a change both in their Taste and other respects too, as if indeed they were
a quite other thing. And thus says also Paracelsus ( lib. 3. De Not. Aq. Tract.
2. p. 265.) In istiusmodi destructione corporis Mineralium, ipse quoque gustus
dissipatur. Then he goes on to particulars, Sic in Aluminis resolutione
observatis, quae Alumini non convenient. Itidem and in resolutione Vitrioli
decedere videtis, quae Vitriolo similia non sunt, etsi ejusdem substantiae and
materiae sunt. To wit, Thus in the resolution of Alome into Water, you observe
some things that are not agreeable to Alome. And so again in Vitriol, you see
some digressions that are not like Vitriol, while yet they are of the same
substance and matter. And this is as plain in this case of ours, as if
Paracelsus had designed it purposely, and intended to correcting his followers
in this their mistake. For these Minerals are not here corporally but
percolated, as he himself expresses it (in the 13th cap. of his 3 d Book De
Not. Aqu.) Sic and persape accidit ut Minera Vitrioli, aut Aluminis, aut
Sulphuris, aut Antimonii concurrat, non quidem corporaliter probe tamen
percolata. Now the eminent Digression that falls out in these two Minerals
Vitriol and Iron, as imbibed by this Water at Scarbrough, is this; that since
they are not here in their perfect Bodies, but exceedingly percolated and
diluted; they therefore do not calcine into a Colcotar or Crocus, not Red, but
White.


And this is the ground of the great puzzle some ingenious Chemists of my
acquaintance are put to, in judging of the Minerals of the Spaw, and
particularly Mr. Samuel Johnston a Physician at Beverley in this Country of
very good repute (concerning whom I shall have farther occasion to speak anon)
from whom this very day while I write this, I received three sorts of
preparations out of the Minerals of this Spaw, viz. a Chrystalline Sabulum as
he calls it; Terra Vitrioli, which I rather think to be a product of the Iron
than the Vitriol; and the Essential Salt. This last he says he cannot tell what
to think of it, being such an Anomalous Salt; differing so much either from the
Natural or Factitious Kinds of Alom, Vitriol, or Nitre, though in some
properties it agrees with each of them. The reason of the scruple is this,
which Paracelsus has clearly made out, that here they are not corporally, but
percolated; not perfect in their several Kinds, but in succo primitivo; not
single, but all mixed together; which as yet I could never attain to separate:
And therefore this Salt is nothing so Acide as Vitriol, nor Emetick; nor
Stiptick as Alome; not inflammable as Nitre, notwithstanding it does shoot in
Stirias: I Will only add this, that they are all here, though in fractis,
imminutis and debilitatis viribus, and the virtue of the Water must be judged
from them all. Paracelsus says ( cap. 1. De Not. Balu.) treating of such
Waters, Quod sint resoluta Minera ex Corpore to quod simile est Vitriolo,
Alumini and Sali and tamen id non est: ita emergunt ipsarum virtutes secundum
harum crium simplicium potentias. P. 186.

But to return to my Antagonist, who is here managing his best Argument, which
he calls instar omnium, in contradiction to these two Minerals Iron and and
Vitriol, which he says ought not to be White; I shall now refer him to
Fallopius de Metal. page 217. who treating of such like Waters as this, tells
of one that is near Rome in agro Volaterrano, which he says has imbibed a Juice
that is white, and it is the Juice of Vitriol, not of Alome; his own words are,
In illa Aqua est Succus, and Albus, and est Succus Calcanthi, non autem
Aluminis. Now its very probable that this white Juice would make a white Salt
by Calcination, after its separation from the Menstruum.


To the same purpose also speaks the Acute Zuelfer in his Appendix to his
Animadversions, P. 95. discoursing of Calcined Metals, whether they yield a
Salt or no. He determines that the firm Metals being calcined with violent fire
(among which he reckons Iron) will not calcine into a Powder, out of which Salt
may be extracted; but in Scorias and Cr^cos convertuntur, neutiquam in Cinerese
quibus verum Sal eliciendum. Now if so, why then should these men expect that
these Minerals should calcine in Scorias and Crocos, since they had not here to
do with perfect Metals or Minerals, but only a Concrete Juice of Metals and
Minerals dissolved in Water, which now they discern plainly does calcine into a
Powder, out of which may be extracted a Salt of very great virtue in opening
Obstructions, and correcting the Ferments of the Stomach and other natural
parts, as I have frequently experienced, and have expressly pointed at in my
Book of the Spaw, P. 152. where I said, and I know that out of these Mineral
Salts which are separated from this Water, some very useful preparations might
be made, to be safely joined with other Vehicles to good purpose.

And thus again Zuelfer in his Animadversions upon the 20th Class. of the
Augustine Dispensatory, treating of the Calcining of Vitriol, says, It will
calcine Red or of a Dark Brown Color; but he blames those Chemists that
expecting to make further use of it, do use to edulcorate it with Water; Sive
enim vi astringente sive aperiente polleat, ille tota per edulcorationem
tollitur, quippe utraque vis vi Sale Metallico Vitriolato in aquaresolubili
consistit: For whatever quality it has, whether astringent or aperient, its all
lost by edulcoration, and all the virtue which was in the Metallic Salt, does
consist in the Water, into which it is resolved. And so it is here, the Vitriol
thus resolved into Water, is become in all respects a quite other thing, the
virtue thereof being imbibed in the Water.

The Water black with Gall.
But I wonder all this while, that neither of these Gentlemen have said one word
of the calcining of that Black Sediment (which I mentioned before) that falls
to the bottom of the Vessel after it has received a Tincture from the Gall:
This had they done, it would have given them no small light, concerning this
very Point, of these two Minerals we are treating about: The Black Tincture is
received by the Vitriol, that which is precipitated to the bottom by the
Stipticity of the Gall, is the Iron: this I calcined in a Crucible in very
strong Fire, and it becomes of a Dark Brown Color, and turns to a gross Powder
hard as a Cinder, and is no other than the Scoria of Iron: After Calcination I
dissolved it in pure Spring Water, and let it stand till the next day; I also
tried whether the Water being very Brackish, would take a Tincture from Gall,
but it did not; so as I conclude it has nothing of Vitriol: This Water I
evaporated away, and it afforded a Brownish Floscule very sharp and biting upon
the Tongue; which Color since it has it not from the Vitriol, for the reason
aforesaid; so nor from the Gall; and therefore I judge it to have it from the
Iron.

Another thing I observed in calcining all the whole Body of the Minerals, as
they are come from the Water after Evaporation: That though they do calcine
Whitish, yet there are here and there Laminea ferrea or Flakes of Iron
interspersed among the Calcined Powder, broad and thin and like those that fly
off from Iron while under the Smiths Hammer: From all which it does plainly
appear that here is both Iron and Vitriol, notwithstanding this Man's Denials
hitherto.


I shall for the determining this Dispute about the Minerals calcining White,
produce but one Argument more, which to him is Argumentum ad hominem: I sent
for 10 Gallons of the sweet Spaw at Knaresbrough, which by his own Confession,
( P. 136, and 137.) has imbibed a Vitriol of the Minera of Iron: This Water I
evaporated away, having first cleared it from all fabulous earthly mixture;
what remained in the bottom I put into a Crucible, and calcined it, and it did
not differ from the Color of the Scarbrough Minerals, nor had it any Colcotar
of Vitriol or Crocus of Iron, nor any such Laminae as those other afforded: I
weighed the Powder after Calcination, which was about a Dram and an half: Then
I dissolved it in a little Spring Water, that it might imbibe what Salt it had
in it, which upon Evaporation I found to be White, and not above 17 Grains in
Weight. Where by the way let me observe to the Reader, that Three Pints of the
Spaw at Scarbrough has imbibed more of the Mineral and Metalline Juices, than
Ten Gallons of that of Knaresbrough, and hence it is that it is far more
operative, and yet every whit as pleasant to the Palate, and as safe to be
drunk.

Now that which I infer from hence is, that since Mr. Sympson grants, that this
has Vitriol and Iron, and yet calcines White, the other may as well have them,
notwithstanding it does calcine White; and so his main Argument is altogether
invalid.

I have been longer in this Argument than at first I intended, because this is
his main Bulwark, which I thought fit to level to the ground; whereby I think
it appears to the Intelligent Reader, that it had but a Sandy Foundation, and
all the noise we have from it, was but as the blurt of a Paper-Gun charged with
White Powder.

Mr. S his contradiction.
Well! Notwithstanding all this, Mr. S. concludes the Section, Thus we discard
these two Minerals of his Spaw, viz. Vitriol and Iron, as to the Body of them.
To which I reply, I have one Argumentum ad hominem still left. If I point out
Mr. S. CONTRADICTING himself in this Assertion, and confessing both these
Minerals to be there, then I hope the Reader will be satisfied, that what I
affirmed in my Book concerning them is true, and all this ill language ought to
have been spared: Habemus reum confitentem: Turn to P. 39. his words are, Nor
is this variation of Color by Galls a sufficient argument of the presence of
the Minera of Iron, He confesses Iron
although I do not deny it to be an Ingredient. Now turn to P. 44. where he
grant that there is a Solution of the Minera of Iron in this Spaw, his words
are, For this Mineral Acidity is the very Solvent in the Water, which pervading
a Minera of Iron, makes a slight solution of it, and being equally contempered
together, makes up the Body of the Spaw, etc. So concerning Vitriol, P. 359.
where he says, and Vitriol.
That he might inform himself more satisfactorily of the true Constituent parts
of the Water at Scarbrough, he sent for 3 Gallons and 3 Pintes, which he let
stand a while to settle; whose first precipitation was a Reddish Sediment, from
which I filtered the Water (says he) and this dried in the Sun, proved to be a
Red Earth or kind of Ochre, or rather Terra Vitrioli.

By this time the Reader discerns the folly of the YOUNG GENTLEMAN, and the
injustice of his quarrel against me thus far: I suppose wherever I find him
disputing any more as I pass, against these two Minerals, I may spare to
rehearse what has already been said by me to prove them, unless his Expressions
do administer new matter.

Of the properties of Vitriol
P. 20. The Doctor proceeds to tell us the Nature and Virtues of these Minerals:
First, Of Vitriol, he says it is eminently hot, of a biting and adust quality,
etc. according to the account he receives from Galen, Dioscorides, Mr S.
impatient to hear of Galen, should etc.
etc. enough to tire one in the reading, etc. but methinks the Doctors long
experience in re medica, should ever this have furnished him with plenty of
Observations of the Worth and Virtue of so Noble a Mineral.

Would not a little more modesty well become this Young Man, than thus to fly
in my Face without a Cause? I have already declared my design in writing that
Book, was not to make long Discourses either Philosophical or Medicinal, since
it would not have suited Vulgar Readers, to whom I was to write; and therefore
it would have been abs re to have discoursed concerning the Analytical parts of
Vitriol, or any other of the Materials found in the Water, or their
preparations. He cannot but think my experience in re medica might minister to
me some Observations concerning the Nature of them all: but I thought it most
proper, briefly as I could, to give the sense of our Principal Authors that
treat of them, and particularly of Vitriol; as Galen, Dioscorides, Serapio,
etc. whom he has not the patience to hear named. I know Paracelsus in many
places of his Works extolls it to the Stars, and counts all the Medicines in
the World in ordinary use, trifles in comparison of it: but such rancor does he
show in all his Writings where he treats of it, that I did not think it worth
the while to trouble the Reader with what he says, nor to put him in the same
Rank with those Princes in Physic that I here mention; especially since I did,
in that short rehearsal of its qualities, comprise all the eminent properties
of Natural Vitriol, concerning which I was to speak; referring the Learned
Readers to the Authors themselves concerning their further satisfaction.

Yet because I will please Mr. Simpson, Ill now refer him to Paracelsus, who
will tell him that I have done but as I ought: I mentioned this before, Consult
him therefore ( lib. 3. de Aq. Medicin.) Summum ergo studium esse debet, ut
Natura Lapidum, Metallicorum and similium exact teneatur: fic enim fiet ut
Aquarum ex illis genitarum conditio ac vis, probe cognita sit. Great care ought
to be had, that the Nature of Stones, Metals, and such like, be exactly
observed; for so the condition and virtue of the Waters that have imbibed them,
will be best understood. And in what parts or respect soever, the virtue of
Vitriol consists, it matters not much; its enough that we are sure, that though
full ripe and mature Vitriol be a violent Emetick or Vomit, and in no wise to
be given inwardly without due correction; yet this in our Spaw being unripe and
not come to maturity, is not Emetick, but most safe and full of virtue. And
thus also does Fallopius affirm (de Metal. cap. 7. p. 216.) Habemus quinetiam
aquas qua Calcanthi succum habent admixtum, qualis est aqua illius Balnei quod
vulgo dicitur Bagno al Morbo, in agro Volatterrano, quae tamen aqua tantum
abest ut nocet, ut ad paranda Edelia, ad Balnea conficienda, maxima sit idonea:
assumitur etiam in potum and ad alios plerosque usus adhibetur; i. e. Moreover
we have Waters which have imbibed the Juice of Vitriol, etc. which Water
nevertheless is so far from killing or hurting any man, or so much as provoking
to vomit, as that it is found to be very proper, either for dressing of Meat,
or for Bathing in; it is also drunk inwardly, and is good for many other uses;
and the like he says of several other Springs that have taken in Vitriol, as
that near Rome, and those which we call the German Spaws.

Now assuredly in treating of this and the rest of the Minerals, it is more
satisfaction to the World, that I should acquaint them with the Concurrent
Judgments of all those Learned Authors, than to have obtruded upon them my own
private Experiences or Observations; nor am I so desperate as he, to make
dangerous Experiments upon men's bodies by Minerals; till I have enquired among
sound Authors what opinion Antiquity had of them.

( P. 21.) Here he passes on to make his severe Observations concerning what I
have said about the Temperature and Nature of Iron, and finding me to have
asserted it to be dry in the Third Degree, according to the declared Judgment
of several of the Princes in Physic, and others later Writers. Here (says Sir
Simpson) we see that as the Galenists have their Degrees of the Four Qualities,
by which they feel and handle the Virtues and Properties of Vegetables; so
likewise it seems they reach with them to fathom the Nature of Metals. And then
he runs a Risque of scurrilous language against those whom he calls Galenists
and my self; discovering rather puerile folly to be laughed at with scorn, than
any thing that deserves an Answer.

Of the Four first Qualities.
The Reader is to take notice, That Physicians do ordinarily discourse of all
Simples, whether Vegetables or Minerals, according to the Four first Qualities
as they call them, of Heat, Cold, Dryness, and Moisture, of each of which they
make 4 Degrees; whereby they judge concerning the Temperature of the Simple,
and its operation upon the Body of Man, according to those Four Qualities. Thus
we say Vitriol is hot, that is, its heating: Iron is dry, that is, it is drying.
Now while I say it is dry, I speak the sense of all that treat of it; not only
Galenists but Chemists also. Thus Jacobus de Partibus in his Commentaries upon
Avicen, says it is cold and dry; and Manardus (lib. 16. ep. 5.) and the
learned Kircher (p. 219.) Juxta dominium primarum qualitatum ferrum refrigerare
and siccare asserit; i. e. In respect of the first qualities he declares it to
be cold and dry. But I find a difference among some of them concerning its
Temperature, as to heat and cold. Galen accounts it of the Nature of Earth, and
so it must be cold. ( lib. 9. de Simpl.) So Conciliator, and indeed all agree
in it, except Fallopius (de Metal.) who holds it to be hot, and that because
Scribonius Largus prescribes it in Ulcers of the Bladder, which it cures; yet
not as heating, but as drying: and indeed its evident in Moist Bodies, that the
constant use thereof does very much conduce to the drying up of the superfluous
moisture; yea and all the Chemists go this way. Paracelsus wrote 7 Books de
Gradibus, which begin his 7th Tome; only he owns but 2 Complexions (as he calls
them) viz. Heat and Cold, and will have the other 2 of Dryness and Moisture to
be involved in those; accounting what ever is hot to be dry, and what is cold
to be moist; and (in cap. 8. lib. 2.) he says Iron, of which we speak, is cold
in the third Degree: but that it should also be moist, I think it needs no
Confutation:
however hence it appears that Paracelsus does own these Four Qualities, though
the two later involved in the two former. But it seems W. S. knows nothing of
these things, busying himself more in making a few useless Experiments, than in
considering the Temperature of the Medicines which he uses, or the true Nature
of the Diseases whereto he applies them.

Second Qualities.
Besides these, though not immediately flowing from them, there are others,
which we call Second Qualities: Such are Mollifying, Condensing, Rarefying,
Resolving, Attenuating, Incrassating, Attracting, Repelling, etc. as also some
which we call Third Qualities, Third Qualities.
such are Vomiting, Purging, Expelling the Stone, Provoking Urine, or the like.
Likewise there are others, which we call Occult Qualities, Occult Qualities.
which are found by Experience to produce eminent effects, of which the most
strict Scrutinists into the Secrets of Nature, can give no plain account, but
ordinarily content themselves to say they operate (...); i. e. according to the
property of their whole substance they do good or harm, and into this Class
they refer those that work by Sympathy and Antipathy.

Of Iron and its Virtues in the Spaw.
And now to return to what we are speaking of, viz. Iron, To its drying there is
also joined an opening quality, on which account we use it in opening
Obstructions of the Liver and Mesentery, and in all Hypochondriack Diseases, as
the Dropsy, Scurvy, etc. which he mentions. But to impose it on the Galenists,
as if their chief intention in using of Iron or Steel in the Dropsy (or any
other of those Diseases mentioned by him) were upon the account of its drying
quality, I Will have more charity than to indite him for so great an Ignoramus: I
wish he can acquit himself of a malicious design in saying so. Iron has two
eminent properties, Deoppilative and Astringent; the former lies in a Volatile
Salt with which it abounds, the Astringent lies in the Crocus or Terrestrial
Part; these two substances are thus discerned and severed: Cast the Filings of
Steel or Iron into the Flame of a Candle, and you shall see it burn like
Saltpeter or Rozin; take these Filings and infuse them three or four times in
Water or Wine, as when we make Chalybeate Wines, till the Liquor has dissolved
all the Salt, and then dry it and cast it into the Flame, and it shall not
burn, but the Liquor will have a strong taste from the Salt; and this is that
which opens Obstructions, and is the Ingredient in our Water, the Crocus
remaining is Astringent, of which also it does partake. I have reckoned up many
other virtues that are in Iron (in P. 142. of my Second Edition) which if he
had duly weighed, he might well have spared those many Scurrilous Invectives,
which most unjustly he lets fly in the face of those learned and most worthy
Gentlemen, which he calls Galenists, and my self.


But I shall spare him, since he takes sufficient revenge upon himself, in a
Foolish and Nonsensical Discourse, and a company of fond Boyish Quibbles ( P.
23.) wherein he makes himself ridiculous; which I wonder a man of reason should
not blush to have done; and a man of Learning would have scorned to have left
so many shreds of false Latin as here and there we meet with in his Book: but
I suspect he takes Priscian for a Galenist in that he breaks his head so often;
I hope next time he will take some care to provide him a plaster.

Here I declare I do not twit him with the Printers faults, I suspect my own
will not be without his: I have a Copy of the Printer's Errata, which I
received from himself the other day (with a most uncivil Letter) wherein he
mentions not the grossest lapses in Latin, making them thereby his own; having
by his Letter provoked me to put this thorn in his heel, which otherwise for
his Degrees sake I had passed by in civility.

(In P. 33.) he quarrels at me, because in treating of several properties that
are ascribed by Learned Writers to Iron, I tell what Dioscorides says, that it
looses the Belly, especially when it is joined with a Vitrioline Juice, as here
it is and he says, If so, it should be Emetick, and constantly provoke Vomit:
concerning which I have already proved by the Testimony of Chemical Authors,
that Vitrioline Waters, such as we are speaking of, which have in them an
immature Vitrioline Juice, do not at all provoke to vomit, and therefore all
his Objections, concerning the Emetick property of perfect Vitriol, are nothing
to the purpose: nor do those that imbibe Iron, but do rather strengthen a
relaxed Stomach, according to the suffrage of our best Authors; wherein I refer
him to Fallopius, who delivers both his own verdict and others too concerning
this thing ( de Therm. Aqu. cap. 11. p. 233.) Aptae quoque sunt aquae ferreae,
and prosunt stomacho, lieni, renibus vesicaeque, ut Antyllus, Seribonius and
Marcellus dicunt.

And for what he says concerning taking the Flowers or Filings of Brass
inwardly, it is nothing to the purpose, save to fill up the design of
invectives; since no such thing meant by me: I have wholsomer Medicines than
those which he himself does frequently use, if we may believe himself in this
Book. It is enough for the present that I have proved Vitriol and Iron to be
two Ingredients in this Spring, and that notwithstanding, it is strengthening
to the Stomach and other parts, and not only answered all his Arguments to the
contrary, while he dissented; but have also discovered him to have changed his
mind and granted them both to be there.

Of Alome in the Spaw.
( P. 34.) He proceeds to another Principle of the Spaw, viz. Alome, of which I
mentioned three sorts, according to the Opinion of Galen and the Princes in
Physic, that treat of it, viz. (...), all which are of gross parts and very
stiptick, etc. Which no doubt, says Mr. Simpson, must be a simple Mineral Salt,
centred in the Bowels of the Mineral Stone of Alome, without any
superadditionary additaments of Urine or Salt of Kelp -- I wonder he could not
as well judge of Vitriol in the Water to be a Simple Mineral of its own kind,
and not factitious, as made out of Iron or Copper, as well as he does Alome
without Urine or Kelp: whereas the Alome that is vulgarly used is so made, and
then he had judged aright, and saved himself and me a great deal of trouble.

But still he queries which of these sorts it is, and accounts himself in a
mist till he know; truly it is easy for any man that resolves to be Skeptical,
to raise more impertinent doubts, than the Sages of the World can tell how to
clear: All the three sorts I mention are of one and the same property, or at
least not much different; and therefore its altogether needless for me to
enquire how to determine. I find Fallopius gravelled about this very Question (
cap. 7. de Therm. Aq. p. 217.) Some may ask, says he, since there are several
sorts of Alome, of which sort is it that Waters do imbibe the juice.
Dico, inquit, quod est admodum difficile hoc scire, quoniam succus aluminosus
non concrescit; at ubi sit facile cognoscitur. I say it is very hard to
determine it (says he) because an Aluminous Juice does not harden or rock, but
where it is, its easy to be discerned. If I must give my opinion, I think of
the three it is the last (to wit) the Liquid sort, which is here mixed with the
Water; and this is the only Mineral which Sir S. has some time thought to be
in the Spaw.

Of Nitre in the Spaw.
( P. 35.) He passes on to consider of the 4th Ingredient, viz. Nitre:
concerning which I mentioned two sorts: One inclining to a Reddish Color,
according to Serapio, and another mentioned by Galen, which is White; of which
later sort this is: which is mixed with the Spaw, and this is that which in my
Book ( P. 13.) I asserted to be of all the Minerals the most predominant: the
body of them all extracted out of the Water, being laid some days in a cool
place, I have discerned Stiriae or little icicles among them, which is the
peculiar form of Nitre. But we shall find Mr. S. peremptorily denying all this
by and by: As for the properties of Natural Nitre, which is that sort imbibed
by the Water; I have laid down there a short description out of several of the
Princes in Physic, but of this more anon.

Of Salt in the Spaw.
Next he hastens to the 5th and last Ingredient of the Water-Spring, viz. Salt;
concerning which I have said ( P. 146. of my Book) there is not much in it,
though some Ingenious Naturalists of my acquaintance are otherwise minded; in
regard of its level with the Sea, with which in Spring-Tides it is sometimes
overflown; as also because of the brackishness of the Mineral Body that
resides, after Evaporation of the Water, which yet I rather think proceeds from
the other Salts; for so they may be all properly called; although Kircher would
not have found fault with me for saying there is Salt in it; for he says there
are none of these sorts of Waters without Salt: And truly I am glad I have
pleased the more Wise and Learned.

But Mr. S. is very severe against it, and since I have said in my Book there
is not much in it, I will not fall out with him for a trifle: But yet it is a
strange thing that he will not allow any the least Tincture of Marine Salt to
this Spring, which bubbles upright through the Sand, that is frequently
overflown by the Sea; and yet can suppose the Sulphur Well at Knaresbrough to
have a Body of the same Salt in it, which is 40 miles from the Sea.


( P. 37.) He tells, that he made a Journey to Scarbrough, Mr. S. at Scarbrough.
where in truth he so behaved himself, that he had found a very rough welcome,
if I had not prevented it: But it may very well be chronicled that he was at
Scarbrough, where I am almost confident he was never two days before in his
life; notwithstanding his great pretenses to treat of this Subject. He tells
what discourse we had at the Well, where what he got by it, I appeal to the
Gentlemen that were present, and shall now again further make out.

His design he said was to enquire, whether I had made a true report of the
Mineral Ingredients of the Water or no, and at the very first he resolved that
they were not there: I asked him if he had evaporated the Water to observe the
Sediment, he said no. Then I told him it was not just to pass a Sentence, till
the party arraigned was heard to speak for himself. When he came to the Well (I
then being absent) he began to talk among a great many Gentlemen that were
drinking the Waters, at the same rate that now he writes; and pulled out of his
Pockets half a score Glasses: The truth is the Gentlemen at the first took him
to be a Jugler, but perceiving his errand, sent me word, he told me he had
brought the solutions of the Five Minerals before mentioned in fresh Water,
with mixing of which he would make an Essay if he could imitate the Spaw. I
told him that the Water had passed under the Trial of very many Learned and
Ingenious Gentlemen, both Physicians and others, and I doubted not but would
abide his: and further I said that Nature was more complete in its Operations,
than to be fully imitated by Art.

I also said, That he could not parallel those Minerals which had undergone the
Fire, with those that were in the Water that had not passed the Fire, nor judge
of the one by the other. He said they were naked and bare solutions made
without Fire; though now in this Narrative, he says, They were made without
STRESS of Fire, and so might well be taken to make experiment withal. But I
pray what have we to do here with Fire at all, since there is none in the Spaw;
which certainly must alter the case? Besides what he means by STRESS OF FIRE I
know not, it is an ambiguous expression; even a small degree of heat will serve
to unlock a Mineral, and dissolve its compact substance; making it speak
sometimes that which of it self it would not do. And further I told him, that
the Accidents to be observed in the Water were such, as did proceed from the
dissolution of Minerals and Metals, not yet come to maturation; which of
necessity must be far different from those of his, which were made out of
perfect Minerals and Metals, as I have evinced already out of the Testimony of
Paracelsus ( lib 3. de Not. Aq.) which I mentioned in my reply to P. 3. of his
Book, and am not now willing to repeat.

P. 38. He says the Vitriol of Iron made it taste very like the sweet Spaw at
Knaresbrough; which for my own part I could not say, that there was the least
resemblance of it to that Water, which I know as well as he, for these 20 years
together. He then proceeded to try what Tincture the solution of Gall would
give to the solutions of the Minerals he had brought, thereby to imitate the
Water of the Spaw, and he found that the solutions of Alome and Vitriol, would
both take the like Tincture from Gall, and so become clear again by the putting
in of Spirit of Vitriol; By which says W. S. I demonstrated to the Doctor what
he would not otherwise believe, had not his eyes convinced him; viz. that the
bare solution of the Calx of Alome having nothing of Iron and Vitriol does give
exactly the same alteration; and hence he infers, that this Mutation comes from
the Alome, and that there is nothing of Vitriol in it.

What a Crack he gives, and yet he bursts not! why, there is not a word in my
Book of Scarbrough Spaw, that could in any reason lead him to make out such a
demonstration; I said indeed and so I do confidently say still, that it is the
Vitriol alone, that being dissolved by its Mineral Juice in this Water, takes
the Tincture from the Gall. Ay (says he) but the solution of Alome will do so
too; therefore there is no Vitriol but Alome. This is a pure non sequitur,
especially if we consider that this solution he talks of, was made of Calcined
Alome as himself confesses in the next, P. 39. in these words, Seeing a
solution of calcined Alome will do the same. And so again, P. 40. By all which
it appeared that the solution of the Calcined Stone of Alome admitted the same
precipitations, etc. with that of the Spaw. Now I pray with what Logic can he
argue from Calcined Stone Alome to this Aluminous Juice that is here in the
Water? Had he tried whether the Crude Stone of Alome would qualify simple
Spring Water to take a Tincture from Gall, or impart any sapor to Water; he had
acted according to reason: But the truth is, I have tried it of that sort of
Alome Mine which is in the Cliffe near the Well, having broken it to Powder,
and infused it in Spring Water some hours, and it received no Tincture from
Gall; nay, I did calcine that very Stone, and then dissolved it in
Spring Water; and yet it received no Tincture from the Gall: so that I very
much question, whether his Calcined Alome of which he made his solution were of
that Mine or no.

There is at Whitby on the same Coast 12 miles from Scarbrough, an Alome Mine,
out of which Alome is wont to be made, and sent abroad in great quantities; in
the middle of which a Spring of Fresh Water breaks out, having above 12 fathom
of the Mine above it, and how many 12s below it let him enquire; this I have
got Captain Francis Cummin and Mr. Christopher Wright a Minister, both
ingenious Gentlemen and of good repute at Whitby, to try whether it would
receive any Tincture from Gall at the Fountain, and they do both assure me it
does not. They also sent me a Glass Bottle of the same to York, which I tried
with Gall and it changed not at all. Nay, I do with them further averr, that it
is like ordinary Spring Water, having taken no Vapor, Odor, or Sapor from the
Mine, and being evaporated, it yielded no Sediment: I calcined also a piece of
this Mine which I had from Whitby, and put it into Spring Water with Gall; but
it received no Tincture: so that I cannot find either the one or the other to
receive a Tincture of Gall.

Alome tinctures not with Gall.
Now this does plainly evince that its not from Alome that this Water at
Scarbrough takes its Tincture, but from some other Mineral, and that in all
likelihood must be the Vitriol, unless we can find how to fix it upon another.

I shall therefore now enquire whether Iron will suffice to give it this
Tincture with Gall: If so, then another Spring that passes through Iron must
receive a Tincture, but that it will not; Ergo, not from Iron does this take
its Tincture.

Nor Iron.
There is an Iron Mine near Barnsley upon the Edge of Darbyshire where great
store of Iron is melted, out of which runs a Spring of Fresh Water. This, I
procured Mr. William Cotton who is Overseer of the Iron Work, to try if it
would change Color with Gall; he writes me, that it did not change the Color
at all: He sent me also a Glass Bottle of the Water, which I tried with Gall,
but it changed nothing at all; neither being evaporated did it yield any
Sediment: notwithstanding that he writes that he observed it to have something
of the Taste of Scarbrough Spaw at the Fountain. He writes also that to make a
further Trial, he stayed till they had got a Pit at the bottom of the Mine, and
so he caused a hole to be made under the bottom Stone, for the Water to fall
into, and stand till it was clear, and then took and tried it, but it received
no alteration from the Gall: He sent me also some of the Mine it self which I
calcined, and put into Water, to see if that would give any Tincture by the
addition of Gall, but it did not. So then, if neither Alome nor Iron will do
it, then it remains that Vitriol is that that gives the Tincture, Nor Nitre.
unless Nitre will do it; which neither he contends for, nor any one upon trial
shall find to do it; and the same may I say of Salt, which is the Fifth
Ingredient; from all which it follows that Mr. S. is in a grand mistake, to
think that Alome can contribute to this Color by Gall.

Furthermore (as I have already made out) this Water being carried abroad, or
left some while to stand in an open Vessel, will receive no Tincture from Gall,
as also it will have laid aside its Acidity, which methink is an argument of
some force to prove, that both these Qualities or Properties come from one and
the same Cause (to wit) Vitriol: which I suspect to be in its volatile parts
imbibed in the Water, and that the Sediment which remains after Evaporation is
rather the product of the rest of the Minerals, than the Vitriol; for else I
see no reason but while any thing of the substance of Vitriol is there, it
should keep its Acidity, and also receive a mutation from the Gall.

And also I infer, that if that Tincture come from Alome, then certainly that
which he by and by calls the Aluminous Salt, which he makes the essence of the
Spaw, should give the Black Tincture to the Gall, so long as it remains in the
Water. From what has been said, it also follows that ordinary Spring Water
takes no Salt at all, and but little of Sapor or Vapor or Odor from perfect
Mineral of Alome or Iron: Indeed what it would do if it were made Corrosive by
the participation of Vitrioline Juice I cannot so easily determine. From whence
also it follows that if Minerals and Metals be but in Solutis principiis or
their Concrete Juyces, even Simple Spring Water will be sufficient to imbibe
them, without any necessity of Helmonts Primum Ens, which therefore I have with
good reason exploded before; and if any doubt be made of that which yet I
proved to be the opinion of good Authors, then here is the Juice of Vitriol,
which will not fail to do it.

A bad memory.
Page 44. He tells us, That the Medicinal Acidity or Primum Ens, Which is the
Solvent in the Water, has made a flight solution of a Minera of Iron, which
being contempered together, makes up the Body of the Spaw.
Is not this a Body of Iron then which becomes the Body of the Spaw, and that
very thing which he denied totidem verbis ( P. 20.) in the close of the Fifth
Section? You know who had need of a good memory: But yet he minces the matter
prettily, for he calls it but a slight solution of the Iron, and yet it is the
Body of the Spaw. Let the wise Reader judge how these things will hang together.

Well! But he says further, That if Spirit of Vitriol be powered upon this Water
of the Spaw, it makes no alteration in it because of the similariness of parts
between the Acid Spirit of Vitriol and the Acid Solvent in the Water, no more
than fair Water mixed with fair Water. Would not any man think from this very
Observation alone (if there had been nothing else) Mr. S. had reason to be
persuaded that this Primum Ens or Mineral Acidity was nothing but Vitriol,
which I have proved to be the true Solvent (if we need any) in my reply to P.
3. since the spirit of Vitriol is as near of kin to it, being powered upon it,
as Water is to Water; that is in plain words, they are both Vitriol; nor does
the Experiment which he mentions make out any thing to the contrary, indeed it
is nothing at all to the purpose.

Instability in Writing.
(Page 45.) Thus far, s^ys Mr. S. I assented, That an aluminous Salt from a
mineral acidity had dissolved a slight touch of the Minera of Iron, and both
dissolved in the Current Spring of Water, makes up the Spaw. What Is here! Did
he not say just now in the foregoing Page, that the Mineral acidity and the
Iron made up the Body of the Spaw; and now he says, there is also an aluminous
Salt in it, why could not he have said so before?
Is not here great instability in his Writing? Methinks he seems to write Mente
tremula with a trembling heart and hand, being very unwilling and afraid to
confess what he finds. Here it is plain he has granted Iron and Alome, and how
far Vitriol I appeal to the Reader; I doubt not but to wrest them all out of
him at length.

Yet notwithstanding his plain confession of Iron here, I appeal to all the
Gentlemen that were present at the Spaw, if he did not absolutely deny it in
our Conference there, allowing nothing but Alome, until we had done, that I
showed him the Cliffe, which (so much of it as is exposed to the Weather) is
turned into a Cindar as hard almost as Iron, and out of which Mr. William
Cotton (being then by) said he would undertake to make Iron; at which he seemed
to be startled, in that he had denied it.

Concerning his Quaerie, How I would demonstate those to be Vitrioline Spirits
which were lost in the Waters carrying at distance? I returned the same Answer
which here I have already laid down, and need not to repeat; only to that
which I urged out of Fallopius I Will subjoyn the Opinion of Dr Heers in his
Spadacrene ( cap. 6. p. 44.) where he is proving the German Spaws to have
imbibed Vitriol, Conjecturam hanc duae rations firmant, utraque nifallor
evidentissima, etc. These two reasons, says he, do evidently confirm this
Opinion; One is because where such acid Waters are found, there is usually
found something of the Minera of Vitriol near at hand; and thus it is at
Scarbrough within Sixscore Paces of the Spaw where Vitriol sweats out of the
Cliffe. His other reason is, from the eminent acidity that is in Vitriol,
suitable to that which such Waters have imbibed, wherein he appeals to the
Chemists themselves, and declares that no man but he that has a snotty Nose
will presume to deny it. Cujus nasum pituita obstruxerit, etc.

(P. 46.) But an ingenious Person being by, asked the Doctor, Whether if the
Water was sealed up in a Glass Bottle hermetically, and so carried abroad, it
would be altered by carriage or no? He answered he thought it would; If so,
says Mr. S. then it was not from any volatility of parts, because it was sealed
up; and so not from the loss of the Vitrioline Spirits. It is very true I said
so, and now upon trial I am sure it is so; Vitrioline Spirits in the Spaw.
nor is his consequence of any validity, but rather the contrary; for if there
be any loss, it must be of the volatile parts, there being nothing else that
can be lost; since it is supposed to be sealed; yet says Mr. S. it is not from
the loss of Vitrioline Spirits, but it is an Aporrhaea Mineralis; whether
Vitrioline or Aluminous. It seems hereby that he is in doubt which of the two;
but certainly I judge it from Vitriol, since both the acidity and the
Vitrioline smell, and the tinging quality will be all lost together:
Notwithstanding they will all keep longer, being sealed up in Glass Bottles,
than in Wooden Vessels, and therefore I did advise in my Book that it should
rather be carried in Bottles well stopped, although in these also it will not
keep long, but be subject to Putrefaction, and become whitish in Color.

Nor let any man think it strange, that though stopped it should yet lose its
Spirits, since Frambesarius reports as much of the Sauvenir in Germany; for
causing 12 Lagena to be carried but two days journey (which is near so many
Gallons of English Measure, taking a Lagena to contain 6 Sextaries, and a
Sextary to be 20 Ounces) and that in Bottles well sealed up, there wanted to
every Lagena one Glass of its measure, which probably might be half a Pint,
through the loss of the Volatile Spirits; and the Water became like Common
Spring Water. Dr. Heers his words are, Has nihil a communibus discrepasse, ut
quibus singulis lagenis aquae vitrum decesserat, cum tamen apud fontem picatae
and subere obseratae lagenae fuissent. (Spad. cap. 5.)

And Dr. Heers affirms the same on his own Observation in the same Chapter,
Decedit etiam, inquit, quantitati aquae, nam vase optime obturato, nec ulla
gutta dilabente, si fons hic alio transferatur minuitur: quia spiritu turgentia
plus loci, quam eo privata occupare amant.
Thus it appears, my assertion is no Paradox, and indeed I do really think the
main part of the Vitriol in this Water is its spirits, rather than any body of
the Mineral it self, yet do think it has also something of the untipe juice.

While I in my Book discoursed concerning the extracting the Minerals that are
in the Water, I said ( P. 10) they may be found either by DISTILLING off the
Water, or otherwise by evaporating the Water away in a Skellit over the Fire.
Mr. S. very disingenuous.
He exclaims ( P. 47) of my Tools, that they are very rude und of a low rank
(to wit) a Skellit, a Culinary Fire, but not a word of a Glass still, which an
Ingenious Artist would have chosen, etc. Here I find constantly the young man
in the same temper, owning nothing of Modesty, and knowing as little of
Moderation.
Is it not enough that I say they may be extracted BY DISTILLATION, but must I
needs tell what Metal my Still is made of? I designing to speak to the capacity
of all men, mention both ways, and do particularly point out such Tools for
trial of the truth of what I say, as are most ready at hand; however any thing
will serve this man to rail on me, who walks excentrick to all the Rules of
Reason. If the Reader please but to look into P. 360. he shall find him using
the very same Tools, viz. A Skellit and a Culinary Fire. Of the said quantity
of Spaw Water I took about 2 Quarts, which having filtred, I put it in a
SKELLIT, and boiled away two thirds. What a strange spirit is this man of,
especially to me, that he will not allow me that liberty of expression, which
he takes to himself!

Yet let him do what he can by Distillation, so volatile are these spirits that
they will yet be gone, as upon trial I have often observed. The same did Doctor
French discover in his Distilling of the Sweet Spaw at Knareshrough, which
though he did it in a Glass still, luted and closed up carefully in the joints
thereof, so as the spirit of Wine could not evaporate out thereat; yet so
subtle were the Vitrioline Spirits, and so volatile, that he says they are
sooner sublimed than the Water, and do penetrate even the Glass it self, or the
Lute, and he believes that neither Glass nor Lute can hold them. ( P. 67)

So again he lets fly, because I say ^^e Minerals, when the Water is almost
gone, do rise up in Bulla's making a bubbling noise like the boiling of Alome,
etc. -- Our Naturalists observe that of all Minerals or Vegetables, Alome makes
the greatest noise when it is boiling, as I have observed in those Mines at
Whitby, which a Stranger would wonder at; and there being Alome in these
Minerals, hence they bubble with more noise than ordinarily Minerals use to do,
where that is away.
Doctor Jordan a very learned Chemist, speaking (in Chap. 7.) of the boiling of
Vitriol, has this very Expression, It arises up in Bulla's like Alome. Had I
to deal with any Man of Reason or Ingenuity, who being unsatisfied, had
undertaken this task against me, I had not met with such measure, nor to my
knowledge did I ever read any man of the like temper.

As for what he says concerning the Emetick or Vomiting Property of Common
Vitriol, it is altogether extraneous to our Subject, and I have said enough to
that point already.

And whereas he says, I blushed not to instance in Spirit of Vitriol, that we
use it in Juleps and Cordials, and it is not Emetick. -- I answer, Nor need I,
since the main part of the Vitriol in this Water is the Spirit, as I have now
proved; which is as much, yea and far more diluted with the Water wherein it is
imbibed, than the force of the Vitriol is corrected by the vehement heat of the
Fire, in the distilling of the Spirit: And what follows in that Section,
wherein he runs a risque concerning the Vomiting property of Copper, is
altogether pillaged out of Helment, after whose Pipe I find him constantly
dancing; using his very words as confidently, as if he were the Author himself,
and also nothing to the point in hand.

( P. 50.) He returns to our Conference at the Spaw, and particularly about the
Nitre, which I had affirmed in my Book ( P. 13.) to be of all the Minerals the
most predominant; shooting into Icesickles or Stiria, which is the peculiar
form of Nitre; whereby it is distinguished from all other Minerals whatsoever.

Of Nitre in the Spaw.
I queried with the Doctor (says he) how he came to know that Nitre was an
Ingredient, and the most predominant. -- Here he forges a confused Narrative,
which was never in my Heart, nor on my Tongue to say (but perhaps it may be a
lapse of his Memory.) -- I made it out from that Analogy and Resemblance that
is betwixt the Minerals that remain after the Evaporation of the Water, and the
Nitre that breaks out of the Cliffe within 6 or 8 yards of the Spaw, which is
white like a hoar-frost in hot and dry weather, but is washed off by every
shower of Rain; both that and the Minerals extracted out of the Water shooting
alike in Stirias, and also agreeing in Taste.

But that this was Nitre at that time, he confidently denied; He said indeed it
was nothing but an Aluminous Salt; but when I urged that Alome does not shoot
in Stirias, and upon that very account that it could be nothing but Nitre, then
he would have it to come from the Air of the Sea which has Nitre in it. I
replied that then the whole Sea Coast should abound with it, which we see it
does not. Hence it follows that it can be nothing but Nitre, which proceeds out
of the Earth, that is exceeding Nitrous. Neither yet is this Nitre discernable
in every part of the Cliffe throughout, but runs in certain Veins, and much
more plentifully near the Well.

That this is Nitre several learned Physicians have been abundantly satisfied,
and those both of London and elsewhere; the shooting of Nitre into Stirias
being as peculiar to that Mineral, as the form of any Plant is to all of the
same kind. This and the rest of the Minerals, which are apparent upon this
Cliffe, have put many Naturalists into no small amazement; which made Dr.
Tonstall of Newcastle, an Eminent Physician and Chemist say, He thought it was
the most fertile Bank in the World.

Let him further know, that all the Earth about Scarbrough is full of Nitre,
from whence it is that the Meadows about the Town are more eminently fertile,
than any other that I have observed upon the Seacoast; which gave too much
encouragement to an Ingenious Gentleman a Friend of mine, to begin a Project
there of Making Nitre, which for his own sake I wish had succeeded according to
his expectation; but the truth is, it proved but an imperfect Nitre, especially
that which is extracted out of the Water, and so in refractis viribus, and also
joined with the other Salts, which perhaps do enfeeble it more.

And yet I have observed many years ago this Sediment of the Water, having been
laid aside in a cool place some days, to shoot into Stiria's half an Inch
long, especially after Calcination, Filtration, and Separation from the grosser
parts of the Minerals.

This I have expressly touched on in my Book, and did also sufficiently urge it
in our Conference at the Spaw, which yet prevailed nothing with this Gentleman,
though it was abundantly satisfactory to all else that were by; and yet it
seems even now while he writ this, he was of the same mind; That these Volatile
Nitrous Particles, as he calls them, which float in the Air, are magnetically
attracted by the aluminous Salt that is in the Body of the Minerals, extracted
from the Water* as also by the Mineral Earth of Alome which is upon the Cliffe:
and consequently that which is in the Water is nothing but an aluminous Salt.

And this is such a truth as he endeavors to illustrate (in Sect. 4. p. 53) in
a long Discourse with several Experiments; after all which, and a large
Harangue of hard words (fit only to breed admiration in the ignorant, and
laughter in the learned) he gives us his definitive Sentence in short by way of
Recapitulation, in these words ( P. 61.) The Esurine acid Salt having in its
solution got a slight touch of a Vein or Minera of Iron, and passing through a
rocky Mineral Glebe of Alome, becomes specificated in an aluminous Salt, with
which the Water of the Quick-Spring is impregnate, which makes the Spaw we
discourse of.

Now if his Assertion, Note.
which by all those Experiments he endeavors to illustrate be false, as I am
certain it is, and shall prove from his own Concession under his hand, then
there needs no more to satisfy the World that I was all this while in the
right. And if so, then is not mine Antagonist an able man indeed, that can thus
draw Quidlibet ex quolibet, plainly to prove that which is clearly false? One
would think almost this Batchelour were playing the Sophister again, intending
to deceive the World with a Fallacy, which yet a Wiseman would have couched
more cunningly in the premises, and ta'n care to end with a plausible
Conclusion; but just thus we have him 20 times in this Book building upon a
sandy foundation, illustrating by far-fetcht Experiments, that which to every
man's reason is evidently false, and from false and mistaken premises drawing
necessary Conclusions.

Let me now remind the Reader of what we have been doing all this while. The
sum total of what Mr. S. has said.
He denied all the Principles of the Spaw except Alome, and disputed (if so it
deserve to be called) against me with hard and harsh language for asserting
them. I think I have answered all his Objections, and fully proved them all to
be there by sufficient Arguments of Demonstration, (which I willingly submit to
the Judicious Reader.) He severely carps at many of my expressions which I used
in my Book, which I have plainly made out to be the forms used by Learned
Writers upon such Subjects, and particularly of the Chemists themselves; whom
it seems he understood not. He throws dirt in my face ever and anon, while he
argues against the four ways (I mention) of a Waters imbibition of Minerals or
Metals; which by the help of the very Chemical Authors themselves, who speak
the same words, I have calmly and clearly wiped off. I did not think it fit to
call in the Testimony of the Ancients and Princes in Physic, whom I had cited
before in my Book; since I see he so insolently spurns at them; but rather to
convince him with the Verdict of the Chemists, whom he ought better to have
understood, and cannot deny.

I shall now open the Curtain, and let in more light to the Reader, that he may
the better discern the temper of my Antagonist, and on which side is the truth
in the Dispute that lies before him, and this ex ore suo. What needs any more?
Habemus reum confitentem.

In P. 20. Thus (says Mr. S.) we discard these two Pillars of his Spaw, Mr. S.
his Recantation.
viz. Vitriol and Iron, as to the Body of them. Now turn to P. 39. I do not
(says he) deny Iron to be an ingredient. So again P. 44.
This Mineral acidity pervading a Minera of Iron, makes a slight solution of
it, and being equally contempered together, makes up the Body of the Spaw. Now
consider this Body of Minerals which is in the Spaw, is of an Ounce Weight at
least, sometimes ten Drams in a dry Summer, as this last was ( viz. 1668.) in 5
Quarts of the Water; and this is that which he styles a slight solution. And
for Vitriol turn to P. 359. That I might (says he) inform my self more
satisfactorily of the true Constituent parts of Scarbrough Spaw, I took 3
Gallons and 3 Pints, which I let stand; whose first precipitation was a Reddish
Sediment, from which I filtred the Water, and this dried in the Sun proved to
be a Red Earth, or kind of Ochre, OR RATHER TERRA VITRIOLI. So again he argues
against Nitre from P. 50. to P. 61. asserting only an Aluminous Salt with a
slight touch of Iron: but turn to P. 360. and we have these words. Then I
evaporated the clear filtred Water in Glasses to a dryness, which I found to
have an ALUMINO-NITROUS TASTE, or rather indeed MORE NITROUS, and would relent
in the Air. So P. 364. Where you meet in our Hydrological discourse with the
word Aluminous Salt, you are to read it ALUMINO-NITROUS SALT, OR
NITRO-HERMETICAL SALT; this Salt if duly ordered is Crystalline, shoots into
LONG STIRIAS. Here let the Reader observe in his Hydrological Discourse, where
he is directly denying Nitre several times, and says its only an Aluminous Salt
that is in the Water, what woeful Nonsense it would be to turn the word
Aluminous into Nitro-Aluminous, or Alumino-Nitrous, or Nitro-Hermetical.
Certainly never any man writ at this rate before. Besides if a Galenist should
talk of Nitro-Hippocratical, or Nitro-Galenical Salt, what a comely Canting
would it be, and yet it would gingle as well as Nitro-Hermetical. Risum
teneatis amici. After all this ranting what a woeful case is this POOR GENTLEMAN
brought into, that he must be forced to crowd in Nonsense. But it appears in
this, and many more things that I have hinted at (and I shall find more before
I have done with him) that to say and unsay is no strange thing with our Author
here; right or wrong, Sense or Nonsense, he is not ashamed to tell what is in
his heart.

But yet if we observe him, Mr. S. in a strait.
he would fain sumble out an excuse to blind the unwary Reader, that he may not
find his contradicting of himself; for he says ( P. 364.) Therefore what we
said against Nitre in our foregoing discourse, is to be understood the Common
inflammable Nitre which is vulgarly used. But I pray will this go down with any
man of ordinary understanding? What have we to do here with Common Nitre of the
Shops, we are treating of Natural Mineral Nitre as it is here in this Water or
this Earth, never known or taken notice of, nor used, till I discovered it, and
brought it into use; which indeed will not blaze in the Fire, perhaps because
it is but in Embryone, not in statu and perfectione, or else so diluted with
the Water, that it lies down or loses its inflammable property, as the Vitriel
does the Colcotar.

Really I am ashamed that a man that pretends to Learning and Reputation,
should write such palpable Contradictions, attended with so many gross
circumstances of abuse to another, for asserting that which himself is forced
to acknowledge for truth upon deliberate consideration; and I am as sorry to be
put to this unpleasant task of ripping up a weak Brothers Infirmities, which I
would (had I not been forced to the contrary) much rather have covered with a
Mantle of Love. So severely to reject Iron, Vitriol, and Nitre, and before his
Book be done, to be forced to recant: To charge those things upon me as great
faults, wherein himself can have no plea for it, but his rashness, contracting
thereby a great guilt to himself: This is that, which (it seems) the liberty of
the Press does afford an opportunity to do, but yet that which no ingenious man
or good Christian ought to take to himself. The best of us all have our
failings, and its well if we live to repent. Even Solomon left his
Ecclesiastes, St. Augustine his Confessions and Retractations, and my
Antagonist his Epilogue or Recantation.

However this with the aluminous part he calls (in his Epilogue) the Essence of
Scarbrough Spaw, and he undertakes ( P. 365.) to tell what proportion it bears
to the Water, viz. as 1 is to 128. A rare Arithmetician indeed if you will
believe him; his Confidence in this is like all the rest, deeming himself to be
(...); for we must believe him without reason, as if all the virtue in the Spaw
should lie in this Salt, and with this alone he pretends to do wonders;
especially if we will but take in his Ternary. But I wonder why the Vitrioline
Spirits which by his own Confession are not here in this Salt, or the Terra
Vitrioli which he acknowledges he found, or the Iron which I proved, and he has
confessed to be there, should be excluded from being of the Essence of the
Spaw? Two Minerals of the Spaw are lost by Carriage.
For my own part I do seriously profess, I never saw any considerable Cure done
by the Water at distance; and it is no marvel, since two of the principal
Minerals are wanting; viz. the Vitriol, which loses its volatile parts by
Carriage, which should help its penetration into the narrow Meanders of the
Hypochonders; and the Iron, which is always found precipitated in the bottom
of the Vessels; besides that in a few days it begins to putrefie, and so
spoils the Stomach, and taints the Blood, and lays a foundation for the
Jaundies or Cachexia, as I have made appear by good Testimony in my Book.

But here some may wonder how it comes to pass that Mr. S. should thus
contradict himself (in his Epilogue) and so plainly recant what he had said in
the foregoing Discourse? Mr. S. forced to make this Recantation.
To which thus, Mr. Samuel Johnston of Beverley (whom I mentioned before) a
very ingenious Chemist, meeting him, showed him the Red Earth which he mentions
in P. 359. and told him it was no other thing than Terra Vitrioli, as also the
Nitre which had shot in Stiria's above an inch long: This being matter of fact,
he could not deny, especially seeing them both so plainly made out. Now his
Book was then well-nigh printed, so as he could not recall it; and therefore
was forced to bring it in an Appendix at the latter end, and study out words to
blind the unwary and ignorant Reader. This Relation I have from the Gentleman
himself, when yet Mr. S. is not so ingenuous as to acknowledge his Director
(for he taught him the whole process that he lays down in the Epilogue) but on
the contrary falls into a simple Rant ( P. 361.) as if he was the first that
has made so many separations of the Minerals. Yea and I can say he is the first
that ever denied them of the Gentlemen of Art that ever came to the Water, and
he is the first that ever I met with that canted and recanted at this rate. But
the very truth is, I my self had done enough that way, having all the parts by
me of several years keeping, though I thought it impertinent to make* so many
separations.

Mr S. his Opinion whence the Saltness of the Sea.
( P. 54.) He undertakes to tell whence the Saltness of the Sea proceeds, viz.
From the Salt of the Earth, which with great dashes of Water passing through
the subterraneal Channels, becomes dissolved and carried into the Ocean, which
has its Minera from fossile Salt; from which also some Springs are saturate, as
the Sulphur Well at Knaresbrough. Now let us turn to P. 303. and he tells us of
a Circulation of the Sea Water from the Sea to the Heads of Springs by
subterraneal Channels; and these Springs are fresh, the salt of the Sea being
deposited in the Channels. How these two Assertions can stand together I cannot
discern; A C^ntrad^ction.
that the same Channels should convey a Salt into the Sea, and also convey the
Sea Water to the Springs; here is a contrary Current in the same Channels, for
the same conveys Salt from the Earth to the Sea, and lays down its Salt in its
passage to the Springs. I confess this is above my reason to conceive, I shall
leave it to the Reader to believe as he sees cause. For my own part I think
both parts of his Assertion are doubtful; though indeed it is bravely resolved
of the Gentleman on the sudden, to find out the cause of the Seas Saltness,
which has in all Ages put the most grave Philosophers to a puzzle. I do verily
think that all the fossile Salt in the Body of the Earth (which we see is very
rarely found) if it were dissolved, will not serve to supply a twentieth part
of the Salt that is in the Sea; the sixteenth part whereof being a Body of
Salt, as I have tried at Scarbrough, every Pint having about one Ounce in this
our Northern Sea, and in the Southern Seas it is far more strong of the Salt:
Besides the Peripateticks thought this came far short of an adaequate cause,
and thereupon they fly to the torrefaction of the Sun.

Moreover, if the Saltness of the Sea should proceed from the fossile Salt of
the Earth, then being an extraneous quality to the Sea, it would destroy the
Fish of the Sea; as we see fresh Water made s^lt by fossile Salt, kills all
manner of Sea Fish as well as other. Hence it is that the Sea of the Plain
called the Salt Sea, Josh. 12.3. which has its Saltness from the Earth, (for it
was formerly no Sea, but the Vale of Siddim, and has its Original from Jordan
and the Sea of Galilee, which are both Fresh Water; besides that, Commentators
and Travailers do unanimously report the Country about to be full of
Salt Pits) is observed to kill all manner of Fish that fall into it from
Jordan; and is therefore called Mare Mortuum: so that I suspect Mr. S. is much
mistaken in his assignment of the Cause of the Seas Saltness.

Again, As to the latter part of his Contradiction, viz. That the Sea Water is
conveyed to the Heads of Springs by the Subterraneal Channels; we must imagine
that these Subterraneal Channels must be sometimes 2 or 300 Miles long or more,
which how that should be, Credat Judaeus Apella: But this I shall reserve till
I come to examine his Original of Springs.

A Contradiction.
But there is another thing which here I may not pass by: He tells us now, That
the Sulphur Well at Knaresbrough is saturate from fossile Salt, and yet if we
turn to P. 143. treating of that Well, he determines,
That a Salt Marine is the cause of that Sulphurous Spring. I wish the Young
Man would reconcile these Contradictions: In the mean while, till we understand
the ground of them, it may suffice that we understand a little what reason
there is in the man: Yet this makes me remember the Story that I read in
Quintilian of Didymus Chalcenterus, the famous Grammarian of Alexandria, a man
with Bowels of Brass, so they named him, because of his indefatigable pains in
Writing; for he writ, says Sentca 4000 Books, 3500 says Suidas: Now one telling
him an Historical Relation, which he disliked and disapproved as vain and
frivolous, the party broug^t out one of, his own Books, and showed him the
Story; which made Didymus look blank* Truly the Old Man deserved some
Indulgence, but for a Young Man to be so forgetful and contradict himself so
often; to become a Didymus, or rather a Dithymus, double-minded, as that one
and the same Book (nay within a few leaves) should bring forth Didymos Twins,
one very unlike the other, as if they had not the same Father: I am very sorry
to see it in any one that pretends to be a Scholar.

P. 55. He passes on to St. Mungo Well at Cockgrave, which though to the touch
it be extremely cold, yet by an intrinsic sulphurous warming quality, it opens
the Pores, etc. I believe he never saw that Well, for if he had, he could not
have any ground to think it had any thing of Nitre or Sulphur in it, but to be
a Simple Water, and an excellent Spring, operating only by its excessive
Coldness; whereby it suddenly repels the Blood and inward heat to the inward
parts, from whence it returns after bathing (while the Patient lies in a warm
Bed) more strongly invigorated with Spirits, and so concocting the Crudities
that were in the weak parts, increases new strength, and overcomes the
lameness of the Joints and the Rickets; concerning which I have treated more at
large in my Second Edition of Scarbrough Spaw (P. 104.)

In P. 55. He proceeds to speak a little of Knaresbrough Sweet Spaw, which he
says is but languid of Mineral Principles, having but a slight touch of the
Minera of Iron, etc. How the Doctors that frequent that Spring, will resent
this, that the ancient reputation of that Spaw should be so blasted I know not;
I leave it to themselves to consider their own Obligation.

In Sect. 5. ( P. 59.) He falls to a Point of Philosophy as he calls it, which
if any intelligent man reads, it will make him merry doubtless; especially in
P. 58. Numb. 8. where a man would think he were a conjuring, if not killing the
Pytho^ with a company of hard words: I refer the Reader to the Book its self,
rather than make my own swell with Impertinencies. This brings to my mind that
Epigram of Antonius Muretus upon a Pretender to Philosophy, who appeared to him
to have an affectation rather of bombasting words, than any solid or grave
matter; whom he calls a PHILOSOMPHER rather than Philosopher, from (...),
Fungus, or some empty frothy thing.

Philosophum te vocas, and hoc te nomine jactas,
Prae te omnes reliquos ut nihil esse p^tes.
Nec tamen aut rerum causas and pondera nosti,
Aut aliud nomen quo mere are Sophi.
Vna tuis titulis addenda est litera recte,
Nec mihi Philosophus, sed PHILOSOMPHVS eris.
In P. 59. He contrad^cts expressly what before P. 4. he had said concerning his
Ens Primum, that it can take in but one Mineral; for here it will take in as
many as he pleases (this Experiment he has verbatim from Sendivogius Tract. 2)
concerning which I have there treated more at large; only I cannot but observe
his frequent Contradictions.

He tells of the Virtues of the Spaw.
In P. 61. He undertakes to discourse of the Virtues of Scarbrough Spaw; thus
many a man talks of Robin Hood, that never shot in his Bow. I dare boldly say,
he knows no more how to manage that Water in Critical Cases, than he that lives
at Rome and never saw it. In this particular he is altogether Mimical, being
confined to what I have said in my Book, or what necessarily may follow
therefrom. He commends it indeed as very successful in the cure of many
diseases, which yet cannot be upon his grounds; he owning as yet nothing but
Alome, and a small touch of the Minera of Iron. I think it not impertinent
(says he) to speak somewhat of its Virtues, and that the rather, because Dr.
Witty gave out that I endeavored to defame the Spaw, in that I held it to be
an Aluminous Spring. I think it no Defamation to say its an Aluminous Spring,
but to call it so exclusive, as to the rest of the Minerals or Metals, as if it
were only so, and had not imbibed also Vitriol, Iron, and Nitre, is certainly
to defame it; since first the rest are in it as well as Alome* and secondly it
cannot do such Cures from Alome alone as we find it to do, now where they are
all conjoined together, by which it is become an excellent Composition that
suits various Indications. And this his Grand Master Paracelsus ( lib. 3. cap.
ult. de Not: Aq.) treating of these sorts of Waters, says, Virtutibus as
dotibus admirandis praeditae sunt, pro natura Mineralium quae in eis
resolvuntur: Vos igitur, ex quo ortu and principio enascantur, sedulo
examinate: summum ergo studium esse debet, ut natura Lapidum, Metallorum and
similium exact teneatur: sic enim fiet ut Aquarum ex illis Genitarum conditio
ac vis probe cognita sit. i. e. They are endued with admirable Qualities,
according to the Nature of the Minerals resolved in them: be ye therefore
careful diligently to examine from what Principle they come: for, says he,
there is nothing more necessary than that the Nature or Property of the Stones,
Metals, or Mineral Glebes be exactly retained; for so may the condition and
virtue of the Waters that proceed from them, be rightly understood.

Of Aluminous Springs.
Now the properties and virtues that are ascribed by Learned Naturalists to
Aluminous Waters as such, do come far short of what we find in Scarbrough-Spaw.
Let us take measure from what profound Kircherus says of them ( Sect.5.) He
tells, that they are very astringent and of an exceeding drying quality,
(whereas this Water at Scarbrough is purging) hence it comes to pass (says he)
that the places where those Aluminous Springs are, be usually barren; which
Theophrastus also observed. (Now the grounds hereabouts are more than ordinary
fruitful as I expressed before) Vnde morbis, inquit, qui ex nimia humiditate sive
frigiditate originem ducunt, sanandis mirum in modum conducunt. i. e. Whence it
comes to pass that they wonderfully conduce to the cure of those Diseases, that
proceed from the excess of Cold and Moisture. This is very well and true of the
Spaw, but yet far short of what Cures are done by it; which I am not now
willing to dilate upon; having treated at large in my Book upon that Subject.


And therefore it is certainly a disparagement to it, to say it is an Aluminous
Spring, intending thereby to exclude all the rest, which are in it as eminently
and undeniably as Alome is. If any man should say that Mr. S. is a Grammarian,
he does not defame him at all, but if he intend it exclusively to the other
Arts that be professes; as if he were not also a Philosopher and a Physician, I
suspect Mr. S. would look upon it as a defamation, and not thank him for it:
for being a Grammarian one may expect Elegant Latin from him, at least true:
but its his being a Philosopher that makes him reason thus strongly, and a
skilful Physician, which enables him to make many admirable Cures in Physic,
and with wholesome Remedies; which in time we may expect and shall be glad to
see.

But Mr. S. comes on with his Noverint universi per praesentes: Let him and the
World know, that in the Esurine Salt of Alome as noble medicinal Virtues are to
be found, as in any other Mineral specificated Salt whatever. Bate me an Ace
quoth Bolton. In truth I see no Obligation wherein I am bound to believe him, I
am sure Paracelsus gives Vitriol the pre-eminence by far; nor is this
comparable being imbibed alone in a Spring, to that which has taken in either
Vitriol or Nitre: nor do I think that any Aluminous Spring, as such only, is
to be compared to the Sweet Well at Knaresbrough, which himself says, has only
imbibed a slight touch of Vitriol of Iron.

Chalybeate Waters rare.
And now while I speak of Iron it brings to my mind what Fallopius says, who, it
appears in all his Observations never found a Water that had imbibed Iron,
though he does not think it impossible; but he heartily wishes for such Waters,
Vtinam tales reperirentur, quia melius ageretur cum iis qui laborant affectibus
renum and vesicae: i. e. Because it would be very well for them that are
subject to the Diseases of the Reins and the Bladder. To which I Will only add
the Judgment of Kircher, Aquae ferreae five Chalybeatae virtutibus ferri seu
Chalybis imbuantur, ad obstructiones hypochondriacas saluberrimis: i. e. Iron
or Chalybeate Waters have in them the virtues of Iron or Steel, and so are most
excellent against the Obstructions of the Hypochondres, and the hardness or
schirrhus of those parts, and the beginning of a Dropsy; as also they
strengthen a relaxed and debilitated Stomach.

Of Vitrioline Springs.
And since this is a Vitrioline Water, as I have proved sufficiently against all
his Objections, and at last brought him confessing as much, it were but proper
to lay down the Virtues and Properties of those sorts of Waters; but that being
done in part already. I shall therefore be very brief: I have proved already
out of Fallopius and Paracelsus, etc. that a Water may imbibe Vitriol and yet
not become Emetick, or provoking to vomit; and constant experience shows that
its verified in this Water: besides hereby it is become of a penetrating
quality, and so attenuating and cutting gross phlegmatic humors, being also
drying and leaving a moderate astriction behind it; and therefore good in all
cold and moist Constitutions, and for expelling of Worms. Much of the same
nature are such Waters as have imbibed Salt, save that they are not so
piercing; but these having but little Salt in them, I shall pass it over
without more words.

Of Nitrous Springs.
But because Nitre is of all the rest the most predominant in this Water, and
himself has confessed it; I shall therefore bring in the Testimony of the
profound Kircher (in Cap. de Aq. Nitrosis. Praedominium dominium Nitri Aquas
potentes facit, etc. i. e. When Nitre is predominant it makes the Water that
has imbibed it powerful in operation; inables it to correct an ill habit of
body, which such as are phlegmatic are prone to; it looses the Belly, is good
in the Diseases of the Nerves, and for such as are subject to Defluxions upon
the Lungs, heals the Itch and other Diseases of the Skin, Cures the ringing of
the Ears being dropped into them; and in a word makes it to be of an eminent
abstergent property. So far Kircher.

Now this Spaw having imbibed all these five Minerals, must take its virtue
from them all, according to reason and the Testimony of Learned Writers, as I
have made out already, and I am assured it suits full well with the
Experimental Cures I have mentioned in my Book; to which I refer the Reader,
and shall say no more at present.


Next P. 62. he falls to treat of his five Digestions (which he pillages from
Helmont verbatim, though he curtails the number, and corrects his Master; for
Helmont makes six ( vid^ Helm. P. 167.) from the pravity or deficiency of every
one of which proceed several Diseases; whereas the whole Classi^ of Physicians
make but three, viz. in the Stomach, the Liver, and the Solid Parts: I wonder
indeed he did not make 50, for there is not any the least part of the Body, but
if it be depraved in the Concoctive or Digestive faculty, so as it cannot
separate the serous part of the Blood from that which is for its nourishment,
Diseases may arise from it, which may disturb the whole Economy of Nature,
and breed Aposthumations and Tumors, according to the Nature of the Humor, and
the Constitution of the Parts: Thus in the Breast may breed a Schirrhus or a
Cancer, in the Hands and Feet a Ganglion, in other parts an Oedema or a
Phlegmon, and from thence a Fever, in the Joints a Gowt or some other Lameness
or Rheumatismes, etc but I may not digress upon this Subject. The truth is, in
his describing of these Diseases, he erres very much through a defect in the
understanding of Pathology and Anatomy; frequently confounding such as are
nothing of kin, and all this in a canting form of Expressions, that all the
Learned Men I have met with that have seen the Book, do laugh at.

These Spaws are found out by chance.
Then he undertakes ( P. 83.) to tell what Diseases the Spaw cures, and what
not, and cites Helmont; but what I pray is Helmont's Judgment concerning this
Water, which he never saw? Fallopius says that the properties of all those
sorts of Springs are found out by Observation, and doubtless he is in the
right; now since he could have no observation or experience of this Water, his
Verdict cannot be very Authentic: I have in my Book made out my Observations
and Experience for near Thirty years, and that under the hands of the Persons
themselves on whom such Cures were made; which give better ground of
satisfaction to wise men, than all that Mr. S. can say; who can have nothing of
his own Experience, as being upon my knowledge not much more acquainted with it
than Helmont whom he cites.

Notwithstanding he takes upon him to give his Opinion of some of the matters
of fact, Of an Alderman of Hull in the Asthma.
and particularly of an Alderman of Hull, whom I mention to have found Cure in
an Asthma; But that this was a real Asthma (says he P. 94.) I fear the Doctor
mistakes in his Diagnosticks. How civil this is in the young man to make
himself a Judge of that which he never saw, and thus severely to become a Cato
Censorius over me; I refer it to the wise Reader to judge. The truth is this
Alderman had joined Dr. Primrose and my self in this his Disease, to whom we
prescribed Remedies according to Indications, which yet the Malady did in a
great measure resist; so as after due prep^ration we thought fit to send him to
the Spaw; where after a few days he found cure, and returned well. This being
about 15 years ago, and the Gentleman now alive and in health; and by his
leave we both thought fit to call a Spade a Spade, and that Disease an Asthma.
If it would conduce any thing to teach W. S. that best point of Diagnosticks,
viz. to know himself; I could every day let him see some that have found
exceeding much benefit by this Vitrioline Water in the Asthma, without his
Arcana's.

Of a Gentlewoman in great Debility cured by the Spaw.
Then he undertakes to judge of the Case of a Gentlewoman, whom I mention in a
very Critical Point, who had been long in a wasting condition, bolstred up with
Pillows, through constant difficulty of breathing; which he calls an Asthma,
from the Obstructions of the Womb; and though he never saw her, yet he
undertakes to tell what was also the Procatarctick Cause of her Malady, viz. a
Cold, etc. Was ever any man so bold, to be thus positive without ground? I
wonder what W. S. sees by the enumeration of the Symptoms, that can persuade
him to think this was an Asthma, for be may observe it did not seize on her per
periodos, but a difficulty of breathing held her for a Month or five Weeks
together; but it may be he thinks every difficulty of breathing to be an
Asthma. It was indeed a violent Dyspnaea, which ofttimes is a Symptom of a
Consumption, and great Debility, and indeed that was the thing I most feared,
for she was in a Hectic, in which Case purging is not safe; although not only
she but many others that have been eminently Hectical, have found benefit by
these Waters, and I can make it out with good reason too, if here it were my
task, and I had time to enlarge.

Of a Cata^^he.
He next takes upon him to descant of a Cure I mention in an Inveterate
Catarrhe, which had resisted all other Methods, and here he takes occasion to
let fly against the Galenists for some Assertions, which Helmont fancies them
to make concerning the Causes of that Disease; from whom he pillages all he
says, out of a Tract of his, called Catarrhi Deliramenta, after whose Pipe in
every thing he dances throughout all the Book without farther Enquiry: As for
himself it appears that he is a mere stranger to their Writings, and to say the
truth, I believe he never read Galen, or any sound Writer that follows him; it
is plain that he forges things frequently out of his own brain to impose upon
the credulous Vulgar, on purpose to abuse them; dealing with the Galenists as
the Heathen Persecutors of Old did with the Primitive Christians, put
Bear-Skins upon them on purpose to bait them. He ought to remember the Ninth
Commandment, and not thus ordinarily to bear false witness against his
Neighbors. I find in Pet. Faber's Agonistic. That there were certain Laws to
be observed in the Olympian and Isthmian Games, which they ever swear to
observe; among others, That they would not seek for Mastery by fraud or deceit,
but deal fairly, not bite, not kill, otherwise it was not a lawful striving,
but was called (...), to use soul play, as being belluine and brutish; and
against these Laws does Mr. S. constantly transgress. I could set him right as
to their Opinions concerning a Catarrhe, wherein they speak a great deal more
reason than Helmont, who deals not fairly in that he cites not his Authors;
endeavoring to raze well-laid Foundations, but builds nothing himself. But its
far from my design to write a Pathology, or to discourse in this place
concerning the nature of Diseases. And it is also plain in Experience that the
Medicines which the Galenists use in the Cures of Catarrhes, and their Method
they go in upon their own Hypothesis, are eminently successful.

( P. 101.) He takes upon him to discourse concerning the Essence of Fevers,
together with their Cures, declaring against the use of Water or other cooling
Drinks in Fevers, which (he says) are so far from abating, as they rather
increase their heat, and exasperate their Symptoms: wherein he discovers that
he is a mere Stranger to their Writings. Yea even the Cooling Juleps (says he)
prescribed by the Galenists, yield very small help; if they do not actually
prejudice Nature in the purifying work of Fermentations. Alas poor man! he
understands not the use and end of the Galenists prescribing these Cooling
Juleps, Of Cooling Juleps in
which are not only to cool and to quench that intemperate heat of the
Stomach, a thing most necessary to be done, and wherein the Patients find much
/ relief; but also to correct (as they are fitted by good Artists) the
Putrefaction and Ebullition of the Blood, and to help Nature to evacuate the
Morbous Humors / by Sweat, Siege, or Urine, and also to fortify the Digestions
and refresh the Spirits; being constantly found to do all this, better than his
Hot and Corrosive Diaphoreticks, made most what out of Poisons; yea and
frequently to correct the scorching heat and intemperies they have caused, as
upon mine own knowledge I can speak. Here we may see plainly an Emblem of Hell,
for if any man f^ll into a Fever, and be at this Physicians ordering,
his Case is like that of Dives, for he will not allow him a drop of Cold Water
to cool his Tongue, though he be tormented in those flames: It Is also very
likely from what he says, that Mr. S. is of opinion, that Dives was mistaken
in calling for Cold Water to cool his Tongue, but that it would have inflamed
him the more.

Here I would not be mis-understood: I commend Cooling Drinks in Fevers, as
Juleps, Emulsions, or Water, but not excessively Cold, as these possibly may be
in Winter: for the Stomach being a Nervous Part, may be offended with that
which is intensely Cold, its Concoctive Faculty being debilitated;
notwithstanding it may seem to be refreshed by it at the present, by dulling
the Appetite and Sense of Thirst: and therefore in my Practice I order that
these be aired a little to be made less cold, and so the moisture will
penetrate the better, and the Eventilation by insensible Transpiration or Sweat
furthered; as also they will pass down more speedily by Urine: and this is
according to the advice of Hippocrates ( lib. de Vsu Humidorum, and lib. 3. de
Ratione victus acut.)

Of (...).
As for what he says concerning Juleps and Cordials ( P. 102.) That they are
made up with Syrupes which clogg the Stomach by their sweetness. This is a
false Charge, wherein I may appeal to any that have occasion in Fevers to
experience them: Syrupes in themselves are alterative, and prepared for several
Indications, which we use pro re nata joined to our Juleps, with several other
things, as Spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur; which do both give a grateful Acidity
to the Palate and Stomach, and resist Putrefaction; and all these according to
the intention. I admire that in all things Mr. S. should be so mere a Stranger
to the Writings of his own Authors the Chemists. Zuelfer in his Pharmacop.
Regia describes above
50 sorts of Syrupes, which are made up with Sugar or Honey, whose Virtues he
also commends: even twice as many as any of our Apothecaries have, or need to
have in their Shops. And Schroderus mentions three times as many in his Pharm.
Med. Chymica: Yea no good Chemical Author that has writ de Re Medica, but he
describes them and commends them. Besides I know that he himself does
constantly use them, and more of late than formerly, having had sufficient
experience of the mischiefs done by his other hot Medicines, and the frequent
Complaints of his Patients, than which nothing is more ordinary in our Ears.

Of Emulsions.
Moreover, It is an usual thing in Fevers for Patients to complain of Acid
Humors in their Stomach^ and sharpness of Urine, which are exceeding well
corrected by Emulsions, yea and Syrupes too; the Sugar allaying their Acrimony,
and hindering the Spurious Fermentation of the Blood, as I could make out at
large out of the Chemical Writers themselves; to whom I find him so great a
Stranger, but that I study brevity. Vide Zuelfer, and Schroder.

Of Cordials.
Page 103. He affirms, That nothing is effectual as a Cordial, but such as do
compescere flatum, viz. oppose or take away wind. I pray let us consider that
Cordials are used in case of faintness at the Stomach; now this faintness may
proceed from several Causes, as in Fevers, many times the preternatural Heat of
the Stomach will cause Faintness, in which respect a Glass of Cold Water or a
Draught of Emulsion, or a Cooling Julep of Small Beer will give present Remedy,
yet I suppose that he will not say these correct Wind. Sometimes this faintness
comes from Corrupt Humors wherewith the Tunicles of the Stomach are infarcted,
in which Case a Vomit is a proper Remedy and yields present Relief; and yet he
will not affirm that it opposes Wind: so that it is not univers^lly true: Nor
that neither of Helmont, Nil cordi gratum quod Spiritui vini non sit nuptum.

(P. 104.) If we examine the Shop Cordials, we shall find the main Pillar of
them all to be Sugar, witness their Electuaries, Loochs, Conserves, Syrupes,
Confections, Cordial Waters, etc. as that their very Cordials in conclusion
prove burdensome to Nature. I have spoken to this in part already, showing that
we give not our Syrupes alone, so as by their lusciousness to clogge Nature,
but diluted in their Vehicles, that the Sugar is the least part of the
Medicine, and yet of singular use too. But I pray have not the Chemists all
these forms of Medicaments too! I wish you would study your own Authors a
little better, and not trouble the World with these frivolous Cavils, that
favor of nothing but ignorance, or something that is worse. Is Sugar the main
Pillar of all these Medicines? Certainly not so, there is only so much put to
them as may preserve them from corrupting, which when we have occasion to use,
you know we mix with several other things; as dry Cordial Species, with which
the Shops are well stored, wherein there is no Sugar at all; whereby we make
our Compositions according to our Intentions, and answerable to what
Complications w^ observe in the Diseases: and the success we have by these is
such, as nothing but desperate malice it self can traduce.

Of Bleeding.
Next he rants against letting blood in Fevers, as he does also in other places
of his Book, but with what reason or arguments we shall by and by examine. This
is certainly a most necessary and noble Remedy in Acute Diseases, provided
there be a redundancy of the Humors and a plenitudo ad vasa, Age and Strength
concurring, as Hippocrates says ( de Rat. Vict. Acut. Text. 16.) yea so many
Cases there are in which Bleeding is a Remedy, that we have often occasion to
do it; as in most sorts of Fevers, especially if there be a Putrefaction of the
Humors, and not any Malignity: so in Hot Distempers of Inflammations of the
Inward Parts, Pleurisies, Squinancies, Peripneumonies, Phlegmons of the Liver
or Spleen, Violent Ophthalmies, Gowtes, and Arthritick Pains, Frenzies,
Vomiting of Blood, Dangerous Wounds and Bruises by Falls, Vertigoes,
Lethargies, Coma's, Suppression of the Menses and Hemorrhoids, Acute Pains what
part soever they possess; in all these Cases it is accounted and assuredly
experienced to be a most present Remedy. But in all these, three special things
are always to be observed, according to the common Consent of all the Princes
in Physic, viz. The Magnitude of the Disease, the Flourishing Years of the
Patient, and his Strength and Habit of Body: To these I will add the time of
the Disease (for it is best in the beginning) the time of the year, the
Country, the Patients manner of life in point of Diet, and his Custom whether
he has been wont to be let blood or no.

Ay (says Mr. S.) if the worst parts of the Blood could be singled out from the
rest, then letting blood would prove a singular remedy, but the balsamic parts
are carried forth with the other. To this I reply, that he grossly mistakes, to
suppose that Blood is always taken, because of bad parts that are in it. In a
Plethorick Body we let blood, when we know there is no Peccancy in Quality at
all, only to lessen its quantity, which may be of singular use to prevent a
Disease, that otherwise would come on; so oftentimes for Revulsion, as in
several of the Cases I reckoned up, when there is no fault at all in the Blood,
and notwithstanding some of the balsamic parts (as he phrases it) go out, yet
if it were not done, the life would be hazarded. But farther let him know that
in Fevers, its ordinary for Physicians to observe their Patients so refreshed
immediately upon the taking of a due quantity of blood, that Nature, that
before lay grovelling as it were under the burden of the Disease, becomes an
absolute Conqueror over the Disease, and able to discharge its functions; (and
this I have seen a thousand times) which could not be, if loss of blood were so
great an impoverishing of the vital spirits as he speaks of.

Of Reiteration of Bleeding.
But that which next he disgusts is, The reiteration of bleeding, as is the
custom of some, not to excuse the Doctor, etc. Is it not strange that W. S.
should take upon him at every turn to censure both my words and my actions; and
that in my own proper business, wherein he is no way concerned? and I am
certain not fit to be a Judge? I have already made it appear that he is an
Ignoramus in his own Authors, the Chemists, and therefore its no wonder if he
understands not the advice of Hippocrates and Galon, and all the Ancient and
Modern Writers in Physic, concerning this point of bleeding in Fevers again
and again, if there be Indications. I can tell where several persons both in
Fevers and other Diseases, have died for want of bleeding, and where by some it
has been so long deferred, and yet afterward done when it was too late; and so
can W. S. if he do but rodere ungues: where I am assured if a Galenist had been
called, there had been no danger at all. Sed qui destinavit finem, ordinavit
media. Many like Stories does this City ring withal concerning some body, which
I am not at present willing to relate, because they have nothing of Argument in
them.

But ( P. 106.) he goes on to aggravate; Hence they that recover under their
hands, do it with much lingering and tediousness, because of the great
enfeebling of their spirits by the loss of blood. -- Why! then it appears our
Patients recover under our hands, notwithstanding the bleeding: Had they died,
we had been sure to have heard on it. But will not any wise man rather think,
that the lingering proceeded from the violence and deep rooting of the Fevers,
that exacted the repetition of the remedy, than from the bleeding it self?

But ( P. 107.) he comes to his Club-Law. Nay after a ternary of Bleedings, and
as often Vomitings and Purgings in an Obstinate Fever, etc. One being asked
what he would now do after all this? He answered, that unless he run the same
round again, he was at a stand what to do further. The querying Person
returned, that he did believe, if he run but the same round over again, from
the beginning to the end, the Patient would by that time be cured of all
Diseases. I desire the Reader to take notice that W. S. says all this was done
in an OBSTINATE FEVER, and I pray will not an Obstinate Disease require an
extraordinary process? Although I aver here is nothing that he mentions done in
the Case, which any Artist in the World would not have done, and doubtless is
frequently put to. And this is agreeable to what Hippocrates counsels ( Aphor.
6. lib. 1.) Vehementioribus morbis vehementiora remedia; viz. Great Diseases
must have answerable remedies. Not that here I used any Medicines that were
violent, but benign enough, in all things suited to Indications, and the
strength of the Patient; although (it seems) I did that which W. S. understood
not, and so I believe I may have occasion to do again.

The Case of Major J. St.
Here I think fit to tell the Story that he aims at, which I have liberty to do,
and name the Party if I please; but it is enough that many hundreds do know whom
I mean. Major J. St. a Gentleman of note in Yorkshire, of a good habit of body,
and in the flower of his age, did for more than a year labor under an
Anorexia, or Loss of Appetite and Digestion, so as I have often heard his
Landlady say, If she had been confined to his flint in eating during all the
time, she must needs have been starved. At last the Gentleman got a Surfeit, to
which was joined a most Violent Fever and a continual vomiting of what ever he
took. Now was I consulted, and saw cause to give a Vomit, and let blood, and
indeed to do many things, for the Correction of the violent Symptoms and the
Cure of the Disease, which was not likely to be very easily done (as the Reader
may guess) since it had been so long in taking root. In a few days the
continual Fever in all its Symptoms abated, only being in Winter, it
degenerated into a Tertian. This required a reiteration of the Vomit, and
Bleeding and Purging, according as I saw cause, with several other remedies;
whereby I daily gained ground, and had occasion to make very hopeful
Prognostics: although the Disease ran out unto two Months at the least. While
I was thus acting for my Patient, this Mr. Simpson procured himself to be
introduced one day to the Major, by a Gentleman who was an intimate Associate
of his, and pressed the Major to take the advice of this RARE CHEMIST, whose
Medicines he said would soon make a Cure. The Major told them both he was
abundantly satisfied in what I was doing, and bid Mr. S. take his time.

Here I could wish that all Physicians of a more regular stamp than this young
man, that have taken their Degrees in Physic, or otherwise are legally
licentiated, were not also too prone to undervalue their Profession, in begging
Practice and rudely intruding themselves into other men's business, without any
Call, especially in the latter end of a great Disease, which is the Custom of
some. But at this Mr. Simpson was very much offended; and this is the business
he aims at. Some few days after the Gentleman met me at the Majors Chamber,
and asked me what I thought of the event of all, and what further I would do? I
(knowing from the Major himself his design, and his good will toward me) told
him I had good grounds of hope of recovery, and further (it may be not so
gratefully to him) said, I would do as I should see cause pro re nata, even as
I had done all the while.

And herein I followed the Counsel of Hippocrates (2 lib. Aph. 52.) Si medico
secundum rectam rationem facienti, curatio non statim succedat, non est tamen
mutanda Methodus, quamdiu id restat quod a principio visum est. viz. If while a
Physician does act, according to right reason, the Cure does not presently
succeed, he ought not yet to change his Method, so long as that remains, which
was seen from the beginning. And whereas W. S. urges that all this while I gave
him not one good Diaphoretick ( P. 175.) though I am not bound to be
accountable to him, yet on this occasion I will endeavor to set him right, and
do assure him that during this course, I gave him three times as many
Diaphoreticks, as I did of any Medicine whatsoever, as my Bills this day extant
in the Apothecaries Shop do testify, and the Patient himself now in perfect
health does witness.

Now you must know this Gentleman who would have introduced W. S. was a
Pseudo-Chymist, who had wasted great sums of money in making Chemical
Experiments, and a Principal Confederate of Mr. Simpsons, and had a great hand
in compiling of this Book against me, as himself several times told the Major,
while it was in fieri, bragging how much they would wound me by it; concerning
which the Major is ready to give Oath, if there were occasion: But within a few
Months after the Gentleman himself fell sick, and so physicked himself with
his own Chemical Preparations, that he soon cured himself of all Diseases.


Upon the whole matter I admire at the folly of my Antagonist, that he would
urge any thing herein as an Argument against me, seeing he could not but know,
that the Patient soon after did thoroughly recover, long before his Book went to
the Press. But why do I trouble my self to rectify W.S. in his gross mistakes
about the cure of Fevers, whereby he will know more, than hitherto by all his
other Reading? save only that I would let him know, that the Galenists (whom
he so uncivilly spurns at) have good ground for every thing they do in the
management of their business, though he understands it not; and that their
endeavors are by the Blessing of God found very successful, even in the most
arduous Cases.

But at length He grants that the single breathing of a Vein, or Artery, or
Moderate Phlebotomy, may and does sometimes help in a Fever; I am glad the
Gentleman is convinced now at length; its not long since he was of another
mind, for about three years ago when he writ his Zenexton Antipestilentiale, he
severely declared against bleeding, even in Pleurisies; there he says ( P. 41.)
that it is unnecessary in all Fevers, though if any, the Pleurisy may seem to
plead a necessity but to whom? only to the Galenists, who know no better
remedy. I am afraid some poor men paid dear for his Learning. But I wonder what
he means by single breathing of a Vein; this is the doing it but once, and in a
small quantity, which will not always serve the turn, especially in the
Disease we are speaking of, viz. a Pleurisy, in which Case Hippocrates advises
to do it in case of extremity twice a day, and so on, according to the
magnitude of the Disease and strength of the Patient, as I my self had occasion
to do it this last week, even to 5 or 6 times; while no Diaphoretick, Vegetable
or Mineral, or other Applications inward or outward, would take off the Pungent
Pains, and that with excellent success. As for Moderate Phlebotomy, that may
be, and yet be done more than once, even often, and be accounted but Moderate
if the Case require it; and better it is to take often than too much at once.

(P. 108.) I confess (says he) I never order Phlebotomy oftener than once in a
Fever, and that with reluctance bemoaning my self. It seems Mr. S. is a very
PITIFVL PHYSICIAN. Well! its enough he shall not teach me, but really I believe
he has had many partners with him in that sorrow.

Nay further I have been with some Patients (says he) who in Pleurisies have
undergone a Galenical Method of twice bleeding, etc. ready for the third time,
and the Fever as high as at the first; whom after all this, I have cured with a
Diaphoretick Specific once or twice repeated; and sometimes one single Dose
thereof has done the feat. -- Speak out man where was this? Those that have
good advantages to observe, and do well know Mr. S. do desire the Reader to
understand that here is an HYPERBOLE, which among all the other Figures of
Rhetoric; with which his Writings abound, to the amusing of Common Readers, he
thinks not fit to leave out.

Then he goes on and says, That bleeding does diametrically oppose the
fortification of the Digestions and Vital Spirits, because it robs the blood of
its treasure, surreptitiously stealing away its balsome, and debilitates the
Vital Spirits, making them lower their Topsails, etc. -- Even just so a Ship
in a Storm over-laden with Merchants Goods, for the saving whereof some part is
thrown overboard, is much injured by being robbed of her treasure, whilst
after it she can hoyst up her Topsail, when the Mizen was too much before.

(P. 109.) As in Acute, so in Chronical Diseases, the frequent use of
Phlebotomy is not commendable nor proper. -- If he had told what Chronical
Diseases he had meant, I should probably have joined issue, for some do
necessarily require it, as the Case may be put, and others as severely
interdict it. And therefore he ought to have specified his Case in all reason
before he had condemned it. The Scurvy is a Chronical Disease, and does require
bleeding, if there be Strength and a Plethorical Constitution, and other things
premised that are advised by the Learned. So is the Consumption, and the
Dropsy, in both which Cases it is not tolerable.

Of Thirst in Fevers.
( P. 110.) Mr. S. is Retrograde in his Discourse, resuming his Topic of
Thirst, which of all Symptoms is most urging; which (says he) according to the
Galenists proceeds from a hot and dry Distemper of the Stomach, to answer which
Indication, they most frequently order cool and moist things; which if the
cause of thirst were as they suppose, they would have a most facile way of
Cure, in case that were true, Contraria suis contrariis curantur. -- And then
he falls on as his manner was before to inveigh against Cool Drinks. Well! It Is
no great matter, Mr. S. will never hurt Physician while he keeps in this mind,
and never profit Patient. I have already expressed the necessity and usefulness
of Cooling Drinks, and therefore I Will not further enlarge, only do say, that if
it be singly a hot and dry Distemper at the Stomach, its necessary to correct
it with Drinks that are Cold and Moist, as the most present remedy, to wit,
necessitate medii, although the end does not always presently follow the most
rational means. And if it be the Symptom of a Fever, although it require other
things which are not done in instanti, yet drinking Cool Drink is necessary
too, lest through the omission of it, that Symptom of Thirst become more
intolerable, than the Fever it self.

Contraria contrariis curantur.
As for the Rule that he refers to, Contraria contrariis curantur. It is to be
understood in a right sense. Nature it self is Morborum Curatrix, and therefore
those things which do strengthen Nature, have a great influence into the Cure
of Diseases, although they act not thus by any contrariety of quality in
respect of the Disease; but from a similitude of property; for the supplying of
Natures deficiency, which having now got new force and vigor, arms it self
against the Disease, and reduces its excesses into a Mediocrity, acting in
every thing contrary to the Disease; and thus Nature works as an efficient and
proximal Cause, and the remedy as an instrumental and more remore Cause.

Again, There are some Diseases that seem to be cured by their like; thus
vomiting by a Vomit, and purging by a Purge, although these are not performed
per se, but per accidens, by the taking away of thos^ peccant humors, which
being retent were the Causes of the Malady. But as for such Diseases as do
consist in the excess of some one or more of the four first qualities, those
are cured by their Contraries; thus a Hot Disease is best helped by Cooling,
and a Cold Disease by Heating Remedies, and so I might also say of the other
two, viz. Dryness and Moisture; and this is agreeable not only to the Doctrine
of Hippocrates and Galen, and all their Followers, but even the knowing
Chemists assent thereto; and Paracelsus goes this way, who treating of the
solution of Metals ( Tract. 2. cap. 8.) Hoc (inquit) ad differentias Metallorum
attendi debet, ut si Morbus a calore sit, Metalla frigida assumas, si a frigore
calida. That is to say, As to the difference of Metals diligent heed is to be
taken, that if the Disease come from heat, you take those Metals that are cold,
and if from cold, then such as are heating.

Only Mr. Simpson is very hasty, for he says ( P. 110. Nihil fit in instant^
) If Diseases be cured by their Contraries, then the Cure should be forthwith
effected, even as soon as an answerable degree is applied. I deny the
consequence, for nihil fit in instanti; Natural Agents are not so quick and
forcible in their Operation, nor are Patients so ready to receive impression,
especially when the contrary quality to what it has already, is to be imprinted
upon it; for there is a reluctance arising from the contrariety, that hinders
the instantaneous effect, which must first be overcome by the more forcible
strength of the Agent, before the contrary quality can be stamped upon it; for
which there is necessarily required a proportionable time, as in all these
remedies which we call alterantia.

When our Blessed Savior wrought the Miracle upon the Blind Man, Mark 8.23.
upon the first use of the remedy he had not a perfect recovery, but only
gradual; seeing men as Trees. But after a further application his sight was
perfectly restored, and he saw clearly; and yet notwithstanding the Miracle is
not lessened. So may we judge concerning Natural Effects in the Cure of
Diseases, that they must be gradual, and yet be good Cures too; especially if
we consider, that it is not so much a small peccancy in a single quality (as
suppose Heat, and consequently Thirst in a Fever) which we are to alter, as an
intemperies in some remote parts, or in the Humors which contribute toward it,
and must also be corrected, which must necessarily be by a reiteration of the
remedy, and require time and patience; and these intentions are excellently
well performed by the Cooling Juleps of the Galenists.

But notwithstanding all this severity we have seen in Mr. S. against these
Cooling Drinks and Juleps in Fevers, yet in the next Page, upon more serious
Consideration he commiserates the poor man, and allows him some Drink to quench
his Thirst, and blames those that with held it, for want of which (he says) the
Fever becomes the more increased, and all the symptoms more exasperated. --
Why! I know none that ever prohibited it but himself, who ( P. 102.) said, That
Cooling Juleps did more harm than good, and inflame the Fever more. I must
confess I never saw any man so confident in asserting Contradictions in all my
reading, as this Author is.

But he seems to allow Drink for the liquid quality to dilute and soften those
burnt sordes, though it does not satisfy the Thirst, or else all things go the
worse. -- Is not here a contrariety of qualities betwixt the liquid drink, and
the dry and burnt sordes that are in the Stomach, the very thing which he
argued against in the foregoing Page? But I pray how came those sordes to be
burnt but from heat, and does not the scorching heat as much need its contrary
to correct it, viz. cooling, as the dryness does moistning, especially since
heat is a more active quality than Dryness? And since the dryness comes from
the heat, why should he go about to correct the Effect, and let alone the
Cause? Do not the Galenists far more prudently, who at once by their Juleps,
etc. correct both the Cause and the Effect. and the intemperies to boot, which
appears in other parts?

P. 112. I have often wondered, Of Diaphoreticks.
the Galenists should not more seriously take into consideration the efficacy of
Diaphoreticks or Sweating Medicines in Fevers, (he says) is a most effectual
means to quench Thirst and abate a Fever. -- Really I cannot but much more
wonder at his confidence, to impose upon the World, that which the meanest of
men know certainly to be true; viz. That in Fevers the Galenists do constantly
use Diaphoreticks, and more too that he little understands, and thereby are
more successful than he. I am assured those in and about York, whom he has the
best opportunity to know, have been ever wont to use them in Fevers, even
before he understood his Primmer, and do so at this day. Certainly it would
better become this young man to learn more Modesty, than thus magisterially to
teach his Superiors, who in all their several Countries throughout the World,
are Men of Learning, Honor, and Reputation, and know better Remedies and
Processes in Physic than he, understanding both the Galenical and Spagyrical
way of Practice, while it appears he is too much a stranger to them both; not
well understanding the Writings of his own Chemical Authors.

Why! The very Cooling Juleps which we were just now treating of, do further
Transpiration through the insensible pores of the Skin, and provoke Sweat many
times to the quenching of the Violent Heat of Fevers, as I have found many
times, when all his dry Diaphoreticks would do nothing.

Of Laudanum.
Touching his rant about Laudanum, a few grains whereof (he says) will quiet the
Spirits for a time, quench Thirst, and allay Pains, and all this as a
Diaphoretick. -- That Laudanum does all these as a Diaphoretick remains to be
proved; A quatenus ad omne valet Consequentia, if as a Diaphoretick, then every
Diaphoretick should do as much, viz. quiet the Spirits, quench Thirst, and
allay Pains, but every one will not do it; as his Antimonium Diaphoreticum,
which next he treats of will not do it; and therefore it does not this as a
Diaphoretick, but as a Narcotick and by virtue of the Opium.

( P. 113.) He proceeds to talk of Antimonium Diaphoreticum, Of Antimonium
Diaphoreticum.
which (he says) the Galenists are afraid of because its a Chemical
Preparation, and that they give but 3, 4, 5, 6, or 7 Grains, while he dares
give 60 without scruple. There is no doubt to be made, but he that is so big in
his Writing, will be bold enough in his Prescripts, as we shall have occasion
to observe by and by. This Antimonium Diaphoreticum is a Composition made up of
Antimony, Nitre, and Tartar; now turn to P. 180. and he confesses that Antimony
has in it an Arsenical Sulphur, which though it may be corrected by Fire, and
made a harmless Medicine for Sweating, yet is it not necessary a Physicien be
sure that it be well done, and so rather keep within a safe compass in point of
Dose, than be in danger of exceeding?

Besides, the Constitution of Patients is different, which he that is the
immediate Physician is most fit to judge of, and not another, who understands
not all circumstances that occur; and therefore it were better that others and
particularly Mr. S. would forbear to censure that which they know not, but
trust every man in his own business: Possibly Mr. S. might at some time look
into an Apothecaries Shop, and there might see into some of our Bills, where 3
or 4 Grains might be ordered for a Child, or for some very feeble Patient
subject to Colliquation, where a Physician for reasons best known to himself,
had prescribed some small quantity of this Medicine, increasing his Dose with
another sort of Diaphoretick; but what is this to him to tell the World of it?

Moreover, Schroderus (who is a Learned Chemist) accounts the Dose to be from
10 Grains to 25 at the most. ( Pharm. Med. Chym* lib. 3. cap. 18.) though Mr.
S. amounts to 60. But especially its considerable what the acute Zuelfer says
concerning this Antim. Diaph. to wit, That what way soever it be prepared, it
will in time from the Air contract a dangerous malignant quality, which may
cause oppression at the heart, fainting and vomiting; and so become not so safe
to be given inwardly. ( Mantis Hermet. P. 800.) Is it not therefore needful,
that we should be careful how we use this Chemical Preparation, and by all
means so to do it, as it may be safe and yet successful? Now this Medicine is
used in Malignant Fevers or otherwise, when we would provoke Sweat; but if it
be not well prepared and purged from its Arsenical Sulphur, what woeful work
would there be, if instead of sweating the Patient should fall into vomiting or
purging. Ay but (says he) it is of my own preparation, and therefore I dare
more confide in it. -- Therefore indeed he may the better give it, but the main
Question is, Whether the Patient may the better take it? Besides, if Antim.
Diaph. may contract a malignant quality from the Air, were it not safer to give
it in a less quantity? and may not there also be danger, lest the Acid Humors
in the Body should make it resume its Malignity as well as the Air? Upon the
account of all which, let wise men judge whether acts more prudently, he that
gives 60 Grains, or he that gives 8 or 10.

For further satisfaction concerning this thing, I refer the Reader to what I
have to say in my Animadversions on the 195th Page of this his Book.

(P. 115.) He proceeds to treat of what Diseases the Spaw at Scarbrough cures,
viz. The Scurvy, Dropsy, Stone, Strangury, Jaundice, Hypochondriack
Melancholy, Cachexia, Women's Diseases, etc. -- I confess I cannot but wonder to
see the confidence of Mr. S. who knows nothing at all of these things but by my
Book, no more than he that lives at Constantinople, and has read my Book there.
Indeed this is the only thing wherein I am beholden to him, in that he gives
me Credit, although sometimes he makes Comments which the Text will not bear,
and by a multiplicity of foolish new-coyn'd words, does obscure that (even) to
some wise and learned men, which was plain and obvious to Common Understandings.


But upon the grounds he yet goes on, I declare it impossible that the Spaw
should have such Virtue as to cure these Diseases; for if we observe, he owns
nothing of a Mineral property to be in it, but an Esurine Aluminous Salt ( P.
116. Numb. 3.) Now whether we consider the properties of Alome, as I have
instanced (in the 145. Page of Scarb. Spaw 2d Edition) or the Verdict of the
most profound Authors concerning Aluminous Springs, we shall find it impossible
that the Spaw should have any such Virtue, upon his Principle he rests on, as I
have already made out in my animadversions on P. 61.

But to amend the matter, He would have it seconded by other penetrating
Medicines of his own preparation. -- Why! I can assure him, the Cures I
mention, were done without any of his preparations, and the like probably may
be done again; although not without some other helps sometimes, as the Cases
may require.

( P. 118. He tells of a sort of Dropsy which he styles Anasarcasis, which is
a word (I guess) of his own coining, for he means Anasarca. He says, They that
are tapp'd for the Dropsy viz. the Tympany (for he is speaking of it, in which
Case doubtless he never saw any man tapp'd) they let forth an almest insipid
liquor; so that water which passes from those that drink plentifully of the
Spaw, has no Vrinous Salt, and so neither Tincture nor Sapour. -- Sure he never
saw any tapp'd for the Dropsy, in that he says it is insipid, I have several
times found it of a brown Color and a brackish Taste. And if he will distill
or evaporate away the water of those that drink of the Spaw, as I have done, he
shall find a slimy Sediment, highly impregnated with an Urinous Salt.

(P. 119.) He tells, That There are some Causes of a Dropsy, which will resist
all Medicines, except the noblest of Chemical Arcana's -- Really it is great
pity he had not found those Chemical Arcana's when Robert Beford was in his
hands in this Disease (of whom I made mention before) whom if he had let alone,
he might probably have seen cured without Chemical Arcana's.

Lunar Pills.
( P. 120) He reckons up several of his Chemical Arcana's, which he counts
highly of for the Cure of the Dropsy, among which are the Pilulae Lunares, of
which he confesses, he never found any considerable success, and for the sake
of the Aqua Fortial he rather advises against. --
I am much afraid poor Beford had of these his Lunar Pills, which he took for
Chemical Arcana's, for his Complaint was of such an Heat and Corrosion in his
Stomach and Bowels, as if he had taken his Aqua Fortial Spirits. But it is well
he does confess his fault, and I wish he may reform, and not make Experiments
of Poisonous Medicines upon the Bodies of Men, to the hazard of their Lives, in
an Empirical use of unsafe and ill-corrected Mineral Medicines, imperfectly
described in Paracelsus and Helmont, which he knows not either how to make or
use.

Of Hysterical Fits.
( P. 128.) He proceeds to treat of the Hysterical Fits in Women, where he runs
(as almost in all things) such a riot in an unwholesome form of words, peculiar
to himself alone, as who so will have the patience to read, shall find matter
enough for laughter, but nothing that merits the least line of reply. Satis est
nominasse refelli.

A False Charge.
Only I observe he forges a Figment upon the Galenists, as if they should say
that the Fits of the Mother do proceed from a Windiness of the Matrix, which he
most scurrilously fancies to be charged like a Gun and ramm'd, etc. which I
wonder he is not ashamed to have said, and exposed to public view, in unsavory
words, which a regular Scholar, or Physician, or a good Christian would abhor
to have written, and every modest Person, especially those of the Female Sex do
abominate to read.

But besides this its utterly false, for no such thing was ever said or writ by
any man that deserves the name of a Galenist, nor if you mark does he cite any
of their Writings in the Case, neither indeed in any thing that he objects
against them, but frames Arguments out of his own Brain* on purpose to traduce
them.

In this business I Will refer the Learned and Judicious Reader to my late
intimate Friend and Colleague Doctor Primerose, in that excellent Treatise of
his de Morbis Mulierum, where he treats (in lib. 3. cap. 11.) of this Disease;
he reckons up the Opinions both of the Ancients and Modern Writers, concerning
the Causes of these Hysterical Fits, but not one syllable of Windiness in the
Matrix to be the cause of them. At last he concludes of two principal Causes
from whence they proceed ordinarily ( P. 207.) Frequenter itaque causa est
seminis corruption, ut in viduis and libidinosis Mulieribus, si Viri amplexibus
fraudentur, contingit. And this he shows to agree with what Hippocrates, Galen,
Epicurus, Democritus, Rondeletius, and others have writtten. Another cause
which he assigns ( P. 209.) is, Quilibet humor in utero putrescens, tetrum
venenatumque vaporem expirat. Id ostendit (inquit) quod vetulas etiam quasdam
infestat, quibus nec seminis nec sanguinis superfluitas colligitur: tum etiam
eas quae been purgantur, and Viri consuetudine fruuntur. And this also he shows
to be agreeable to the Doctrine both of the Ancient Princes in Physic and
Modern Writers too.

I shall need to say no more, but refer it to the Ingenuous Reader to judge of
the Spirit of this Man, and who can be safe from blasting, while such a
malevolent breath as this blows upon him.

( P. 132.) Mr. S. treating of the Green Sickness in Maids, says, it will not
bend to the single help of this Spaw, etc. where little or no body of a Mineral
is found. --

Let the wise Reader judge whether this man understands what he treats of, that
says this Spaw has little or no Body of Minerals in it, when five Quarts
contain at the least an Ounce of Minerals, and in dry years ten Drams, while
the usual Dose for Women in this Case is three Quarts of Water, and sometimes
more.

And thus having examined what he has said concerning Scarbrough Spaw, together
with several Discourses that hang thereupon, and particularly his Objections
against the Rational Method of Physic, or the Galenical Way (as he calls it) I
am content to submit all I have said to the Judgment of the Learned and
Impartial Reader. I shall now follow him as close as I can through what
remains, and that with what brevity I may, because I would not swell into a
Volume.

Pyrologia Mimica.
The Second Part.
Malton Spaw.
Page 134. He takes occasion to discourse concerning Malton Spaw, which I
mention P. 194. in my Book of Scarbrough Spaw. The plain truth is, this Spaw he
has as little experimental knowledge of as the other, having only saluted it in
Transitu, ceu Canis ad Nilum, and therefore he is but very short, referring to
what he has said of the other; wherein if he had observed the like brevity, I
believe he would have come off with more credit. What difference there is
betwixt these two Waters, I have in few words expressed in my Book.

Knaresbrough Spaw.
( Page 136.) He proceeds to speak of the Sweet Well at Knaresbrough, concerning
which Doctor French has writ a
very ingenious Discourse at large, which he has illustrated with very many
pretty Experiments, out of which our Author has drawn abundance of his, which
here we have crowded together often times confusedly enough, and yet he owns not
his Author in any of them.

( Page 137.) He says its but a poor lean Water, and thin of Minerals, and
therefore persuades to intermix Salt of Steel with it; and he gives some
directions about the drinking of it, all which might well have been spared,
since Doctor Dean and Doctor French have writ copiously of that Subject, and
laid open the Nature of that Water, and several Cures it has wrought, and given
better directions to help the slowness of the Water, who both of them did a
hundred times better understand that Water than he.

Sulphur Well.
( Page 142.) He passes on to the Sulphur Well at Knaresbrough, which he says
has a strong body of Sal Marine in it; now if we look back to what he said (
P. 55.)
he tells us this Well is saturate with Fossile Salt. I wish he would reconcile
these Contradictions. But how is it probable that this Spring should partake so
plentifully of Sal Marine (of which there is the quantity of two Ounces in a
Gallon of the Water, as I have found upon trial) what communication has this
Well with the Sea, more than other Springs, it being 40 miles from the Sea, and
how can he suppose that the Subterraneal Channels should convey the Salt of the
Sea in puris naturalibus 40 miles, and yet others be purged and defecated of
the Salt that are nearer the Sea? for my own part I see no reason to believe
it, and shall leave it to others to believe as they find cause. Besides if it
should proceed from such a plentiful Fountain as the Sea, since the Salt is not
left behind it in the passage it should necessarily have a larger Channel than
other Springs, and so be a very plentiful Spring, whereas it is a very
penurious one, and if I mistake not, voids not a Gallon in an hour. I therefore
rather think it receives its Salt, from the Nature of the Soil where it
bubbles, and that it has also imbibed Sulphur and Bitumen.

Methink he might have contented himself with what the Authors a foresaid have
said concerning this Well, to whom he has added nothing, save only an Harangue
of impertinent discourse, as his constant way is, whereby he confounds both
himself and the Reader, and disparages that Spring, Affirming it not to be of
much more efficacy, than so much Trencher Salt, dissolved in such a proportion
of ordinary Water, in P. 146. In opposition to which I could join issue with
him, but I shall rather leave that to others, more concerned, to assert their
Experiences, who probably will think themselves concerned to maintain the
Ancient Reputation, both of this and the Sweet Spaw, which he has not a little
blasted.

Of Hot Springs.
In P. 148. He treats of the Original of Hot Springs, where he borrows largely
from Kircher in his Mund. Subter. together with his Experiments, as also
Monsieur de Rochas; at last he determines that they proceed from Calx vive,
which Notion he has from a Relation I make in my Book ( P. 80.) of an
Observation made by a Noble Lord of this Nation, viz. the Lord Thomas Fairfax,
of some heaps of a White Powder which he found sweat out of the Earth near
Bath, which being put into Water makes it hot, as I my self did experience five
or six years after his Lorship had taken it up, some of which I had from his
Lordship.

A false Charge on the Galenists
(P. 158.) He falls to make a Vindication of Chemical Physic, which (he says)
lies under an Odium by the Galenists. In my Judgment he might very well have
spared his pains herein, there being no cause in the World for a Vindication,
nor do I know of any man in these parts that ever opened his mouth against it.
Indeed he and others stepping into the Practice of Physic four or five years
ago, had a design to turn all the Practice of Physic in the City and County of
York to the Chemical way, exclaiming in all Companies they came in against the
Medicines of the Shops, which are prepared according to the London
Dispensatory, established by the Law of the Land; after the same rate as here is
expressed in his Book: This both my self and others of my faculty thought fit to
oppose, not condemning Chemical Medicines well prepared, which we all daily
use, but maintaining the Ancient Honor, Reputation, and successfulness of the
Rational Practice which he calls Galenical.

The Chemical Way we own as an excellent Appendix to the Noble Art of Physic,
and if the Gentlemen had been but good natured and modest, I do confidently
affirm they had in all things found a suitable respect from us all; but why they
should go about to make Chemistry an Art of its own kind, and like a viperous
brat to eat through the bowels of its dam, in designing to root up the Ancient
and Rational Practice of Physic, which has in all Ages been successful and
continues so to be in our hands, as with modesty I hope I may say, I see no
cause for it.

Has not the Honorable Society of the College of Physicians of London owned
the Art, and appointed a multitude of Chemical Medicines in their Pharmacopeia,
which suit variety of Indications? And had not they an Operator whom they
encouraged for the making up of those their Remedies, till Death came, which
made a Caput Mortuum of him? And had not they a Laboratory in London, till the
Dreadful Fire made a Calcination of it; which now they are preparing to set up
again? What cause then is there, that this man should complain thus, or that he
should need to rise up in Vindication of that which no man opposes?

It is well known to the Learned that many Ancient Writers have treated of
Chemistry, as Avicen, Rhasis, Albumazar, Haly, etc. in Arabic: Democritus,
Myrepsus, Zosymus, Marcellus, Heliodorus, etc. in Greek: and an abundance of
Latin Authors, that would be tedious to reckon up for these two or three last
Centuries, no man of learning or worth ever opening his mouth or using his Pen
against it, although some are more affected toward it than others; and truly
methink every man should be left to his liberty in that point, to use or not
use this or that method as he shall see cause, without being imposed on or
censured by another, so long as he is faithful and honest in his business, as
also learned and rational, and willing to give convenient satisfaction to
others, and able to make it out by success.

Nay I could make it out if it were needful, that the most eminent professed
Galenists have spoken honorably in their Writings of this Art of Chemistry,
and prescribed a number of Medicines so prep^red, both out of the Vegetables
and Minerals and Metals. As Sennertus, Mercatus, Pereda, Rodericus a Castro,
Horstius, Freitagius, Crato; and of our own Nation Dr. Glysson, Dr. Primerose,
Dr. Willis, Dr. Wharton, and many others eminently learned, both who have
written and have not, whom I know to be Lovers of the Art, and the useful
discoveries which we have by it: Upon all which account Mr. S. might very well
have spared this Vindication.

No difference among the learned.
And as the Galenists approve both in their Writings and Practice of Chemical
Medicines, so the most learned among the Chemists do use the Galenical. Thus
Zwelfer has made his Comment upon the Pharmac. Augustana, and left one of his
own, which he calls Pharmacopaeia Regia, which are as full of all sorts of
Medicines, viz. Syrupes, Distilled Waters, Electuaries, Extracts, Pills,
Powders, Cordial Species, Lohochs, Trochisks, Oils, Ointments, and Cerates, as
our London Dispensatory, and made out of the very same matter, viz. the
Vegetables, though Mr. S. cries them down, saying ( P. 161.) That there are not
above a score that are good for any thing. Thus also Schroderus and Excellent
Chemist has writ another after the same Method. Likewise Hadrianus a Mynsicht,
so Libavius, Renodaeus, Crollius, Hartman, go this way, describing Medicines
both out of the Vegetables, and Minerals, and Metals: all which we know and
make use of in our Practice, at least so many as we approve of to be good and
wholesome. And why may not this be done without reproaching one another?

Indeed of late some Controversies have been started betwixt some who call
themselves Chemists and others, but in those it plainly appears the Chemists
have been the Aggressors, and the other only defensive: Or else they have risen
from some personal quarrel, in which other wise and learned men on both sides
have not thought fit to interess themselves, but have rather privately
endeavored to compose their differences, and so to keep the Peace in the
Faculty. And even in these also (if I mistake not) the Chemists have begun the
Controversy.

And thus it is betwixt my Adversary and me, while I had never disobliged
either him or any man else, nor meddled with any thing in Controversy, save
only with the Dispute about the Original of Springs, which I modestly carried
on by Argument, without any the least personal reflection upon any man that had
engaged in it, leaving every man to believe as he saw cause; and in treating of
the Mineral Ingredients and Virtues of the Spaw was modest in all my
Assertions; even then and therefore does he fly in my face with uncivil
personal reflections, and takes thereby occasion to throw dirt in the face of
the most Learned Physicians in the World, and the Universities, as we shall see
by and by: and then to make a Vindication of Chemical Physic as if it were
opposed. And all this merely to carry on a design of over-turning the Rational
Practice, and advancing his own way of Practice; which whether it be so safe or
no, I shall now examine, yet without the least intention to reflect either upon
the Chemical Way in general, or any Learned and Candid Professor thereof.

He says ( P. 158.) That till within this ten or a dozen years this Noble
Science bath undergone much ignominy. -- I have reckoned up a number of Authors
who have writ in Commendation of it, and mentioned several in these our own
days and Nation, who are Fautors of it; and therefore I judge there is no
cause for this complaint. But if it has sustained any ignominy, it has
proceeded either from the ignorance of such as were pretenders to it, but did
not prepare their Medicines aright, or else from those that use them
preposterously.

I grant that this Noble Art (which doubtless is more proper than to call it a
Science) has got more reputation of late than formerly, and I wish it may never
lose it again by the folly of its Professors.

( P. 159.) We see (says he) that in all Concretes whether Animal, Vegetable,
or Mineral, there is a mixture of pure and impure, of gross and tenuious parts,
etc. Yet as to medicinal use, its the pure, nimble, and spirituous parts of
Vegetables or Animals, or the depurated fixed part, or the reunion of both
after purification, which assists Nature against the Malady. -- First, Gross
parts not unfit for Medicine.
I do not think that the gross parts are always impure, and the thin parts
pure, but that even the gross parts may be as pure as the thin (and in some
drugs are more useful than the thin.) Thus Water and Earth though they be more
gross, yet are as pure Elements as Fire and Air, and equally joined with them
in the Composition of mixed Bodies. Had God Almighty made Man merely a
spiritual substance, I should have thought that he had been best fed and
physickt with pure spirituous parts and quintessences; but having also a gross
Body, and a capacious Stomach and Bowels, fitted to receive gross parts and
furnished with Concoctive Faculties, whereby the Virtue of them for Diet or
Physic are commodiously drawn out, I think the gross parts were as well let
alone, and not taken from the thin parts, only a little fitted for Natures more
easy extraction, as we use to do by Fire.

Thus we see our Bodies are well nourished with Flesh, and Corn, and Vegetables
in their gross Bodies, whereas the Chemical Extracts, and Spirits or
Quintessences of these, would soon feed a Man to death: And the like reason
there is for Physic, wherein the gross parts are sometimes to be preferred far
before their Spirits. Rubarb is an excellent Purge for Choler, and also
astrictive, the Chemical Spirit or Oil not so. Thus Pepper grossly beaten is
better against Wind, and also the Decoction of Anise seeds, than their Chemical
Spirits, by the consent of many Learned Writers.

And the Acute Zwelfer in his Mantissa Hermeti^a (P. 782.) prefers the Powders
of Pearl, Coral, Hartshorn, etc. far before the Magisteries, Of Magistery of
Pearl, etc. Not so safe as when ^nprepared.
and concludes with this Expression, Hinc and reliqua Magisteria ex Coralliis,
Perlis, and consimilibus Gemmis parvi pendo, imo penitus rejicio; and Platerus
says, That some things are better suited to our Natures when unprepared, than
when they have undergone the Chemists Fire. Thus Crato in his Epistle to
Monavius cited by Scholtzius (Ep. 163. (who was himself a great friend to
Chemistry) taxes the Pseudochymists for spoiling many good Medicines in
extracting their Quintessences (too long here to recite) and particularly
concerning the making of their Magistery of Pearl, or extracting its Spirits
with Acetum Radicatum; whereby the whole substance of the Pearl is corrupted,
and becomes corrosive. And he tells of one Casparus Logus, who by taking this
Magistery from a Paracelsian died, and being opened, the Tunicles of his
Stomach were found black and corrupted: and the like he says happened to a
Marquess his Lady, whose Stomach was eaten through with the poison thereof. And
yet this we know is an excellent Cordial as its used by the Galenists in
substance.

And of the same mind is the ingenious Mr. Boil in several places of his
Skeptical Chemist, as also in many other places of his Writings, particularly
in his Experimental Philosophy (2 Part. cap. 6. p. 148.) Methinks (says he)
those that practice as if Nature presented us nothing worth the accepting,
unless it be cooked and perfected by Vulcan, might consider that Paracelsus
himself oftentimes imployeth Simples for the cure even of formidable Diseases.
Besides the success that we have in the use of Conserves, Condites, Powders,
and Compositions, made of these might satisfy any rational person, which is
done with much more safety and gratefulness, than with Spirits and Chemical
Oils.

And whereas Mr. S. will have these Spirits and purer parts (as he calls them)
to be reunited after separation, and put into other Vehicles; I think their
own parts are the most proper Vehicles they can be joined to, as being
connatural to them, (I speak of Vegetables.) Indeed as for Minerals and Metals,
which are most what virulent and venomous, or else whose grossness renders them
indomitable, and uneasy to Nature to extract their Virtues, doubtless a
separation of their useful and thin parts by Fire or Salts, is of great use in
them, and not at all to be rejected.

(Page 161.) Mr. S. acknowledges, There may be about a Score of Choice Plants,
Mr. S. a great Herbalist.
which well managed with a skilful hand, may by their singular Virtues produce
considerable effects, the rest are not (that we know of) of much use. -- If we
take his Parenthesis in the singular number, perhaps he says truly, for it may
be he knows not a Score, I hope he will not hinder others from knowing more
than he, perhaps as many hundreds as he does Units, and how to use them when
occasion serves.

(P. 162.) What heaps of Plants (says he) by some Physicians are ordered to
stuff Diet-bags withal, whereas a few choice good ones might probably be more
effectual? I confess I do not at all approve of the Practice of some who make
such laborious Of heaping up ^imples.
Bills, which are ever so to the Apothecaries, and often times to the Patients.
Usually they are such as do least understand Materiam Medicam. Certainly
Physicians should never put any Medicine into a Composition, which does not
answer some indication.

Besides some Simples are (...) and have such a dissonancy betwixt themselves,
as that they will not grow together, but the one destroys the other, and so it
may be too in their conjunction in a Composition of Physic. I read in Ernestus
Burgravius (his Achilles (...) Redivivus) a Story which he has ( Page 94.) out
of Barthol. Carichterius, that if a Fig and the Berry of Alkekengi, (which we
know are both innocent being used apart) be joined in a Composition, they
become a deadly poison, quod Cani propinatum eum faciet crepare medium, which
would burst a Dog. And he lays it down as a Caution to those that use to stuff
so many simples together, which are often times of contrary qualities; when
perhaps a Simple well known, or a small Composition would better suit the Case.
I confess I tried this, but it did not kill the Dog, only he purged extremely;
perhaps they should be both new, and then probably it might succeed.

Then he goes on, and for several Pages together tells of the great use of
Fire, for the extracting of several parts, as a Phlegma, Spirit, Oil, and Salt
out of Vegetables, Animals, Minerals, and Metals, which no man ever doubted of;
for Art will easily separate all these parts: but to what purpose? concerning
which we have treated already. But he says, ( P. 166.) that all Middle Minerals
or Marcasites and Metals are actually poisonous: Minerals and Metals poisonous.
And again Antimony, the Mineral Stone of Vitriol, Bismuth, etc. have venomous
properties, that unless they be corrected by Fire and good Solvents, they do
deny us their Medicinal Virtues, and rather actually impress their virulency
upon our Vital Principles. Who can have a worse Friend than he brings from
home? Is not this enough to make men startle at Chemical Medicines, for fear
all his Art cannot correct their poison? I acknowledge in the hands of a good
Artist, some Medicines may be made out of these that are safe, but then they
are to be discreetly used, since I have already shown out of Zwelfer the danger
that is in them of resuming their virulency, even after a due preparation.

( P. 167.) He undertakes to answer the Objections which are made against this
Art by the Galenists. -- Why! I have already shown that the Galenists do not
except against the Art, though perhaps they may except against some that call
themselves Operators therein. Galenists are not enemies to Chemistry
I do verily believe they are better friends to the Art of Chemistry than many
that call themselves Chemists, for they honor it by making wholesome
preparations, and using them in due and safe proportions, and with such success
too as no man complains of them; and therefore they have always been improvers
of it: whereas some of the other go to poisonous Drugs, which its to be
suspected they do not prepare well, or cannot, and hence many mischiefs ensue
in their Practice.

First (says he) They say the Chimical Remedies are Hot, which we deny, and he
instances in Antimonium Diaphoreticum, Bezoarticum Minerale, Cinnabar of
Antimony, none of which are Hot to the Taste. -- What then I pray, may they not
yet be Hot in Operation, in the Stomach and Bowels, though not in the Taste?
There may be a Corroding Quality which may revive upon the access of the Acid
Humors in the Stomach from that Drug, that to the Taste was not Hot, as even
now I proved out of Zwelfer, concerning this very Antimonium Diaphoreticum; and
the same I may so of Bezoarticum Minerale, which is also made out of Antimony,
and sometimes with Aqua fortis (vide Schroder P. 411.) and so likewise of the
Cinnabar.

Of Coldness in the Air.
From this he takes occasion to discourse of Cold, and the Cause thereof in the
Air, making it to be a Positive Quiddity, to wit, if I understand him aright, a
substance, and yet inherent in the Air: How this will stand with the Rules of
Philosophy, it were well he had made out, which denies Penetrationem Corporum.
Certainly Cold is rather a Quality naturally inherent in the Air, which it
always retains, unless by the reverberation of the Sunbeams in this lower
Region, it be altered; so that if any thing happen to debar it from the Suns
heat, that which was warm will soon be cool again, more or less, according to
the prevalency and duration of those External Causes.

( P. 174.) He again resumes his invective against the Galenists for giving
Cold Drink in Fevers, which he says denotes their ignorance of the Essential
Cause of a Fever. -- To discourse here about the Essential Causes of Fevers is
impertinent, and it would be tedious: I shall only say what ever is the Cause,
its necessary that violent pressing Symptom of Heat and Drought be regarded,
without which there will be foul work. But to this I have spoken already ( ad
P. 102.) well Mr. S. take your Course, and so will the Galenists, you are
pertinacious in your Opinion, and I shall not further endeavor to undeceive
you. The Galenists cured Fevers before you were born, or Paracelsus either,
from whom you fetch this Notion, and you see daily they do so still. It Is to be
seared this Opinion of yours (for I cannot call it Judgment) will cost many a
man his life.

It Is very strange to me (says he) that their daily Observation does not
convince them of the folly of administering cooling things; they cannot but see
that no good effect comes thereon. -- They will still trace the same trod,
though they be lasht for it both in their reputation and otherwise. -- How now!
I am jealous it was the Midsummer Moon when ^his was writ; for but a leaf
before he was talking of the Suns coming into the Tropic of Cancer, which
perhaps might have some influence upon his Pericranium; or is it that (...)?

Sir, If the Galenists had no better reputation than you, they would certainly
have very little. I wish you had spoken out, and told the World what are your
Observations concerning the Galenists success in Fevers, even those among whom
you live, or in other Diseases. Hitherto we have heard of nothing to their
dishonor. Note.
I know some Learned and very Observant Gentlemen, that are well enough
opinionated of the Chemical Way, that seeing the success of the Galenists and
Chemists so different, have seriously professed, they would not venture their
Lives in the hands of such Chemists as they know, especially in a Fever.

( P. 175.) They will blood twice or thrice, and purge as often, and yet scarce
will they order one good Diaphoretick. -- Mr. S. I see in all things follows
the Machiavellian Rule, fortiter incusa, aliquid haerebit. We had this before.
Certainly he has an ill Memory, and a worse Method, or else we should not have
such frequent and frivolous Tautologies. I guess he levels again at the Case of
Major J. St. (mentioned ad P. 107.) whom in an Obstinate Fever as he styled it,
which held out above two Months, I did let blood and vomit and purge, several
times, but I did also give him thrice as many Diaphoreticks, which did operate
very well, and so (I think) were good; which my Bills in the Shop this day will
testify, and all this with eminent good success: only I suspect it sticks on
his Stomach, that his offer of his service to the Major was rejected.

(P. 176.) I sometimes indulge (says he) the Feverish Patient with a Glass of
the richest Sack he can procure. -- Ay like enough, hence the woeful experience
of some; although to say the truth, the Citizens of York are grown so wise,
that they are not willing to own the Toleration.

But to confirm the truth of what he here asserts concerning hot things to be
useful in Fevers, A rare Experiment.
he tells of an Experiment made upon himself in a Colical Distemper, together
with a Feverishness that accompanied it; how that by the use of some hot
Medicines, and particularly of Elixir Proprietatis he found benefit; where it is
worth a laughter to read in what cleanly words he expresses himself, which I am
not willing to repeat. -- I like this well indeed, let him make Experiments on
himself, I am resolved he shall not try his Skill upon me. But I pray is not
this bravely confirmed, from a little intemperate Heat or Feverishness (as he
calls it) which was merely lymptomatical from pain, and that a Cold Cause, viz.
Wind, to argue therefore it is most proper in a violent Fever? -- If Mr. S.
catch a Fever in earnest, and manage it according to his present Opinion, I Will
tell him his fortune; he will become Felo de se, and forfeit his Goods and
Chattels to the King.

I can tell where one that vaunts himself a Chemist, came to a Physician at
Malton, who was himself also Chemist enough, and in a Fever (which before that
seemed to be in its Declination) gave him a Dose of this Elixir, and some
Diaphoretick Pills, as he called them; which immediately inflamed the Blood and
Spirits, so as that his nearest relations at this day say, that it appeared to
him, immediately upon the taking of them (to use his own expression) as if his
Eyes would have started out; which the Gentleman feeling, cried out while he
had life of the acrimonious heat of the Medicines, and declared that if he
recovered that sickness, he would leave that pernicious way of prescribing, and
fall into a more wholesome Practice. But alas! a day or two ended his life,
leaving his Friend to practice upon himself.

(P. 178.) He says, That notwithstanding Chemical Remedies are accused to be
smelling too much of the Fire, yet the Fire is no less useful for the preparing
of Medicines, then for the Cooking of Meats. -- What Is this to the Objection,
which respects the Empyreuma, or Corrosive Quality; or Nidorous Taste, which
they draw from the Fire, savouring many times more of the Fire, than of the
Simple out of which they are made; whereby they inflame the Stomach and
Intestines of the Patients? For such violent Heat of the Fire produces that out
of the Simple, which was not in it before (even like a Man upon the Rack, whose
torment makes him often times utter that which was never in his heart) and this
it does according as the Simple is capable of enduring the Fire. But it is not
only the Mineral Medicines which Patients complain of in this Point of Heat,
but also the ordinary way which some Chemists use in prescribing other sharp
and hot Medicines. However what force of Argument is there here, to argue from
the use of Fire in Cooking of Meats, which we see makes them more easy to be
concocted, while yet they contract no Empyreuma, or Nidorous Heat? The
Galenists speak not against the use of Fire, either for the preparing of Meats
or Medicines, but use it as much as is needful in them both. But I can tell of
some whom he calls Galenists, that have too much cause to find fault with some
men's hot Medicines; whereof Patients make often sad complaints, calling for their
help to correct the corroding heat, which they find from some Chemists Practice.

O you my Learned and Worthy Brethren of this City of York, you are my
Witnesses, How often have all of you and I, both jointly and severally, heard
the sad complaints of many in this poin^, and been called to correct that
scorching heat, which had been the sad effect of Chemical Practice, when many
times it has been too late, or not possible to be corrected? Yea this whole
City of York rings with stories to that purpose, which as yet I am not willing
to relate, without a further provocation.

But at length I suspect this man will challenge Cookery to be a point of
Chemistry, and so forbid the Galenists to eat or drink any thing that is
wholesome. It appears indeed if it were in some men's power, they would soon tie
up our Chaps.

He says, There is an acrimonious virulency that adheres to many Vegetables, as
well as Animals or Minerals, and therefore the Adepti correct all poisonous
Plants, Animals, and Minerals, by that fiery Solvent, the Alkahest. -- This
Alkahest I suspect he has not yet attained to, I am sure better Chemists than
he have not. But I desire to be as charitable as I am bound, I do verily
believe Mr. S. knows very few Poisonous Plants, or wholesome either, at least
never corrected any, to make them safe for inward use. I am sure it were better
he should endeavor to know such as are wholesome, and let alone such as are
poisonous, whose venom it is to be suspected will still remain, when he has done
what he can.

( P. 180. He confesses Minerals have an Arsenical Malignity, and particularly
Antimony has its Arsenical Sulphur, which Fire and Salts do correct, and make
it an innocent and harmless Diaphoretick, -- Really if he have any Credit, it
will make men startle, for fear he cannot with all his cunning correct them. Is
there not great reason to be careful, how we prescribe Antimonium
Diaphoreticum, when he himself confesses it has in it an Arsenical Sulphur?
What need the Galenists or any body else urge the unsafeness of Chemical
Medicines? Ex ore suo.

The Corrosive Oil of Antimony, and also another Menstruum almost as strong as
it self, though they be very corrosive, yet when mixed together -- becomes a
white Powder, which proves to be an innocent Diaphoretick, of which (he says)
he has frequently given four and twenty Grains. -- Now turn to P. 188. and
there he confesses, This Oil of Antimony is a most desperate Corrosive, even
beyond Mercury Sublimate -- and yet he brags he gives it with another as strong
as it self, inwardly unto 24 Grains. What a daring man is this? when Nature
lies grovelling under a Violent Disease, its like to be well helped up, with such
a Medicine? Sir, The Galenists use no such Poisons, they coast not in the least
upon any thing that is Arsenical.

Mr. S. his Tools
But let us further observe his Tools he works withal ( P. 181.) Mercury
Sublimate, Aqua Fortis, Butter of Antimony; who will henceforth dare to take
this man^ Medicines? Qui potest capere, capiat. Just such Tools as these did
his Grand Master Paracelsus use, even Arsenick, which (he says) is Venenum
summum, a desperate Poison; whereof he confesses a Dram will kill a Horse and
yet ignito ipsum cum Sale Nitri, sic Venenum esse desinet, hujus si libras
december sumas, nil damni senties. To wit, Do but fire it with Salt of Nitre, and
then it ceases to be Poison; so as if you take ten pound of it, you shall
perceive no harm. ( Defens. 3. de Scrip Novorum Receptorum.) Believe him who
list; but thus we see these are both of a Litter.

It Is no wonder if Patients complain of the corroding heat of this man's
Medicines. Henceforth let no man make doubt concerning the Mineral Medicines of
some of the Chemists, especially of this man's, who uses such Tools. He has here
discovered so much as all his Accomplices will scarce thank him for.

Are these his innocent Diaphoreticks, that arise out of such desperate
poisons? O ye my Countrymen consider this and ^void your danger. It Is no
marvel if Nature run out of Doors in a sweat, when ^t has got such an Inmate.
Are your Minerals so virulent and poisonous, and your Tools such as these? Why
Mr. S. either the world of Englishment will be^ieve you, or not. If not, then
you have ^ost your Credit; if they do, then you will lose your Practice; till
they be satisfied that you are fallen into a more whol^ome Way.

It is no wonder indeed that Paracelsus his Patients died usually within a year
or ^wo, as Monavius expresses in his Letter to Dudythius cited by Scholtzius
(Ep. 194.) He says he had often heard from Gentlemen of good repute at Basil,
where Paracelsus lived, who were not ashamed publicly to attest it, Quotquot
Paracelsus ille magnis morbis, remediis suis Vulcaneis, aut ut ipse vocat
Spagyricis, liberavit, eos ferme, intra annum, aut saltem paulo post
interiisse, ut ut se egregie sanitati restitutos existimaverint. That though he
seemed to have performed great Cures by his Medicines prepared out of the Fire,
yet almost all of them died within a year or more, notwithstanding even the
Patients themselves did think they had found excellent Cures. And he observes
very well in the same Epistle, that which is also agreeable to our own
Observation in these days, that Chemical Medicines do rather cure the
Symptoms than the Diseases, and do for the most part aliquid malignitatis
corpori imprimere, viz. Leave some impressions of malignity upon the Body,
which afterward discover themselves. And further he adds, Our remedies perhaps
may be somewhat slower in their operation, and more nauseous in taking; yet
this I may confidently say, they are far more safe than those fiery Drugs of
the Paracelsians.

For as I had occasion to observe before, Note.
it is much to be suspected, that their Medicines, which are out of such
virulent, corroding, and often times poisonous Drugs, as he has here confessed,
being given in substance, by lying in the Tunides of the Stomach, and cleaving
to the Bowels, may from the contact of the Acid Humors of the Body, resume
their Ancient Arsenical Properties, as Zwelfer says concerning Antimonium
Diaphoreticum. And the same Author affirms concerning Vitriol calcined, even
till it has deposited all its sharpness, that yet being exposed to the Air, it
will contract an Acrimonious Salt. (in Pharm. Aug. p. 675) And may there not be
as good reason to suspect it from the Acid Humors in the Body, as from the Air?
Now this is plainly apparent to every man's eye, that that which has deposited
its malignity, may yet from the Air take it up again. Suppose a piece of very
strong Tobacco dried in the Pocket, till it has lost all its strength; lay but
this in the Window when the Air is moist, and it shall become as strong as
before, and as uneasy to be taken by a new Beginner.

( P. 183.) A strong Fire is as requisite in some Mineral Preparations, as a
mild Fire to some easy Vegetable Separations, etc. -- Why! the Question in
difference is not, whether a strong Fire be requisite for Mineral Preparations,
but whether Mineral Preparations be necessary in Physic. If Mr. S. loses his
Question, he gives up his Cause. Certainly the Materia Medica was full enough
to answer all Indications in Physic, before this new process by Chemical
Medicines was found out; and the Ancients yea the Modern Physicians that wave
them, cure Diseases as well, if not better, than the Chemists can with their
Medicines alone, without the other.

But Mr. S. goes on and says, Would not a Cook Maid be accused of ignorance, if
she intending to roast a piece of Meat, should lay it down at a
disproportionate distance from the Fire? -- and then he tells how roasting of
Meat is performed. -- A piece of good Chemistry indeed, and of general use; I
could wish they would take his advice in the Kitchen, and let him partake with
them in their Fees.

(P. 184.) What are all the Spirits and Cordial Waters, but Chemical
Separations of Vrinous Spirits, by Distillation by the Fire? What are the best
of their Purging Pills, as Extr. Rudii, but a Chemical Extraction of Tinctures,
etc. -- He still misses the Mark; no wise man that I know condemns Chemical
Preparations, especially such as these, and a hundred more, which were in
constant use in Physic, even for many Centuries before Paracelsus was born;
for which we are not in the least beholden to any that ever assumed the name of
Chemists, in contradiction to Galen's Method: and such Candor have Physicians
ever since had toward the Inventors of such Remedies, that to this day we
reserve to them the honor of their Invention, and call them by their Names, as
is observable in the Pharmacopaeia. But the Objection is still valid against
such as the Pseudochymists do use at this day, and such as I find our Author
here describing and ^dministring.

What are the best Emeticks in the Shops, but such as are chymically prepared,
as the infusion of Croc. Metal. and Mercurius vitae? This is indeed very true,
these are good and safe Medicines, and therefore the Galenists use them, and
both found them out, and prepare them by their own hands, or their
Apothecaries, and are not beholden at all to the Chemists for them; but yet the
Infusion of them is safer than the substance. We use such as are safe, and
leave the rest to you to make Experiments withal.

( P. 188.) He charges it upon the Galenists, A false Charge.
That they cry out of Antimony as a dangerous thing, -- and then the next
Prescription shall be the Infusion of Croc. Metal. or Antimonium Diaphoreticum.
-- By this time the World well discerns that this man's Pen is no slander. How
unworthily this is said against Gentlemen of eminent and approved integrity, I
shall leave it to any Ingenuous Reader, who has made any Observations, since
this matter of fact. Nor do I know whom he levels at, it had been but just for
him to have cited his Author, and not charge particular men's faults upon the
whole party; for my part I never read nor heard any man cry out of Antimony,
more than himself, who says it has in it an Arsenical Sulphur: and if upon this
account it be dangerous, yet the Infusion may be safe.

What are their best Medicines for Worms, which they also frequently use
against Venerial Diseases, but a Chemical Preparation called Mercurius Dulcis?
-- It is very true it is a good Medicine, but yet not the best; and therefore I
told you the Galenists were no Enemies to Chemistry. My dear Friend Doctor
Primerose says as much ( lib. 4. de Vulg. Error. cap. 1.) Mercurio dulci utimur
innoxie, We use Mercurius Dulcis without any danger at all. Eadem siquidem est
materia medica Pharmacopaei Chymici and vulgaris, exvegetabilibus, animalibus,
mineralibus, and omnibus tam benignis quam violentis, quae in usum Medicum
venire solent. Both the Chemical and the Vulgar Apothecary have the same matter
of Physic. And I have given this very Medicine an hundred times to Children of
three or four years old, but it is always best to join it with some Cathartick
to carry it speedily through, or at least to follow it soon with one, lest it
lie in the Tunicles of the Stomach, and resume its corrosive property.

And yet great care must be had that this Medicine be opportunely prescribed,
and in a due Dose (as indeed it is requisite in others) and therefore not to be
meddled withal by every good Wife or temerarious Quack. Sennertus tells ( de
Consens. Chym. cum Gal. cap. 18) of an Eminent Physician of his acquaintance,
who had often prescribed Merc. Dulcis to his Patients with good success, and
yet had hazarded his life by the taking of it himself. And I know of another
Learned Physician of my acquaintance, who never recovered after the taking of a
Dose hereof, being then upon the brink of a Consumption. However this is not
the Invention of the Pseudochymists, be it never so good, but was in use before
Mr. S. was born.

And the like I may say of all the fixed Salts that we have in our Shops at
this day; only I perceive whatsoever is prepared by any use of Fire, Mr. S.
seems to challenge it, as if he and his fellows that call themselves Chemists
had a peculiar property in it, as if they were the Masters of that Element, and
others were only Intruders into their Freehold. I cannot but smile to see how
this Gentleman and others do arrogate that Title to themselves of the Sons of
Fire, which is that very Term that not only the Greek Poets but the Hebrew Text
also give to Firebrarnds. Deus avertat omen precor.

And the same is true also of the Essential Oils of the Shops, which he reckons
up, as Rosemary, Sage, Cinnamon, Rhodium, by all which it appears to the World
that the Chemists do unjustly charge it upon the Galenists, that they are
Enemies to Chemical Preparations. They only reject some of their new Arcana's,
which are made out of Poisonous Metals or Minerals, of the corroding heat
whereof their Patients do constantly complain, and we are frequently called to
correct; not that I think any thing worse because perhaps it is novel, and
value error because of its Antiquity, but would have every thing brought to the
Test, and owned or rejected as it is found to deserve, although any remedy may
be better or worse as it is applied; distinguishing aright betwixt Vitium
Medicinae, and Medicantis.

The sum of all is, The Objections remain firm, notwithstanding all he has
said, against the Empyreumatisme or corroding heat that is in many of their new
Arcana's, and more particularly against the use of hot things in all Diseases,
which is too much the practice of some, as I am not willing to instance,
whereby they become loathsome to the Palate, and hot and corrosive in the
Stomach and Intestines; but on the contrary he has been forced to confess (and
I suspect to his damage) that which the Vulgar, not Physicians so much upbraid
them withal; to wit the unsafeness of that way.

Of Method in Physic.
(Page 192.) Another thing (says he) wherewith they impeach Chemical Physicians
is, That they are not Methodical in their Practice. Here take notice that I am
on the defensive hand, and am not charging the Chemical Physician for not being
Methodical; I know there are learned men that understand well the Chemical
Practice, and know both the Art of Composition and application of Chemical
Medicines according to Reason and Method, for the Cure of Diseases, who deserve
a great deal of Honor. But yet I do not think that every man that calls
himself a Physician, is so indeed, nor yet every man that pretends to
Chemistry, to be a Chemical Physician. He that through Ignorance or
Singularity, dares not, or will not submit to a Regular Trial by the
Universities, or otherwise, as by Law is provided, merits not the name of a
Physician, but is a Quack; and such I am certain are some that call themselves
Chemists.

Nor is it the curing of a Disease, Cito, tuto, and facile, that implies a good
Method, as Mr. S. does suppose; that may be done by a Woman who knows nothing
of Method, nor how to answer Indications, which is the Rule of Method. To make
a man a Methodical Physician, there must be a good Foundation laid in
Physiology and Pathology; Of Physiology.
the former takes in Anatomy, which treats concerning the Composition of a Man's
Body, which is the proper Subject of the Art of Physic, and the Contexture of
the parts, as they refer one to another; whereby an Artist is enabled to
discern of Diseases that come from Sympathy and Consent of other Parts, and so
to apply his Remedies accordingly. It respects also the Temperaments, the
Humors, the Spirits, the Faculties of the Soul, and the Animal, Vital, and
Natural Functions, with many other things that are Appendices to these. Of
Pathology.
Pathology treats concerning Diseases, with their Differences, their Causes,
their Symptoms, and their Signs; and comprehends those that are both universal
and particular, and whether inward or outward: inabling an Artist both to judge
aright of the Diseases, and also make true Prognostics.

The Method of Curing.
Next comes in the Method of Curing, and this respects the Nature of all sorts
of Remedies, and shows how they are to be applied to the several Indications,
and directs the Art of Composition answerable to the Complication of Diseases.
Now these Remedies are fetched either of Vegetables, or Animals, or Minerals,
and all do equally belong to the Art, and are to be accounted the Matter of
Physic, and the common end of these is the health of Man's Body.

The Nobleness of Physic.
Hence it will follow that of all Arts and Sciences that are in the World,
Physic is the most Noble; First, In regard of the Nobility of its Subject,
about which it is conversant, to wit, the Body of Man; and that not merely as
the subject of its consideration, for so it falls under Natural Philosophy; but
of its Work. And secondly, in regard of the Excellency of its end, to wit
Health, which of all things this World does afford, is the most desirable
thing, and infinitely to be preferred before all the wealth in the World; and
indeed is that which sweetens all other enjoyments.

Now the Chemical Way of Practice is an Appendix to the third part of Physic,
and is no more distinct from the Art of Physic, Chemistry a part of the Art of
Physic.
than if a man should speak of the Vegetable or Animal Way of Practice; and
therefore if it be not joined with Physiology and Pathology, it is not to be
called Methodical. And O that I might now have the Honor of being a Moderator
in the Difference, that by some is started in the Faculty to the breach of the
Public Peace and Amity that ought to be among us. Why should we divide, while
we agree both in the Subject and the End? Let not these young heads breed a
difference among those that are sage and grave. (...), as Heliodorus says in
Aethiop. Young heads are forward; who if they amend not with more modest and
amicable philosophizing, though I give not that hard Censure which others would
give, yet let them be assured, there are some that will make bold to write this
old Adage upon their Books, especially if they be like this: Qui semel
modestiae limits transiliit, nisi cito castigetur, gnaviter evadet impudens.

I shall now proceed ( P. 193.) Mr. S. says, The Galenists pretend to a Method
in curing of Diseases -- But whether is not this Method more directed to the
mitigating of the Luxuriant Symptoms, than to the immediate encountering with
the Essential Cause of the Disease? The Galenists strike at the ro^t of
Diseases.
-- I reply Diseases have their times, viz. their Beginning, Growth, State, and
Declination, and several Symptoms proper to their several times; these while
they observe, they arm against them, acting rationally, not only for the
lopping off the Branches, but the stubbing up the Roots of the Diseases. As in
a Fever, (in which he instances) those which he calls Symptoms, are as so many
Limbs of the Disease, which being knit together and joined to the inward Cause,
make up the Fever, and that Method that he mentions to be used in Phlebotomy,
Cooling-Juleps, Emulsions, Frequent Purgations, Laudanum, and the like, against
the Symptoms, prove the Cure of the Disease. ^leeding.
Thus Phlebotomy in a Fever that permits it, especially where there is a
Plethora, and after due preparation as the case may require, and time give
leave (of all which the Physician that is called to attend it is the most
competent Judge, and not another) supposing as he says there be a fault in the
Blood, as in Putrid Fevers, takes away some of the peccant humors and combust
matter, and consequently strikes at the root. Juleps.
Juleps do not only quench the inward heat and dryness by their coolness and
moisture, but as they may be compounded by a knowing Physician, do correct
crudity and resist putrefaction and malignity, and so strike at the root.
Emulsions.
Emulsions do correct the acrimony of the Humors, and open the Passages of
Urine, furthering Natures expulsion of the matter of the Disease that way, as
also amend the intemperate heat of the Stomach and inward parts, Purging.
and so strike at the root. Purging especially if there be a Cacochimia, takes
away the peccant Humors; and so also do Clysters, they both drawing down from
the Head and Noble Parts, which often times in Fevers are mainly affected, and so
not only loppe off the Symptoms, but directly strike at the root. And any of
these may be reiterated according to emergency of Indications, due regard being
ever had to the age and strength of the Patient; for ante omnia sum est
habenda ratio virium. Upnoticks
So likewise Vpnoticks quench the ebullition of the Blood, and correct the
acrimony of the Humors, assuage Pain and help Sleep, in which special care is
ever to be had that they be seasonably and regularly administered.

Now this Method have all the Ancient and Modern Physicians of the World
constantly observed in their management of Fevers (with such other things as
they judged fit) and have been successful; yea even our selves at this very day
have sufficient Experience of the commodiousness of this Method, and have
THOVSANDS of Witnesses that have found the benefit thereof, in the restitution
of their Healths out of Fevers, which malice it self cannot contradict or
gainsay.

But if in this Methodical and I may say Rational Process, there be any Remora,
either through the Nature of the Disease it self, or the Constitution of the
Patient that may hold the Physician tugge, and retard the Cure; is it likely to
be lamended by a Pseudochymist, especially by a Tyro in the Faculty, whose
Tools are such as these by his own Confession, which are generally poisons, or
but newly separated there from?

But he goes on ( P. 193.) and says, Unless the Theory of Diseases be certain
and infallible, the Method of Practice grounded thereon cannot be satisfactory.
-- How now Mr. S. will nothing less than infallibility suffice you? Of
infallibility not found among the Galenists.
I must confess it is not to be found among the Galenists. The Art of Physic
is not (...), but (...), not from Heaven, but from Men. Our Universal Theorems
are such (...), but not (...). No Rule with us so general but it may admit of
an Exception. No Process but sometimes it may fail us. Let us leave this Point
of Infallibility to be discussed by the Divines, who have a Rule belonging to
them that may undoubtedly challenge it, to wit, the Holy Scriptures, being
given forth by God, who is infallible, and changes not; though sometimes the
Glosses that are put upon it are erroneous by reason of the weakness and often
times the wickedness of men.

It is enough for us, that our Art is grounded on sound reason and constant
experience, though we have nothing of Infallibility, yea and the wisest of men
we have to deal with are very we^l satisfied, while we act for them according
to our Art, which they know to be Rational, though it be not Infallible; and
therefore they do not charge it upon the Profession, or our selves as a defect,
while we satisfy their Reason, though we may fall of success, but do patiently
submit to that irresissible and inevitable Statute of Heaven, Statutum est
omnibus semel mori. It is appointed for all men once to die.

I question whether Solomon was (...), or infallible, in writing upon the
Plants, and yet I believe if we had that Book, and did rightly understand it,
we should have excellent Remedies, and perhaps find cures for some Diseases
which now we judge to be incurable. The Scriptures were given forth by the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost, to be a Standing Rule of Faith to the end of the
World, and we expect no new addition or Revelation. The Art of Physic was
found out by men through a large Tract of Observation for some thousands of
years, and improved by Reason, and admits of daily growth and improvement by
Experience; which even all the Learned Writers Ancient and Modern did expect to
be: though they should not live to see it. I know none but Paracelsus that ever
pretended to be infallible, and he does it plainly, and by this Objection of
Mr. Simpson I suspect he does believe him; else why should he urge the want of
infallibility in the Theorems of the Galenists, as an Argument against their
Method?

Paracelsus claims it.
Paracelsus in his Preface to the Book that bears the Title Paragranum, ranting
highly against the Method of Physic delivered by the Ancients, extols his own
to the Stars, in such a multitude of vain brags, as would be tedious to recite,
and among others he has this Expression. Ars ipsa contra me non vociferatur:
Est enim immortalis, ac super fundamentum constituta tam solidum, ut necesse
sit prius cum terra ipsum coelum frangi and interire, quam ea emoriatur and
intereat. To wit, The Art it self exclaims not against me, for mine is
immortal, and established upon such a solid Foundation, that Heaven and Earth
shall perish and come to nothing, before it fail or come to nothing. -- And a
little after in the same Preface, he flies out into another proud Rant, Vos
dico Parisienses, vos Monspessulani, vos Misnenses, etc. In English thus, All
you of the University of Paris, you of Montpellier, you of Misnia, you of
Colen, and as many as live within the compass of the two great Rivers Danubius
and the Rhine (which water all Germany) you that live in all Lands that are
encompassed by the Sea: Also thou Italy, thou Dalmatia, you Athenians, thou
Grecian, thou Arabian, thou Israelite, I will not follow you, but you shall
follow me; nor shall any of you lurk in the darkest corners of the World, whom
the Dogs shall not piss upon. Ego Monarcha sum, etc. I am the Monarch, and the
Monarchy shall be mine. This I manage, and will gird all your Loins. Is it not
I whom you nickname Cacophrastus? Haec vobis MERDA edenda est. I Will leave this
to Mr. Simpson to construe. But that I may yet further satisfy the World and
Mr. S. concerning Paracelsus, I shall cire one place more of his own in his
Preface to Paragranum, whereby we shall see what Christian temper he was of,
where he insolently triumphs over Galen and all his Followers, and sends them
all to Hell, and says that he had received Letters from Galen's Soul dated from
Hell. His words are notorious, viz. Si Galenus in Medicina immortalis fuisset,
manes ejus in abysso Inferni, unde ad me literas amandarunt, quarum datum erat
in Inferno, non essent sepulti. Nunquam, nunquam putassem equidem tantum
Medicorum Principem in Podicem Diaboli involare debuisse; Huc ipsum ejus quoque
Discipuli insequuntur. Was ever any thing said like this in the World? and yet
after this Pipe do some men dance.


Notwithstanding if we may trust Kircherus, who was certainly a hundred times
more prosoundly learned than he, he tells us (in his Mund. Subterran. Tom. 2.
P. 279.) That partly out of curiosity, and partly out of his desire of sound
knowledge, he read all his Writings with a scrutinous eye, that he might
understand what was in them, that some men do so much admire and dote on; and
he protests, after he had well observed all things he treats of, he found
nothing (save a few things which were not his own) but mere trifles, affected
forms of words, airy conjectures, and that upon trial all his Experiments were
false. And he further adds, that all that he has writ which has any thing of
worth in it, was stolen partly out of Raymundus Lullius, and Arnoldus
Villanovanus, and partly out of Isaac Hollandus, and Basilius Valentinus, whom
yet he rails on with most opprobrious language, as if all they said, had not
been worth regarding. Upon the whole matter Kircher says he was,
Impudentissimus Nebulo, Scurra trivialis, Thraso insolentissimus, furiis
infernalibus agitatus, etc. These things I would not have instanced, but to
clear it to the World, that as there is no infallibility pretended to by the
Galenists, so neither is it to be found among the Chemists. Let it suffice that
we all do endeavor to understand the rational ground and Method of our
Profession, and manage it with good Consciences, and then all wisemen will be
pleased, what ever the event be.

But Mr. S. says ( P. 194.) I am apt to question whether any Methodist can give
a solid satisfactory reason of the Operation of any one Medicine he gives, etc.
-- Indeed I think he says truly, for I never met with any man more apt to
question: It were more becoming for every man to endeavor after a
well-grounded resolution to act in his own Sphere, then thus to trouble the
World with needless and impertinent questions. Further every thing is received
ad Modum Recipientis: It Is possible a Methodist may give a Solid Reason for
what he does, but whether that shall he satisfactory to every one that has a
mind to cavil, or to Mr. S. I much doubt, since some men are of that temper,
that they will never be satisfied with what another man says, nor approve of
what he does.

Of Mineral Vomits.
( P. 195.) If I should query (says he) why the Infusion of Stibium or Crocus
Metallorum should operate by Vomit and Stool; and why the same if further
prepared by Fire and Salts should operate by Sweat? and then he further
supposes the answer would be given as to the emetick quality, That it arises
from Antipathy. -- I observe it is Mr. S. his constant way to frame both the
Question and the Answer, and then to make his severe Inferences upon his own
Hypothesis; whereas he ought in all reason to cite the Testimony of some solid
Author concerning the received Opinion of the whole Party, before he gives his
Verdict: Or rather he should read the Principal Authors themselves, and then
make his Comment.

Nevertheless as to this Query I Will tell him my Opinion, yet not as the
Judgment of all the Galenists, I leave every man to abound in his own sense. I
take Antimony out of which the Stibium and Crocus are made by Calcination, to
have in it an Arsenical poisonous or malignant property, which discovers it
self if it be unlockt by Fire, otherwise it is innocent, (as also several other
of the Minerals and Metals) and to be abhorrent to Nature, but being calcined
with Salts, it loses much of its Venom or Malignity, while yet it retains some
property which is hostile to the Stomach. Now the liquor wherein these are
infused after Calcination, imbibing the Odor and Vapor of the Antimony becomes
troublesome to the Stomach, by which Nature is roused up to expel it; and so
casts out the Medicine and the bad Humors together both upward and downward, as
it best can get passage, and by its position enclines. Thus the vomiting and
purging are not so much the proper effect of the Medicine, as of the Natural
Faculties of the Stomach and Bowels (by the Chemists called Archaeus) imitated
by the Medicine, which is performed by the help of the transverse Fibers in the
parts.

And of these two I take the Crocus to be the better, which is prepared with
Nitre; now this Calcination being soon over, to wit, but a blaze, does not take
away the Toxical property of the Antimony, but leaves enough to hold up its
hostility to Nature, and so to expel it through the Body.

After the same manner out of other of the Minerals, which are not so safe to
be given inwardly in substance without some correction, are Emeticks made: as
out of Vitriol is made the Sal Vitrioli, so highly extolled by Angelus Sala,
with Calcination, Dilution, and frequent Edulcoration. As also the Gilla
Theophrasti, and others of that name mentioned by Schroderus; in all which the
poisonous property of the Vitriol is cotrected by the Fire, and only a vomiting
and purging quality remains.

So we see in Mercury, which though being vive it may be taken inwardly,
because through the fluidity and weight of it, no stay is made by it in the
Bowels, whereby it can put forth its Arsenical property; yet if it be killed,
and so become fixed, it is not so safe. Even out of it with a preparation of
Antimony is made by Distillation, etc. Mercurius vitae, which is a forcible
Emetick for robust Bodies, working both upward and downward.

of Mineral Diaphoreticks.
Now if these preparations that I have mentioned to be made out of all these, be
carried on by a further stress of Fire, the Emetick and purging property both
will be deposited, as well as the poisonous quality by less Fire, and they will
become Diaphoreticks, or Sweating Medicines. Thus with futher additions of
Nitre, and frequent Detonation or Calcination and Edulcoration of the Crocus of
Antimony or the Regulus, may be made Antimonium Diaphoreticum; as also there
are fetched out of it both Spirits and Oils, that are for the same intention by
force of Fire. And so out of Mercury farther corrected by Fire, and joined with
other Metals, are made Diaphoreticks, which are in use among some of the
Chemists; as with Gold Aurum vitae, and others mentioned by Schroderus ( Pharm.
Med. Chym. lib. 3. cap. 15.) as also other safe Medicines for various
intentions, both for inward and outward uses. Nay out of Arsenick it self
Schroderus says is made a Diaphoretick or Sweating Medicine, which he calls
Rubinus Diaphoreticus, Page 499.

Now the Vomiting quality having been so closely united to the Arsenical, and
but newly separated therefrom, I think the Stibium and the Crocus are much
safer to be given in the Infusion, than in substance; because given in their
gross powder, there might be danger lest sticking to the Tunicles of the
Stomach, they should bring on an Hypercatharsis, or too violent motions in
vomiting and purging, not easy to be staid, to the hazard of the Patients
life, as I have sometimes observed in the hands of Quacks; as also the danger
there may be of resuming their former malignity from the Acid Humors of the
Stomach.

And there is the like danger of the Diaphoreticks, even of that which is the
very best of those that are made out of Minerals and Metals, and in most
frequent use (to wit) the Antimonium Diaphoreticum, as I hinted before out of
the ingenious Zwelfer, even from the Air it self, and more may it be doubted
from the Acide Ferment that is within the Body. Mant. Hermet. P. 800.

A Modest Offer.
But still the Query remains, How it comes to pass that these do operate by
Sweat? Here I only offer it to the consideration of my Learned and Judicious
Brethren of the Faculty, whether or no it be probable to come from any
Alexipharmical property that is in the Antim. Diaphon-while they weigh its
Composition of Antimony, Nitre, and a small quantity of Tartar, which by some
is added: Or whether Nature does not sweat rather from some other quality it
has in it from the Antimony, which though it be not such as to provoke
vomiting, yet some hostility remains, as that it may provoke Sweat. And it is
not without reason to be considered of, seeing we see from Zwelfers Verdict, it
will so easily resume its malignity. For my own part this is that which I ever
doubted concerning it, and upon the serious deliberation I have of it on this
occasion, I have still the more ground of hesitation.

Of other sorts of Diaphoreticks.
And if it be thus, then I offer again to be considered of, whether
Diaphoreticks made out of Vegetables and Animals, which have certainly an
Alexipharmical or Cordial property, be not more to be preferred, since we know
how to prepare them so, as that they will not fail us, nor any ill symptom can
be suspected to ensue: such as Radic. Scorzonerae, Zedcariae, Petasitidis,
Angelicae, Tormentilllae, Serpentariae, Scordium, Carduus, etc. Corda viperarum
and Serpentum, etc. as also those excellent Compounds described in the
Dispensatory, as Theriaca Andromachi, or Venice Triacle, Mithridate, Alkermes,
London Triacle, etc. besides several generous Waters distilled with Spirit of
Wine. Upon the whole matter I also offer, whether this Antimonium Diaphoret.
were not safer to be used in a few grains, till we be satisfied from whence it
has its Diaphoretick property, and that joined to other Medicines which answer
the same intention, than to give a Dram at once, as Mr. S. braggs he does?

I say I am not severely positive in this, but do modestly leave it to the
consideration of the Brethren of the Faculty.

But to proceed, Mr. S. (P. 197.) says, It would be very satisfactory to have
been able to predict according to Rational Prognostics, that Scammony,
Colocynthis, Sena, etc. would purge. -- Really I think so too, but surely that
was not to be expected from any man of limited reason, since there is no
manifest quality in any of them to ground such a Prognostic on. The Virtues of
Medicines (as also several other useful discoveries) have been found out by
chance, when men thought not of it, but have been making Experiments on other
occasions: And it is a good Providence of God that these and many more are found
out, although we know not how they were found, nor by whom. But if any man
shall happen to find out some new useful property in a Simple, or be able to
make out some beneficial Compound Medicine, I hope both this present Age and
Posterity will take care to let him enjoy the honor of it, in the mention of
his Name. And though Mr. S. has designed causelessly to rob me of the honor and
reputation (if there be any in it) of my discovery of Scarbrough Spaw, with its
usefulness to my Country; yet if he have any thing to make out in point of
Art, I shall never go about to eclipse it, but let him ride on with his honor,
and thank him to boot.

( P. 20.) He says, That by the Fermental Venom of Drugs badly prepared, and
unskilfully administered, incredible numbers of Vomits and Stools may happen,
etc. -- Yea and though a Medicine be not venomous and also well prepared, yet
if the Nature of the Disease and the Constitution of the Patient too be not
very well observed, a Hypercatharsis may ensue, especially if the Body be
inclined to a looseness, which sometimes happens, and is not very easily
foreseen, or otherwise in a Colliquated or Consumptive Body, which from every
small irritation of the Belly is apt to run like a Bowl down the Hill, though
this is easily helped if the Physician be at hand.

Of Opium.
(P. 202.) I have known a man (says he) so accustom himself to Opium, as that
every Night he would take 10, 12, or 15 Grains of it without preparation, etc.
-- The Turks by using themselves to it, can take a Dram, which commonly they do
before a Battle, and that puts off all fear. And a Learned Gentleman and an
eminent Chemist of my acquaintance, has often in long Journies given a Grain or
two to his Horse, when he feared his tyring, which he told me made him hold out
more lively.

In the same Page, He seems to be fully satisfied from whence it is that some
Vegetables are found to have virulent properties, Of Poisonous Plants.
which he grounds upon Kircherus; viz. from Mineral Arsenical Juices fermenting
in the Earth, where such Vegetable Seeds are, which incorporating themselves
therewith, become thereby the Authors of such virulent fermental poisons;
whence (says he) Napellus, Hyoscyamus, Cycuta, etc. take their virulency. --
For my own part I honor Kircher, who is one of the most profoundly learned
Authors this Age has brought forth, but I confess I cannot so easily jurare in
verba Magistri. For if it be so, how comes it to pass that all the Plants that
grow out of one and the same turf or sod of Earth, have not the like Toxical
property? Certainly it is rather from the Nature of the Plant it self, every
Seed bringing forth according to its own kind, from the Divine Benediction of
the Protoplast, in what soil soever it is sown; for a transplantation into
another ground will not amend it at all.

But Mr. S. goes on and says, Since the true cause of the Operation of
Medicines, and the knowledge we have of them, is taken from and grounded upon
Experiments, and these Experiments are as likely to fall into the observation
of those who are ignorant of a Method, as of those that are skilful therein;
what advantage then has a Methodist, whose grounds and principles are either
found unsuccessful in practice, or much what contradicted by experience? --
Here he begs the Question, and determines that the Methodists are unsuccessful
in their Practice; and perhaps some may be so, or any man in some thing: for as
I have already said we are not infallible, but are in a possibility to err;
though there is a great probability we shall not, if we duly weigh the Rules of
our Art, and the state of the Patient. However he that understands the rational
Method, shall probably be successful, when the Ignoramus knows not what to do.
But further I perceive Mr. S. his aim is wholly directed to the operation of
the Medicine, and what it will do, when certainly the Nature of the Disease and
Constitution of the Patient, are as seriously to be respected as the Medicine;
and then the Indications put the Physician to seek out a proper Remedy, lest
Andabatarum more, he encounter blindfold with Diseases. And if a Physician go
out thus fitted, his knowledge is well grounded, especially if he be backed
with former experiences of parallel Cases, as a well practiced and observing
Physician possibly may: And thus his Judgment is not conjectural but certain,
in respect of the operation of his Medicine, for though the first finding out
of the virtue of the Medicine was by chance, yet he is become certain of it,
and his application is rational.

Of success in Cures.
(P. 204.) One reason (says he) why great Physicians are often so unsuccessful
in their Cures, etc. Here again he begs the Question, supposing great
Physicians to be unsuccessful, but if so, why does he call them great
Physicians; unless they be eminently learned in the Theorical Part, and so
fitted for the Schools, as some may be who addict not themselves to the
Practical: but then what success can be expected from mean fellows? Though the
ability of a Physician is not to be judged of by success, yet an ordinary
unsuccessfulness in Cures given just ground to suspect his ability.

But at last he concludes, that he will refer it to the Judicious Reader, to
consider whether Chemical Physicians are not the most likely (from what has
been said) to cure Diseases best. And so will I let him use his reason from
what has been said on both sides, and try by experience if he thinks fit,
whether Mr. S. (for I have nothing to say to others) who calls himself a
Chemical Physician, and uses such Tools as we have been told by himself, be
like to cure Diseases happily, soon, without trouble, and debilitation of
Spirits. I use here his own words.

But now Mr. S. proceeds to another Query (to wit) Whether to be so accurate in
the punctual observations of all the injunctions of the Schools, be altogether,
or at all necessary to make a Physician cure Diseases more successfully? -- Mr.
S. would almost make them that know him not, suspect (by this Query) he were
inclinable to be a Quaker, as if he would intimate that School-Learning were
not useful, or as if the understanding of Physiology and Pathology were of no
use in order to the curing of Diseases. I wonder whether Mr. S: when he sets
himself to make a piece of Latin, does think that the accurate understanding
and punctual observation of all the Rules of Grammar be necessary or no? Or
whether the total ignorance or sleighting of the Rules will be a better
qualification? Whether the found understanding both of the Common Law, Statute
Law, and Book Cases, does not much conduce to a Lawyers better doing his
Clients business? Certainly he that best understands and observes the Rules of
Grammar and Rhetoric, will make the best Latin;
He that is most learned in the Laws will be the best Lawyer, and he that is
most knowing in all the parts of Physic, will become the best Physician and
most successful.

(P. 205.) When I consider (says he) the tedious and almost inextricable
Labyrinth, He contemns the best Authors.
wherein young Physicians are commonly involved. How many great Volumes of
Galen, Hippocrates, Dioscorides, etc. etc. etc. with a great many more they
revolve? What tedious pieces of Anatomy of Velsingius, Riolanus, etc. etc. they
peruse? How many unprofitable Discourses in the Theory of Physic are they
engaged in? How many hundreds of Plants do they burden their Memory withal?
What a jumble of Pulses? What a multitude of Symptoms? What Discourses of
differences of Urine? and to confirm all this, what long Pilgrimages into
Italy, and to the University there, do they make? -- Does not now the Reader
admire with me at the conceited confidence of this young man, to set so slight
a value upon these profoundly learned Authors? Certainly had he read any of
them whom he so tramples upon, he could not possibly have said this: It appears
he is merely (...), and knows little of what these, or any other Authors in
Physic have writ, being wholly wedded to his own Laboratory.

These Worthies whom he thus contemns, have writ Treatises full fraught with
strength of Reason and Experience in the Art of Physic, as if they had been
(...), -- inspired by God for the good of Mankind, without the reading and
understanding of whose Grounds or Rules, it is impossible to cure Diseases. --
Anatomy is with him an empty Study, for I find him ever and anon spurning at
it; to which I have given some return already in my animadversions on this Book
of his. What excellent improvement has been made of late in this Point of
Anatomy by some of our own Countrymen, which with great thankfulness all
learned men receive throughout the World! witness learned Dr. Glysson of the
Liver, Dr. Willis of the Brain, Dr. Wharton of the Glandules, Dr. Higmore of a
new Ductus in the Testicles, Dr. Jolliffe of the Lymphatick Vessels: So Dr.
Pecquet of the Receptacle of the Chyle, and the Lacteae Thoracicae. The Milky
Veins of the Mesentary by Asellius, besides other admirable Discourses on
Variety of Subjects; and above all that most excellent useful discovery of the
Circulation of the Blood by the renowned Dr. Harvey. These and many more that
refer to Anatomy, which I might recite, but that I study brevity, are
entert^ined by the learned with singular ^ppl^use, which yet Mr. S. calls
unprofitable Discourses.

So the understanding of Plants he accounts unnecessary and burdensome to the
Memory. Why! are not these part of the matter of Physic, and is it not
necessary an Artist should understand his Tools? Herein it appears did consist
a great part of Salomons Wisdom, which yet with him is but Foolishness.

Thus he quarrels at the Observation of Pulses, whereby we discern how the
Vital Faculty is affected. Of Symptoms, by which we know the Disease, as the
Lion by his Paw. At Inspection into Vrines, which often, especially in Accute
Diseases, give good hints, and denote to us what Concoction there is in the
Veins. Of this Subject Dr. Willis has written excellently well. But upon the
whole matter, I conclude this Paragraph, Ars non habet inimicum nisi
ignorantem. I plead not for that Customary way of the Quacks, who will conjure
upon a Liquor in an Urinal, and I could wish we could persuade the people to
believe, there cannot be so certain judgment made upon an Urine as they think
on.

Next he spurns at such as travail to the Universities abroad for the
improvement of their knowledge in this Faculty, saying, That after their return
home, they cannot certainly cure one poor Disease. Here if by the word
(certainly) he means infallibly, he is doubtless in the right; its enough a
priori if they act according to probability, and this they may do if they
understand their profession; and a posteriori while we observe the effect, its
apparent some of them do certainly cure great Diseases. Are they the worse for
their travail, for the advancement of their Learning? I think not, unless they
leave their Religion behind them. Perhaps it is not necessary that men should
travail in order to the understanding of Physic, our own Country affording
advantages enough for it; but in this they have liberty and free will; and I
judge it absurd to upbraid any Gentleman for his sedulity in that point. It may
be some come home as wise as they went, perhaps scarcely so, yet others we are
assured return very well accomplished. And this Testimony I must give on the
behalf of some Gentlemen of the Profession, whom he has the best advantage to
know and observe, that as to them its a false charge.

He langh^ at the learned.
(P. 206.) Young Students in other Countries (says Mr. S.) commonly go along
with a Learned Professor, to whom he frequently reads Lectures upon the
Patients he visits, and does it with such a grave Method, etc. which he
unmannerly jeers at, -- so as the young Students do verily believe, that none
of those Diseases can come amiss to them, but they shall surely cure them all.
But alas! when they come to matter of experiment in their Practice, they find
they are mistaken, they are puzzled at every turn, etc. -- they cannot perform
the cure of any Disease, not so much as a Whitlow. -- Yea Mr. S. have they such
advantages as these, besides their Lectures in the Schools, and on the Plants
in their Physic Gardens, and in their frequent Anatomies, and are these to be
laughed at, and accounted insufficient to ground young Gentlemen for the Art of
Physic? What then shall we think of such a young man as never heard a Physic
Lecture? Or if he did, it was before he understood the words of Art, so as the
Lecturer must needs have been as a Barbarian to him; one that knows nothing of
the Plants, viz. P. 161, nor ever saw (as we have reason to think) a
Dissection; one that knows not the Terms used by Learned Authors in those very
Subjects which he undertakes to treat of, neither the Chemists where his
greatest pretense is, nor others? ( vide what has been said on both sides
concerning a Waters imbibing a Mineral or Metal) nay himself tramples upon them
with pride and disdain (P. 207.) How cumbersome to the Memory (says he) are the
very Terms of Art? -- and again, sufficiently troublesome, and sometimes put it
upon the Rack too. I say if these helps that do so directly refer to the
Practice of Physic, come so short to qualify a young man, that still neglects
not his study of good Authors in a right Method, whether will the sole making
up of Experiments in the analyzing of the parts of a few Metals and Minerals,
furnish a young man with better qualification? I refer it to the Judicious to
judge.

Besides it has been my fortune to be very much acquainted with several youn^
Gentlemen that have travailed, and returned from Foreign Universities, who have
been very well fitted for the Practical part, and yet have been modest; while
some others, not worthy to carry their Books, have been as bold as Blind Bayard.

He tramples upon the Universities and the Arts.
(P. 207.) How do young Students (says he) trifle a great part of their time
away at Universities, in the frothy Study of Logicks, Ethics, Physics, and
Metaphysics? O impudence in the Abstract!

Aude aliquid brevibus Gyaris and CARCERE DIGNVM,
Si vis esse aliquis. --
Does he expect to climb by trampling on the Universities.

How this will stand with his University Oath of Matriculation, and when he
commenced Bachelor of Arts, I appeal to his own Conscience: What! thus to
throw dirt in the Face of the Universities, and to arraign all the Learned Men
in the World, and their Studies before his Tribunal. How could I ever expect to
escape his supercilious Censure, whose pride is such, that the most famous
Universities in the World must be thus judged. We have found Sir Simpson
severely ranting against both the Ancient Princes, and Modern Writers in
Physic, and spurning against the most Learned Discourses that are written upon
any the most useful Subject in the Faculty, and here he sawcily censures the
most famous Universities, and tramples upon all Arts and Sciences. A man would
wonder that ever such Pamphlets as this should pass the Press, and that none
should crush such Cockatrice Eggs before they were hatched. It appears this man
can find nothing to study but himself, nor to pore upon but his Laboratory.

Is not he likely at length to prove a hopeful Chick, learning to crow like the
old Cock? I find Paracelsus in his Preface to his Fragmenta Medica, bragging
that for the space of ten years, he had never read so much as one Book. And in
his Preface to Paragranum, he impudently professes, that a hair of his head
knew more than all the Writers in the World, and that the Rings of his Shoes
were more learned than either Galen or Avicen. Et barba mea (inquit)
experientiae majoris est quam Academiae vestrae universae, viz My Beard (says
he) is of greater Experience than all your Universities. And this our Author we
find comes not far behind his Master (though perhaps he never read these things
in him) being both big with the like Tympany.

A Pardon asked.
Sir Simpson must pardon me, if for the love I bear to Learning, and the honor
I have for the Universities, I admonish him of these things. I remember I have
read of a Law among the Lacedaemonians and Thurians, which was this; Qui juvenem
quempiam aliquid indecori patrare vidisset, nec quasi Filium proprium
redarguisset, emendassetque, tanquam Malus and Degener Civis multabatur. viz.
He that shall see a young man do something that is unbecomming, and shall not
reprove him, and endeavor to amend him, as if he were his own Son, should be
punished as an evil and degenerate Citizen. And certainly nothing is more
unbecomming a Scholar, than thus to fly in the face of all Learning.

But here he seems to have some plea for himself, in crying out against the
Study of Ethics, affirming that, They consult more the Sayings and Moralities
of the Heathen, than the Life of Christ and Christians. -- I am assured this is
a false Charge with many, nor does the study of the Arts hinder the Profession
of Religion in the least, but the one is rather a Handmaid to the other. And
therefore we see that when our Savior sent forth the Apostles, who were
Fishermen, and probably illiterate, he first qualified them with all manner of
Learning, whereby they had the Gift of Tongues, and were also able to dispute
against all Gainsayers.

A Caution given.
I do heartily wish, that notwithstanding this pretense of Mr. S. here
concerning the life of Christ and Christians, that whatever his judgment may
be in other matters, he take care that he do not follow Paracelsus in Religion.
For I find the famous Bullinger testifying that he often went to discourse with
him, and to try what Religion he was of. Contuli (says he) cum eo semel atque
iterum de rebus variis, etiam Theologicis, and Religionis, etc. But he says he
could never discern any thing of piety in him from any of his Speeches; but
that he pretended to Magic, etc. -- Raro aut nunquam ingrediebatur caetus
sacros, and visus est Deum and res divinas leviter curare, etc. To wit, He
seldom or never went to Church, or the Public Congregations, and seemed
slightly to regard God and his Ordinances; and this Testimony is confirmed
(with a great deal more) under the hands of Oporinus, who had served him two
years, and Erastus a Learned Physician in Germany. And yet I find Paracelsus in
some of his Books like Mr. S. pretending to treat of Religion. This Caution out
of Christian Love, I do on this occasion give to Mr. Simpson, which I wish he
may take kindly and follow, whatever he does in the rest.

(P. 208.) How uncertain (says he) are Physicians in their Diagnosticks of
Diseases. -- I confess again they are not infallible in this point, yet not so
uncertain as he pretends, if they be such as are well studied in the Art. But
what then? because there is a possibility that in some difficult Cases they may
err, must they therefore wilfully close with error, and through abandoning of
Study embrace affected ignorance?

To be deeply versed in the knowledge of Diagnosticks of Diseases of all good
and bad Symptoms reckoned by Galen and Hippocrates, etc. only enable a man to
be confident, and thereby to commit folly, by being too positive in the
determination of life and death.

And were it not easy for Mr. S. if he would but look in a Glass, to spy one
that is not so versed, that can be confident enough? What means all this severe
taxation of other men, and things that deserve it not, but a plain
demonstration of superlative confidence and folly. -- But if Physicians be
confident in judging of the Nature of the Disease, and this be grounded upon
Reason, judging as men from the sign to the thing signified, and from the Cause
to the Effect, who can charge them with folly?

Of encouraging of Patients.
(P. 209.) Here he taxes some that out of confidence of their skill in
Prognostics, use to promise to their Patients and themselves a recovery out of
the Disease, with words of Encouragement, etc. Now this being matter of fact,
is not to be disputed if he have any Credit. In this particular we must
distinguish concerning Diseases: Some are Salutares, Three sorts of Diseases.
which have no manner of danger in them; here a Physician may appear confident,
and make encouraging Prognostics. Secondly, there are some that are Ancipites,
viz. of a doubtful nature, which sometimes admit of a Cure, and sometimes not.
If a Physician do understand well the Nature of the Disease and the
Constitution of the Patient, he may be well able to predict what the event
shall be; and if he have good ground to hope well, certainly he ought to keep
the Patient from too much fear and despondency, which in timorous spirited
people would kill sooner than the Disease; especially in such as are
Hypochondriack: yet in these great wisdom is to be used, that while he thinks
fit to encourage his Patient, he still take care to act rationally and
vigorously, for the correcting of that part from whence the danger mostarises;
and yet for the saving of his own reputation, that he discover to some wise and
prudent Friend of the Patient, wherein his ground of fear does lie. A third
sort there are, which we call Lethales, which either in their own Nature, or
according to the Circumstances of hic and nunc will become mortal: Here let a
Physician take heed how he gives any encouragement either to the Patient or his
Friends, lest he suffer in his reputation; as if he should not apprehend the
danger, and so fail in his Prognostics.

Besides, when a man must certainly die, he had need to know what he is to do,
since upon that scantling of time depends ETERNITY. Now in this point of
Prognostics, every man is his own best Judge, what ground he has to predict
Life or Death; and others ought not too severely to censure, while in doubtful
Cases, if he see room for Action, he rather trusts God and wise men with his
reputation in speaking cheerfully, than in hazarding the speedy ruin of the
Patient, by throwing him under despondency.

Have not we known some Chemists often promise a Cure within a fortnight, when
either the Patient has died within that time, or become irrecoverable, and a
Galenist or two perhaps have been sent for, when it has been too late? This my
Brethren can witness with me, and many in this City know it full well.

The Galenical way more difficult than the Chemical.
(P. 213.) I could heartily wish says he) the Galenists would consult a more
facile way of Practice, such as by the efficacy thereof might prove more
delightful to themselves, and more grateful to the Patients. -- Here I must
confess some Pseudochymists have the advantage of the Galenists, for they make
Physic to have little of difficulty in it, while they wholly employ their time
in the narrow compass of the Minerals and Metals, and read nothing of the
Theorical part, whereby they should be fitted for the due application of them
for the cure of Diseases; and this is that which makes so many at this day fall
into that way; to avoid the difficulties they should necessarily meet with all,
in seeking out the grounds of a rational Method, which certainly requires more
Learning and Judgment to understand it, than the other; from whence it is that
even all our Modern Quacks in every corner of the Nation, do run into the other
way. But Learned Men are not so contented, they desire and endeavor to break
through all difficulties, not valuing their own Labor and Study to fit
themselves for their Profession, being desirous to understand not only the
virtues and preparation of Medicines, but also the Nature and Composition of
Man's Body, which is the Subject of their Work, to which they are to be applied,
and likewise the Natures and Differences of all Diseases. But since Mr. S. will
be wishing, I will wish too, that he would become more modest, and not think
better of himself than he has cause; that he would study to be quiet and do his
own business; that he would be wise unto sobriety; that he would not bear false
witness against his Neighbors; and that he would endeavor to be serviceable
in his Country, by studying a sound way of Practice in his Profession.

Of Experimental Phil^sophy.
Next he has a Project for the Improvement of Experimental Philosophy, in order
to which (he says) He thinks it would be necessary to lay aside our Books,
excepting such as refer to the communication of Experiments. I like well indeed
the confirming of Notions by Experiments, where the Subject is capable of it,
but that cannot be in all things. Certainly the World would soon run into
Ignorance, if all Learning and Books were laid aside that did not communicate
Experiments. But if that must be, I wish his Book may be first thrown aside as
impertinent, and that this of mine may go with it to boot; for I would not have
them separated, indeed its pity they should be parted.

If after his preparation of some of these things he be yet to seek out their
properties, it were better to try his Experiments upon himself than upon
others, especially such as are sick, who need present relief, and ought not to
be hazarded with making doubtful Experiments; since certainly they call him not
for any such intent, nor can he merit thanks from the Patient, with whom he
takes such a course.

(Page 217.) He projects that some may be empleied to make Observations of the
efficacy of Simples, and others in their Laboratories may make Essences,
Tinctures, Spirits, Extracts, Magisteries, etc. out of them, and may have
liberty of making Experiments thereof on Sick Persons -- Really I am ashamed to
find any man that pretends to the Art of Physic, My. S. his Project of making
Experiments on sick persons.
to set so mean a rate upon the Bodies of Men, in this Age of the World, as to
make Experiments upon such a Noble Subject. Who would be so mad as to let him
make his Experiments upon him? It Is to be feared it has been too much his
Practice already. Certainly the World is not now in its Infancy, nor the Art of
Physic in its Childhood, nor to learn to go; If this man had but read these
profoundly learned Authors, Ancient or Modern, whom he so tramples upon, he
might discern this Art to have attained to such a perfection, as scarce any
other can pretend to. Not that I think it has reached to such a pitch, as that
it may not admit of augmentation; but certainly all is not to be expected from
a Pseudo-Chymists Furnace and Laboratory.

The Virtues of Simples not always in their thin parts.
But here he supposes that all the Virtues of Simple Specificks must lie in
their volatile parts, which are to be extracted by vehement heat of Fire;
wherein certainly he mistakes; the Essences, Spirits, Tinctures, etc. of
various Simples being almost of the same nature, and partaking more of the Fire
than of the Simples themselves, out of which they are taken; from whence it is
that they are all extremely hot, and offer violence to the Stomach. So we see
the Salts of several Plants are almost all the same, (while yet the Plants are
of different Natures) yea and not differing much from such as are taken out of
the Minerals or Metals. Now the Virtues of Vegetables consisting rather in
their Natural Composition, than in any one part, I think they were (at least
many of them) better left to Nature to extract their Specific Properties, than
tormented by the ^ire; which (as I said before) makes them like a man under the
Rack, ^utter that which was not thought of before, and become of that quality,
which was not properly in them.

His project for an Universal Character.
Next he makes a Digression, and discourses concerning an Universal Character,
which he borrows from a very Reverend Person of our Nation, to whom in justice
he ought to have left the Honor of his Project, and not thus impertinently
have thrust his Sickle into his Harvest. But perhaps he has the like Opinion of
himself, that another had that I have read of, who at Rome posted up his Papers
upon the Gates of the Vatican, challenging all the learned men in the World to
dispute deomni Ente: whom the ingenious Sir Thomas Moor once Lord Chancellor of
England, being then there, did quickly confound with this Common Law Question.
Vtrum Averia capta in Withernam sint replegiabilia.

(Page 239.) He resumes his Subject, and inveighs against the Galenical Method
and Medicines, extolling the Chemical Preparations, because first, he says,
They are less in bulk than the other, and therefore they are less offensive to
the Patient. -- Here again I declare I am no Enemy to Chemical Medicines,
Chemical Medicines no better because little in bulk.
which I know to be well prepared, though they are not much the more to be
valued, because they are little in bulk, unless also they be benign in their
operation; which often times such as are given in small quantities are not, but
extremely violent. Thus a few Grains of Colocynthis will purge, and that
violently too, yet not so safely as an Ounce of Cassia or Manna, etc. And so I
might say of some Chemical Preparations, which though they might be given in a
very small quantity, perhaps a few Grains, yet are not so safe as these I have
mentioned, or Syrup of Damask Roses, or an Infusion of Seen, etc. And
therefore Sennertus (Cap. de Chymia) blames those Pseudo-Chymists, that in
every (even the smallest) Diseases use to fly to their Medicines that are made
out of Minerals or Metals, Hoc unum agunt, (inquit) ut in minima dosi
Medicamenta Palato non ingrata exhibeant; because (says he) they have a mind to
make them the more grateful to the Palate in their small quantity: quam vero
illa interdum violenta and corpori noxia sint, parum sunt solliciti. (That is)
Little regarding how violent they are, and how hurtful to the body. To whom he
applies that Rule, Non solum jucunde, sed and tuto curandum. We ought to cure
not only with pleasant, but with safe Medicines.

Galenical Medicines are safe and also successful.
Another thing for which he commends the Chemical before the Galenical
Medicines is, because they are less dangerous. -- Here I verily suspect no man
will believe him, so as I might very well spare my labor of a reply;
especially if we consider the property of his own Medicines, which in this Book
he has told us he uses, which are wholly made out of Minerals and Metals, which
he confesses ( P. 180) have in them an Arsenical property. We say the Galenical
are not at all dangerous, but as Herophylus says (...), even the finger of God
in the hand of an Artist. And in these our days they are much more safe and
benign than in the days of old; to wit, among the Ancients; we have our Seen,
Rubarb, Cassia, Manna, Tamarinds, etc. unknown to them, and far to be preferred
for safety before their Peplium, Colocynthis, Enphorbium, Scammony, Hellebore,
etc. which we lay almost wholly aside, unless in some peculiar Cases, when we
would acuate our Medicines for a robust body. And therefore our Patients
complain not of heat and corrosion, as we know they do from some men's
Medicines. Our successes do crown our Endeavors, wherein we can appeal to our
Countrymen. If from the nature of Diseases sometimes we are slow, yet we are
sure, and are trusted accordingly. Our Patients relapse not from any violence
or virulency in our Medicines, as I have proved concerning Paracelsus.

Mr. S. severely taxes his Fellow-Chymists.
Yet (he says) he vindicates not the confident boastings of some Quacking
Pretenders to Chemistry, who presume to cure all Diseases with some secret
Powder or Oil, or the like, which when known is but a mere trifle, etc. while
yet (he says) they vilify all others that are more modest than themselves. --
I must confess I wonder Mr. S. can talk at this rate against others of his
Tribe, when amongst them all,
none have discovered so much confident boasting, or immodesty in vilifying
others, as he himself does, and that against the most learned Physicians in the
World; trampling upon both the Ancient and Modern Writers, and undervaluing all
Arts and Sciences, and the University-Studies. Why may not they as well cure
all Diseases by their Powders and Oils, etc. as he by his Ternary; which when
the World comes to know, may prove as very trifles as theirs? Qui alterum
incusat ipsumse, etc.

Some of the young Chemists begin at the wrong end.
(Page 242.) Where the Galenists in their Dispensatories end, there the Chemical
Physician begins. -- Ay, that is the mischief, these young men begin at the
wrong end; when they should first study Physiology and Pathology, they are
falling to make Medicines, and that before they understand either the
Properties and Nature of Humane Bodies, or of the Diseases incident thereto.

Zwelfer whom he mentions to correct some things in the Augustane Dispensatory,
is a most acute and ingenious Writer, and he carps at some things perhaps not
without a cause, yet he rails not at this rate; he retains still the same
matter of Physic and forms of Medicaments that he found in that Dispensatory,
as I made out before. If some others go to the like work, it will be as Asinus
ad Lyram, and a meddling with what they understand not.

Another thing wherein he prefers the Chemical Medicines before the Galenical,
is, because they are more purified from their Terrene Feculencies, for (says
he) in Decoctions, Syrupes, Conserves, Electuaries, Lohochs, and other
Shop-Preparations, there are but very small separations of the Terrestrial
Foeces, little Depuration made, etc. These things we met with before and
answered. I wonder, whether if Logic had been set at a better rate, Vegetables
and Animals need not so much preparation as Minerals do.
it would not have freed us from all these frivolous Tautologies, and put us
into a closer Method. -- Certainly there is very great reason that (hymical
Medicines, which are made out of the Minerals and Metals, should be much more
purified from their Terrene Feculencies, than the other, for they need it. I
have made it out from the Testimony of the best Chemical Authors (yea, and
himself has confessed it) that most of them are poisonous, if they be not well
depurated: whereas many of the Remedies which are used by the Galenists, need
no more preparation than our Meat and Drink does. Now if any should out of
dislike of the Terrestrial or gross part of our Food, set upon a design of
separation of it from the Terrene Feculency (as he calls it) and think to live
upon a Chemical Extract of Flesh, and Bread, and Beer, or Wine, or Ale, or some
neat Defecated Spirit made out of these, or some pure Oil, what would be the
result of it, I suppose he might as well feed upon Needles. And the Case is not
much different. The Galenists do enough in point of preparation, for most of
our Medicines, as well as our Meat, at least I know no reason why they should
be taught by him, the rest Nature by the Fermentation of the parts will supply;
and this is evident even to every man's Observation. And therefore if in some of
the forms of Medicines he speaks of, there is not much done in point of
separation of the parts, it is because they do not need it.

Chemical Medicines are very operative.
Lastly, He prefers the Chemical (P. 244.) because they are more effectual in
their Operation. By Chemical Medicines (he says) he does not mean such as every
ordinary bragging Chemist exposes to sale, who are a reproach to the Art. --
but such as are made by a skilful Artist. -- How I beseech you shall we know a
bragging Chemist who is a reproach to his Art, from a skilful Artist? I am
willing to take him for an Artist, and yet I find him ever and anon bragging
and boasting of his Medicines, and undervaluing others which are far more safe
and successful.

I know the Chemical Preparations made out of Minerals and Metals are
exceedingly operative, and we often stand in need of such Tools, when we meet
with stubborn Diseases in robust bodies; and are approved of by the Galenists
and therefore the Galenists do approve of them, and when they see cause use
them (to wit) such as they know to be safe and prepared by a good Artist. Nor
did ever the Art of Physic want strong and efficacious Medicines, such were
those I mentioned before which were in ordinary use among the Ancients, viz.
Colocynthis, Peplium, Hellebore, Elaterium, etc. That which we glory in, and
our Patients find benefit by, is that in this Age we have more benign
Medicines, which operate without ill Symptoms; and now it appears Mr. S.
condemns these, and flies again to such as are more violent than those of the
Ancients, which we have in a good measure laid aside. Well, I suspect at length
his Patients will experience, by the Operation of his Medicines a difference
betwixt his and others, when they shall have given him leave to make his
Experiments upon them, and so become competent Judges in this point betwixt him
and me, and therefore to their decision I will for this t^me refer it.

But here is one thing more I may not pass over, that Mr. S. lets fly sharply
against some bragging Chemists that expose their Medicines to sale, and thereby
are a reproach to the Art. -- If I understand him aright, he means such as do
post up their Medicines upon the Gates or Corner Posts of the City to call in
Customers, as the Quacks and Mountebanks use to do. -- Could he ever think that
this Book of his would not be read at York, where all men know that he himself
exposed his Amulet for the Plague to sale, posting up his Bills on every Corner
of the Streets; and may we not have as good reason to expect the same for the
vending of his Ternary?

Thus I have closely traced Mr. Simpson through the greatest part of his Book,
and have thoroughly sifted all his Arguments against my declared Principles of
Soarbrough Spaw, wherein I have discovered him plainly canting and recanting,
which I have further established by evident demonstration. I have asserted the
Terms which I used in my Book concerning a Springs imbibing of Minerals to be
those of Art, used by the very best Chemical Authors, and agreeable to sound
Reason. I have answered all his Objections against the Rational Practice of
Physic, which he calls Galenical, and confirmed my assertions from the
Practice of the most Learned Chemical Writers. I have manifested the Congruity
that is betwixt the most learned on both sides, and made out the Minerals and
Metals, together with the Animals and Vegetables to belong in common to the
Art, and to be the matter of Physic; wherein both the Galenical and Chemical
Physician are equally concerned; and do heartily desire that every man in the
Faculty would endeavor what in him lies, that since they do convenire in eodem
tertio, they may also convenire inter se, and that we may all join hand in hand
as there shall be occasion, for the Peace and Honor of the Faculty, and the
health of our Friends that employ us.

Of his Constitutive Principles of all Concretes.
There are some other Digressions in his Book concerning the Constitutive
Principles of all Concretes, wherein he carps at the two Principles of Helmont,
at the three of the Ancient Chemists, at the four of the Peripateticks, and at
the five of Dr. Willis, resolving all into one (to wit) Water. But since it may
justly be said of that Discourse as once of the young Prophets Axe, Master it
was borrowed; I therefore matter not much whether it sink or swim, since the
Subject is not of such common concern, nor yet relates to me; I refer the
Reader to Helmont, out of whom he fetches what he says on that Subject.

When I consider what abundance of Experiments borrowed from variety of
Authors, are patched up together, to make up this Book of his, as also what a
company of impertinent Subjects that relate not at all one to another, nor to
the general scope of the Book, our Author has drawn in by the head and
shoulders to make up this Composition, it makes me call to mind what I read in
Nonius Marcellus concerning an Elogium that old Lucilius that famous Roman Wit,
gave to such an Author upon the like occasion, viz.

Sarcinator est summus, suit Centonem optume. Concerning The Original of
Springs.
I Am now come to this Appendix concerning the Original of Springs, where he
designs to confute what I have said in my Book of Scarbrough-Spaw concerning
that Subject, wherein I have examined the variety of Opinions among both
Ancient and Modern Philosophers: some ascribing it to the Sea, the Water
whereof they will have conveyed by subterraneal Channels to all the Springs at
Land; and to that purpose they fancy the Sea to be higher than the Land, and
consequently the Water to run per-declive in a Natural Motion, to any, even the
highest Springs at Land. This I have examined, and according to my Model have
proved to be but a fancy, by several Arguments, from Page 55 to Page 76 of my
Book of Scarbrough-Spaw, ( Edition 2.) too long here to be recited. But others
that are for the Sea to be the Original of Springs, being with me unsatisfied
with the former fancy of the Seas altitude above the Land, have their various
opinions concerning the conveyance of the Water from the Sea to the Springs, as
there I instance out of their Authors; the disagreement of whom among
themselves, may well save me the labor of refutation.

Others there are that will have the Water conveyed from the Sea into some
large Caverns that are in the Earth, and there by heat from Subterraneal Fires
kindled by Naphtha and Bitumen, will have Water resolved into Vapors, which
ascending toward the Superficies of the Earth, are by a more remiss degree of
heat condensed again into Water, and so make the Springs; which was the Opinion
of Empedocles, as also Seneca, to which Eall^piu^, Mr. Carpenter, Mr. Lydiat,
and Dr. French adhere. This I have weighed according to my Cubit, and find it
of no weight, from Page 77. to P. 89.

A second Opinion concerning the Original of Springs, is that of Seneca ( lib.
3. Not. Quest. cap. 7.) zid. by a transmutation of Earth into Water in the
Caverns of the Earth; which since I discern it has not many Fautors, I waved as
not needing Confutation: and so came to that of Aristotle, vid. that the
Springs are generated from the transmutation of Air into Water in the
Subterraneal Caverns. This also I considered of and found invalid; from P. 89.
to 93. being attended with inextricable difficulties and absurdities.

I then proceeded to consider of Rain and Snow being the Cause of the Springs,
of which Opinion I found Albertus Magrus and Georgius Agricola to have been the
most eminent Patrons, and to them I did with modesty join in my judgment. I
have lately heard that Lessius has writ something upon this Argument, and also
that learned Frenchman Gassendus has newly set forth a peculiar Tractate in
defense of it; but it has not been my hap as yet to meet with either of them.

What grounds Albertus and Agricola had laid down for their asserting this
Opinion I declared, together with various Objections against them made by
learned men, who since have treated upon the Subject. To these I replied
according to my talent, having not pretermitted the mention of any Argument,
that seemed to have any thing of weight or reason in it, that ever I had met
with in any Ancient or Modern Writers against the Opinion; which as I went
along in answer to them, I backed with new Arguments of Demonstration of my
own, grounded on Reason and Observations, both of my own and others, in our own
Nation or abroad (from Page 93. to 110.) modestly submitting all to the
judgment of the more learned and considerate. And truly I have had thanks from
several very learned Gentlemen for that Discourse, who declared themselves to
have become Proselytes to the Opinion upon my grounds.

But Mr. S. it appears, is not satisfied, and gives some Reasons against it,
which being for their Substance no other, then what I have there mentioned to
be objected by others, and have also replied to, (though he takes no notice of
it) I judge needless to repeat here, but do rather refer both him and the
Reader to what I have said there, this being swelled into a bigger Volume
already than at first I intended.

Indeed he has a distinction of Land-Springs and Quick-Springs mentioned P.
286. which runs through all he has to say against the Opinion, granting that
Land-Springs may proceed from Rain and Snow, but denying it as to the Quick
Springs, and yielding that the failing of Rain and Snow may be the cause of the
drying up of the former, but not of the latter. -- But is not this plainly the
begging of the Question, while I have proved that there is no real difference
in this distinction, but that they are both one, both in their Cause and in the
Quality of the Water? and that where there is never any Rain or Snow, as in
Egypt and Ombrion, there are no Springs; where there is little Rain, there are
few Springs as in Aethiopia and Arabia, in so much as for many miles together
there is not a Spring to be found (as Travailers tell us) to quench their
thirst or their Camels. And in Countries where there uses to be great plenty of
Rain, there are great plenty of Springs; yet if for some good space of time
there be a failure of them, most of the Springs that ordinarily were not wont
to fail, do dry up, as it happened in this Kingdom in the years 1654, 55, and
56: And when there is a total failure for many years together, as it happened
to Cyprus in the days of Constantine for 36 years together, which I proved
from Dr. Heylin's Cosmography; there they are wholly dried up, as there it fell
out, so as the Inhabitants were forced to leave the place, and seek for a new
Habitation elsewhere for want of Water.

Besides are not all sorts of Springs at Land, and so to be called
Land-Springs? I see no difference save only in their Continuation, and I have
sufficiently proved that to depend upon the Continuation of Rain and Snow,
while being withdrawn in any proportion, the Springs fail accordingly, even
such as all men thought to have been Perennes, or everlasting; which are those
that he calls Quick-Springs.

Indeed as to that of the three dry years 1654, 55, 56, during which space we
had very little Rain or Snow in York shire, either in Winter or Summer, when I
observed very many of our Springs upon the high Wolds were dried up, which in
the memory of man had never failed before, so as they were forced to drive
their Cattle many miles for Water: This (he says) he enquired of the Country
people, and they testified it was not so. To this I answer, it is matter of
fact, of which I was an Eyewitness, and I doubt not but my Affirmative will
find Credit with the Ingenuous Men of the World, before those Country peoples
negative, who either might live in Low-grounds where the failing of the Springs
was not so signal, or possibly after so many years they may have forgotten.

But this I took the more notice of, because it was a Confirmation to me of
this Opinion of the Original of Springs, with which I did abound ever since I
was at the University, and considered that Point of Philosophy. All that Mr. S.
replies to it ( P. 291.) is, that those Springs that did so dry up, were not
Perennes, or everlasting, or such as he calls Quick-Springs. Why! I say so too,
and that indeed there are no Springs so Perennes, but from the deficiency of
Rain they will be dried up; and many of those were such as in all the Story of
the Wolds never failed before: and those that did yet flow, were so slow in
their Streams, as that the nearest Inhabitants began to be very scrupulous to
supply their Neighbors, for fear they should lack for themselves.

But further, to return to my Argument I draw from Dr. Heylin's Story of
Cyprus, I would know from Mr. S. whether there were in Cyprus these two sorts
of Springs according to his distinction or no? If not, then it was only the
Quick-Springs that were awanting, and why should Cyprus alone be defective in
such a necessary thing? If they were both there, then the Quick-Springs failed
as well as the other, and so his distinction is invalid; the reason of all is,
that they all came from the same Cause (to wit) the Rain, which failing totally
for many years together, they were dried up; so as it necessarily follows that
the Quick-Springs at Cyprus came from the Rain, and the like we may judge of
all the Springs elsewhere.

But Mr. S. finding himself pinched with this Argument, has a very ready
Answer, even almost the same that the Countrey-Parson used in the Pulpit in
Confutation of Bellarmine, when he cried out Bellarmine thou lie. -- For he
calls in Question the Honor and Honesty of Reverend Dr. Heylin, saying ( P.
301.) That like as Historians use to do, he might probably take it upon trust.
And because he knows not how to evade the force of the Argument, he denies the
verity of the matter of fact, and cries out in these words, -- That an I sland
so near the Mediterranean Sea should want Rain, for 36 years together, would
certainly put an ordinary credulity upon the Tenterhooks, and stretch a Thomas
beyond his ordinary pitch. And thus Mr. S. has turned over his thumb two of my
Arguments, viz. that of the three dry years mentioned last, and this of Cyprus,
by denying the verity of the matters of fact; an easy way of Answer indeed.

As for Doctor Heylin, he did certainly take it upon trust, and so did Mr.
Purchase in his Pilgrimage ( Page 439.) and Mr. Sandys in his Travails ( Edit.
3. P. 222.) who relate the same Story. And I pray what other means of knowledge
have we of matters of fact done before our Times, but to take them upon trust
of those that commit them down to us? And so I find did Doctor Heylin and the
rest, for they have the substance of it (I guess) from Mattheaus Quadus his
Fasciculus Geographiae, and he seems to setch it from Boterus (whom as yet I
cannot meet withal) Quadus his words are, Boterus istuc addit, Constantini
Imperatoris tempore, continuis septemdecim annis, nullae hic fuere pluviae,
unde deserta mansit Insula, donee D. Helenae beneficio in Olympo Monte Templum
aedificaretur, etc. exinde pluviae redierant, ac habitari denuo caepit. To wit,
Boterus adds this, that about the time of Constantine the Great, for 17 years
together here was no Rain at all, so as the Island was forsaken by the
Inhabitants, till the time that Helena the Empress built a Church in Mount
Olympus, etc. about which time the Rain returned, and it began again to be
inhabited. Mr. Sandys and Doctor Heylin do agree in their mention of the number
of 36 years, but out of whom they had it, I discern not, for they cite not
their Author. But its all one to my purpose, the failure of the Rain made the
Island unhabitable for want of Water in their Rivers and Springs, and
consequently, the Rain was the Proximal Cause of them.

I have other Arguments wherewith I did confirm this Opinion in my Book: As
concerning one of the Fortunate Islands or Canaries called Ombrion, now Fierre,
which I mention P. 98. of my Book, where it never rains, but the Inhabitants
are supplied with Water by an admirable Providence of God, from a certain Tree
that grows there plentifully, which distills from its leaves every Night an
abundance of Water, enough to supply the Inhabitants and their Cattle with
Water. Ovetanus and Martyr do both say there are no Springs in the Island, nor
Rivers. But to this Mr. S. gives no return.

So when ( P. 118.) I deduce an Argument from the full and perfect Agreement,
that is in all Qualities perceptible to the Senses betwixt Rain and
Spring Water, so as its hard to distinguish the one from the other, Mr. S.
takes no notice of it.

And when I mention there another from the exact Identity of the Water of those
he calls Quick-Springs, and of that which flows out of the other, which he
calls Land-Springs; and grants that they proceed wholly from Rain and Snow;
which if they proceeded from several Causes, must probably differ in some
respect: He leaps over it; will you know the reason? even because he could not
answer it. And yet so dis-ingenuous is he (P. 301.) as to say, That he had run
through all that I had offered in order to the confirming of this opinion of
Rain and Snow to be the Original of Springs, and probably if not
demonstratively overturned the Opinion, together with my grounds, arguments and
reasons. It Is apparent to many that have read his Book, that he had a wrathful
design against me, which all along he has prosecuted with as much rancour as
possibly he could, aiming at victory rather than verity, and particularly in
this Dispute about the Springs, while he has not the least ground of pretense
that he has answered my Arguments wherein the force of the Opinion laid.
Certainly no man that ever pretended to Learning or Reputation writ at this
rate.

But while I was answering an Objection of Seneca's which he made against this
Original, I made a Concession that there may be some transmutation of Air into
Water in the Earth or above, from whence it comes that Churches become wet
before Rain falls: I find Mr. S. extremely severe against me, I wonder (says he
P. 299.) the Doctors Philosophy in his Second Edition should not come out more
maturate than to adhere to this old and long since exploded transmutability of
Elementss. In so much that he seems willing to hang the point in controversy
upon that hinge. So sure (says he as the Air is transmuted into Water, which
moistens the Stone Walls of Buildings, so sure is the Air in the Bowels of the
Earth transmuted into Water, yea and so sure is the Original of Fountains from
Rain and Snow Water. -- Well! Let the cause go upon that, I desire no more, and
then I am assured the learnedest men of the World will be of my Opinion about
the Original of Springs.

Is not that Air which we breath in, and that Water which we drink under that
Notion? Now its plain that some of that Air that we breath in (within a Church)
will in a few hours be turned into Water upon the Walls and Floors before Rain,
which being collected together may be drunk into the Stomach, and quench
thirst. I know where it pinches Mr. S. I do not take this Air and Water to be
pure Elements, for so we could not live in them; its enough that they are such
as all the World c^ll Air and Water, and these we see may be turned one into
another, the grosser parts of Air into Water, and the purer parts of Water into
Air.

I mentioned just now a Story out of Ovetanus concerning Ombrion, where there
is a Tree from whose leaves every night does distill an abundance of Water, to
the supply of the Inhabitants for all uses; the like Story is ^old by Pliny (
lib. 6. cap. 32) and Mr. Hawkins in his second Voy^ge recorded by Mr. Hackluyt
tells the like of some frees in Guiny. Now I would gladly know of Mr. S. from
whence that Water comes, if the ^ir be not turned into Water, unless he will h
ve it to be a Miracle, and so a new Creation?

Again, I would ask Mr. S. whether he thinks Fromundus (or Cardanus) understood
a Point of Philosophy or no, as well as he, in whom I find an admirable Story
(in Meteor. lib. 5. cap. 2. art. 3.) which he has from Cardanus ( devar. rerum
lib. 8. cap. 44.) Anno 1481. Quaedam Aegra in Italia -- In English thus, A
certain Maid of 18 years of age in Italy, did every day void 36 Pints or Pounds
of Urine, while yet both in Meat and Drink she did not take in above 7; so as
her Urine exceeded them both every day 29 Pounds: and thus she continued for
the space of 60 days, during which time were collected 1740 Pounds of Urine
more than the weight of all her Meat and Drink that she had taken; when yet the
while body of the Maid did scarce weigh 150 Pounds.
It was demanded (sa^y my Authors) byMarlianus how it came to pass? It was
answered, That the Air which was contained in the Arteries, was converted into
a Watery Substance; and that being cast out, what more came in its place, was
presently turned again into Water, and so was multiplied into that large
proportion. This it appears to have been the sense of Cardane, Marlianus, and
Fromundus, although it pleases not Mr. S.

I would also enquire of him whether he thinks Sir Kenelm Digby understood what
he writ, in his Book of the Cure of Wounds by the Symp^thetical Powder, where (
P. 67. of his English Copy) he tells a stupendous Story of a Nun at Rome,
the truth whereof was confirmed to him both from her own Relation and the
attestation of Petrus Servius, who was Pope Vrbane the 8th his Physician, and
several other Doctors of Physic at Rome, that assured him of the truth of it.
This Nun by excessive Watching, F^sting, and Devotion, had so heated her
Body, that she seemed to be all on fire; this heat and internal fire drawing
the Air so powerfully (I use his own words) the Air did incorporate within her
Body, as it uses in Salt of Tartar, and the Passages being all open, it got to
those parts where there is most serosity, viz. the Bladder, and thence she
rendered it in Water among her Urine, and that in an incredible quantity; for
she voided during some weeks more than 200 Pounds of Water every 24 hours.

Now as to the Salt of Tartar he had been treating of it in the foregoing
Page, that being exposed to the open Air, it converts the Air into moisture in
almost an incredible proporion, to wit, a Pound of the Salt well calcined, will
afford ten Pounds of good Oil of Tartar, by drawing and incorporating with it
the Circumj^cent Air.

Now while so many learned Philosophers do s^tisfie themselves and the World,
in so speaking concerning this Trans^^utation of Air into moisture, why should
Mr. S so severely carp at me for using the same forms of expression. I know
well enough what he runs at. Helmont (according to whose Pipe I find him ever
d^ncing) says it is a Vapor which is in the Air that is condensed into Water,
and not the Air it self, to wit not the Element of Air that is turned into
Water. But is it not more properly called Air which we breath in than Vapor?
and it is that which we breath in which is turned into Water, to wit, the
grosser parts of it for as to the pure Element of Air we have nothing to do
with it in this Dispute) nor do any Philosophers or other wise men doubt in the
least to call it the Air. Hence the several Expressions in use among them
concerning the 3 Regions of the Air; and the Atmosphere of the Air, etc. A Term
used by himself in several places of this his Appendix about Springs, but he
will not allow me to call it so. If this be not properly called Air, I do not
know where we shall find it in the World, nor will Mr. S. ever be able to
describe its ubi by Ocular Demonstration, nor yet Helmont whom he follows; For
my own part I choose rather to retain the wholesome Grounds and Terms of
Philosophy now used for many Ages, than to fall into the new way of Canting in
frothy words, much in use among some late Writers, especially such as go this
way; who while they have no new matter, do yet coin new terms to obscure truth,
on purpose to amuse ignorant Readers, as if themselves had been Inventors.

If what now I have said be sufficient in the judgment of wise and learned
men, to evince a possibility of the transmutation of Air into Water, then I
need say no more as to Mr. S. in the proof of the Point in hand, concerning the
Original of Springs from Rain and Snow. Nor has he any way to evade it, but by
calling in Question the Credit of the Relators in matter of Fact, as he does
with Dr. Heylin. And I must confess, were it not for the Credit of the Relator,
and his plain and undeniable circumstances of evidence whereby he makes it out,
a man would very much doubt of the verity of the last. But without all
peradventure a Person of that Honor, Prudence, and Learning, would take care
that he might not be imposed upon.

As for the former Story of Cardane and Fromundus which is also rare, there is
less ground of admiration, since something extraordinary (not much different)
has been observed among our selves. I my self knew a Sergeant belonging to the
Garrison at Hull, who in a Diabete did void above 6 Quarts (to wit) about 12
Pounds of Urine every 24 hours, for some weeks together, till all his musculous
parts were dissolved into Urine (and he became a Skeleton) the measure whereof
did far exceed the weight of his whole Body, and of his Meat and Drink, while
yet he drank not 3 Pints of Drink in a day. But

But ( P. 296.) Mr. S. tell us, He meets with two great difficulties which he
cannot get through, the solving of which (he says) will prove ominous to my
Thesis: The first is, how the Rain Water shall sink into the Earth by empty
Crevices or Clefts, and what is that which must bring the intermediate
particles of Water, which fall betwixt one Crevice or Cleft and another into
the distant Crevices? -- Why where is the difficulty? Water is thin in
substance and also a heavy body, and he grants the Crevices or Clefts are
empty, what then should hinder its sinking? Nothing in the World is more plain
than that it does so. But it seems by what he says ( P. 297) that he would have
been pleased if I had otherwise expressed it; Supposing the Earth to imbibe
Rain Water as a Sponge, where it meeting with capillary Veins or small Pores,
not Clefts or Crevices, which (he says) are scarce to be found but among Rocks,
sinks down by degrees into larger Veins, and those into Subterraneal Channels,
where it makes Springs; and this he acknowledges would have been truly said. --
Well if this be true in his Judgment, then Mr. S. has given up his cause,
while he is starting a difficulty. Only his distinction of Land-Springs and
Quick-Springs saves him, for he grants the former, but is not satisfied in the
latter. But I wonder Mr S. should observe no better what he is doing, than to
tax me for not saying so, when in effect he says nothing but my own words in
the 94th Page of my Book; where treating of the Sinking of Rain and Snow Water
into the Earth, I express it thus, -- It finks down by secret passages into the
Earth, with which the Superficies does abound (which are like unto the small
fibers of Veins not discernable by the Eye, terminating in the Skin in all the
parts of our Bodies) and in rocky ground it sinks through the Clefts, and by
them is conveyed to the Subterraneal Channels more or less deep in the Earth,
where it is concocted by the Earth, and moves as Blood in the Veins.

Now this I having said, and he owning it to be truly said, the difficulty is
vanished, and it becomes an Argument of demonstration for the proof of my
Opinion. I wonder either at his dis-ingenuity in denying me to have said so, or
at his inadvertency in not observing that, which in his own Opinion has so much
of truth in it, and is so materi^l to the point in controversy. But this
proceeds (I suppose) from his Combination with others in this Work, while one
takes one piece in hand, and a second another, and in the mean time he that
undertook to make his inferences, did not well discern the state of the
Question.

The next difficulty which Page 297.) (he says) is most considerable, is, How
the Rain Water sinking into the Earth should supply the Springs that are in
Hills or high Heaths? -- To this I reply, That as it is very r^re to fi^d
Springs upon the tops of Hills, so where ever they are, they are very penurious
Springs, affording but little Water, and break out ordinarily upon the
dependant sides of the Hills, which they may very well receive from the Rain
and Snow that falls above them, upon the tops of the Hills, which may settle to
that dependant part; these not suffering such expense of Water from Men or
Beasts, and being supplied by every Shower, and not so much scorched by the
heat of the Sun, as lower grounds are, may very well be supposed to be so
caused and perpetuated. Besides that Hills are usually even in the dryest
seasons kept moist by Clouds and Mists that do encompass them, as upon my own
Observation I can speak of some Hills that have Springs in them. And if it be
thus with those Springs that break out upon the Hills, much more plain is it in
them that break out upon Heaths, where the ground being level, they receive the
Rain and Snow more plentifully, and afford Springs accordingly.

Besides we see that Water is of it self apt to motion, for being poured out,
it does immediately spread it self (which it is well fitted to do by reason of
its fluidity) and much more it is prone to motion in the Bowels of the Earth,
where it loses much of its gravity, being out of its proper place, assigned to
it by the Creator; viz. the Unequal part of the Earth to which it has a natural
inclination and tendency, not resting till it meets with its natural
Correspondent the Air, under which it must needs lie, by reason of its greater
gravity, as above the Earth, by reason of its levity, Hence it is (as I
conceive) that it ceases not to move toward the Superficies of the Earth, so
long as the Channels have a supply of Water; nor is there any difference of
site to it, as to up or down, while it is in its Channels (like the Blood in
the Veins of our Bodies) but it breaks out where ever it finds vent, and so
makes Springs; and that so forcibly too, as that it brings out with it the
Sabulum or Sand, which is a far heavier body than it self: from whence we see
that the bottoms of Rivers are covered with it.

And this agrees with what Helmont says P. 47. in contemplation whereof he
seems to be rapt up into an admiration, and breaks forth into a high Doxology.
Aqua (inquit) intra vividum terrae fundum sorbetur, and trahitur, unde communem
nacta vitam (Regem cui omnia vivunt, venite adoremus!) lecorum situs nescit,
cacumina montium sine molestia facile adscendit, una cum Quellem, ut
indesinentes inde fontes evertat. viz. Water is sucked and drawn into the Vivid
Bowels of the Earth, whence it being made partaker of common life (Come, says
he, let us praise God to whom all things do live) it knows no site of place,
but naturally and easily ascends even to the tops of mountains, together with
the Sand (which he calls Quellem) and so makes ever-running Springs. Thus I
have solved these 2 great difficulties, in order to the establishing my
assertion concerning Rain and Snow Water being the Original of ^prings.

But will not the Reader wonder if I point out my Adversary himself granting me
the facility of Waters rising up from the Subterraneal Channels to the highest
Hills or Heaths? Turn then to Page 305. where we find these words, We see that
Blood while circulating in its proper Vessels, knows no such difference as
either going up and down, etc. In like manner Water whilst circulating from
Seas, etc. knows neither up nor down, and can as easily (while in those
Channels) climb up to the tops of Hills and Mountains, and there make Springs,
as break forth in Valleys and in the Level of Plains; yea it can as well mount
tops of Hills and high Heaths, as the Blood in the Arteries can ascend into the
Head; and all this (says he by the Natural Circulation of Water, set on work
by the Original Fiat. -- So that upon the whole matter we see Mr. S. is not
invincible in his Objections, nor yet so fully resolved in this point, but that
he can change his mind upon a slight cause, and even as his interest carries
him assert Contradictions.

I shall now proceed to examine what he has to say concerning the Establishing
of another Original of Springs, wherein (as in all things else that he has
treated of) I find him very Positive; for so in ( P. 303.) he calls it a new
and positive Thesis; and that is from a Circulation of Water in the Terraqueous
Globe, by the mediation of Subterraneal Channels along the Sabulum Bulliens,
from the Sea to the Heads of Springs, and from them into Rivulets, and thence
into Rivers, and so back again into the Ocean; thereby making the Sea to be the
Original of Springs. -- Thus far it is no new Thesis, but as old as Thales and
Plato, and is followed by Valesius, Mr. Lydiat, Mr. Carpenter, Dr. Jordan, and
Dr. French. What Reasons they have propounded in their Writings to persuade
them to this Opinion, I have examined in my Book of the Spaw from P. 55. to 89.
but could not receive satisfaction from them on the grounds I there laid down;
besides the great disagreement among themselves in seeking out a passage to the
Springs.

And for the making out of this Positive Thesis, Mr. S. makes an Hypothesis, in
Page 317. which certainly is not a sufficient foundation in the Judgment of
wise and rational men; viz. He supposes, That the Seas are perforated at the
bottom in many places, with Subterraneal Channels and secret Vortices, through
which the Water of the Sea finds passage; into certain Hydrophylacia or common
Cisterns of Water; where it comes to a Level with the Surface of the Sea; and
from the pressure of the Atmosphere of the Air, and also of the Winds, Clouds,
and Storms, and the oblique Motion of the Tides upon the Surface of the Sea,
the Water is forced up from those Cisterns even to the highest Hills or Plains,
and so makes Springs.

Here is much said, but nothing proved: Indeed a Grand Supposition (for so he
calls it) which he ought necessarily to have proved, before he had given his
Definitive Sentence against my Thesis, lest he be to seek for a true Original
of his Springs. And yet to speak out, neither is this his own, but wholly
borrowed from Kircherus de Origin Fontium in his Mundus Subterraneus, where he
discourses at large upon this Subject, making no less than five Suppositions,
in order to his Design of illustrating the Sea to be the Original of Springs,
although he differs from others about the manner of Conveyance; which with
submission to better Judgments) seem to me to be no other than the begging of
the Question; affording very little satisfaction to any man that shall well
study the Point.

But to return to Mr. S. He supposes that the Seas are perforated at the
bottom, or to have holes through which the Water runs into Subterraneal
Channels (or as Kircherus calls them Rivers, which he fancies to be far larger
than those we have above the Barth.) -- But how knows he this to be so, since
no man ever saw them? De non apparentibus and non existentibus eadem est ratio,
is a good Rule in Reason. I cannot believe there are such holes, because they
do not appear to the eye of Reason.

In our Lincolnshire and Norfolk Washes, where at every Low Water or Ebb of
the Sea, the Water goes out, and leaves the Land bare for many miles together,
no such holes were ever seen; nor on the Coast of Holland, where the Seas are
very shallow at Low Water for some leagues together, is there the least Symbol
of these holes, which probably should be if any such thing were in Nature, and
so ordinary as is implied in this Hypothesis.

I speak not here of those Extraordinary Subterraneal Gulphs which some Authors
tell of, and our Seamen confirm to us, as that on the Coast of Norway, called
the Malstrondt, and another at the bottom of the Baltic Sea; where the Water
runs with a mighty stream into the Earth. by which some ships (they say) have
been swallowed up; nor yet of the Subterraneal Passages that are supposed to be
betwixt some Seas in Asia, which I mentioned in my Book of the Spaw.

Again, If the Seas were so perforated, and that the Water should pass so
plentifully through the Holes, as it must necessarily do, to give being to so
many Springs, there would be found Suctions in the Sea, whereby Ships
(especially small Vessels) would be in constant hazard; which we hear not o^.

Moreover it seems to be repugnant to Reason, and our Observations at Land; for
the motion of the Sea in the Constant Circulation of the Tides, and also from
Wind and Storms, would be in danger to stop up the Holes, by washing Earth into
them, and so choke up the Channels and consequently the Springs: As we see in
the Roads, where sometimes we meet with dangerous Holes in the Latches; if
there happen a Spowt of Rain, so that the Water run in a stream but a day or
two over those Latches, the holes are closed up and they become pass^ble and
firm.

Another Branch of Mr. S. his Supposition is this, That there are Subterraneal
Channels (or Rivers as Kircherus has it) whereby the Salt Water is conveyed to
the Hydrophylacia, or Cisterns, etc. -- This I cannot in his Sense grant,
because they appear not: For never did any that dig in Mines either near the
Sea, as at Newcastle and Sunderland, in the Coal-Pits; or farther off at Land,
as in the Lead, Iron, or Tin-Mines, make any reports of Streams of Salt Water
that they meet withal, which they should probably do, if this Hypothesis were
true. They tell us indeed of swift Currents of Fresh Water that sometimes they
meet with, but not a word of Salt.

Again, Those Subterraneal Channels must be supposed to be sometimes 2 or 300
miles long, even in a right line, nay perhaps so many thousand in great
Continents, where the middle parts of the Land are at that distance from the
Sea, and have their durable Springs; and how many hundred or thousand miles
long must we suppose them to be, if these Channels have such crooked turnings
and windings, as the small Rivolets have that we observe at land? I confess
this surpasses my understanding how it can be.

Moreover, This supposes multitudes of his Hydrophylacia or Cisterns of Salt
Water in every Country, and those of an immense Magnitude, which as yet never
any man found, and is (in my weak Judgment) repugnant to Reason, for the Earth
and Sea compressing on all sides of this Terrestrial Globe, should make it a
Solid Body, and such as cannot admit of such large Chasmata or Vacuities.

Furthermore, Mr. S. supposes This Water is forced up through those long
Channels, and from the Hydrophylacia to the Springs, by the weight of the Air,
Clouds, Winds, Storms, and Tides depressing upon the Surface of the Sea. --
That the Air has a weight and may depress a little upon the Sea I shall not
question; the Torricellian Experiment evinces the Air to depress by its
gravity, yet how the Winds, Storms, and Tides should further that Depression I
see not, but that their motion being oblique, should rather hinder it;
forasmuch as it interrupts the motion of gravity, which is evermore in a right
line toward the Center. But how it is possible that this depression of all
these upon the Sea should hold so strong (which yet we discern is very
inconsiderable) as to force the Water through those Subterraneal Channels so
many scores, hundreds, or thousands of miles long, and that by such Crooked
Meanders as we have reason to suspect, I cannot conceive.

Indeed Mr. S. (P. 318) tells of a Pneumatick Engine like the Wine-Coopers
Bellows, which will by the pressure of the Air force up Wine or Water into
other Vessels, that are at distance and on higher grounds, and he suposes that
after the same manner the pressure of these upon the Sea, forces the Water
through the Channels to the Springs on Hills or Heaths at distance. He has also
2 or 3 more Schemes, whereby he endeavors to make out the facility of the
conveyance, but both the other, and these are all fetched out of Kircherus in
his Mundus Subterraneus, where P. 230 and 231: the Reader may see them all.

To these I shall say, they are only such in Mente Machinantis, but here is no
proof to make them out to be so in Mundi Machina.

But lastly, If the Springs should be supposed, notwithstanding all these
difficulties and absurdities, to proceed from the Seawater, there would
certainly appear some difference perceptible to the senses, betwixt that sort
of Spring Water, that comes from this cause, and those that assuredly (himself
confessing) proceed from Rain, when yet we discern there is none at all. And
how comes it to pass that those Springs (especially such as are near the Sea)
have not after so many thousand years as the World has continued, somewhat of
saltness in them, and that the Channels are not tainted after so long time?
Indeed Mr. S. tells us that the Seawater lays down its saltness in the
Channels of the Earth, and so the Water runs fresh out of the Springs. -- But
did he not also say (in P. 54.) That the Salt of the Earth is conveyed through
the Subterraneal Channels into the Sea, and that thence it has its Saltness,
and its Minera from Fossile Salt? Now how the same Channels should convey Salt
to the Sea, and also drain the Seas Water from its Salt, and become Conveyances
of contrary Streams, I cannot reconcile to my Reason.

To conclude all, I find that this new and positive Thesis of Mr. Simpson is
but a borrowed Hypothesis, and so far as he has here endeavored to make it out,
to have no bottom: and therefore I must adhere to my Opinion of Rain and Snow
Water to be the Original of Springs, which still farther I can defend with more
Arguments of Demonstration; but those I shall wave till I have further occasion.

I confess this is an abstruse point in Philosophy and difficult to determine
upon; But difficulty in finding should not discourage us from seeking, but
rather whet us on to more diligence in searching; so as whatever our Opinions
are in things of this Nature, provided we assent or dissent according to
reason, and with readiness to submit when our reason shall be convinced, we are
out of all danger of Heresy, though perhaps we may be subject to error.

I had here thought to have entertained the Kind Reader with some
Animadversions upon another (small) Book of Mr. Simpsons called Zenexton
Antipestilentiale, where there are many things worth observing, and that may
merita Comment; but this having far exceeded what at first I intended, I shall
respit it till a further provocation, being also desirous to continue on the
defensive hand, and so at present I bid Farewell.

From my House at York May the 28th. 1669.
FINIS.

