AN EPISTLE To all FRIENDS That be Traveling toward the Holy CITY and REST
that is in the Everlasting Life, that they may not Over-charge themselves, nor
Burden themselves in their Journey.
WITH A Visitation of Pure Love To all such as have Erred in their Hearts from
the Holy Commandment, that to the Lord, who is is very Gracious and Merciful,
with all their Hearts they may be Turned, and so be by him Saved.
DEar Friends, that have a Love to the Lord in your Hearts, that would enter in
at the Straight Gate and Narrow Way, that is holy and undefiled forever; but
its End is Peace and Everlasting Life. They that will so fight the good Fight
of Faith, like the good Soldiers of Christ, as to take hold of Eternal Life,
they must not Over-charge their Hearts and Minds with the Affairs and Things of
this Life; which if they do, they cannot please their Captain, that chooses
them to be his Soldiers: They must not Entangle themselves nor Load themselves
with the many Things; for that will hinder them in the Way and Work of God,
which Way is Holy, and Work Honorable and Glorious.

So, dear Friends, this is the Work of God in all we do, or put our Hands unto,
to believe in him, whom God has sent a Light into our Hearts, to lead out of
all that which would darken your Understandings, and shut the pure Eye, with
which the Lord may be seen going before you, making your Way perfect and plain.
This is he that is not of this World, that leads man out of the Evil of the
World, in the Way of Righteousness; not to do his own Will, or seek his own
Glory; for he that seeks the Glory of him that sent him, and does his Will, he
sanctifies all that stand therein: Him ye may trust, and believe in, and commit
your Way unto, that he may bring it to pass; for the same is true, and there is
no Unrighteousness with him: and so doing all your things in him (who is meek,
and has Salvation) they are done in the Name and Power of the Lord, which the
Family of God and Household of Faith know to be their House eternal, to work all
their Works in; and so they be done to the Praise and Glory of the Heavenly
Father, and in the Victory over the World and its Spirit, and such in
VVell-doing shall not be weary, nor faint in their Minds; for their Faith
stands in the Power, and the Power keeps open the Eye of their Understandings,
and they see him that is true, with whom there is no Unrighteousness; And he is
their Tower and strong Hold in the Day of Trouble, their Shield and their
exceeding great Reward: And this is that Invisible and Holy One, who is full of
Grace and Truth, whose Day of Glory Moses and Abraham saw; and it made them
willing to deny themselves, and the Pleasures of Sin, that are but for a
season, their own Country, and all Egypt's Treasures and Glory: And this is he
whom we in our Day and Age have seen, or else we should have been weary by
reason of Unreasonable Men, their Cruel Laws and Precepts they have prescribed,
to weary us out, and make us deny our Just and Holy Principle, in which we be
established as Mount Sion, that cannot be removed, and taught of the Lord in
the Spirit and in the Truth, and in the Beauty of Holiness to worship the Lord,
and not after the Precepts and Commands of men, by whom we have deeply
suffered, who have been stirred up by the Hirelings and Deceivers of the
Nation, that have turned about like the Wind, and have been given to change
with the many Changes of Government; and they that do so, serve not the Lord
Jesus, but their own Bellies: But He is become our Salvation, our Light, our
Life and Glory; and as we in him abide, he makes us Triumph in every place; and
he leads us into the strong City and Country, that has Foundations, whose
Builder and Maker is God; and we therein do Bless, and Laud, and Praise him
that lives forever.

And they that will so run the Race that is set before them, as to obtain the
Price, even this Inheritance that never fades away, and Kingdom that cannot be
shaken, must cast off every Weight, and the Sin that does so easily beset them;
mark that, the Sin that easily besets, that must be cast off also, and every
thing that brings a Vail or a Burden on God's Spiritual and Holy Day; that so
the Just may be Ruler in you all, and as a Morning without a Cloud; or else ye
cannot enter in at the Everlasting Door, and Gate of the Heavenly City and Holy
Place, there to minister before the Lord in the Holy Robe and Garment of
Righteousness, to do the Work of his Sanctuary and Tabernacle, that he has set
up and pitched amongst us: And this is that Gate where be the pleasant Things,
and City, into which Job, whose Glory was fresh in him, with his Garment of
Righteousness, that was to him as a Robe and Diadem, entered, where the Rock
poured him out Rivers of Oil: For, Friends, where the Righteous dwell and
reign, there is great Glory, and the Secret of God is upon their Tabernacle;
there is Oil and a Treasure to be desired, which the Wicked One will consume
and devour, if he be not watched against: But the Way to attain these things
will be too straight and narrow for them who do not take up a Daily Cross, and
walk in the Footsteps of the Flocks of the Companions, casting off the Weights
and the Burdens, and the many things, which in the true Light that shines in
the Heart, be seen to hinder the Eye to guide man's Feet out of all the Sin,
that darkens him, into the Way of Peace; the Way and Everlasting Door will not
be lifted up nor exalted in them, but be rather shut against them, who be in
the Bond of Iniquity, and in that which brings the Vail and Gall of Bitterness
over them; and such had need to Repent, and wait for his Judgments to put away
their Sins and Iniquities from their Tabernacles, that has put them far from
the Lord, and made them to wander in a barren Wilderness, where no plain Way
is, and in a Land of Fear, where no Peace is, like Cain, to whom the Lord has
no Respect; for he was not of that Righteous One, as Righteous Abel was, in
which Righteousness he had the Living Record in Heaven, and Witness, That he
pleased God. So to such I say, Before ye pray, put away your Idols, and put
down the Altars of Baal, and the Images of the Sun, that ye may know the Golden
Altar, which the Apostles had right unto, thereupon to minister before the
Lord; for it is raised and builded in the Fear and in the Name of the Lord. So
Friends, wash ye in Innocence, that ye may compass this Altar of the Lord with
your holy Offerings; for all that be round about him, do bring their Presents
to him; and they that be afar off and in the out-most parts, be afraid of his
Tokens; for he is a great King, in whose Hands be all the Corners of the Earth,
and above all Gods is he that ought to be feared. So let the holy Hands be
lifted up without Wrath or Doubting, and the Head uncovered, and lifted up
without Spot; and the Offerings and Sacrifices being seasoned with Salt, and
salted with Fire of the Word, being clean without the Blemishes and without the
Corruption, which the Salt and the Fire takes away, and being brought and
offered in a clean Vessel, the Lord is well pleased, and smells a sweet
Savor; and then the lifting up of the Hands, being washed in Innocence,
becomes as a Morning or Evening Sacrifice acceptable to him: For, Friends, As
the Prayers and Sacrifices of the Wicked are Abomination, even so the Prayers
of the Righteous and the Cry of the Innocent is his Delight; and therefore
Christ spoke a Parable concerning the Unjust Judge, that feared not God, nor
regarded Man, nor doing of Judgment or Equity, and yet because of the
Woman-Importuning him, lest by continual coming she should weary him, he would
avenge her of her Adversary; and says he, Shall not God avenge his own Elect,
that cry to him Day and Night? yea, he will avenge them speedily: And this was
Christ's End in speaking this Parable, That men should pray even continually
without fainting. And again, by the same Spirit it is said, I will pour clean
Water on them that be athirsty, yea, when the Poor and the Needy seek Water in
a dry and thirsty Place, where there is none, I the Lord will open a Spring to
them; I the God of Jacob will not forsake them; but will cause my River, whose
Streams be pure as Crystal, and do make glad and refresh the Weary, to run in
d^y Pl^ces, and upon all Hills and Mountains; there shall be Rivers and
Streams, and like the Waters of Jordan in time of Harvest, overflowing all its
Banks. So to the Afflicted and Grieved in Spirit for want of the Lord, and
Power over the Destroyer of their Vine and of their Peace, I say, Do not quench
the Spirit of Prayer and Supplication, when in the least Mea^ure and in the
Will of God it moves, although but with Sighs and Groans, that in words cannot
yet be uttered; for it always makes Intercession, and teaches us to call God
Our Father, and submit to his Heavenly Will in all we desire and pray for; and
all that do not thus call upon him, and ^eek him, they seek amiss, and ^o they
obtain not; for such would con^ume it on their Lusts: But the Prayer in the
Faith goes through the dark Clouds, and is of a saving Kind and Nature to all
that be sick and weary of their Sins; it is like the Sword of Saul or Jonathan,
that returned not empty from the Blood of the Slain and the Far of the Mighty;
or the holy Hands of Moses, that were stayed up by Aaron and Hur in the same
thing, whereby Amalek was smitten, and Israel in the cro^s and crooked Ways to
smite the Weak and the Feeble; and he feared not God. So let all that be in
Trouble call upon God in that Day, and he will redeem and deliver you out of
the Hands of all your Enemies, that have been too strong for you, that ye may
Prai^e him in the Land of the Living, and in the Glorious Liberty the Sons of
God and his Daughters stand in: But without Faith it is impossible to please
God, that is the Word, that in the Power of the Endless Life ari^eth to you;
But to the Evil Doers, that are not willing to be reproved for their Iniquity
(when committed) reformed or gained from it, but preceed from one Evil to a
wor^e, by covering their Transgression and hiding their Sin, like Adam, or like
Saul, in the Stubbornness and Rebellion which is as Witchcraft, by hiding it as
a sweet Morsel in their Bosom; and although the Witness of God has turned
their Meat in their Bellies, yet in the Pride, and for want of Humility and
Self Denial, that always goes before Honor, will they not lose their sweet
Words, nor Bread of Deceit that was sweet to them; and such do not declare
their Integrity as David did, who said, I will confess my Sin, and be sorry for
my Sin: And they that hide their Sin shall not prosper, nor have Peace with God
in that State, or true Joy and Delight in his People, to whom the Reproofs of
Life and Smitings of the Righteous were as precious Balm: And the Apostle
says, Confess your Faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye
may be healed or restored: So here is the Spirit of Corah, of Cain and Saul
judged, and the Troubler of Israel, even the Accursed hid Thing in the Tent
(that was goodly in the sight of the Evil Eye) dug up and east out. So
Friends, if any have done amiss, come to Plainness, and to David's Mind, and
Peter's Mind, that ye may be restored, and kiss the Son, and bow to him in the
Way of his Righteous Judgments, which David loved more then fine Gold, and
rose at Midnight to Praise God for.

So dear Friends, to whom my Exhortation is, in Bowels of pure Love and Pity,
desiring you in the Name of the Lord, to be reconciled to God, by putting away
the Evil that brings the Curse to your House, and so separates the Soul from
God and is blessed Life, out of which, as out of a great Deep, it should be
watered and receive its Life, lest the Lord be angry with and depart from you,
and so your House become desolate, as over-thrown by Strangers, and ye perish
from the Way, and the Day of your Visitation pass over you, the Clouds return
after the Rain, and your Sun set in a perpetual Night of Desolation.

So Friends, we had all need to be watchful and diligent in our holy Calling
and Work, lest we, even we, who by him were quickened when we were dead, dye
again a second time, and so be plucked up by the Roots, and cut down, as they
that cumber the holy Ground, that we may be a living People to his living
Praise, who would not have any to be sloathful in Business, or idle in his
Marketplace and Vineyard; but to be fervent in Spirit, serving God: And here
none labors for the perishing Food, but for that which endures to Eternal
Life; for he serves the Lord Christ, the Bread of God, that strengthens his
Heart; and he seeks the Kingdom and Righteousness first, and the Heavenly
Treasure before all other things, the One thing needful; and with Mary chooses
the better part: and so the Redeemed of the Lord do not labor in vain, or
^pend their Strength for naught; for they witness all other things added unto
them (as the Lord has promised) and every good Word of his does he bring to
pass, for he that clotheth the Lili^s, and hears the Ravens when they cry, he
feeds and satisfies them; and the Eyes of all the Living, that look to him and
wait upon him, do not fail; for he enlightens them and keeps them alive in
Famine, and from the Scourge of the Tongue, even the Viper's Tongue and Noisome
Beast, that would devour them in his secret Pavilion and Tent of the Lord, that
is round about them pitched, in that does he hide them till the Wrath of Man be
over, and the remainder of Wrath will he restrain, and it shall praise him, and
be to the Praise of his Grace and holy Power that saves them: But the Eyes of
the Wicked shall fail; and they shall be cut off that watch for Iniquity, and
secretly cry, Ha, ha, so would we have it; their Expectation shall perish as
their own Durg, and as the Untimely Birth of a Woman, and their Hope shall be
as the giving up of the Ghost; But the Righteous shall rejoice in the Lord, and
glory in his Strength, and praise him in his Sanctuary, and in the goodly Tents
of Jacob, and Dewlling Place of Israel forever and forever. Even so be it, Amen.

O Friends, do you all examine your selves and in the True Light, the just
Measure and Balance of the Sanctuary, which the Lord loves and delights in;
for his Mind is in it, and it is one with him: Do ye try your selves whether
Christ be formed in you your Hope and Glory, and so brought forth from under
the Clouds and deep Waters, that have been round about him; and whether ye be
in the Faith, even in that living Faith that stands in the living Power of
God, and gives perfect Victory and Dominion over all the World and the Prince
thereof; If ye be of the Household of Faith, then in the Power of God's Endless
Life your House, in the Heavenly Place that is in Christ; we witness it so, as
said the Holy Seed in former Ages, Thou have been our Dewlling Place in all
Generations; and he was made more to them then their Necessary Food, and more
precious then the Golden W^dge of Ophir; and said they, We have a strong City,
whose Wells be Salvation and Cates Praise; and here was the River of God and
Wells of Salvation, whose Springs and Streams made them glad: And Friends, can
ye in the Faith that is true and living, that was once delivered or given to
the Saints, let down your Buckets, every one of you, into these Wells that be
within the Walls of this Holy City of God, and draw of the Waters of Life, that
the true Believer has in himself, springing up, and keeping the Soul in
Eternal Life; but if it be not so well with any, but Deadness and Leanne's is
come upon them, and the Clouds be returned after the Rain, let such examine
themselves, What the Cause is, and What it is that has shut up their Sp^^ng
and W^ll, that the Water does not run and issue out to make them glad, as
formerly; and if the Lord in his own Light be not lifted up as Moses lifted up
the Serpent in the Wilderness over all in his own House and Temple, then
Examine and try your own Hearts, Unto what vain and perishing thing has the
Mind and Heart been lifted up or turned aside unto, and what Idol of
Abomination that makes the Soul'd solate, and to want its former M^rcus, has
been preferred before him, even the Lord, who did in this our Age and Day work
Wonders for us, as ever he did for Israel of old in the Land of Egypt, and in
the Tabernacles of Ham, in bringing us out of the House of Bondage, and House
wherein all that be there be yet the Servants of Sin, even many of them loving
and pleading for the Hard Master, the Cruel Lord and Strange King, whom they
serve. It was the Lord, I say, who in Mercy brake Israel's Bands, and he in
Mercy has broken our Bands and Fetters, and the heavy Yoke of Sin, that was of
the Devil, and loaded us and oppressed us; and as he after a wonderful manner
broak the Yoke of Israel's Oppressors in the days of Mid^an, when he mightily
oppressed them, so he in tender Mercies has taken the Yoke from off us, and
burst the Clouds, and Bands and Chains of Darkness, and from off our Hearts
has he rent them by the Rising of the Day of his Power, and the Exaltation of
his holy Mountain, that entered and were drawn over us in the sin and
transgression, these has he done away in Christ Jesus, and made us to go
upright: And Friends, this is true in him, and truly witnessed by us, as we in
him do abide; and we ought to give all Diligence to search and examine our
selves, Where we be, whether we have a Name to live and Profession only, or in
the holy and divine Nature, out of which we can do nothing well-pleasing;
neither can we be made Partakers of the exceeding Great and Precious Promises,
but as in him we abide to whom they be all made sure.

And so after all this Grace and Mercy, showed of the living Father of Mercy
unto us in this his unspeakable Gift, Christ Jesus, we had need to be vigilant
in walking worthy of his Merties, in rendering to the Lord as from him we have
received, even our Souls and Spirits to him, and all our Members a living
Offering and Sacrifice, and Servants to Righteou^ness, which is but reasonable;
seeing when we had sold our ^elves for naught, and being filled with our own
Devices, and held fast with the Cords of our own Sin, then he with a Frice
redeemed us; and this the time of our Mi^cry was the time of his Love; and when
there was no Intercessor or Days man, then did his own holy Arm bring
Salvation, and get him the Victory. So we be not our own any longer, or to
please our selves, but the Lord.

And all you that have known the Resting place, which remains forever because
it is not polluted, and the Bed of Love that is green, and so truly honorable
and und filed; you that have known the fresh and large Pasture, and the
gathering of the true Shepherd, and his puttings forth into it, who has
brought you nigh the Shepherd's Tent-prize ye this his Mercy; and be not like
Israel of old, who were unmindful of their Pock't at begat them, and did
lightly esteem God their Savior, who had fed them to the full with the Bread
of Heaven, but they waxed sat, and kicked against him; moreover, he brought
them unto a good Land, wherein was no want of any good thing that was in the
Earth to possess; Houses they builded not; Vine-yards and Olive-yards, and
Wells and Fountains of Waters they planted not and dug not; and so for want
of remembering the Lord their God, who brought them up out of the Land of Egypt,
and House of Bondage and Slavery, who remembered them in their low Condition,
when they cried to him in their Afflictions he helped them; for his Mercies
endure forever. And so, is not this our State, whom the Lord has brought out
of spiritual Sodom and Egypt, where the Witness was slain in us, and where the
Vine most dear, and the pleasant Plant could not grow nor prosper, by reason of
the cruel Lord and strange King, that ruled over us before we knew the King of
Saints (who bound the Kings and Nobles in Fetters of Iron) to be the Lord our
Righteousness, whose Service is perfect Freedom, and Work Honorable and
Glorious; and they that are in his work, and are become his Workmanship, can
say, His Praise endures forever? But was not Israel for this his Ingratitude
disinherited, and plucked up by the Roots, from the good Land which the Lord
had promised and sworn to their Fathers, if they took heed to his Commandments,
his Laws and Statutes, that he set before them, they should inherit forever.
But even as he did to the House of Ely (the Priest of the Lord) for their
Disobedience to him, so did he to them whom he had said, should walk before him
forever, afterward said, Now be it far from me; for I will do a thing to the
House of Ely, the Ears that hear thereof shall tingle: For them that honor me,
I will honor; but them that honor not me shall be lightly esteemed: And was
not the Word of the Lord (spoken by Samuel) justly fulfilled on them, That they
should be cut off* and such as remained of the House of Ely should come and
crouch for a piece of Bread? So Friends, we have been by the Lord brought into
a good and spiritual Land, and heavenly Place, which is the Glory of all Lands
and Places; and with the piritual Rock and Bread of Heaven have we been watered
and fed; and the Vineyard we planted not, and Wells we dug not, have sprung
up to us, and we rejoiced over it greatly, as Israel of old rejoiced over their
Well in the Wilderness, saying, Spring up, O Well; sing ye to it: And thus was
it with them in the Day of their Espousals; then their Hearts were glad because
of the Lord, whose Right Hand was exalted, and whose Holy Arm had got him the
Victory (in bringing them out of Egypt, and through the Red Sea) and a
perpetual Name of Praise, of Fame and of Glory, as it is at this Day. But let
all dear Friends and People consider, but especially those whose Hearts be not
steadfast with the Lord, who deal faisly in his Covenant, and secretly turn back
in their Hearts into spiritual Egypt and Sodom, that black Sink and Sea of
Iniquity: I say, let us all consider, that have known the Lord and fear before
him, by their Example, who after all these Signs, and Wonders, and Mighty Hand,
and Outstretched Arm, and Great Judgment showed to them in the Red Sea upon
their Enemies and Persecutors, who said, Let us pursue them, and over-take
them, and satisfy our selves upon them: But after this, they not remembering
these his Mercies, but soon forgot his Word; they waited not for his Counsel,
but ran a Whoring after their own Inventions, and lifted up their Eyes to the
Idols of the People that knew not God, which made Moses (that Holy and Just
Man) to say, Do ye thus Requite the Lord, O foolish People and unwise? Is not
he thy Father? Even so it may be said to many that have known the Truth and Way
of he Living God, and were glad when they had found it, and walked therein for
a season, who have been greatly benefited by it every way, whi^st in it they
stood; but as it was in the Apostles days with some, even so have they turned
again, like the Dog, and like the Sow once washed to wallow in the Mire: And be
not these the foolish People and unwise, even like the foolish Galatians, that
were bewitched from the Spirit, who do thus requite the Lord, who has long
spared them, and waited on them to do them good, and to be gracious to them,
expecting his Long-suffering (that they have not duly prized) should have led
them to Repentance, and they have turned, and not have dyed, but have been made
Vessels of Mercy meet for the Bowels of Love and Mercy; For, O Friends, how
great are the tender Mercies and the Loving Kindness of the Living Lord, that
he does daily extend toward his living Children, even in and through that true
Light, that out o^ Darkness has shined in their own Hearts, and does daily
open to them, that obey it and follow in the Love to it, in the Selfdenyal,
which this Light calls for in all that come to God through it; it opens to them
the Bosom of the Father, that Abraham and all the Holy Followers of God, that
walk in Love, as dear Children after him do lie in and gives them the Light of
him, and the Knowledge of the Glory of him; and as he over-came Abraham's Heart
and Moses's Heart and Mind, to follow him that is invisible, with the Eye open,
looking straight on before them, being atop and above all the Amazements, Fears
and Terrors of the Wicked, his Snares and Allurements being all seen; and ye
know, the Net being seen, the End and Desire of the Fowler and cunning Hunter
is all in vain. So dear Friends and Brethren, in the Name of the Lord, all keep
your Eyes open to him, from whence comes your Salvation, lest ye be taken in
the Pit of the Wicked; for if the Night comes, and Darkness blinds the Eye (by
which Moses in his Day, and we in our Day do see him that is invisible) we
wander then in Crooked Ways and By-Pathes, wherein at best we do but warm at
the Light of the Fire that our own hands have made and kindled; then is
Darkness put for Light, and Light for Darkness: But the lasting and perfect
Peace of God to keep the Heart, is not known, as they do know it whose Hearts
and Minds be stayed on the Lord, out of, and clean above the World, and things
that therein are.

So dear Friends in every place, that call on the Name of the Lord, though but
with Sighs and Groans that in words cannot be uttered nor declared; stir up
your selves, and let the Loins of the pure Mind, that seeks nothing but the
Living Lord, be girded up, and stand, stand on your holy Watch continually,
that the head and chief Cornerstone ye may see lifted up above all the
Billows, Temptations and Raging Waves of the Sea. So the Lord and his holy
Power be amongst you all, in and over you all, Amen.

So Friends, in the Heavenly Power and Seed feel and feed on the Height, Depth,
Length and Breadth of the Love of the Everlasting God,

I rest in Peace with the Lord (whom I do love above all other things) your
Brother, praying in the holy Spirit (where the true Faith is known, that stands
in the Power) to my God and your God, your Father and my Father, to show Mercy
and Loving Kindness always to your Souls with his Heavenly Riches and
Treasures, and spiritual Blessings in Christ Jesus; which is, and forever shall
be the Reward, Lot, Inheritance and pleasant Portion of all that love Equity
and Righteousness, so as to hate every False Way, Deceit, and the thing that is
Evil in the Sight of the Lord.

The 2d Month, 1674. Humphry Wollrich.

THE END.

