A DECLARATION TO THE BAPTISTS.

Concerning the Name of the Lord, and what it is to be Baptized thereinto; and
the Nature of the Lord, and what it is to be made partaker thereof.

AND SHOWS That none can be saved, but such as are Baptized into the Name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, into which Name and Nature, the Apostles were
sent to Baptize; and not into Water.

Showing also, That the Apostles were made the Administrators of the Spirits
Baptism by virtue of their Commission, Matthew. 28. Go ye therefore into all
Nations teaching them, and Baptising them in the Name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost.

ALSO A Discovery of the BAPTISTS Foundation and Bottom, and many of their
principal Doctrines set down herein; held forth at a Dispute in
Leichestershire, at one Henry Smiths, at Wythcock, the 27 day of teh 12th.
month, 1658. Before a multitude of people; with an Answer thereunto, wherein
is showed also, that the Baptists are setting up Types and Shadows above
Christ, and visible carnal created things above the invisible, Eternal and
unchangeable God.

Zach. 10.12. And they shall walk up and down in the Name of the Lord. 1 Cor.
12. For by one Spirit are we all Baptized into one Body. Written by one who was
sometimes one with them in the shadows, feeding upon the wind, and eating that
which died of its self, and did not satisfy; But have now found the day
wherein the shadows flee away, and has received another name Besides HUMPHRY
WOLLRICH.

London, Printed for G. C. and are to be sold by Thomas Simmons. 1659.

A DECLARATION
To the Baptists, concerning the name of the Lord, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20.
FRiends, all ye that are called Baptists, you are they amongst whom I have
sometime had my conversation, and as you are now, so was I whilst I was among
you, professing a God, and a Christ, whom I knew not but by the hearing of the
ear; and then I was looking at things that were seen, as you are building my
foundation upon carnal, created visible things, which all must perish in the
using, but my self knew not Christ the Rock of Ages, who is invisible, and
eternal, and a foundation of many generations, and the foundation of his people
in all generations, him have I found, whom Moses and the Prophets wrote of; and
therefore I leave those things which must decrease, as John's Disciples did, and
follow him who must and does increase, even Christ Jesus the Light of the
World, who has lighted every man that comes into the World, who is the end of
all shadows, types, and figures the end of the Law to his people, who are
come in to him, who was before sin and transgression was, the same it is that
does put an end to sin, and finish transgression, unto which, and because of
which the Law was added, until the seed came which is made under the Law,
shadows, types, and figures; I say when he is come and does reign and rule in
his Saints; and has condemed in them all iniquity, transgression and sin, to
such, and none but such is Christ the end of the Law; for the Law takes hold of
a man so long as he lives in sin, for the Law was added because of sin, and
none are under grace, till the Law has condemned sin; therefore all friends
who are breathing after the Lord, but your minds still without, and ye being
alienated from that which may be known of God in you, which is the candle of
the Lord, and searches all your hearts, and tries all your reins, to you I
say, let your profession be what it will, and your form be what it will, it is
but your own will, and so contrary to the will of God, you not being led into
it, by the pure, eternal, unchangeable spirit of the Lord God, in whom as I
have said before, there is no variableness, or shadow of changing; therefore
in love to you all, and the welfare of your immortal souls, which is of more
worth and value then all the World, all turn to the Light of the Lord, that
shines in darkness, that convinces you, reproves you, and checks you for all
your ungodly words, and for all your hard speeches, which ye have ignorantly
and wickedly spoken against the Lord, and against his people, whom he has
anointed with the oil of joy and gladness above their brethren, who have cast
them out for his names sake, and have said, Let the Lord be glorified, as you
have hated me, and cast me out as an evil doer, as a blasphemer, a heretic,
and as one not fit to live upon the earth, though to this day ye can prove no
evil against me, either in life or doctrine, but as Christ his Apostles and
Saints, in all ages who were innocent, suffered as evil doers, by this evil and
adulterous generation, who were gone a whoring from under their God, and are
run into the things that are seen, which are temporal, and have got the
shadows, types and figures, and a form, but are enemies unto, and deny the
life and power of Godliness, and in obedience to the Lord, because of these
things which I found among you, I turned from you, and separated from you, and
this is according to the Apostles doctrine, and not contrary to Scripture: But
the Lord commands his people to separate from all that walk disorderly, under
what name or form soever they be, and he will be a Father unto them, and a God
unto them, and will dwell in them, and walk in them, and they shall be my sons
and daughters says the Lord Almighty; and into this state and condition, the
Lord God is gathering his Sheep, which have been scattered in their thoughts,
and imaginations, upon all the dark mountains of Israel, crying lo here, and lo
there, even into a sure resting place, to sit under their own vine, and under
their own fig tree, where none shall make them afraid, and their place of
defense shall be the munition of rocks, where their bread is sure, and their
water given them, and they eat of the hidden Manna, which has been hid from
many generations, where they eat of the bread of life, and are refreshed and
strengthened in the Inward man, where they drink abundantly of the Rivers of
pleasures that are at the right hand of God for evermore. Into this place is
the Lord God of life gathering his children more and more, even into this land
which flows with milk and honey, where they drink of the Living fountain, and
eat of the honey out of the Rock which has followed them in the wilderness,
and has led them out of darkness, even out of thick darkness; and by his Light
they walk and are walking through darkness, and through the wilderness where
they have been long tempted, proved and tried, even by a way which we knew not;
and he suffered us to hunger, and he fed us there with Manna, which had been
hid from us, and by a way which we never went, has heled us by a way which is
hid from the eyes of all living, and kept close from the fowls of the air;
there did he lead us by the hand of Moses, and Aaron, the saint of the Lord;
there did he lead us from one Nation to another people, and rebuked mighty
Kings, yea, famous Kings for our sakes, saying, Touch not mine Anointed, and
do my Prophets no harm; and we have been Baptized with Moses in the Sea, and in
the Cloud, and we have heard the voice of the Lord speaking out of the cloudy
Pillar, and his Light is arisen, and his arm is made Bare in us, and darkness
is under his feet. Now he who is the Light of the world, and shined in the
darkness, is risen out of darkness; and in him and by him we comprehend all you
who are yet in the darkness, in the diverse washings and carnal ordinances
which were imposed but till the time of Reformation, and no longer; and we see
your bottom, and know your ground, and we know your house of Imagery, and see
with the eye of God, that ye are looking with beastly eyes, which are many in
you which are in the many bodies, who are alienated and reprobated from the one
body; the Light which is the Eye of God, by which his Children are led and
guided into all truth, which truth sets free from iniquity, transgression and
sin, a thing which ye never look to be set free from in this life, but are
preaching and disputing against it.

Therefore to you all, This is the Word of the Lord God, and a charge from the
Lord God to you all that are high in your profession above the Door Christ,
Repent and turn to the Light of the Lord God in you, for there is not one of ye
all that is yet come to the first principle, which is Repentance from dead
works, for he that is dead sins not; therefore come out of Babylon, out of
all your inventions, imitations and likenesses, into which ye are run; and the
Spirit of the Lord God never led you by your own Confession, who say, the
Letter is the Leader, Guider and Teacher, which is contrary to the Doctrine of
Christ, and the Scriptures, which say, Christ is given for a Covenant of Light,
for a Leader, and for a Teacher of his people; therefore the leaders of this
people causes them to Err, and they that are led of them are destroyed; But
they that are the sons of God, are led by the Spirit of God, and are Redeemed
out of all your types, and figures, and shadows, and diverse washings; for
which you have nothing to say or prove them by, but by the Handwriting which
we know he has taken away, and abolished, and nailed to his Cross, which are a
shadow of Good things to come, But the Body is Christ, into which body by one
Spirit we are all Baptized, whether Jews or Greeks, Bond or Free, and have all
been made to drink into that one Spirit, in which Spirit is found the life of
all types, shadows, and figures, and in whom there is no variableness, nor
shadow of changing, and him we witness in us to be greater then he that is in
the world; he himself is not of this world, but he leads all that follow him
out of the world which passes away, and gives us an entrance, and by him an
entrance is ministered into the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ;
and this is the Savior of the Soul, even the ingrafted word of the Lord, which
ye that say ye are wise, have rejected and cast his Law behind your backs, and
to you all he is become a stone of stumbling, and Rock of offense, and the
preaching of his Cross is to you foolishness, who gird your selves, and
esteemed by you in that wisdom nothing but confusion, babbling and nonsense,
though unto us that are saved, the power of God, and the wisdom of God.
Therefore in the fear of the Lord God, and in the dread of the Lord God, I
charge you all again, Repent whilst wisdom utters her voice in the streets,
saying, turn in, and the Lord calls by that of himself in you, and reproves
you by his pure witness, and smites you in your Consciences, I say, all turn
to that which smites, checketh and reproves, that the Lord God may pour forth
his Spirit upon you, and cause you to know the mind of the Lord, and to feel
the word of the Lord, which is nigh you, in your hearts, and is quick, and
powerful, sharper then a two edged sword, and searches your hearts, and
shows you your hearts, and shows you all your hypocrisy, and how you are
hypt from the pure Spirit of the Lord God, and have lost the Image of the
heavenly, and bears the image of the earthly, sensual and divelish, and in that
wisdom you are with all the world which is enmity with God, and brings not any
to the knowledge of God, no more then it brought the Jews to the knowledge of
Christ, when he came; and this is your woeful and sad Estate, and herein are you
crying as they were of old, that ye are the Church of the Lord, and keep the
Ordinances of the Lord, and are crying out against them who witness Christ the
substance, the body, the end of all types, and figures, who is the Everlasting
Day, in which all shadows flee away, and he was before all shadows was, and
they that are out of him, are in the shadows, and not they that are in him.

And your actions plainly declare and make it manifest unto all that are not
blind, and have not utterly lost the feeling of the Lord God, that ye are
wholly degenerated from the Lord, and inwardly ravened from the Spirit of the
Lord God, which gave forth the Scriptures; For both of them bear Testimony
against you, that ye have lost the spiritual weapon, and knows not the Sword of
the Spirit, which is the Word of God to defend your shadows, types and figures,
and all your ordinances, which you in your immaginations have set up, and have
made to your selves many likenesses, and fall down to them and worship them,
and would have all to do the like, as if they were the true God; but God is a
Spirit, and all that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth;
therefore all come down and feel the spirit of the Lord, and the power of the
Lord God in you, leading and guiding you out of all the Worlds ways, and the
wickedness thereof, and it will lead you by a way which you never went, and in
a path which the vulters eye has not seen, nor the fierce lionish nature has
not trodden therein; But the Children of the Lord, and the redeemed of the Lord
walk therein, and a fool cannot err therein; Therefore all cease from your own
wisdom, which is foolishness with God, and own Gods wisdom in you, even the
Light which is accounted foolishness by you; and all wait low in it, and a
secret strength and power you shall feel Rise in you as you wait out of all
your thoughts, and reasonings, and imaginations, and then shall you feel, and
not before, that Gods thoughts are not as your thoughts, nor Gods ways as your
ways, neither does the Lord reveal his secrets to any who are out of the Babes
nature, and childs nature for there is not any of them as yet, that is become
as a little child, or as a weaned child before the Lord, as David was, and how
then should you see the Kingdom of God; for Christ says, a man must be
regenerate, and become as a child, before that he can see the Kingdom of God,
and again he says, whosoever receives not the Kingdom as a little child, shall
in no wise enter therein; Therefore I say again unto you who are in the
halings, pullings, and tearings, and using Antichrists weapons, which are not
spiritual, but carnal, when any is moved of the Lord, as I have often been, to
come to your meetings, and have spoken unto you in the Name and dread of the
Lord, then have you made it appear that you are yet in the Lions nature, which
never trod in the way of the Lord; honestly consider and search the Scriptures,
which you say is your rule to walk by, where did you ever find therein that any
of the Saints, or people of the Lord, did ever pull and hale any out of their
meetings, or elect officers, or make it the work of their Deacons, which should
be full of the Holy ghost, to pull, or hale any violently out of their
meetings? as Thomas Lamb, and William Allin did, who say the Holy Ghost has
made them overseers of the Church of Christ, with many more such like actions
which ye be found in, besides many damnable doctrines, which would be too much
here to repeat, some of which I shall set down in the following discourse. And
this is the judgment of the Lord, and the wrath of the Lord upon you all for
your wickedness, in that you are still calling your selves Christians, and the
Church of the Lord, and will not see how unlike Christ and his Church you are
in all these actions.

And many of you who are called Baptists have had much tenderness in you
formerly, and then was the Lord nearer you, and ye nearer to him then now you
are, and then could you begin to say, that all the World lay in vanity, by
reason of which there is nothing but vexation of spirit, and then did many of
you, begin to deny respect of Persons, which you saw to be sin; But are now
contending for, and practicing of that which you once saw vanity in, and are
again building that which you once destroyed, and so are become transgressors
of the Law; But it is happened unto you according to the true proverb, the dog
is returned to his vomit, and the sow that was washed, to the wallowing in the
mire. And many of you in those days began to deny the worlds fashions, in
casting off your gold, and silver, and costly attire which you saw to be
needless, and contrary to the Scripture, and practices of the Saints, and not
the adorning which the daughters of Sarah and the holy women of old were
adorned with, and many of you have cast off your points, fancies, and needless
toys, which then you did wear, but now there is many of you, have got again
your silk garters, and fancies, and wear your silver and gold laces, and plead
for them, (and say they are needful things) and that by your own rule, the
Scriptures, with which rule you could formerly plead against them; so that if
one come to your meetings, one can behold no difference between you, and the
world, which you say you are separated from, and who in all the Steeple Houses
can be more full of vanity then some of your. Teachers and Pastors are in
wearing your cuffs, and silver hat-bands, and your hats licked like a spotted
Leopard; therefore all your separation from the world is but in words, for you
are not yet redeemed out of the Worlds ways, fashions, friendships, and
customs, which are all enmity with God, and must pass away; but he that does
the will of God, abides for ever, and can never be moved. And when I consider
these things, and whether, and from whence ye are fallen, and how ye have
hardened your hearts against the Lord, as Pharaoh did, in whose presence, and
before whom I was altogether unwilling to write unto you, so that I may truly
say, that I do it rather by constraint, then willingly; But the spirit of the
Lord constrains me, which is contrary to man's will in all things, and in
obedience to him, whose ways and wisdom is not as man's, do I write, whether
you hear or forbear to hear. And concerning the order of your Church, which you
say is the Church of Christ, and you say your selves are in the Gospel order
and Members thereof, answer these queries following.

First, where do ye find, or read in the Scriptures, that the Ministers of
Christ did set up an hour-glasse to preach by as ye do; and when that is out,
to say the time is spent? whether your time be in the Fathers hand, or in the
hour-glasse? or whether the Spirit of the Lord is or ever was limited to an
hour-glasse? or whether the Saints did not all speak one by one, as the spirit
gave them utterance?

Secondly, Whether the Saints or Ministers of Christ did invent what to say
beforehand, and writ it down, as some of ye do, and then read it to your
Church, or whether they did not speak as the unlimimitted Spirit gave them
utterance?

Thirdly, Where did the Church of Christ ever appoint a certain number of their
members to speak at set times, and call it disorder for any to speak besides
them whom they did appoint? and whether they might not all speak one by one,
that all may be edified, and all might be comforted? whether this was not the
order, and not counted confusion in any of the Churches of the Saints?

But Alas, alas! so are you fallen, and so far degenerated from the Lord, and
apostatized from the Apostles life, doctrine, and practice, and so ignorant are
you of the letter of the Scriptures, which ye say is your rule, and so far has
the God of the World blinded your eyes, that now you are seting up things that
are seen which are temporal, created visible things, and must perish in the
using thereof; in stead of the invisible, eternal and unchangeable God, you are
setting up carnal water in stead of the Name of the Lord, which is the nature
of God, and is invisible, and is unchangeable, and one with himself, and
unchangeable as he is unchangeable, and so far are ye gone from the Name of the
Lord, which is a strong tower, which is the Rock of Ages, and the foundation of
many generations; into which name, Christ gave his Apostles commission to teach
and Baptize, as ye may read, Mat. 28. and the three last verses, and Jesus came
and spoke unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in Heaven and Earth; Go
ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptising them in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe, and to do all
things whatsoever I command you, and Lo I am with you always unto the end of
the Word (where there need not that any man teach them) and this you are crying
up to be water, who have lost the Name and power of the Lord which should lead
you and guide you into the Scriptures of Truth, and instead of this name, which
is but one, and this body which is but one, into which body the Saints was
Baptized into the body, by one spirit, Ephe. 4.5.
whether they were Jews or Greek, bound or free, and was made to drink into
one spirit, and in stead of this name ye have got the beasts names, and the
beasts doctrines, which are Doctrines of Devils and names of blasphemy, and
this in particular I charge upon ye all in presence of the Lord, and by the
power of the Lord God, Rev. 17.3.
who are crying up water, and preaching up water in stead of the Name of the
Lord God to be a Doctrine of Devils; for Christ sent not his Disciples to
baptize with water, but to preach, and to baptize in the Name, which Name of
the Lord consists not in words and sillables, 1 Cor. 17.1
but in purity, Righteousness, and holiness, and is the Divine nature, and
the Name of the Lord, as you may read, Exodus 34.5. And the Lord descended in
the cloud, and stood with him there, and proclaimed the Name of the Lord, and
the Nature of the Lord, and the Lord passed by him, and proclaimed the Lord,
the Lord God, merciful, and gracions, long suffering, and abundant in goodness
and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and
sin; and this is the Name of the Lord, and the Nature of the Lord, and besides
this, there is not another name whereby man can be saved, but the Name of
Jesus. Acts 4.11.


But alas, alas! how does this stagger ye? and how are you in your inventions
seeking to find it out, and in your own wisdom are Judging and Condemning them
as that Generation did in all Ages, Condemning the Children of the Lord, who
had made the Name of the Lord their Tower, and were led by the Spirit of the
Lord as Deceivers, Blasphemers, and Seducers; and so he who is the Lord our
Righteousness, and the Foundation of many Generations, both he and his Name
which ye are gone from, is become the stone of stumbling, and the Rock of
offense, and set at naught by you builders of Babylon; and so all in the fear
of the Lord God (who are crying up water, and setting upwater in stead of the
Name of the Lord God) honestly sink down to the light of Christ, who is the
true light, and lights every man that comes into the world; and ye shall see
ye have not as yet so much as known the Name of the Lord, nor heard thereof,
but by the hearing with the carnal ear, as they who were Baptized with water,
had not so much as heard whether there were a Holy Ghost, as ye may read, Acts
19.2. to the 7. verse, When they heard this, they were Baptized in the Name of
the Lord Jesus; but how should it be otherwise with you, who are yet in the
worlds fashions, and customs, and who is so blind as he that is perfect in ye
in whom the god of this world has blinded the eye, which should be your
leader, teacher and instructor, and leads in the way of Righteousness, and
causes all that follow him to inherit substance; he it is who is the Light of
the world, and is not of the world, but leads all that follow him out of the
world, its friendships, fashions and customs which ye are in, and yet say, you
are separated from them, and say, you are Jews, and are not, but are of the
synagogue of Satan, and are found Blasphemers therein; and thus ye have set up
the Idol in your hearts, and put the stumbling block of Iniquity before my
face, says the Lord God, and turned away the face of mine Anointed, and have
cast the Law of the Lord behind your backs, and have rejected the Light of the
Lord in you, which is the Word of the Lord, and know not God, Christ, nor his
Spirit, but in your thoughts, where God is not to be found, and therein have ye
imagined a God above the Clouds, and afar off, but know not the Christ who is
the express Image of the Fathers person, to reveal the Father in you; even he
who is born of the Spirit, and is Spirit, and the only begotten of the Spirit,
the Glory of him, I say, you are changeing in your vain Imaginations into the
glory of a corruptible man, Romans 1.21. to the end, read your state there. And
you are speaking of a Christ, some of you of five foot long, and asking how he
can dwell in a man, and calling it blasphemy to say, that Christ which suffered
at Jerusalem, of five foot long, can be in a man; thus you are in your
imaginations, and therein have set up a carnal Christ in your carnal minds, but
to this day; are altogether ignorant, as Philip was, John 3.8. Read and
understand, John 14.8.
if you have an ear to hear what the Spirit says, and see how you are gazing,
and are at a loss, as the men of Galilee were, while the vail is over your
hearts, and the Cloud has taken him out of your sight; and the are you
scattered upon all the dark mountains of Israel, and have wandered from the
Lord, the living Fountain, and are like Noah's Dove, tossed upon the waters, and
knows not a resting place for the sole of your foot. Therefore all Return,
Return to the light of the Lord in your Consciences, that you may feel a Rock
to stay and lean upon, and he is not far from any of you, there is none of you
need to say, who shall descend or ascend to fetch him up from beneath, or bring
him down from above, but what says it, the word is nigh thee, in thy heart,
that thou may obey it, and do it; and this is your fallen estate, says the
Lord, God, which know not Christ in you the hope of glory. Even the same that
was before the world was, one with the Father, and fills Heaven and earth,
and was never seen with any carnal eye, nor his voice heard by any carnal ear,
but in the pure eternal, unchangeable light is he revealed and seen more and
more, as it is written, Psalm. 36.9. For with thee is the Fountain of life, in
thy light shall we see light, and so the way of the Just (and the seed of the
Just, which is as a grain of Mustard seed) is as a shining light that shines
more and more, until the perfect day, Hosea 6.3. Then shall we know the Lord,
whose goings forth is prepered as the morning; therefore none despise the day
of small things, nor none reject the weakness of God, but come tot his help
against the Mighty, nor reject the seed of Israel, because it is in bondage,
and lies in thick darkness, and shines in thick darkness; but all sink down
that ye may feel the Arm of the Lord, and witness Israel, to do valiantly, and
to smite down all, and break, and hammer down all which is exalted, and has
been exalted above him, and lick up Nations, and lick up people, as the Ox
licketh up grass, and scatter Nation, and scatter people, and thresh the Mount
of Esau, and scatter the dust thereof, and burn up the thorns, and briars
thereof, as the wind does scatter the chaff, and the fire devoureth the dry
stubble, (but read within) thus shall it be when the Lord arises in you to
shake terribly the earth, and overturn the mountains by the roots, and dry up
the Sea by his Power, and smite through the proud by his Power, Jude 26.11, 12.
And so who waits love in patience upon the Lord God, shall come to know what it
is to be Baptized into the Name of the Lord God, when they feel the Name of the
Lord, and see the Name of the Lord to be exalted in them above every name, and
to know the Mountain of the Lords House established a-top of every mountain;
Then shall come to pass that saying, and not till then, which is written, Isa.
58.14. Then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord, and I will cause thee to
ride upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of
Jacob thy Father, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it; then shall ye know
the builder of the waste places, and the raiser up of the foundation of many
Generations, the repairer of the breach, the restorer of the paths to dwell
in, then shall the beast and his many names, the King and his many Nobles be
all brought under, and bound with fetters of iron, as ye may read, Psalm. 149.9.
Let the Saints be joyful in Glory, let them sing aloud upon their beds, let the
High praises of the Lord be in their mouths, and a two edged sword in their
hands, to execute vengeance upon the Heathen, and punishments upon the people,
to bind their Kings with chains, and their Nobles with fetters of Iron, to
execute upon them the Judgments written, this honor have all the Saints,
Praise ye the Lord, Mark, read and understand, not shall have, as you turn it
hereafter, but this honor have all the Saints who were in all ages bound, and
fettered themselves by the wicked Rulers of the earth. But before you can see
or believe these things, that eye which ye now see with, must be blinded, and
the eye which the god of the world has blinded, must be opened, and then he
that speaks not of himself, but of the Father, nor receives honor of man, but
of the Father; then, and not till then will his Words be plain unto you, and
not parables. But all ye that are speaking of yourselves, know neither the Son
nor the Father, ye that can pray when you will, and preach when you will, and
when you will can be silent, and all this is but in your own will, and in your
own time, but ye have neither heard the voice of the Father at any time, Jo.
5.37.
nor seen his shape, but are inwardly ravened from the Spirit of the Father, in
whose hands your time should be rather then in an hourglass, which ye think
the Spirit of the Lord will be limited unto; for when that is run, ye say, the
time is expired; and this is contrary to the Apostles practice, which spoke as
the Spirit gave them utterance, which ye may read, was until midnight, Acts
2^.7. And thus the Scripture, which you say, is your Rule to walk by, bears
witness against you, that ye walk contrary to it; And yet so blind are ye, that
are Condemning us as Apostates which are led by the Spirit of the Lord, and not
contrary to the Scriptures, and will not see that ye your selves are led
neither by Letter nor Spirit; But in your thoughts and imaginations ye are, and
ye see with the beasts eyes which are many, and so are in the many minds, and
many heads, and divided into the many bodies, being led by the many eyes of the
beast, and with his many horns are thrusting and kicking one against another,
but know not the body, nor discern not the body of Christ which is but one,
neither know the one eye which is the Spirit of truth to be your guider, and
leader into all truth; But one is crying, I am of this mind, and another I am
of this, and ye being many are of many minds, and see with the beasts eyes
which are many, and all about the meaning of some one particular Scripture; but
are all gone from the Spirit of the Lord which gave forth the Scriptures, and
did speak as it meant, which Spirit is but one in all his Children, and all
that are led by it are led into oneness, and they are of one heart, and one
Soul as they that were guided by this one spirit in all ages was, what ever you
may imagine who are far from knowing such a state; but one of you is crying, I
am for general Redemption, and another, I am for particular Election; one is
for eating of blood, and another is against it, some for washing of feet, and
others own it not, one for laying on of hands, and another against it, and some
that have preached it up as an Ordinance of Christ, as William Allen, and
Thomas Lamb, and without it said, they could not admit any into the body of
Christ, and now themselves are gone from that also, and look upon it as an
indifferent thing, and some of them are so blind that they say they cannot call
any Brother until they have been Baptized in the water, though it be but an
hour before they are Baptized, and yet a month before that, when they have
Examined them about their Faith, and have judged them believers; and I say,
that all are the Sons of God by Faith, and therefore read, Gal. ^.26. And
consider what an Idol you have made of carnal water, that cannot have
fellowship with the Sons, of God, until they fall down to worship the Idol
which ye in your Imaginations have set up, for which ye have neither the Spirit
nor the Letter of the Scriptures to own you in. Some of you say that Christ
shall come and reign among you a thousand years hereafter, but that ye say, ye
know not when it shall be; and many of you are for a Supper before that which
ye call the Lords Supper, and many of you deny both these; thus are you Babels
builders, scattered and confounded among your selves in your Imaginations,
where you are building up, and flinging down that which ye have built, and so
makes your selves transgressors; and upon you all this is the plague of the
Lord God, for many of you have been convinced in your Consciences when I was
amongst you, that all things were out of Order, and that ye were not as ye
should be, but now are again pleading and contending for them, and are licking
up that which ye sometime vomited out, and thus are you restless and out of
peace, as the wicked are, who are like the troubled Sea; and ye are gone from
the Rock of ages, Isa 58.12
and know not the Foundation of many generations, and have laid another
foundation then Christ Jesus the Cornerstone, which is smiting at the feet of
your Image which ye in your Imaginations have set up, and the Lord God of life
and power will over-turn, over-turn, over-turn, until he Reign, whose Right it
is to Reign, and the Lord has dried up the Sea, and has discovered to his
Children your Foundation, you who know not what it is, nor how any can be
Baptized into the Name of the Lord, which is the Nature of the Lord, which Name
none knows, saving he that has it, as Rev. 2.17. He that has an ear let him
hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches, to him that overcome will I give
to eat of the hidden Manna, and I will give him a white stone, and in this
stone a new Name written, which no man knows saving he that receives it, Rev.
3.12. And I will write upon him the Name of my God, and the Name of the City of
my God, which is new Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven from my God,
and I will write upon him my new Name, he that has an ear let him hear what
the Spirit says. But you who are in the Mystery of iniquity, are comprehended
with the Mystery of God, and your bottom seen, and your sandy foundation
discovered, and the Beast Rules and Reigns amongst you, as I have said before,
and ye are kicking and thrusting down one another, who are gone from the Name
of the Lord, and power of the Lord, and ye are in the many heads, and many
bodies, Rev. 13.1. And I saw a beast rise up out of the Sea; and here is all
your foundation, even in the waters, and ye have all drunk of the Cup which is
in the right hand of the Whore, with whom the Kings of the earth have committed
fornication, which sits upon many waters, Rev. 17.2, 4. And upon her
forehead was a name written, Mystery Babylon, the great Mother of Harlots, and
the great abomination of the Earth, and I saw the woman of the Martyrs of
Jesus, and when I saw her, I wondered with great admiration. And here is the
mind that has wisdom, for the woman which thou saw is that great City which
reigns over the Kings of the Earth, ver. 18. And he said unto me, the waters
which thou saw where the Whore sits, are Peoples and Multitudes, Nations
and Tongues, and this is the state of all Nations, and Multitudes, an Peoples
whatsoever of all Sects and Opinions, Bodies and Heads, who we gone from the
one Body, and one Head, but know not the Name of the Lord, and are not Baptized
into the Name of the Lord, 1 Cor. 12. For by one Spirit were they all Baptized
into one Body; and this is your state in particular who are called Baptists,
who are tossed up and down in your Imaginations, and are as unstable as waters,
Genesis 49.4.
and wavering as the waves of the Sea, and are contending for shadows and
variable and changing things, and are gone from the Rock of ages and from the
sure Foundation, and Tried-stone which stands above the waters, and in whom
there is no shadow nor variableness, neither shadow of turning. Therefore to
you all this is the Word of the Lord God, come down to the Rock, and feel the
Rock out of all your Thoughts, Reasonings and Imaginations, that you may eat
the Bread of Life, and be satisfied; not as the fathers did eat Manna in the
Wilderness, and are dead; neither as you are eating your carnal bread; or
drinking your carnal wine, which bread must perish, and go into the drought,
and that which eats it must return to the dust as it was; but that a man eat
hereof, and live for ever. John 6.46. to the 61. Therefore all own that which
will purify you which is the Spirit of the Lord God; a measure of which Spirit
is given to every one of you to profit withal, and so that will create in you a
clean heart, and anew heart, as you obey it; and then shall you come to witness
the new wine in the new bottle, and so both are preserved, and neither spilt;
and says Christ, I will not henceforth drink any more the fruit of the vine
until I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom; for the Spirit was not yet
given, nor the day was not yet come, nor the shadows fled away. But you are
eating and discern not the Lords Body, and ye are drinking Condemnation to your
selves, and woe be to all that eat, and Christ is not with them in their eating,
for they know not the Word to sanctify that which they eat; but you are eating
in the contention, in the striving about words, wherein there is no profit, and
one is covetous, and another is proud; and this is not to eat with singleness
of heart, as they did (whom ye say) ye imitate, who was then of one heart, and
one Soul, as the children of the Lord who are led by the light of the Lord are
now, whatever you may falsely slander them withal, and so your table is become a
snare unto you, in whom the God of the World rules, and has blinded the eye
which should discern the Lords body, and your table is a table of Devils, and
ye cannot partake of the Table of the Lord, and the table of the Devils. But
the Lord has blessed us, and we are blessed, and cursed is every one that
curses us, and we sit round about our Fathers Table, and we eat bread in our
Fathers house, and sit under our own vine, and we drink of the new wine with
him in our Fathers Kingdom; and blessed are all them that eat bread in the
Kingdom of God, for they eat their bread with singleness of heart, out of all
strife and contention, out of all transgression and sin, and we witness him
who does finish transgression, and puts an end to sin, and brings us into his
everlasting righteousness, and his righteousness we know (which is not as
filthy rags) even the white linen which is the Saints righteousness, and it
is become unto us as a garment, and to us it is a Helmet of Salvation, and we
are in him, and not in our own righteousness; and he that is in him, and
follows him, is led in the way of righteousness, and sins not, John 5.1
John 3.6. whosoever abides in him sins not, whosoever sins has not seen
him, nor known him, and all ye that are commiting sin, and preaching for sin,
and disputing for sin, and say none can be perfect and free from sin while they
live, you are all of your father the Devil, for the Devil sineth from the
beginning, and the work of the Devil has been wrought in you, and the lusts of
the flesh, and the pride of life is brought forth amongst you, and for this
purpose is the Son of God manifested, that he may destroy the works of the
Devil; whosoever is born of God does not commit sin, for his seed remains in
him, and he cannot sin because he is born of God; for thus says the Lord, I
planted thee a Noble vine, and I made thee an upright plant; how art thou
become the degenerate plant of a strange vine unto me says the Lord? And so
you are degenerated from the Lord, and estranged from the life which is the
Light of man, and ye are without God in the World, and the world lies in
darkness, and the light shines in darkness, Jc. 1. and the darkness
comprehendes it not, and in this state you are, who are pleading for sin, and
cannot cease from sin, as ye may read, To. 3.12. they are all gone out of the
way, they are altogether become abominable, there is none that does good, no
not one, their throat is an open Sepulcher, with their tongues they have used
deceit, the poison of Asps is under their lips, but the way of peace they have
not known; and this is the reason why you cannot cease from sin, 2 Pet 2.14,
15. because ye have forsaken the right way, as those cursed children which he
speaks of had, and had erred in their hearts from the light which is the way,
the power of God, and wisdom of God; and so blind are you notwithstanding all
this, that ye preach, and pray sometimes against all sin, and say you know it
is your duty to abstain from all appearance of evil, and to press and to strive
after perfection, and yet connot see that your striving is sin, and your
preaching against, and striving against sin, is sin; for all that is not of
faith is sin; for this is contrary to your belief, that men can be perfect and
free from sin, and your selves being gone out of the way, and striving against
sin, while out of the way, to you the commands of God must needs appear to be
hard and grevious, you being gone from the light, the power which makes his
ways, ways of pleasantness, and all his paths and commands easy, and is not
this the command of God? Be ye holy, for I the Lord am holy, and be you
perfect, as your Heavenly Father is perfect, and that you should abstain not
only from the evil, but from all appearance of evil, and Paul who was an Elder
and Minister of Christ, he prayed in the Name of the Lord, and his prayer was
not in vain as yours are, who pray for that which ye believe can never be, who
prayed that the Saints might be kept blameless and spotless, both in soul,
body, and spirit, until the coming of the Lord; and to present the Churches as
a chaste virgin, and loyal spouse to the Lord without spot or wrinkle, or any
such thing; and was it not Paul's work to present every man perfect in Christ?
and did he work and labor in vain, as ye do, or strive in vain, or preach in
vain, who said he preached wisdom in a mystery to them that were perfect? and
does not John say, 1 John, 2.14. when he spoke to the young men and fathers,
does not he tell them, that greater was he that was in them, then he that was
in the world, 1 John. 4.4. And they were such as had the word abiding in them,
and they kept themselves that the wicked one touched them not, and they were
led by the spirit it of the Lord, and walked in the light of the Lord, and
brought their words, and all their actions to the tryer and touchstone, which
is the Law, and the Testamony, which law is light says Solomon, Proverbs. 6.
and which. Testimony is the spirit of prophecy says John. Rev. 19.10. and
this is bound up, and sealed with his Disciples, Isa. 8.19 20. and this is the
word of reconciliation, and reconciles to the Lord all that follow it, and this
is the light of the World, and all that follow it are led out of darkness and
all sin, and this is hated by you whatever you say who live in sin; for all
that do evil, hate Christ, all who are full of vain words, and use vain words,
and all which are in the fashions of the World, and love and friendships of the
World, even this is the condemnation of them all, because they hate it and love
it not; and no man is justified in the sight of God, nor has peace with God,
neither is he reconciled unto God, who is not led and guided by that which
reconciles unto the Father; therefore all you that speak of being justified by
Christ, and say you do believe in Christ, and yet your selves are found
sinners, deceive not your selves my friends, for it is hard for you to believe
against Gods witness, and to speak peace to your selves, while Gods witness
in your conciences speaks war, and condemnation; for man must be regenerated
and born again of the immortal word, which word is like a fire, and like a
hammer, and as you wait, lo ye shall feel it so, and it will break down, and
hammer down that which separates you from the Lord, it will finish
transgression and condemn sin in you, it will rent the vail, and destroy the
covering which is over the heart; and so will purify you, and open the pure
eye which can see the Lord, and open the deaf ear which can hear what the
spirit says, and the grave shall be opened, and the prisoner of hope shall
come out of the pit where there is no water, and he that has been your
condemnation shall now become your Savior, and he that has been slain since
the foundation of the World, shall live in you, and the great mystery of
Godliness shall be made manifest to you, which is Christ in you the hope of
glory, and Satan which has been exalted in you, even in the Temple of God,
above all that is called God, and the abomination which makes desolate, and the
great mystery of iniquity shall then be seen by the great mystery of
Godliness, and then shall come to pass, and ye shall come to witness it true
without a meaning, that which is written by the Prophet, Isa. 35.1. the
Wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad, and the desert shall rejoice
and blossom as the rose; then shall the eyes of the blind be opened, and the
ears of the deaf shall be unstopped, then shall the lame man leap as an heart,
and the tongue of the dumb sing, for in the Wilderness shall waters break out,
and streams in the desert, and the ransomed of the Lord shall return and come
to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads, they shall obtain joy
and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away, and then shall the
parable be opened, and plainness to you when you have found the key of David,
unto whom the parable is not, I say when you have found the Immanuel, which
Moses and the Prophets writ of, then shall you leave your figures, your
shadows, and types, when you witness the Prophet raised up in you, who is the
life and substance, and the everlasting day, and the Lord of the Sabbath, then
shall you leave your images, and cast away your Idols, and leave off your
idolatry, and follow the Lamb wherever he goes, and then shall you know that
Scripture, which ye have been so much in your imaginations, about to know the
meaning of, Zach. 10 11, 12. and then shall you see Jerusalem searched with
candles, and the inhabitants of Judah with torches, and the hidden things of
Esan brought to light, and the seed of Jacob, which has bowed to Esaus seed,
shall bow no longer but until he be past, and then shall Babylon the great, the
tumultuous city, and golden city, and city of confusion be broken down, and
that in which the blood of the innocent has been found, and the blood of the
Martyrs of Jesus, and the blood of the souls of them that lies slain under the
Altar, crying, how long thou holy and just God, shall all be required at her
hands, and come into remembrance with the Lord God, and he that has slain with
the sword shall be killed with the sword, and he that has led into captivity;
and here is the mind that has wisdom, and here is the patience of the Saints,
and Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and then shall ye know Jerusalem,
and the new city, even new Jerusalem become a peaceable habitation, and then
shall ye be gathered into general assembly, and shall come to the spirit of
just men made perfect, and unto Mount Zion, and unto the city of the living
God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels, and
general assembly and Church of the firstborn, as Paul was, Heb. 12 22 24 and
unto God the judge of all, and to Jesus the Reconciler, and Mediator of the new
Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, which speaks better things then
that of Abes, and then shall your water, even your foundation be shaken, and
nothing shall stand with you, but the Rock of Ages which cannot be moved, verse.
27 and in the presence and power of the Lord God, I warn you all, put not this
day a far off, which is the joyful day and year of Jubilee to his people, and
the day of Zions deliverance to his chosen, which have overcome by the blood of
the Lamb, and by the word of his Testimony and patience which they do keep, and
thereby have made an entrance into the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, Rev. 1.9.
and are become companions in tribulation, and in the Kingdom and patience of
Jesus, and are come from far, and knows our mansions in our Fathers house, and
know the rest which remains for the people of God, and are gathered into one
sheepfold, and witness the Lord our shepherd, and we see his shape, and hear
his voice, and follow him who is invisible, eternal, and unchangeable, and
abides a Priest for ever, and a shelter and a hiding place for ever, and with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob do we sit in our Fathers Kingdom, and our place of
defense is the munition of Rocks, and our bread is sure, and water is given,
and the Lord is become our King, and lawgiver, and we rain with him upon earth,
and he has made us Kings, and Priests to ^od the Father, and we sit with him
in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus, even him who rules the heathen with a rod
of iron, and it is he who does all our works in us, and for us, and slayes our
enemies, and breaks our enemies like a potters vessel, and the sharp two edged
sword, and the new threshing instrument which has teeth, we know wherewith he
has threshed our mountains, and laid them waste without Inhabitants, and is
now threshing your mountains, and is breaking down, and scattering you, and he
is ungirding your loins, which are girding your selves, and have made to your
selves likenesses, but have lost the spirit of truth, and ye have joined your
selves to the Heathen, and have eat the sacrifice of the dead, and have learned
their works, and ye are like Ephraim feeding upon the wind, and that which
withers and dies of it self, and in this woeful, and lamentable state are ye
all, who are not lead, guided and acted by the light; and so your prayers are
as if ye slew a man, and all your sacrifices is as the blessing of an Idol or
offering of Swines flesh; for you have chosen your own ways, and are gone from
the way of the Lord, and light of the Lord, and ye have set up the idol in your
hearts, and ye live in that, and delight in that, and are led by that which my
soul abhors says the Lord, and ye have set up the letter for your rule in
stead of the new creature, and life, and ye have set up the Babel, which is ink
and paper to be your judge, and tryer of the anointing, and with that ye
condemn the Innocent, and judge him unto whom all judgment is committed, as
the blind Jews, who were painred with a profession as you are, but were
inwardly ravened, and gone from the anointing in them, which was, and for ever
shall be the Saints tryer, and judge of the spirits which lead out into the
World, and he is the same to his children as ever he was, and his sons pray,
and preach, and are led by his spirit as ever they were, though ye cannot
believe these which are apostatized from the Apostles doctrine, and have set up
carnal, created, visible things, and have set up water in stead of the Name of
the Lord, and the letter in stead of the life of the Lord, and ye have put the
letter, and your meaning thereof, and your private interpretations which ye
have added to be the rule, the tryer, and the leader of the Saints, and the
law, and the Testimony, and the judger of Spirits, and all these have ye set up
above Christ, who is the spiritual man, who judges all things, and ought to be
your judge in all things, and to whom all power and judgment is given, and
committed in Heaven and earth, and he himself is judged of no man; and so the
beam is in your eye, and the mote in your eye, end ye being hipt from the pure
of God, and with that which has been exalted above all that is called God, are
ye judging and condemning the Son of God, unto whom all judgment is committed;
but this is your day, and the power of darkness, and the regin of the Lord,
and the day of the Lord, which ye so much talk of shall come hereafter, you
shall then hide your selves in the dens of the earth, and cave of the earth,
and the mountains shall you desire to fall upon you, and the hills, to cover
you from the presence of the Lamb that sits upon the throne, and this day to
you shall be as you may read, Amos, 5. a woeful day, and a day of darkness and
not light, as if a man did flee from a Lion, and a Bear met him, or went into
the house, and leaned his hand on the wall, and a Serpent bit him, verse 8 2,
but as I said before to you, even judgment (which ye have turned back, let
that run down as waters, and righteousness, as a mighty stream; But you have
borne the tabernacle of Molock, and Chion, your images, the star of your God
which you make to your selves, and so Christ's personal reign which ye are
speaking of and expecting, and gazing after without, as the men of Galilee
were, shall be upon you, and unto you the day of the Lords controversy, the
day of the Lords vengeance, and a time of the Lords controversy unto you, and
upon you who are not led by the light of the Lord, and the spirit of the Lord;
and that none may say, that I accuse you falsely, and so condemn you, you being
innocent, read a book of Henry Haggers, and a book of John Gosnels, entitled a
discourse of the Baptism of the water, and of the spirit, page the 38. Where
in plain words, he sets up the water above the Name of the Lord, and there
he confesses as Ephesians, 4.5. That there is but one Baptism, to speak
properly, which is Baptism of water, and the other two are but figurative, and
metaphorical; and thus you may see that ye blinds Baptists are calling
Water Baptism, which Peter in his first Epistle 3.^1. calls but a figure, and
the one Baptism, and the only one that Christ sent his Apostles to Baptize
into, which is into the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit,
which ye may read, Math. 28.19, 20. This he calls figurative, and
metaphorical, and so he sets up the figure in stead of the body and life of
all figures and shadows; and John says who was in the figure, I indeed
Baptize with water, I must decrease; but he that comes after me is preferred
before me, he must increase, who shall Baptize with the Holy Ghost, and with
fire, and Paul, 1 Cor. 12. That by one Spirit, whether Jew or Gentile, Bond or
Free, they were all Bapti^ed into one Body, and was all made to drink into one
Spirit; and this John Gosnel calls the figure, even the Name of the Lord, and
water which was a figure thereof, he sets up above; and Henry Hagger in his
Book, he says, the Scripture is the ingrafted Word, and able to make a man
Wise to Salvation, and thoroughly to furn^sh a man to every good work; and in a
Dispute in Staffordshire, he said it were sufficient that he were saved by the
water; and he told me, that the Letter was the Word of God, and the Judger and
Tryer of spirits; and this in the presence and fear of the Lord God, I charge
upon you al, who are of this persuasion to be guilty of Blasphemy, and doctrine
of Devils, and to deny the Lord that bought you, and to be in the many bodies,
and many heads, and seeing with the many eyes of the Beast, and to have the
many names of Blasphemy, but know not the one Name nor the one Head, neither
the Baptism into the one Body and Name, whereby man can be saved, read and
understand Acts ^.12. Neither is there Salvation in any other, for there is no
other Name under Heaven given amongst men, whereby we must be saved, but the
Name which is set at naught by you builders, and become a stumbling stone, and
a Rock of offense; but unto us that believe he is precious and a tried stone,
and the power of God to Salvation, and with him and by him, we deny all your
shadows, and all your figures, and all your washings which makes nothing
perfect; and those which the Scriptures own, we deny not any one of them, as
the brazen Serpent, offerings, and Circumcision, and Baptism, all of which had
a beginning, and were imposed but till the time of a through Reformation, 1
Pet. 4.7.
and makes nothing perfect, but all were to end and do end in him who is the
bringer in of the better hope, and is not made after the Law of a carnal
commandment, but after the power of an Endless life, Heb. 7. Heb. 9.9. And
perfects for ever them that are sanctified, and makes peace, and keeps in peace
all that believe in him, and takes away sin as pertaining to the Conscience;
and so comes the Mystery of Faith to be witnessed to be held in a pure
Conscience, which Faith I charge upon you to be Reprobates concerning, let
your prayers and professions be what they will; as Jeremy Ives, and William
Answorth, two of your chief Teachers have denied the Faith, which is the Gift
of God, and calls it the creatures Act, which is contrary to the Scriptures, 1
Cor. 12.9. Jude 3. Contend for the Faith that once was delivered or given to
the Saints, and all your faith in general, which gives you not power over all
sin, but in it you can be pleading for, and Disputing for sin, and say, none
can be perfect in this life; We Rank you altogether, and by the power of the
Lord we judge you altogether to be Reprobates concerning the faith; read Acts
15. and John 9.1. and 3.2, 3. to the tenth, and your hope is but the hope of
the hypocrite which does not purify you as Christ is pure, but this must needs
be so with you who are in your own works and faith which makes nothing perfect,
and say faith is not the gift of God, but an act of the creatures, which must
needs be imperfect; for James says, that every good and perfect gift is from
above, and comes down from the Father of Lights, James 1.7. With whom is no
variableness, neither shadow of turning; but you that are in the shadows, and
out of the Light, and are in the Error concerning the Faith, verse 16. and are
reprobated from the Faith which is the gift of God, and was once given unto the
Saints, Jud. 3. And this was held forth at a meeting, by one William Answorth,
Robert Ward, and several others of the Baptist teachers, at Henry Smiths, at
Wythcock in Leichestershire, upon the twentyseventh day of the twelfth month,
called February, in the year of Account 1658. Before a great number of people,
with many other Blasphemous doctrines; a few of the witnesses their names are
here written.

FRANCIS CREEK, WILLIAM ATTON, WILLIAM SLYEE, WILLIAM SMITH, JOSEPH HOULT,
MARGERET BEEBY, THOMAS HARVEY, ISABEL HACKER.
ANd because you may not say that I wrong you, in saying that you have set up
Shadows, Types, and Figures above the Life and Substance which is Christ, and
visible carnal perishing things above the Invisible unchangeable Word of the
Lord which endures for ever, I shall here set down a few of your principal
Doctrines, by which ye Judge the principals of Christ, and they that are found
therein to be Apostates, and deceivers, which I shall here mention, and answer
something thereunto, and so leave it to Gods witness in ye all, to Judge
whether you are deceivers and Apostates, or we.

And I am troubled for you all, and my heart is broken for you all, who are
hardening your selves against the Lord, and like the Jews have painted your
selves as the Jews did, who were the greatest enemies of the Lord, when he
came; and I am pained at my very heart for you all, and my life bears the
Iniquity of many, and I am pressed as a Cart is pressed that is full of
sheaves, for your mountain is exalted above the Lord, and great is the
oppression of the Holy seed (read and understand) Isa. 53.5, 4. Psalm. 11.4. The
sorrows of death compass me, the floods of ungodly men made me afraid, the
sorrows of Hell compass me about, the snares of death prevented me; verse 11.
He made thick darkness his secret place, and his pavillion round about were
dark waters, and thick clouds of the skies, the Lord also thundreth in the
Heavens, and the Highest gave his voice, hailstones, and coals of fire, ye, he
sent out his Arrows, and scattered them; then the Channels of water were seen,
and the foundations of the World were discovered, read James 3.6. If you have
an ear to hear what the Spirit, says at the rebuke of the Lord, at the blast
of the breath of his nostrils, he sent from above and took me, he drew me out
of many waters, he delivered me from my strong enemy, and from them which hated
me, for they were too strong for me, he brought me forth also into a large
place he delivered me because he dilighted in me, verse the 18. and 19.

Your first principle is this, held forth at that dispute.

1. That faith is an act of the creatures, and not Gods gift: But because I
have spoken something to this already: I shall add these Scriptures for the
Reader, and leave it, Ephisians 2 8 and 1 Cor. 12.9. And all our
righteousnesses is as filthy rages, but the Lord works all our works in us,
and for us; and what is not of faith, is sin.

2. That a wicked man, whilst a wicked m^n is justified by Christ, and has
access unto, and may freely lay hold upon all the merits of Christ.

Ans. To which I say, you are they which justify your selves, being wicked and
out of the faith which should purify your hearts, and seek to be justified by
Christ, while your selves are found sinners, and so would make Christ as you
are, Ministers of sin, Galathians, 2.17. But he that justifies the wicked, and
he that condemns the righteous, as ye do, even they are both an abominateon
to the Lord, Prove 17.15.

3. That the Bible was the life of their souls, and comfort of their souls.

Ans To this I say, miserable are you, and miserable are all your comforters,
who have set up another comforter then the consolation of Israel; and the
comforts of God, and the consolations of God are small in you, read John, 14 16
17. And says Christ, I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever; even the spirit of truth, whom
the World cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him, but
you know him, for he dwells with you, and shall be in you; I will not leave
you comfortless, I will come unto you.

William Ainsworth did affirm, and John Brown likewise, at his fathers house,
that Paul in baptising with water, and not by commission was wicked, and acted
wickedly therein.

Ans. First, I shall prove, what I there then did affirm; That Paul was not
sent to Baptize, neither was his commission to Baptize with water, but into the
Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; as you may read, Mat. 28. Though John
Gosnel be so blind, who is one of your chief Teachers, in the first page of his
book, says it is with water, and says it is not the Baptism of the spirit;
but if you will believe John Gosnel rather then the Scriptures, which you say
is your rule; Let it be upon your own heads for ever.

Secondly, I shall prove they did Baptize with Water, by permission, and not by
commission, if you can either believe Paul or the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 1.14. I
thank God, I baptized none of you but Crispus, and Gaius and I Baptized also
the house of Stephanus, and I know not whether I baptized any other; and this
he says is the reason and ground, verse. 17. for Christ sent me not to Baptize,
but to preach the Gospel; and I say he did this and many other things by
permission, as you may read Acts, 16.3. where he circumcised Timothy, that he
might gain and bring some to the true circumcision, and one Baptism, Acts,
21.24. Where Paul shaved his head, and all this was by permission, and not by
command: And I leave it upon you to prove that he acted wickedly therein; and
so you may see, that those things which you are making your foundation, and
setting up above the Name of the Lord, could be done, or left undone by them
who were guided by the spirit of the Lord; and all was to gain some unto the
Lord, and bring them into the one Baptism, which is by one spirit into the Name
of the Lord, 1 Cor. 12 yet I do not deny water Baptism, nor John who had a
commission to Baptize with water, in their time and in their place, for I do
believe and know it was a ^ommand of God, and they that rejected it, rejected
the counsel of God, in not being baptized with water of John: But John says of
himself, I indeed Baptize you with water unto repentance, I must decrease, and
he must increase, who baptizeth with the Holy Ghost and fire, and you do not
read in all the Scriptures that John was sent into all nations, but he came
preaching the doctrine of Baptism, and repentance in the Wilderness of Judea,
and to the people of Israel; but he who was to increase, was found by John's
Disciples, then they left John and followed Jesus, and said they had found him
whom Moses and the Prophets wrote of, Jesus of Nazereth the Son of Joseph, John
1.37.41.45 And herein did the friend of the Bridegroom rejoice, even when he
heard of the increase of the Bridegroom*

But Christ, Mat. 28.18. came and spoke unto his Disciples, saying, all power
is given unto me in Heaven, and in earth; Go ye therefore and teach all
Nations, Baptising them in the Name of the Father, Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, and lo I
am with you always, even unto the end of the World.

Fifthly, You say the commission must needs be water, and not the Spirit,
because it was only the work of Christ, and not the Apostles work, to
administer the Holy Ghost, and John Gosnel in the second page of his book, does
conclude that the Baptism here instituted, is with water, for the Baptism of
the spirit, says he was never administered by man, but Christ was the Minister
of it himself.

Ans. To which I say, read the words of the commission again, and there you
shall find that Christ does commission them to Baptize in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and not into the water.

6. And yet so blind are ye, as to say this was not the Apostles work, neither
was it in man's power say you, to administer the Holy Ghost.

Ans. To which I say, Christ did nothing of himself, and all power which he
had, was of the Father, and removed from the Father, verse. the 18th. And
greater works then these shall ye do, because I go to my Father, says Christ,
and read, Acts. 8. and there you shall find, that the Apostles, verse. 17, 18.
were the only administrators of the Holy Ghost, not by any power of their own,
but by the power which Christ received of his Father, and gave unto them: Then
laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost, read Acts.
19.6. when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came upon them;
And you do not read in all the Scriptures, that Christ did thus act: But he
made his Apostles the administrators thereof, and John Gosnel in his 41 page
says thus; That the Baptism of the spirit is expressed, by the pouring forth
of the spirit both in the Old and New Testament; and that he confesses, is
upon all his sons and daughters, and upon all flesh, and he proves this Joel.
2.28, 29. And yet before in his Book, says, the Baptism of the Spirit, fell
only on some few at the first; but Paul says, that both Jew and Greek, Bond
and Free, were all Baptized by one Spirit into one Body, and were all made to
drink into one Spirit; and thus it falls upon thee that which thou art charging
upon some others, Esa 24. They have transgressed the Law, and changed the
Ordinance; which I say is Everlasting, and a storng Tower to his people, and
the Savior and Tried-stone to all that trust in him; and in stead thereof ye
have set up that unstable water, and a carnal Ordinance of your own invention,
and diverse washings, which all must perish in the using, after the commandments
and doctrines of men, Col. 2.

Seventhly, You say that the Bible, on the Letter is the Judge of the Spirits.

Answ. To which I say, you who have lost the Spirit of the Lord, and know not
Christ, to whom all Judgment is committed: must needs err in Judgment, and
stumble in vision, and put light for darkness, and darkness for light; and set
up a carnal thing in stead of the invisible and unchangeable God, and so by the
Spirit of the Lord God, you who are for Judgment are Judged; and by that which
you say is your Rule and Judge, are Condemned, 1 Cor. 2.15. 1 John 4.1, 4. and
John 5.22.

Eighthly, You say, that the Letter is the Sword of the Spirit.

Answ. You who have lost the Word of the Lord, and the Light of the Lord which
is the Armor of God, know not the Sword of Spirit which is the Word of God,
which is quick and powerful, and sharper then any two edged sword, and
preceedeth out of the mouth of the Lamb, Kev. 19.15. Ephesians. 6.17.

Ninthly, You say, that the Letter was the only weapon wherewith Christ
fought, and overcame the Devil.

Answ. You who have lost the Spirit of the Lord, know no other but a carnal
weapon to fight with; but the Saints who are guided by the Spirit of the Lord,
said, that theirs were not carnal, but Spiritual, and mighty through the power
of God to the pulling down of every high thought, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. And they
said, they were not Ministers of the Letter, but of the Spirit, and that is the
Reason of all your haling and pulling, of all your lies and slanders which ye
are forced to use, to defend your form; but know not the Armor of God, nor the
sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God to defend you and overcome
withal, Epes. 6.11, 14. 2 Cor. 3.6.

Tenthly, You say, the Letter is the Law, the Testimony, and the Light.

Answ. All this is contrary to the Scriptures, which you say, is your guide;
for they say, Christ is the true Light that lights every man that comes into
the World, John 1.9. John 8.12. And thy Law is Light, says Solomon, Prove.
6.23. And the Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy, Rev. 19.10.

Eleventhly, You say, it was not the work of Christ or his Apostles, to turn
any to the Light within.

Answ. Read the Scripture, which ye so condemn us for denying, and ye may see
that ye are they which deny them, and not we, Acts 26.18. 2 Cor. 4.4, 6. where
you may read; that Paul said, I was sent to turn them from the darkness to
light, from the power of Satan unto God; and told them, that the light which
did shine in their hearts, must give them the knowledge of God, in the face of
Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6.

Twelfthly, That the Bible is the Living Word of God, and able to make a man
Wise unto Salvation.

Answ. To which I say, All that are in their sins as ye are, know not Christ
the living Word; and to me it is not a wonder to hear you call that living
which is dead, and cannot give life nor power over sin; but the Scripture does
affirm that Christ is the Word, and that it is he that ever lives, and is made
a high Priest by the power of a life that has no end; and this is he that
lives and abides for ever, read John 1.^, 3. Heb. 7.9, 16. 1 John 5.22.

Thirteenthly, You say, that it is false doctrine to say, that he that is born
of God sins not.

Answ. To you which know not the living and immortal Word, it is, and always
was, by such, and to such, as you are, who are Reprobates concerning the Faith
which should purify you; but to the Children of the Lord this was never false
doctrine, for they said, he that was born of God sins not, 1 John 3.6, 10.

Fourteenthly, Yon say, that the Bible is the Gospel, and the power of God.

Answ. To this I say, Christ was the power of God, and Wisdom of God, and the
Rock of all his people in all ages, and the Foundation of the Prophets, and
Apostles; and to us he is the same as he was to them in all ages, even the
power of God to Salvation, Romans 1.16.

And so all that are honest hearted among you, when you have read the Teachers
Principles, may see I have not wronged you in saying, ye have set up shadows
above the substance, and the Letter above Christ, that gives Life.

From him who is in scorn called a Quaker. H. W.

THE END
Page 7. line 1. for them, read you. p. 13. l, 36. for love, r. low.


