A VISITATION TO THE Captive-Seed OF ISRAEL,

And a door opened to the Prisoner in the pit, that the band of darkness may
be broken, and the Cloud of Error scattered, by the brightness of his Rising
who is the Resurrection, and whose Life is the Light of men.

Given forth, in Bowels of Compassion, to the scattered Sheep that are yet of
another Fold, but must be gathered into the Fold of Christ, where he causes his
Flock to rest in the heat of the day that is coming to try them that dwell upon
the Earth, where peace and rest is enjoyed, that no man can take away.

Humphrey Wollrich.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, 1661.

O All People Hear, and Professors of all sorts, lend an ear, incline your
minds, and be of an understanding heart, be not proud in a Profession, out of
the life, power and possession of what in words ye profess, ye are laid to the
line of true Judgment, and weighed in the even balance of the sanctuary of
God, and all your coverings are too narrow to wrap you in, the eye that made
you searches you, and sees through all darkness, where ye are hiding your selves
only with the words of Christ the light, that is the true light that lighteneth
every man that comes into the World.

O all ye vain professors of all sorts, your bed is too short which ye lie
upon, your rest is poluted and bed defiled; Arise O thou Virgin Daughter of
Babylon, the Lord will Judge thee, make bare thy thighs, strip thee, strip
thee, for thy Mother is an harlot, the Lord will plead with thee thou Daughter
of Fornication, he will plead with thee, even with thee that have sat as a
Queen, and in thy heart have said I am, and there is none besides me, I am a
Lady for ever, and shall see no sorrow, I shall not know widow hood, nor loss
of Children; these things says the Lord, the mighty God that judges thee,
widow-hood, loss of Children shall come upon thee in one day, the Archers
shall set themselves in array against thee O Virgin Daughter of Babylon; the
fellers are coming up, the mighty are on their way against thee. O Babylon,
call together all thy wise men, they shall be confounded, gather thy Princes,
even all the Princes of the Sea, and they shall be dashed as one wave against
another; the Lord has determined thy ruin, thou shall not be built nor
inhabited throughout all Generations; because of thy violence to the Daughter
of Sion, will the Lord slay thy Children with fire. Arise O Daughter of Sion,
put thy sword upon thee, deck thee with Majesty, thresh the Mountains, and
tread them under the soles of thy feet that rise up to oppose thee, take the
glittering sword and let it be bathed in Heaven, and made fat with the blood of
bulls, even the bulls of Basan; Arise, shine forth, and let thy right hand take
hold on vengeance, slay the wicked, and feed the fat with Judgment, bind the
Kings in chains, and Nobles in fetters of Iron, execute upon them the Judgment
written, let Thousands of Thousands Minister before thee, even before thee whom
Nations have abhorred and people despised, let the Mountains melt before thee,
and the Hills that are high tremble. Tremble, tremble all ye Foundations of the
Earth, the Lord is roaring out of Sion, and uttering his voice out of
Jerusalem; all ye high hills, come down, come down all ye ragged Rocks with
your Inhabitance, meet the Lord in the valley of Jehosaphat, there will he
Judge the Earth in Righteousness and the people in Equity.

Open ye Fountains of Water, and thou Sea give up thy dead; Oh Earth, Earth, be
thou removed and cover thy slain no longer, death, Hell and grave give up, give
up, and hide my blood on longer; arise ye dead and come to Judgment, arise
thou worm Jacob and seed of Abraham my Friend, Nations shall tremble at thy
rising, and people shall melt away out of their close places; He give Nations
for thy Ransom, and people shall be as driven stubble before thy bow; come up
thou seed immortal, thou babe of eternity, let a Nation be born in one day, and
a generation conceived in the same; shine out thou star of Jacob, thy light is
come, thy day is dawned and sprung from on high, out of thee shall he arise
that must have dominion; his King shall be higher then Agag, and his Kingdom
shall be exalted and rule over all the Kingdoms of the Earth, and his dominion
shall be from Sea to Sea; Spring up thou dried heath in the desert, thou plant
rise out of the dry ground, let the wilderness become a poole of water, and a
barren land a pleasant garden, let the day rise upon all the Mountains and
hills of glominess and thick darkness, even the day of God, and scatter the
mysts and foggs, that the path may be known, the ancient path which the
Righteous trod in through all Generations; The way O Lord even thy way O God in
the wilderness reveal and manifest as in the days of old, that thy Sheep and
Lambs, even the sheep that are yet of another fold, may be gathered unto him in
whom is rest, peace and joy world without end; Unto him, to whom the gathering
of the Nations shall be; O gather, gather thy outcast thou Lord God of Israel.
Moab does afflict thy heritage, and Ameleck would root out the Name of Israel;
O thou Lord God of hosts, thou God of Jacob, thou that formedst him and
createdst him for thy praise, build him O Lord and hold his hands, teach Jacob
to war, and Israel to fight the good fight of faith, as thou taught. Abraham,
who in hope believed against hope.

O all ye Children of Esau, you that know not the, seed of Isaak in the Tent,
but feed in a dryland, and inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, whose
Mountain is not the Lords holy Mountain, but the Mount of Esau is your dwelling
place, you must not enter into the dwellings of Jacob, but wasting and
destruction, overturning, and confusion is your resting place, your waters are
wormwood of which Israel cannot drink, the water that is pure ye uncircumcised
have stopped up, even the Well that Abraham's Servants have dug, read in the
Mystery all ye graves, Tooms and painted Sepulchers, the living water is in you
a spring, shut up, a Fountain sealed, ye wandering stars that are not fixed in
the firmament of his power; ye wells without water, your house is desolate and
overthrown by Alients; Thus says the Lord, over Palistina, Ethiopie and Edom
will I rejoice, I will meet out the vallie of Succoth, here is a place for
sheep to lie down, here is a place to build an Altar to the Lord God of Israel;
I will be exalted in my seed that has been scattered as chips about the graves
mouth, I will gather Israel, and bring him back out of Egypt, I will call my
Son, for Israel is my first born; the Sea will I dry up, and divide the mighty
waters, I will drive back all the night with an East wind from the Wilderness,
so that he shall go safely as on dry ground; Egypt shall fear, and I will smite
the first born of Pharaoh, that my chosen may be glad, and come forth with joy
of heart.

I will have mercy upon Jacob, and pity Israel my chosen, that have been
oppressed in Egypt, and bowed down in the Iron Furnace, he shall be my chosen
Treasure, my peculiar Treasure in whom I will alone delight, I will give him
the goods of the Gentiles, and his hands shall be upon the necks of his
Enemies, strangers shall submit themselves unto him, and those that hate him
shall come bending before him; he shall push the people together to the ends of
the earth, with his horn shall he push down his Enemies, he shall destroy
Amelech and all the Children of Seth, which know not my power in my seed, nor
the blessing wherewith all I have blessed my offspring says the Lord, the God
of Israel, that have Created Jacob for my praise, and Israel in whom I will be
glorified; and I will mar all the beauty, and stain the pride of all glory that
will not be subject in spirit to my glorious Name, that in my sons and
daughters I am making, manifest and revealing; Life shall abundantly be
revealed and brought to light by the Gospel which is preached in every Creature
under Heaven, that in this day of plentious Redemption, the Captive may be set
at liberty, and the prisoner in the pit may come out to have his hope in God,
to rejoice in the Father, and the Father in him, as it was before the
bottomless pit was, death, hell or the grave had a being, before the hills were
brought forth, or the Mountains settled, or ere the high places of the dust of
the Earth was, then was I by him as one brought up with him, rejoicing before
him, and then was may delight in the habitable parts of the Earth.

O thou mourning seed that lies in captivity, thou that groanest under the
weight of thy burden of pressing sin and iniquity, O I will arise says the
Lord in my jealousy, and I will ransom thee from the power of the grave, I
will open the two leafed gates before thee, I will break the iron bars and
gates of Brass assunder. O thou seed in the Grave hear and come out, arise,
shake off thy prison garments, i will cloth thee with Majesty, and put my spirit
upon thee; O I have heard thy cry and thy groaning is not hid from me, but into
my ear is entered, and I will undertake for thee, be strong thou little one,
thou shall become a strong Nation; Out of my Treasure will I send daily I will
gird thy loins, and thou shall travel in the greatness of my strength, all thy
garments shall be dyed in blood, and the slain of the Lord shall be many before
thee O thou worm Jacob; I will bring thee into the strong City, and the
everlasting door will I open, and in a sure dwelling place will I establish
thee; the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light
thereof as seven days; thy gate shall not be shut at all by night, for there
shall be no night there; I will feed thee O thou Seed that have hungered, and
with my daily bread will I sustain thee, thy Earth shall yield her increase
unto thee, and him that blesses thee shall be blessed, and all that hate thee
shall be cursed for thy sake; Oh thou art unto me as the male in the flock, he
that touches thee, touches mine Anoyted, and grieveth the apple of my eye; O
thou have made thy soul an offering for sin, and the chastisement of the peace
of many has been upon thee, therefore shall thou divide the spoil of them that
have spoiled thee; I will bring thee into a good Land where thou shall take
them Captives, whose Captives thou were, and thou shall rule over thy
oppressors; And I will plant thee again a right plant, and Noble Seed, and thou
shall be watered, and replenished with the dew of Heaven every moment; and I
will watch over my Vine and build a Wall about it, least any noysom beast
approach to lay it wast again, and my goodness shall be extended unto thee, and
thy Seeding Seed for evermore throughout all ages, world without end.

O this Seed is nigh to thee, this holy Seed, even to thee thou Cedar, who art
lifted up above the sense of its heavy burden; How do thou hunt before the
Lord thou Son of Nimrod, how do thou compass the Earth with thy mind, but
lendest not an ear to the cry of the Captive in thee? How do thou scatter and
travers thy way in the Earth, like aswift Dromedary, while the Innocent Seed in
thee lies in the Sepulcher of thy dead heart, who shall roll away the stone,
that so within the vail thou may stoop down in thy mind, and see him that is a
little lower then the Angels, that thou may see him in thee that gives thee
feeling of thy sins, and that will give thee to feel and see a Savior from
them also; O thou that love to wander from the Lord, and scatter thy ways
upon the Mountains, turn in, turn in that thou may see Captivity led Captive;
Here is the patience of the Saints, he that has slain with the sword shall be
killed with the sword; open thou eternal eye, that the life may be known, and
the Resurrection seen and be witnessed in all that wait for the Consolation in
Israel, spring up ye waters that are under the waters, that there may be a
dividing the waters from the waters; open O Lord springs in the desert, and dry
up all the springs that are Corrupted, that those that have sought the water of
the well, may not return away ashamed, but satisfied and refreshed let them be
with the Living Fountain: Unseal, unseal thy Fountain O Lord, let pure water
issue out of the City that is yet unhabited; gather, O my Lord, gather them
that are yet a far off in their minds by evil works to thy sheepfold, O Let
them know the shepherd of Israel, and his crook that leads Joseph like a
Flock; O spread the banner to the Nations, and lift up thy standerd to the
people that kno^ thee not; O why should the grave and pit rejoice where none
prayseth thee, rejoice and triumph for ever; O why should thy talent be hid,
and the price always retained in the hands of Fools? shall the Heritage mourn,
and the Vine Languish, even the Vine O Lord whom thou love? When shall the
oppressor cease, and the violent man cease, and destruction come unto a
perpetual end, so that there may be no enemy in thy house, nor adversary in thy
habitation, that there may be no more a pricking thorn and bryer unto the house
of Israel.

Arise thou Son of Righteousness in the Nations, heal them, heal them thou Tree
of Life, thy leaves are for the healing of the Nations; shine forth in thy
beauty, and them that have not desired thee, O let them see thy beauty and
comely proportion; thou art altogether lovely in thy self, and though thou have
been spotted by man, and thy Image marred more then the Sons of men, yet art
thou all fair as the morning without Clouds, there is no spot in thee,
therefore do the Virgins love thee, even thee thou precious Son of Sion,
against whom the Daughter of Babylon has shaken the head, and laughed to scorn.

Spring up O Well of water, issue forth thou Fountain sealed in the Rock, that
the thirsty may drink and be refreshed; Open, open thou River in the desert,
that the soul of the poor may be replenished with water of Life; breath out of
thy nostrils thou babe in the Manger, that the dead may be quickened and bec^^^^
Living, that praises may be given thee in the L^ of the Living; the Living, the
Living he shall praise thee, as my Soul does this day, the Father to his
Children shall make known thy Truth, they that lie in the Pit cannot praise
thee, the Grave cannot Celebrate thy Truth.

Awake, awake ye that sleep in the dust, stand up and show thy self, O thou
mighty one awake, awake O Arm of the Lord, put on thy strength thou that have
slept in the dust of the Earth; Ride prosperously on, because of Grace and
Truth, make thy power known to the World thou Lamb of God, and thy saving
health to the ends of the Earth; let the Inhabitants of Canaan melt away, so
soon as they hear of thee, let them submit themselves; Let the strong become
weak and bow himself, and the weak one a strong Nation; make way O God for thy
Seed in man, even thy Vine whom thou love; from the Land of Egypt plant Jacob
O God, teach Israel thy statutes and Judgments thou Lord of hosts, whose Name
is the Mighty God, the Everlasting Counselor, and Prince of Peace, shine out
of Sion and utter thy voice out of Jerusalem thou Lion of the Tribes of Israel,
break all the strong bands of death, and take away the vail and covering from
the face of all Nations, that Nobles may come to thy Light, and Kings to the
brightness of thy Rising; O thou that art the Resurrection and the Life, shine
out in the hearts of thy Creatures, gather them as prisoners in the pit, that
they may see the sufferings of thy Seed in the Earth; Judge them O Lord that
have Condemned the Just, and Redeem and heal them by the stroke of thy hand,
save thy Seed O Lord, thy Heritage whom thou love throughout all Gen^^^^^ons,
that a Nation may be born in one day, that is Conceived in the Womb of the
Morning, where immortality dwells, and where his Habitation is that does
inhabit eternity; Let man know thy Tabernacle in him that yet knows thee not,
that the Generation and Children that are yet unborn, may praise thee, who art
worthy, because thou have love us; when we were naked, then did thou cloth
us with thy own Garment, we were hungry and thou did feed us and spread a
Table in the Wilderness, thou also did open the Rock, and did cause the
waters to issue out of the Desert; praises to thee, let all the Redeemed of the
Lord say so, that have the breath of Life, praise thee for ever, who have
visited and redeemed Israel out of sore bondage, and raised up a horn of
Salvation in the house of Jacob, that the seed of Immortality may reign and
have dominion in thy chosen for ever and ever.

Unto this gather the Nations, assemble the people O God, that in him, even in
him whom thou art and have exalted, and given a Name above every Name, they may
have a Portion and Inheritance, that thy Name may be one, and thy Creatures
one, all one in it that rents the vail that has been over the heart, and has
separated from the Lord and one another, that in it the Nations may be glad,
and people rejoice, that takes away the curse, and sin, and transgression which
has been the cause thereof does it finish and put an end to, even in that they
may glory, that stains their own, gives victory over the grave, and takes away
the sting of Death, and opens the good understanding, and confounds the bad and
brings it to naught, and expels the darkness by the power of his Rising, who
is the Resurrection and the Life, whereby the true light maybe known to shine
forth of the darkness that in the heart has lodged where Satan's seat has been
set, that he may be known that is the True and Living God, and his glory given
in the face of Jesus Christ, that men may no longer grope as blind men for the
Wall of Salvation, but with Joy they may know the Wall to build upon, that is
not rotten, and draw water out of the Well of Salvation that springs up in all
that do believe and obey the Light of Christ, who is the Well in them springing
up to eternal Life, and that they may no longer worship the lord God
Ignorantly, where there is no acceptance, but only and alone as led and taught
by the spirit of the Lord, and by the vain Precepts and Commandments of men no
longer.

EVery gift of God is pure and perfect, as he is, so is his gift that gav^ it,
and when he ascended he gave gifts that were perfect unto men, in whom he did
ascend, and this was for the work of the Ministry, for the perfecting of the
Saints, until they came unto the mea^^^e (that was pure and perfect) of the
stature of the fullness of Christ, who is the very Image of the Invisible God;
they did not say and teach as the Ministers of Antichrist, neither did they
make a trade of the souls and bodies of men, as do the Merchants of Babylon now
adays, who say none can be perfect in this World; But they labored night and
day that they might present every man perfect in Christ; and they who were
Ministers of the New Testament which is not of the Letter, but the spirit of
Jesus, they said, as he is, so are we in this present World, (mark, ye that say
and do not, ye that say ye are Ministers of Christ, and watch for the Soul.
What is Jesus not pure and perfect, or is not there a measure of the pure and
perfect light of Jesus given to every man that comes into the world, which if
the mind be turned to, is able to redeem out of all imperfect things, and to
present the Soul perfect in Christ? and as this is obeyed, believed in and
followed, even this Measure of the spirit of God, whether this be not able now,
as in the days of Old, to purify, wash and cleanse the soul; If not, how can
they that are sanctified be one with him that sanctifies and justifies;
Answer this Query all ye that make a Trade of the Saints words for money, and
what do ye preach for, that say none can be perfect and free from sin in this
life, is your end to bring them to the anointing and light within, and stablish
them that hear you on the Rock and truth that Christ says sets free from
sin, or to keep them always hearing and ever learning of you, yet never bring
them to the knowledge of the Truth in the inward part, that would unload the
Conscience of the body of sin, and break the chain of darkness, and take away
the Cloud of error, that has caused them to loose the way of life, and err in
their hearts from the Commandment which is the true light Christ, the way out
of darkness to the Father of Light; But this would spoil your trade that preach
for a piece of bread and a hanful of Barley, if the Lord were but known to be
Teacher amongst you.

THE END.

