SCARBROVGHS Spagyrical Anatomizer dissected.

OR AN ANSWER To all that Dr. Tonstal has Objected in his Book against
Scarbrough Spaw.

The Innocence and Excellency of that Spaw is further asserted

1. Concerning the Rise and Growth of the Art of Physic, 2. Touching the
Causes of the Petrifying Property that is in some Springs, and more especially
that of the Dropping well at Knaresbrough. 3. About the Signs, Symptoms and
Cures of Diseases.
As also Reflections upon a late Piece, called a Vindication of Hydrologia
Chymica.

By Robert Witty Doctor in Physic.

London. Printed by B. G. for Nath. Brook at the An^el in Cornhil and R.
Lambert at Minister-Gate in York, Anno Dom. 1672.

To the Right Honorable JAMES Earl of Suffolk, JOHN Lord Roos, Son and Heir to
the Earl of Rutland, and JAMES Lord Annesley, Son and Heir to the Earl of
Anglesey.
My Lords,
I Am once more engaged to appear again in Public, in defense of Scarbrough
Spaw, which is now accused to be a dangerous Water; and what fitter Judges of
this Controversy can be found out then your Lordships, who have tried it, and
found it not only most Innocent, but Excellent. My ultimate and highest Appeal
is therefore to your Honors, since two of your Lordships do bear its Testimony
within you.

As for you my Lord Annesley, though I cannot say this last of your Lordship,
since you did not drink of it out of any necessity, but for company of your
Noble Brother the last Summer: yet this I may say, your Lordship had an ill
share of it, if it have the faults that some have ascribed to it. And farther,
your Acute Judgment and Excellent Learning wherewith you are qualified for the
Highest Service of your Prince and Country when called, renders your Lordship a
most competent Judge of this Subject, beyond all Imposition. And the Favorable
Aspect which then both your Lordships were pleased to Grace this Discourse and
its Author withal, do justly challenge this my Thankful and Public
Acknowledgment. I humbly beg of all your Lordships the Acceptance of this, in
token of the great Service and Honor I owe you, for all your Noble Favors
vouchsafed to

York June 3. 1671. My Lords, Your Lordships most humble Servant R. WITTY.

To the Reader.
MEthink I hear some object that my Answer to this Book comes too late, so as I
might have spared my self this labor, a return being last Summer made thereto,
in a piece called A Vindication of Hydrologia Chymica. To which I reply, Sat
cito si been sat, it is soon enough if it be well enough. This was finished in
June last, as some Persons of Honor do know, before that came out, but was
thought fit to be suppressed t^ll the year came about, when the Waters here
treated of might become the common subject of discourse. And further I shall
say, if my Answer be but like that, then have I lost my labor, and thou thy
money, for in the judgment of learned men, it will (with that) deserve nothing
but to be employed in the most homely us^s.

That Author is scarce satisfied with any thing that this says, save only
where he opposes and girds at me. What the one calls the Glebe of Alome, the
other calls the Minera of Iron. The one calls the Salt of Alome an Alkali, the
other an Acid Salt. The one affirms an Acidity to be in Nitre, the other denies
it; nor do their reasons convince each other. Thus it appears they do not well
understand the Terms of the Art they profess; and truly when men run careers in
the dark, its no wonder to have them justle. And though they differ, yet its
pretty sport to see how they claw one another with the frequent Title of
Ingenious Friend, while yet I am not allowed to dissent, be my reasons never so
cogent, but I am called out of my name by the young man with unscholar-like
reproaches, and new invented stories, that have not the least pretense of truth
in them.

The great fault they find in Scarb. Spaw, and which they reckon to be its
disparagement, is the great quantity of Mineral sediment that remains after
evaporation over the fire. I declare I never saw harm come from thence. The
only fault I know in that Spring, is that it is placed in an angle of the
Kingdom, at so great distance from London, and the midland Counties, where if
providence had ordered it, being found to have the virtues both of Epsam and
Tunbridge, it would have been more known, and better trusted then now it is.

Now though like Sampson's f^xes they turn tails of one another, yet they agree
in this, to fire their neighbors Corn, and causelessly to disparage the Spring,
revenging their Schism upon themselves by separating from one another, as they
do both from the truth. And though Mr. S. can hardly close with Dr. Y. S.
arguments against the Spaw, yet out of design he supposes somewhat of it may be
true, on purpose to make room for himself, and so undertakes to give rules of
advice to those that come there; where he says no more then what may sure such
subjects in general, but wisely refers the Patients to advise with those that
understand their cases better. At last he proves most ingenious, and calls it a
noble Spaw, wherewith he would improve other Spaws, even that at Knaresbrough,
(p. 152.) by dissolving the Salts of Scarbrough water to make it more
effectual. Why could not he say so before? -- but however Nunquam sera est,
etc. And it is honestly said, let the minerals be wh^t and how many they will:
of which more anon. My reply is this in a word; Quod efficit tale, illud est
magis tale.

But I may not pass that (...) of mine, the Author of the Vindication of
Hydrol. Chymica, and his Book without a further survey. That Hydrol. Chymic. is
little else then a Rapsody of Railing first against me, about my Book of the
Spaw, and then against the Galenists and their Method. To that Book I gave
Answer, justifying what I had writ about the Principles of the Spaw, and at
last after a great deal o^bad language that he had given me for assisting them,
I found him recanting in his Epilogue, and confessing them all. I also
maintained the Honor and Reputation of those worthy Gentlemen the Galenisis,
and their method of Physic, (who deserve a better Champion) both from Reason,
and also the Authority of the most eminent among the Chemists, who all go that
way. Nor has that Discourse been unwelcome to the Nation, but I have had thanks
from many private Gentlemen, both of our own Faculty and others, yea and from
some public Societies of Learned men. Now when I had so fully discovered his
errors to him, an ingenious man would rather have repented and cried peccavi,
then writ a vindication: what faults he made there, he has aggravated in this
with more gross circumstances.

He charges my quotations of Authors to be impertinent, or their sense to be
perverted, o^ their words falsely translated. -- This I expected he would say,
if any thing, for he has front enough to deny the conclusion, where he cannot
stand against the premises. The truth is, I was very careful in my collections
of Authority, fetching every thing from the fountains and not from the streams,
even from the original Authors themselves, whose very pages in things most
material I usually cited, on purpose to stop his clamor. Nor have I designedly
wrested in any one place the sense of any one Author. Nor have I falsely
translated a word, or added a tittle more then what was necessary to preserve
the idiome of each language, or make the sense intelligible to common Readers.
I appeal to the Learned who have read my Book, who are most competent Judges
betwixt us.

Nor is it material what he objects to the contrary ( p. 41.) where I citing a
place out of Paracelsus concerning Minerals and Metals imbibed in water, he
says I added by a Parenthesis (dissolved in water) I therefore did put them
into a Parenthesis, because they are not expressed in the Latin among those
words, but they are so necessarily implied, as the Authors sense would be lost
if I had not expressed them; and the following words do plainly make it out,
viz. Haecenim aqua sunt, etc. (lib. 4. cap. 1. de crescentibus Aquis p. 271.

So again in the same page where I cite Paracelsus speaking of vitriol, (id si
in Aquam resolva^ur colorem omnem deponit) he quarrels at the translation of
the word (in) which should be (into) and imposes severely upon me for it --
Whether it was omitted in my Copy or by the Printer, it matters nor among Men
of Reason, since there can be nothing gained by it: but certainly its not so
pedantick as pu^rile, and argues a desperate s^ipwrack of his Cause, while he
has no better Ancher-hold to stick by, then the defect of an insignificant
Particle.

He tells a story in his Preface, which for fureness of memory he repeats again
in his Book, that in a debate about the Existence of Vitriol in the Spaw, I was
put to such a strait to defend it, that after some passion of fear, aiscovered
by a sudden paleness in my face, I had no other refuge but to fly to the ipse
dixit of Dr. Tonstal, and said he told me it was Vitriol last year. Will any
man of reason believe that he whom I so lately lashed about in my Book, and
that among others about this very thing, and catched him in nineteen
contradictions, besides other absurdities, should on the sudden become so
formidable to me, while yet he urged nothing but what I had answered in my
Book? And yet hence he endeavors to persuade, that I had published nothing
concerning that Mineral, but what I had borrowed from Dr. T. Concerning that
debate I could say something from the testimony of the Gentlemen then present,
of their disrelish of his arguments and behavior, insomuch as some of them
hissed at him. But I shall only offer this at present, that I have been
acquainted with that Spaw above thirty years, and am known to many to have
always asserted Vitriol, upon the Reasons mentioned in my Books. And in Anno
1660. my first Edition of Scarb. Spaw came out, with my reasons for that
mineral among the rest, which is now eleven years. Now Dr. Tonstal I think
never saw this Spring till the year 1668. when he came to me, and confessed
himself a stranger to it, asking my advice about his Wife; then did I convince
him of all the minerals in the Spring, so as he was satisfied abundantly at
that time, which gave me occasion to mention his name in my Answer to Hyd.
Chym. p. 107. So as in that debate I asked him the question, what say you to
this, in Anno 1669. But then his mind was changed, and the Vitriol was become
Nitre, querying also whether the Spaw were better if it had Vitriol or no;
which I told him was a new subject, and required longer debate. Now what ground
there is for this his charge, that my appeal should be to him, as having that
notion from him, let any man of reason judge, and thereby take measure of the
temper of this man, and consequently of his cause which needs such supports. I
am certain I shall find Dr. Tonstal just toward me in this point, if any man
shall enquire of him.

But he forges another figment arising from my fear of him about the Vitriol,
when the Chemical Apothecary taking a piece of Alome-stone out of the
vitrioline bed that is in the cliff, and putting it into water with gall, found
it strike a black tincture, inferring thence that the Tincture in the Water was
from the Alome, and that there was no Vitriol. I answered, so would the earth
in that place give a tincture, but neither earth nor the 100. loads of Alome
that are in that cliff elsewhere would do it; here they clamoured extremely,
but upon that he says, that I was so touched to the quick, that I called the
Apothecary aside, and said, if Mr. Simpson would lay down the cudgels, I would
not only look upon him as a Brother, but also when occasion should offer, would
sooner take him into consultation then any other. -- Really such a thing was
never in my heart, nor did I in my judgment think him equal with the meanest
of all the Brethren of our Faculty in these parts, as to the practical part of
Physic, though by this Artifice I guess his design is to level them all. But
the ground of the story is this.

This Apothecary after my Book in Answer to Mr. S. was come out, came to me at
Scarbrough, and told me he had read my Book, etc. and had made that Errand to
me to Endeavor a Reconciliation betwixt us, desiring carnestly, that we might
be in Charity, and join hand in hand, as there should be occasion. -- I told
him I had said what I intended, and my Vitriol and Gall were spent in those
lines, and if he were so satisfied, and did desire it, I could embrace him in
all Christian Charity even as a Brother (following that rule of our Savior
Mat. 18.22. and farther that I would not refuse to join with him, if we were
consulted together, as with any other. Thus I thought my self on that occasion
obliged to say, and repeat as often as he urged the motion: But to wrest that
my readiness to comply in a Christian duty into a Pusillanimos dast ardy is
both unchristian and unreasonable.

Are not these dangerous men that I have to deal withal, from whom a man shall
find nothing short of the lie cast in his face? I say again, there is no
plainer sign of a desperate Cause, then when men seek out such a refuge.

But he says I supplied my defect of Arguments with Taunts and Scoffs at him.
-- As for my Arguments, he is not fit to be a Judge of them; they lie at the
mercy of the judicious Reader to whom I submit all, for I am as little apt to
defend my own defects, as to search our those of others. -- I must confess I
did think slightly of that Adversary, from whom I had received such rude
language without a cause, and therefore I thought fit to go merrily on with him,
both for my own recreation and the Readers, having a mind as it is said of the
Poets, aut prodesse aut delectare, as the motter did lead me. Not have I spoken
to any man's disadvantage out of the least design or animosity, and therefore
though possibly I need the Readers pardon, yet I expect ^one from him. But if
my Passions went hand in hand with the interest of Truth which I design to
maintain and stand by, I hope that will plead for me, and procure me a pardon
from all that are ingenuous, and profess themselves Lovers of Truth.

There are many more ridiculous girds against me in that Book called
Vindication, etc. not worthy to be mentioned, which the wise Reader will
discern to be sufficiently scurrilous.

But to proceed. What have we in that Book, to Vindicate his abuse and contempt
of Galen, Hippocrates, Dioscorides, and all the Learned Princes in Physic, and
our Modern Writers too, with their method, which I have defended, ( p. 205.)
against his manifold Calumnies? But what aggravates his crime, he persists in
the same, and after reproof, yet hardens his heart; unless we shall believe
that Catilines latter Conspiracy were sufficient to vindicate his former; or
that Crimes are justified by Majoration.

How does he Vindicate himself from that shameful guilt of deriding those of
our Faculty that travail beyond Sea to study in Foreign Universities, and his
Scurrilous gibing at those Learned Professors about their Readings to the young
Students, whom he severely taxes with ignorance at their return. ( p. 206.)
What dos he say for himself, in that he trampled upon the Universities, and all
the Arts, calling it a trifling of time at the Universities, ( p 107. in the
frothy Studies of Logic, Ethics, Physics, and Metaphisicks? for all which
things I have chastised him in my Answer; but it apears, not enough.

Had these things been known in that neighbor University beyond Sea, where,
after a Fourthnights so journing, and a private Examination like that of
Schoolboyes when they are admitted Freshmen into our Colleges, he was dubd
with a degree Sub Camino, to wit, under the Chimney, as I heard himself confess
to a Learned Scotch-man, Mr. Richard Douglas, who was well acquainted with the
Customs of that Universitie: So called Sub Camino, on purp^se to distinguish
it from that degree of Honor which is taken publicly in the Schools, and
which the Schools of that nation scorn to take, but is conferred only on
Gentlemen or Noble men's Servants who have a mind to see the Ceremonies; and
signifies no more, then if one of our Professors should jocularly make a
Doctor in his Chamber, to gratify some Friends in showing them the Ceremonies
of that degree, and ought not to set as a Title in a Book. I say had these
things been known, we had not heard of this Leaden Title, the publication
whereof gave occasion to the setting out of this impertinent Piece; nor is it
to be accounted any increase of his Reputation to have added this to his
Batchelors of Arts degree. I mention this on purpose to give a caution to the
Heads of our Universities, that when they admit Gentlemen ad eundem gradum,
they may distinguish betwixt that degree taken in the Schools, and that sub
Camino, since they have not any degree of that metal.

I hope no man that has a value for Learning will misinterpret this digression,
which is designed merely to preserve the Honor of School-Degrees, which is one
main spur to the study of the Arts.

But I may not pretermit his vainglorious challenge he sends me, to take an
equal number of Patients with me of them that come to the Spaw, and which of us
should make the best and speediest Cure should wear the Bays. -- Ay, this is
that he would fain be at, to try Experiments on men's Bodies, which he proposed
before in his Hydrol. Chym. and for which I did a little school him, p. 262. of
my Answer. But assuredly his tools he works withal are so well known, even by
his own description of them in that Book, that no wise man is willing to try
their temper. But where is Modesty all this while? surely that Virtue has left
the Earth, or Young Men whom it would well become, having put on Impudence
instead thereof, being past both Counsel and Correction, hereby verifying that
old Adage, Qui semel Modestiae limits transiliit, nisi cito castigetur,
gnaviter evadet impudens.

Concerning Cures I have done at the Spaw, I have writ at large in my first
Book, and modestly too, and have further occasion to mention more in this, and
could be much more copious if it were needful, having been sufficiently tried
in that particular; and if he be not satisfied, he may further enquire, and
then make report. Ahab King of Israel has left a good Rule, Let not him that
puts on his Armor boast like him that puts it off. 1 Kings 20.11.

I remember I once cured a mad man at Scarb. with the help of the Water, and
some other things that I added, who being very poor, was sent to me above fifty
miles, at the Parishes charge where he had lived. If such an one should come,
perhaps he might be content to be managed by him, but I suspect scarce any man
short of him (except his Relations) will make such a choice.

But I hasten. This Book called A Vindication, etc. is like a Beggars cloak
made up of many patches, (as his manner of writing is) that have no dependency
on one another, but are here drawn in together to make a medley.

He tells a long story about the making of Alome at Whitby. Concerning which
Captain Francis Cummin who is the manager of those works, did of his ow^
accord, and without asking tell me, there is not any thing of truth (...) it,
and Mr. John Thomlinson who ^^ves also in Whitby, and is the Alome Merchant,
asserts the same.

Next he has his supplements to the Sweet Spaw and Sulphur well at
Knares^rough: A large disquisition that seems; for just nothing but to keep him
impertinently busy, and set his wits a working. But I am loath to interrupt him
in that enquiry, since it is to be doubted, if he had not that to do, he would
do worse.

Then he gives an Answer to certain Queries ingeniously propounded by Dr. Foot,
concerning the cause of the sudden loss of the virtues of Mineral Waters,
mentioned in Numb. 52. of the Philos. Transact. p. 1050. in reference to the
Enlarged Account of my Book, the Learned Publisher thereof was pleased to give
( Number. 51.) Dr. Foot's main Query is, Whither all those sorts of waters being
close stopped, or carried to some distance, do not let fall a yellowship
sediment, or Ochre, and so become effete in their virtues, or lose their
purging property. He answers in the affirmative, p. 122. and that in reference
to Scarb. Spaw, which he pretends to make out by Experiments. I answered
negatively, as may appear in Numb. 60. of the Phil. Trans. p. 1079. and therein
I appeal to all those hundreds of Witnesses who have drunk Scarb. Water at
distance, Whether they do not find a yellow sediment in the bottom of their
vessels, and yet the water continues purgative. And to make sure work, he
repeats the same again ( p. 126.) in Answer to the eighth Query. But thus the
Reader may plainly discern what measure of Knowledge this Man has in Scarbrough
Spaw, while he understands not this main point wherein Scarbrough Water differs
from others of this Nation. And then what cause there was for all the heat and
rude language that he has given me about that subject.

There again ( p. 127.) he severely ^^cuses me to have said these words, (...).
That Scarb. Waters lose all their ^^rtue, yea and their quantity and bulk also,
though in glasses and under the Her mitick Seals, if removed from the
Fountain. Let him find those words, or that sense either, and I Will be his Bond
man. If any man has mistaken me, it is not my fault. In page 100. of my Answer,
to which that seems to refer, I admit of an alteration by carriage through the
loss of the volatile parts or spirits; but I do not therefore say, they lose
all their virtue, for they purge still, only I think they open not obstructions
so well, nor are so pleasant to the palate. I tell indeed that Frambesarius and
Heers do affirm, that the German Waters carried at distance, though closely
sealed up in Bottles, lose something of their bulk and quantity; but I did not
affirm that of Scarbrough, only infered that my assertion touching the loss of
the volatile Spirits was no Paradox, while those other are lessened even in
their quantity. But he has accustomed me to bear such charges, and therefore I
am the better provided to undergo them.

Then he tells how he Anatomized the German Spaw in Amsterdam, where probably
he is opinionated that he has made some great discovery: and lastly he
concludes with his Observations on the Dissection of a woman who died of the
Jaundice, when he wonders at every thing that he Saw, as Ston^s in the Gaul,
Schirrus on the Heart, and so he might well, for I believe it was the first;
(though I do not charge him for that, since he is willing to learn,
notwithstanding in his other Book I found him spurning at Anatomy.) So he tells
us of the under part of the Left Lobe of the Liver, but he forgot to say that
it was done with a left handed Knife.

But he tells us he saw something more, and that was, another woman Dissected
there that dyed of a Syncope, I suppose so will he; Although he says its more
then Probable that she died o^ some other disease. -- It seems something there
was that made the old w^^^ die. But the Schirrus tumor (...) or the Heart
sticks on his Stomach, ai^^ he cannot digest it, for he tells of^^^, of lies
again, yet so confusedly, as its hard to judge whether he means that Heart did
belong to the latter or the formed woman. But it may be he was in hafted and so
am I to have done with h^m^ At last he tells how the cause of that Jaundice was
variously disputed, b^^^ he says in such a portion of language as will make
any man laugh, be ^e never so grave.

The truth is his whole Book is nothing else then (...), a clattering of fond
words. Or if you^ please like the shearing of a Svvi^^^ where there is a great
Cry, but lit^^^ Wool. What do his multitudes of Experiments signify, vverein
he so much prides himself? just nothing if they were true and would certainly
fall out. I think never any man loved more to hear himself talk, and what he
fancies must be presently published, be it true or false, real or imaginary;
and like a Child he will have every one to know that he has a Rattle.

I have but one word in reference to this other Author D.T. and then I have
done. He has more severely disparaged the Spaw then the other, but he
producesno testimony but from his own experience, which in Reason cannot be
judged Authentic enough, especially when I come to examine it. I have Right
Honorable, Right Worshipful, Reverend, and Welbeloved on my side to witness
with me; if ever he shall let fly again to accuse the Water of any Faults, it
is but reasonable that he should name his Witnesses and their Qualities or
Reputation; for his own Magisterial Affirmation will not be deemed sufficient.

And if either of these two Gentlemen shall yet further abound in their own
sense, and rejoyn, it shall be a very great povocati on that shall make me
reply having said enough upon this Subject, and perhaps as much as it can well
bear, unless I shall be hurried unto Tautalogies, which I love not, though
probably some body else may give Answer. And indeed it seems to me to be very
reasonable at length to put an end to Disputing. Ne nimium alter cando veritas
amittatur, as Macrobius says. Besides that I am weary of the interruption of
my other Practical Studies. Farewell.

York. June 3. 1671.
AN ANSWER To all that D. TONST ALL Has Writ, or shall hereafter Writ, Against
SCARBROVGH SPAW.
PLutarch reports of Themistocles, that while he was young he was often wont to
say, that he had not yet done any thing Notable, for as much as he had not
contracted Envy, nor met with any Opposition: I am not conceited of any thing
that I have done, (so for a I know my own Heart) but yet if I may take alm a
Posteriori, from the Envy and Opposition that I have met with about writing
upon the Subject of the Spaw at Scarbrough, it will appear there is somewhat
in it, more than at first I thought on. I am sure of one thing, I have
discovered a very Notable Wa^^r, and therein with all fidelity have endeavored
to serve my Country. If I erred in the manner of doing, 'twas much against my
will, yet I have heard on it to the purpose.

At the first, a Confederacy threw dirt in my Face, which I hope I have washed
off in a good measure; Now comes Doctor Tonstall, and he throws dirt in the
Spaw, but it being a Quick-spring, 'twill in time work it our, though I should
be silent, as indeed at the first coming out of his P^ece (entitled,
Scarbrough Spaw Spagyrically anatomized) I had thought to have done, and so to
have contented my self with the ingenious Answer, of one to a like piece Vidi
and Risi, since the weakness of his Arguments, and meanness of his design as:
obvious to every Reader. Yet being done by a Brother of the f^culty, and such
an One as of whom I had before given an Honorable Te^^imony, (though he has
now changed his mind) and observing that some few if facile Tempers, or weaker
Judgments were a little startled at somewhat that he has objected against the
Spaw, I judged it necessary to convince my Brother of his Error, and to
cleanse the Spaw of the dirt he has left in it, wherein though my work is like
that of Hercules, when he cleansed the Augean Stable, yet my Labor is nothing
like his, for I shall wind up all in a few sheets.

He says in his Preface, he would have what he has written to serve as an
Appendix to my Latin Copy, which I have promised on the Spaw, and he would
cloth it in like Fashion. Dr. Tonstalt singles out the Author by name.
-- Thus he has called me out to a public encounter with him, without any
previous Provocation given on my side. -- I hope he will so do as here he says,
when he shall be desired, and there is need; in the mean time I shall say with
Africa^us, Non amo nimium diligentes. -- He has seen somewhat of what I have
done in that point, and here we have such an Essay of his Art, that he must
give me some time to demur, before I call for his help.

He professes himself to be my Friend, and therefore I Will treat him
accordingly, and in point of Friendship will mildly endeavor to clear up his
Eyesight, that he may discern what is Truth, and so set him right in his way.

He says he walks uniformly betwixt my Library and Master Sympson Laboratory,
otherwise he should suspect himself for a lame Physician. -- I am glad my
Friend is so well fitted for his Employment; he is an Ambidexter, and in
utrumque paratus: a Janus that looks both ways, Quem nulla ciconia pinsit. He
has a two-edged Sword, with which he cuts down Diseases, a Library, and a
Labora^ory. Hippocrates and Helmont (he says) are the two great Lights that
rule in his Hemisphere. -- No marvel then if he sees more than the most of his
B e bren, ( vide p. 14. and 42.) where he applauds himself and taxes them, and
more into Scarbrough Spaw in two Summers, than I in thirty: Let no man
henceforth suspect him for a same Physician.

Galen is slieghted by Doctor Tonstall.
Only Galen he is not taken withal, whose Method he will allow to be no further
Rational, then as he writes after the old man his Masters Copy; he dares not
further speak for him. -- Poor Galen! I have had to do with Mr. S. and now with
Doctor T. an angry Adversary, and a -- Friend, and I find that neither of them
are reconciled to him. How severely is he censured by some men now a days! I am
sure it was not always so! Methinks none should take upon them to judge so
great a Prince in Physic, but such a^ know they can do better. If my Friend
dares not speak for him, but he must want so good an Advocate. Well! Let both
their works stand forth in open Court to plead for their respective Authors,
and then let the learned give judgment according to their merits.

Here I crave the Readers patience a while, till I make a short digression, and
tell the world what Galens parts and works have been, and what he has done in
the Art of Physic, by which it will appear what real ground there is for his
Name ^o be so trampled on, and his Authority and Labor so slieghtly esteemed,
as he is by many in this our Age.

The first rise of Physic.
After the Art of Physic was found out, which is attributed by ancient Writers
to Apollo, as the first Inventer, and imported to his Son Aesculapius, who
polished it much from its rude Notions; He trained up his two Sons Podalirius
and Machaon in the same Art: The former addicted himself to the study of inward
Remedies, and the latter to outward Applications; concerning whom Homer gives
his Testmony, as also Suidas.

These kept it as a Secret in their Famil^ for many Generations, till at leng h
H^ppocrates, who was the eighteenth from Aesculapius, po^ shed it still
further, and having it seems a generous pub ick Spirit, drew it into a form o^
method, and exposed it to the world; Having not only the helps of his
Ancestors, and their Experimen^s, ^ut the opportunity of transcribing ^he
Records which he found in the Temple at Coos dedicated to Aescula^ius, where
the Priests ex Officio were bound to take an Account of all Persons that had
been recovered out of any S^ckness, and to transcribe bo h the Symptoms of
their Diseases, and the Remedies by which they were cured. And this was the
Custom in Egypt also; yea, and in Arabia and Persia to this day, as I have
several times heard Sir Thomas Herbert tell, where (he says) the sick people
are brought into the Marketplace, that any passenger may enquire of their
case, to whom they usually give an account, and in case any man do know a
Remedy for such a Malady, he is bound by his Religion to minister help, and
being found healing it is recorded by the Priests.

Hippocrates being learned to a Prodi^y, and thus furnished with extraordinary
help, and living to a great Age, (to wit) a hundred and nine years (as S^ranus
reports) adorned this Art with many grave Sentences, and authentic Aphorisms
relating to the several parts of Physic, and from his own large Experience has
left many excellent Medicines, and a Method which we find of singular use to
this day, now after 2000. years, and so probably must continue to the end of
the World.

Several Sects in Physic.
H^s Writings gave an opportunity to others to step in to the Study of the Art,
among whom were Diosles Caristius and Petron, then Praxagoras and Chrysippus,
then Herophilus and Erasistratus, all these proceeded in diverse methods, and so
fell into Factions. Also Menecrates, whose pride was such that he called
himself Jupiter, and wore a golden Crown. He would never undert^ke a Patient,
unless he would oblige himself under his handwriting to be his Servant and
A^tendant when ever he should call; so as he was went to lead about whole
Troops of Patients, as so many Trophies of his Cures, all whom he called by the
names of the Gods, as Athenaeus and Hegesander make mention.

After these started up Serapion, Apollonius, Glaucias and Heraclius
Tarentinus, with several others who called themselves Empiricks, and so made a
new Sect.

Then followed Asc^epiades and Themison, who instituted another Sect called
Methodists. After those Cornelius Celsus stepped into the Profession at Rome,
being the most Learned of all the Latin Paysicians: He lived in the time of
our Savior, and was commonly stilled Latine-Hippocrates, and well does he
deserve to be accounted one of the Princes in Physic, as he is ranked by the
Learned. After him was Archigenes of whom Juvenal does several times make
Honorable mention, who lived in the Reign of Adrion.

The decay of Physic.
To be short, then came up Thessalies the most proud and malepert Fellow that
ever was in the world, who as Pliny says ( lil. 2^. Not. H^st. cap. 1.) madly
raved against all the most excellent Physicians that had been before him,
contemn ig them all, even Hippocrates himself, accusing them of gross
ignorance, while he boasted egregiously of himself and his method, as in his
Letter to Nero may appear cited by Galen ( lib. 1. Meth. cap. 11.) although yet
he knew nothing of solid Learning, or the Art of Physic, but depraved it with
an unwholesome Method, and a number of unsound medicines. -- Were I a
Pythagorean, and did believe a (...), I should think his Soul had been several
times since translated into another Body.

Thus was this Noble Art lacerated and torn by various Factions, the perverse
humors of some disquieting the peace of others, the wholesome received
Principles rased, and the Practice differing in every Country, while yet every
Quack magnified his own way, and men's lives were most in jeopardy in the hands
of them who pretended most to preserve them.

Its reparation by Galen.
In the midst of this decay steps up Ga^en, (vid.) in the second Century from
the Nativity of our Savior, and 600. years after Hippocrates. He was certainly
the most Learned of his Age in all the parts of useful Learning, as his
voluminous Writings do sufficiently make out, but especially in Physic, even
to a Prodigy; which Art being left imperfect by Hippocrates, and not fully
elaborated as Himself confesses in his Let^er to Democritus, where (he says)
that though he had now lived to be old, yet neither He, nor yet Aesculapius,
nor any that he had met with, had attained to any considerable height in the
Profession, but must leave it imperfect: But Galen undertook this task, and has
brought it to such a perfection, as no Art besides in the World can pretend to,
and thus not only in the judgment of the Ancient Princes in Physic, who
followed him, Galen in high esteem among the Ancients.
as Paulus, Aetius, Oribasius, etc. who have transcribed most choice Sentences,
and long discourses out of him word for word, as not being able, or not needing
to add to him, but also in the Suffrage of our best Modern Writers. What was
obscure in Hippocrates he has cleared up, he has distinguished of things that
differed, and supplied what was defective. Not that I would make him to be
infallible or that nothing has been added since, or yet may not be, but that
certainly he was the greatest Benefactor to, and Polisher of Medicine, that
ever was in the world. He had indeed Hirpocrates his Foundation to build upon,
but assuredly thereupon he raised a most adm^rable structure,

He encountered the several Sects I mentioned, discovered plainly their
impostures, their ragged Methods and unwholesome Medicines, and enriched the
Art with excellent Tractats upon every part of Physic, and innumerable rare
Remedies, which retain his Name to this day: And hereto he was enabled not only
by the help of the ol^ man his Master, (as our Author calls him) but also by
his own prodigious parts, length of time that was betwixt them, and his own
large Experience through age, for he lived till he was an hundred and forty
years old, and therefore probably he might be trusted, though he should in some
things d^ffer from his Masters Copy.

While he lived he was esteemed the prime Star of the first magnitude in his
O^be, and of singular account with the Emperor Antoninus, and the many Volumes
he has left behind him, have begot him a Reputation, which Envy can never blast
among such as are Learned. This made Fuchsius cry Non dubium est quin a Deo
excitatus, As also among the Neotericks
etc. to wit, no doubt but he was raised up by God to repair the Art of
Physic, which was extremely shattered in these times ( lib. 1. instit. med.)
And Valleriola says of him, Quem Heroa potiu ac daemonem, quam Hominem
appellare suo sane merito possumus; he knows not whether he should not call him
some Cae^estial Hero, or Angel, rather than a Man, such was his merit in his
esteem ( Loc. com. lib. 1.) To these I Will add but one more, which I find in
Eusebius his Ecclesiastical History ( lib. 5. cap. ult.) who tells that he was
worshipped (such was their Opinion of him) by some of the Heathens as a God. He
was indeed no Christian; though I read, that hearing of the miracles that were
done in those Primitive times, by the followers of the Apostles of our Savior,
in the curing of diseases by a word. He fell into Admiration, and made a Voyage
toward. Judaea to know the certainty of it by his own view, but as God would
have it died by the way.

Thus far I thought fit to digress on this occasion, that I might give some
account to the world of this great Prince in Physic, Galen, and to make it out
that he was no Trifle, as some would render him, but that his Name was, and is
yet in Reputation among such as understand him well. I now proceed.

Dr. Tonstall says, he hopes it will appear, that in this Tract he has been
very candid toward me, and said nothing ad Personam, but ad Rem. -- 'Twere
well if I could find it so; I think no man that has read his Book is of that
mind; but seeing he pretends it, I shall willingly leap over a great many of
those Reflections ad Personam, (besides what has been told me by Persons of
known integrity of his liberty of Speech) and only examine such as are ad Rem,
if any be so, wherein I Will use as much Candor as the Nature of my task can
admit.

He says, he has not concerned himself in a word which I have said in my two
Books, but only what was necessary se Defendendo. -- Really I wonder at this
Expression! Who ever offended him, that he should stand up in his own defense?
Is not he the Assailant and Aggressor? What was there in my Books that
concerned him? Indeed I mentioned his Name p. 107. of my Answer to Hydrol.
Chimica with some sincere respect, wherein he has made it appear that I was
mistaken, and therefore I Will henceforth resume since he has recanted.

He boasts of his Mechanical Demonstration, whereby he makes cut the Material
Principles of the Spaw, and presents them to our Senses; and says, that my
failure was, that I left off where I should have begun. -- To this I say, I
have ever observed the greatest Censors either produce nothing of their own, or
what is more ridiculous than any thing they reprehend. Much of ill Nature, and
a very little Judgment, go a great way in finding the mistakes of Writers,
especially when a design is at the bottom.

Dr T disingenuous toward the Author
He says, after I had observed what was most conspicuous about the Spaw, and
found that the Gall tinctured the Water of a dark purple color, I contented my
self with fair probabilities for asserting the five Principles. -- So again (
p. 19.) he cites a passage out of my Book, where I say the Principles cannot be
separated further then I had expressed, -- he adds of his own -- Namely by
putting gall to the Water, etc. and then he Comments upon this Assertion in
both places with reference both to my self and others, to whom he undertakes
(though impertinently enough) to read a Lectu^e of Anatomy and Experimental
Philosophy, and tells of things that no man ever doubted of, or in the least
opposed that understands any thing in Physic, but teaches us that the
separation of the Principles should have been made by fire. -- Thus he would
gladly make the world believe, especially those that have not met with my
Books, that all that I have said to make out the five Principles was but this,
that the Water is tinctured black by the addition of Gall. But I would ask him
if this be the ^^ndness of a Friend (as he professes himself to be) to ci^e
thus, and to leave out the rest of my Arguments of demonstration, whereby I
made them out.

This indeed I mention ( p. 9. of my first Book) as a Taken of Vitriol, to
which there I added the acid taste and i^ky smell ( 2ly.) to prove A ume, I
mention its cur^l^ng of Milk, and the bubbling noice it makes when its boiled
near the bottom, which I made out to be a peculiar property of Alume, from the
test^mony of good Naturalists. ( 3ly.) To prove Iron, I mention the black
sediment that falls to the bottom of the vessel after Gall is put into it,
which calc^nes red being near of kin to Vitriol, which therefore ( p. 10.) I
called Ferrum Vitriolatum or Vitriolum ferrugineum; besides the use I made of
it inwardly, wherein I find it to perform the same intentions with Iron or
Steel, and that it tinges the Excrements black, as all our preparations of Iron
do; together with the yellow Sediment which falls to the bottom of the vessel,
when it is carried at distance, being much like unto Crocus Martis, as I
expressed it ( p. 11.) and he himself calls it so ( p. 57) when he observed it
in the spout of Knaresbr. Spaw. ( 4ly.) To prove Nitre, I tell of its shooting
into Stiriae or Icesickles, which is the peculiar property of Nitre. ( 5ly.) I
say what Salt it has, it takes from the Sea, although I declared it to have but
very little Salt in it.

Then again I demonstrate these from their Adjuncts, that there is a great
probability that these are the Minerals that are in it. 1. From the veins of
Nitre, which appear in the cliffe like hoar-frost or snow, and eminently within
a few yards of the Well. ( 2ly.) From the many stones of Iron that are in the
Cliffe, besides the Earth that turns to an Iron-stone, and melts in the Smiths
Forge like Metal. ( 3ly.) The abundance of Alume-stone that is in all that
Cliffe. ( 4ly.) The plentiful imbibition of so many Minerals, which is promoted
by the Acidity of the Vi^ri^^; as also the Vitrioline juice which is yellow of
color, that sweats out of the Cliffe about 110 paces from the Spring, which he
himself two years ago, when he had no design to carry on, acknowledged to be no
other then Vitriol, which gave me occasion to mention him and his consent
therein, p. 107. of my latter Book. ( 5ly.) The propinquity of the Sea gives
ground to many wise men to think it may have Salt. Besides much more that I
have said in my latter Book to prove them all against that my fierce Adversary
while he denied them. and as last was forced to confess them.

The Authors letter to the Royal Society.
Now while I have in terminis expressed all these Experimental Proofs of the
five Principles, and exposed them all not only to wise men's Reason, but also to
the view of many Persons of Quality, and particularly to those Honorable Lords
and Gentlemen of the Royal Society the last year, to whom I presented by that
eminently Learned and obliging Gentleman Henry Oldenburg, Esquire. seven or eight
sorts of Extracts and Spirits, which I took out of this Spaw-water, which those
Noble Worthies were pleased to receive with some s^^isf^ction; a full
^escription of which Extracts, etc. the Reader may find in number 60 of the
Philosophical Trans^ctions, with my Letter at large: I say, while I have thus
fully and plainly made them out, it was not candid^y done of him to mention
that of ting^ng with Gall, and to leave out the rest, on purpose to render me
ridiculous. But thus he deals with me as Hanun^ did with King David's
M^ssengers, 2 Samuel 10.4. of whom the T^xt says, that he shaved off the half of
their beards, and cut off their garments in the middle even to their Buttocks,
and sent them away on purpose to make them ashamed. -- But this did so
exceedingly disoblige King D^vid, that it became an occasion of breaking that
bond of F^i^^^ship that had been between them.

I was indeed short in my first Book, while I di^coursed of the^^ five M^neral
P^inciples, because I designed b^evity, yet t^u^ much was said to make them
ou^. And being called into question by M^. S. for this very thin, I refer to
the Learned, whether in my Reply to him, I have not stood m^ g^o^nd. But this
also our Author had a m^nd to overlook, boasting of his own Mechanical
demonstration, as if I had offered nothing of Experiment to prove them.

And whereas he says ( p. 20.) that fire was the proper Instrum^nt to effect
the separation of the M^nerals -- a m^ng thereby to make the world believe I
had only taken notice of the tinging with Gall, and never tried it by fire: and
hence he says ( p. 34.) that if Light had been brought in by the hand of a
Chym^st -- strange things had been discovered. -- I am certain of this, that
the hands of some that call themselves Chimists have brought more Heat than
Light into our Faculty. But thus it seems, let but some men assume this title
of a Chimist, and they take upon them boldly to say what they list, as if
thereby they had got a Patent for freedom of Language.

Did not I mention a Body of Minerals (to wit) an ounce in five quarts of the
water, which may be extracted either by Distillation, or Evaporation over the
fire? ( p. 10. And notwithstanding it contradicts what he would here impose
upon me, that I only tried the Water by Gall; Does not he himself cite a
passage of mine ( p. 151.) where I had been discoursing concerning this Body of
Minerals, which in that place I said cannot be extracted without a long and
vehement fire? -- What makes all this double dealing for advantage? Such
Artifice is very unbecoming, and (to use his own word) savours more of a
Mechanical than Academical demonstration. If this be Friendly, or Manly, (to
say no more) I neither understand what is Friendly, nor Humane.

And whereas he carps, because I said they cannot be further separated than I
had expressed. -- I am certain these Minerals are so united in their Subject,
the Water, as that when they come under the most Critical Scrutiny, never a one
of them will be found to be entirely such, but a quite other thing, or tertium
neutrum.

He confesses his levity.
( Page 13.) He confesses some Levity of Opinion he had of late been guilty of,
in reference to these two Northern Spaws at Scarb. and Knaresb. one year
persuading his Friends to go to Scarb. and the very next year to Knaresb. This
he excuses from his own Practice, that he commended no other to them than be
took himself, and then he wishes that all Physicians were bound with this
girdle, propounding therein himself as a Patterr. -- If he means that all were
bound to be like him in Levity and Wavering, I know no man that will say Amen.
Physicians ought better to understand the Remedies they use: But if in his
Honesty, we will all own our Engagement to him for so good an Example.

To this I Will add, he brought his Wife with him to Scarb. who there found a
Cure of a Malady, which neither his own Art and Skill, nor Knaresb. Spaw could
have effected, but of this more anon. He extols Scarb. Spaw.
-- This convinced him of the Excellency of Scarb. Spaw, on which account he
magnified it exceedingly, as a rare working Water, while he undervalued the
other of Knaresb. as much, which he accused to be l^t^le impregnated with any
Mineral; ye^, and consequently to be a du^l, heavy Water, not passing well
through the B^dy: And of this there are not a few Witness, both at Newcastle
where he lives, and else where.

On this accoun^ (^n Ann^ 1669.) he persuaded a great many Persons of Quality
to come along with him to Scarb. wholly resolving, as appeared to them, to
desert Knaresb. which ^or above 10. years together he had frequented. But
somewhat there was wherein (it seems) his Exp^ctation ^as frustrate, He
disparages it, and returns to Knaresb.
so as he must resolve to return again to Knaresb. and having a great mind to
draw back his T^ain of Friends with him, and to make some amends for his
deserting and disparaging Knaresb. he takes the most plausible way (so long as
'twill hold) to leave his dirt in Scarb. Spaw, accusing it of some notorious
Faults, following therein the Machiavellian Rule, Fortiter incusa aliquid
haerebit; laying on load enough, in hope that something will stick. Three
faults especialy.

Three faults in Scarb.
First, That it has a petrifying property, and generates the Stone.

Secondly, That there are filings of Stone and G^ay in it, whereby it breeds
Obstructions, and causes the Jaundice.

Thirdly, That it corrodes the Bowels, and causes a Dysentery. -- I'^e now e^^
mine how he makes them out.

It Is petrifying.
To begin with the first, ((...) w^t) that it is petr^fying, which I shall
examine both in point of Reason, in reference to some P^^nciple in the Water,
which he confesses, and so does agree with me, and also ^n Experience; and I
doubt not to sat^^fie wise men in both, and perhaps himself too, that he
labors under a grand mistake in this his Assertion.

Nitre in the Saw, and some small matter, which after it has passed through the
heat of the fire in Evaporation, will not pass the Filter; and he finds Kircher
discoursing de succo lap^difico to affirm it to be a Nitrous Stone dissolved
in Water; this gives ground enough to him, who was catching at advantage, to
accuse the Water to be petrifying.

A Quotation out of Kircher examined.
I shall as to the matter that will not pass the Filter examine that by and by,
and for Kircher, I honor him as a very L^arned Writer, and the Author as my
Friend, but magis amica veritas. In that place Kircher is telling of several
Springs, that turn Sticks, Straw, or Leaves into Stone, or at the least do
cover them, being laid in them so^e while with a stony Crust: Now if the Spaw
have that property, of crusling any thing into a Stone that is laid in it, then
his Quotation will require a consideration of us, but this he affirms not, and
therefore it is impertinent.

Of Nitre and Salt.
Nitre is esteemed by all Naturalists to be of volatile parts, exceedingly
penetrative, and a great dissolvent, and therefore it is (says Dr. Jorden) that
it serves for the dissolution of Metals ( cap. 7.) and all that ever writ of it
do agree in this verdict, yea, Kircher hims^^f ( lib. 6. cap. de Nitro) says
not much less of it, and fixes the petrifying property plainly upon Salt, which
he calls the proper and proximal Element of Earth, which subministers crassness
to all sorts of mixed bodies. His words ^re -- Omnibus mixtorum speciebus
^^assitiem and propriam consistentiam sub^inistrat, verumque and proprium
proxi^^mque terroe Elementum dici debet, cu^us Sal sensibile non nisi subjectum
ma^ni ^le est, and a little after, speaking of the difference betwixt Salt and
Nitre, ^e owns Nitre to partake eminently of the Elements of Fire and Air, and
to be full of fiery spirits; whereas Salt ^e owns to be partaker of the two
grosser Elemants Water and Earth. Now how that which is of such thin, volatile,
and fiery parts, so penetrative and dissolvent, as that it d^ssolves Metals,
should be the matter of a Stone, I understand and not, nor (I dare say) does
Dr. Ponstall. It has been commended in all Ages by Physicians against the
Stone, as that which they expect would dissolve it: Yea, I appeal to Dr. T. his
own verdict ( p. 14.) where he says he preferred the Nitrous spring at Scarb.
before the Vitrioline at Knaresb. and makes a high appeal whether it be not a
more noble Principle for dissolving or expelling the Stone. Kirch* himself
grants as much to any Nitrous Spring, (in the place ci^ed, in Consectari^)
Nitrum aquis naturalibus i^situm purgat, incidit; penetrat, detergit,
^^structiones expedit, movit, prope si q^^ arenos^m renum vesicaeque
sulstantiam. Eminently true concerning this Spr^ng at Scarb. an^ I pray how can
it have (...) petrifying property from Nitre which is so penetrative, as here
we find Kircher confessing.

Besides, who ever saw a Nitrous stone? Nitrou^ E^rth is ordinary; Serapio, and
Dioscorides tell indeed of mines of Nitre in Armenia and Arcadia, whereas
Bellonius, Pliny and Gesner, say its only found above the Earth, but never any
mention is made of Nitrous stones, and indeed its altogether inconsistent with
the Nature of it, which is impregnated with such abundance of fiery and aeriel
spirits, as we have heard from Kircher, his Author whom he grounds upon.

But this is not all, for in this point Kircher himself i^ extremely rov^ng,
and unresolved, wherein this petrifying property shall reside, and what mineral
to fix it o^, for ( lib. 8. cap. de ^^^gine succi lapid^fici) ^e lays, that
either Salt, or Nitre, or A^ome, or Vitriol, (...) Su^thur will serve to make a
Water to ^^^ste a stick or le^f, etc. but how un^^^onable a thing it is to
suppose that many of these Minerals, that are of ^^th thin, hot and piercing
properties, (...) become the matter of a Stone, I ^^ave it to wise men to
consider of, and ^o he^eupon infer that our Authors first Argument, drawn from
the Authority of such an uncertain and wa^e^in^ Writer, is of no validity at
all.

He would prove the Spaw (...) be petrifying by m^king a Parallel between it,
and the dropp^ng Well at K^a^^^b which in a very short time will c^ver Moss, or
Straw or S^cks that are suffered to lie in it, with a stony Crust. To both
these A^g^ments ^^^e answer in one word: Le^ any man show me a stone so
generated by Scar-Water, though the trial be made from a month to seven years,
and I'e give up the cr^se.

He proves it from the musch-shells, and such like things that are found near
the Spaw on the Sands, as if they were converted into Stone by the p^^^^fying
spirit that is in the Spring. -- Some such Shells are indeed found (although
very rarely) on those Sands upon the superficies of the Earth, bu^ seldom or
never in the Cliffe (I m^^ confidently say) or at least not more than in other
soils. These lying (...) upon the Sands are undoubtly cast (...) by the Sea,
and we know such things are found in all Countries upon the Seacoasts, even
where no such Spring^ are. Let no man laugh at this Argument of our Author, for
though it sounds like that of the Kentish Parson, who affirmed, that
Tenderdens-steepl^ was the cause of Goodwins-sands, yet (...) account it as
solid as any other Argument, whereby he makes out the point in hand; in truth
they are all of the same stamp.

Whether the Sea does petrifie or no.
And whereas he takes check, because I said they were petrified by the Sea; I
suspect no other that pretends (...) Philosophy will deny this property (...)
be in the Sea, and I shall easily allow my Friend to be singular. Assuredl^ the
Sea does petrifie, by the plenty of (...) fixed Salt, any thing that has in it
a ^^pidescent juice; from whence it is, ^^at so many Stones of various colors
^^e cast up by the Sea. Thus Coral, o^^rwise a Plant, is hardened by the (...)
into a Stone, as Dr. Jorden observes. (...) have often seen Fish-bones cast up
(...) the Sea, which have been almost ^^ned into a perfect Stone. Hence it
^^mes to pass, that he that has any La^^scent juice, which Physicians usual^^
call a Tartarous humor, shall sooner ^^ntract the Stone if he eat much Salt
^^th his meat; and therefore Salt meats (...) found to be very ill for such as
are ^^clinable to the Stone.

But while he is managing this Ar^^ment, and denying the petrifying ^^operty of
the Sea, he says, (p. 32.) (...), then what befell Lot 's Wife judici^^^ly, Of
Lot's Wife.
is not so great a Miracle as that we (...) not all naturally turned into
Pillars of ^alt, that eat so much Sea Salt daily. -- ^^ere he seems to fall
into a grand mi^^ke, while he supposes that Lot's ^^fe was turned into Marine
Salt, or ^^^h as we eat with our meat. I do indeed think with Learned Dr.
Rivet, M. Cowley and others, that tha^t story of Lot's Wife must be li^erally
understood. Now forasmuch as we know there is a Mineral Salt which is hard as
Stone, and may serve ind^fferently for building, not being subject to melt by
the moisture of the Air; it seems very probable, that she was turned into that
Mineral Salt, and not Marine, which would have melted with every shower, and so
could not have suited with the design of God, who would have it to be a durable
M^nument of his Indignation against her Disobedience and Curiosi^y, contrary to
the expressed Will of God. O^ the mineral Salt, see more in Pliny lib. 31. Not.
Hist. cap. 7. And J^sephus says he saw it ( lib. 1. Ant^ Jud. cap. 1^.) in his
days, when it had stood about o^o years. Although our modern T^avellers report
there is nec vola nec vest gium now a days of it; as both English, French,
Roman and Dutch do testify. Vide Mr. Geo. Sandys, Pietro del la Valle,
Doubdan, etc. And the Learned Dr. Isaac Basire, in his Travels in that Country,
assures me, that though he made a diligent enquiry after it, yet (...) not to
be found. But if our Author shall say, He does not affirm that she was turned
into a Marine Salt: Why then his mention of it is nothing to the purpose!

As for what he adds concerning the Earth, which in one place turns to an
Ir^n-stone, I have said enough to that p. 28, and 45. of my Answer to Hydrol.
^^ym. although here he seems to infer (for his design) that all the earth that
f^lls down near the Spaw turns into Stone, which is not so.

by the effects that it produces in those that are subject to the Stone, (p.
33.) wherein he cites his own case, to wit, That having been cut f^^ the S one,
and one taken out from his Bladder that weighed four ounces and an half, the
Summer following he drank of Knaresb. Spaw, which Water he mixed with white
Wine; these (he says) brought ^^y by Urine abundance of mucous matter, (p. ^6.)
-- T^ere he cite* a place (...) of Helmo^t, whom he calls the Prince of Reason,
Dr. T cites Helmont impertinently.
who he fancies sets down the reason of that Operation in these words: Ubi
custodes male se habent, continuo plorant partem pr^prii alimen^^ quod sibi
assimilare debebat. -- Why he should set such an Accent on his Author in his
quotation of this Sentence, I know not: The learned Reader will easily observe
what Harmony there is betwixt his Matter for which he cites them; and the
Words, for in my judgment they agree like a Harp and a Harrow. Nor does it
appear that he understands Helmont's meaning. To say no more then what appears
true to Learned men, this is one of those Sentences wherein Helmont affects
Obscurity, and is scarce intellig^ble. I suspect my Friend does in this, as
it is said of some Divines, That they weed the Fathers works, picking up many
times what is impertinent, while they leave the Flowers to be plu^kt by others.

Scarb. gave him a fit of the stone.
Two years after he visited Scarbrough, and brought his Wife and above thirty
Persons of Quality, that lived in and about Newcastle, where after a fortnights
drinking of that water, He says it gave him a fit of the Stone, which he had
not felt since his cutting, (p. 22) for he felt it slip from the ^^ft Kidney
into his B^adder, (p. 43.) and (...) the same instant a Thunderbolt from the
right Kidney darted into his great Toe; ^^d afterward he tells (p. 33.) that
when be left the Waters, he had another fit for t^^ days, and this Stone he
will have to (...) generated by the Petrifying property of the Spa^ (p. 35.)

This I have gleaned up out of that confused method which he pursues in his
Book, the substance of his Argument, which he groun^s upon his own Experience.

thunders terribly, and tells of the bolt in hi^ The, But where is the
lightning ^ll this while? I see none, only light^ess enough -- I do very much
wonder to find him commending Knaresb. Spaw for bringing away the mucous
matter, which he acknowledges might have been the Foundation of a Stone, and
yet discommends Scarbrough for ^^inging down the Stone, Certainly he had the
same reason to charge it as a fault in the former, that it bred the mucous
Matter, as in the latter that it bred the Stone, which if he had, no man would
have believed it: but I suppose that would not have suited his design.

I find him confessing (p. 14.) that Scarb. has imbibed Nitre, which there he
acknowledges to be a noble Principle against the Stone: And wherein, I pray,
consists the excellency of that Principle, but in expelling the Stone, or
dissolving it? and therefore it is prescribed by all Physicians, ancient and
modern, for that very purpose; and yet here, when he finds it to perform the
intention, he says it bred it.

I grant (says he p. 34.) that by reason of abundance of Nitre in the Water,
it will force out stony gravel in the kidneys when any is there -- Why? is
there not reason then to suspect, that he that had been wont to have stones
bred in his body, might have so again, for certainly his constitution was not
altered by the cutting; and so this Nitrous Water might bring down what was
bred there before, and not what it self had generated. Kircher will tell him,
he had reason to look for it. Plures s^ctione a calculis liberati tandem eos
iterum concipiunt, eo ferm modo quo Saxifo^ina evacuatae novos cum tempore
concipiunt Saxorum foetus, lib. 8. sect. 2. cap. 3. And there also he tells him
from whence it comes, viz. a Facultatis expultricis imbecillitate, and materiae
terrestris and salis in humido diluti copia.

Again, how can it be supposed, that while there is so constant and plentiful a
current through those passages of Urine, and this promoted by ^he Nitrous
Water, which he confesses to be so cleansing, yet at the same time a stone
should be generated, and that also in a fortnights space? Does not he
acknowledge (p. 18.) that he drank it the year before, and yet we hear nothing
of dislike, but a high commendation of it to many worthy Persons of Quality?
Indeed then he had another design to carry on, which if it had succeeded,
doubtless we had heard none of this; but that failing him, as the Pox said in
the Fable, the Grapes are sour, and the Nitrous Water breeds the Stone.

About Experience.
you argue against experience, which is the su^est Rule to prove a thing; He
tells you, his reins have tried it, (p. 44.) and found it too true.

brains had tried it thoroughly; but since we are to seek for that, I will
endeavor in kindness to instruct him. I dispute not against matter of Fact, but
only examine the Inference, Whether that Stone so expelled, could be bred by
the Spaw or no, and that is a point of Reason. I am certain he takes non Causam
pro Causa; nothing is more manifest, then that it was the Cause of its
Expulsion, but that it should breed it, I have already, and shall yet further
make it out to be impossible.

A particular man's experience, of such an One especially, who for byends seeks
occasion of cavil, and is glad to find the least pretense to it may be
fallacious, and I am ass^red this is so, and in the Judgment of all wise Men
cannot be sufficient to be drawn in to make a Rule to judge a thing by
Experientia should be multiplex; it must be an Induction of a great many
particulars, and of long duration, made by impartial and unbyassed judgments,
that must concur to ground a Rule of Experience upon. Scarb. Sp. excellent
against the stone.
And I dare undertake to bring in an Induction of hundreds of honest and
impartial Witnesses, that can have no sinister design at all, who in the
Disease we treat of (to wit, the Stone) have found benefit, and never any the
least harm, besides those I have mentioned in my Book ^alled Scarb. Spaw Edit.
2. Let my own Experience come into plea with his, who have frequented it these
30. years, besides several that I could name, Persons of Quality, who stand
admiring at this unreasonable charge of our Author: These having drunk of it
ten or twenty years together and upwards, yet never found the least ill
symptom from it in this point or any other, when they went regularly to work,
and were advised.

I must confess I have known several that have got quit of many Stones, and
much Gravel by drinking of it, and ever without any considerable pain. I know a
Lady that voided 28 Stones at these Waters, many of them as big as a pease,
four years ago without trouble. And Mr. James Duncanson a Scotchman, told me
the l^st year he thought he voided half a Jill of Stones and Gravel at once
without much pain, having been very often before subject to grievous fits of
the Stone. Nothing is plainer every day then this; to find Stones expelled at
these Waters; and yet none of these, nor I ever had the least ground to suspect
that it bred those Stones or Gravel.

A double cause of the stone.
If it bred the Stone in the Body, it must do it either as Causa Materialis, or
as Causa Effectrix. If as a Material Cause, that must be by ministering some
crass matter which is apt to condense into a Stone; but this the water cannot
he thought to do, since it is a pure water, and that also strongly impregnated
with a Nitrous Salt, which is a great Dislolvent, as we have said already, and
of thin parts. Secondly, the Efficient Cause consists in an innate and natural
disposition toward the breeding of Stones and Gravel, from the fiery heat of
the Reins and circumjacent parts, which condenses some crass matter into Gravel
or a Stone, even as a Potters clay is by heat hardened into a stone, as
Trallianus expresses it, lib. 9. cap. 4. now this the water cannot promote,
because it is Nitrous, and consequently cooling, and is ever found to quench
the intemperat heat of the Reins, and all the internal parts.

Material Cause, About stone-silings.
and to leave matter in the Body which will condense into a stone, by reason of
the stone-filings that are in it, p. 35. where he compares it to the dropping
Well at Knaresb. that covers any thing that is laid in it some while with a
stony crust.

look on it as an unseparable adjunct.

Again, all waters of this nature that are impregnated with Minerals, will
usually let fall something to the bottom, which is commonly called Och^e, and
this does so, whether it be carried in wooden vessels, or stone, or glass,
though he says p. 55. it is the corosion of the Vessels by the Water, yet
learned Writers on the subject never thought the worse of them.

The Water ^^l^red.
Among the body of Mineral ingredients wherewith this water is impregnanted,
there is a part after it has passed through the heat of the fire in the
evaporation of the water, that when it comes to be dissolved again in pure
water, will not pass the filter, while yet before it came to the fire it would
all have passed through, as I have sometimes shown to several Persons of
Quality, when two quarts of the water newly taken out of the Spaw dropped
through the filter, and left not so much sand behind, as would make a man wink
if it were in his eye, and yet being evaporated away over the fire, it afforded
the same sediment in substance and Quantity, as if it had not been filtred,
such alteration has the fire made in it. Now I doubt not but the water which we
drink that never came at the fire, whereby the fixed parts of the Minerals
should be condensed, will as easily pass through and penetrate our Bodies, and
leave no dregs, as at the first it does the filter.

Fire a proper Instrument, but not a fit Medium.
Indeed I agree with him in this, that fire is the most proper instrumen^ to
try what is in the water, and therefore it was that I proceeded by it in
extracting these Minerals, as before I expr^ssed; but I do not judge it a fit
medium whereby to prove its working in our Bodies, which is the thing he drives
at all along; for that which fire will condense or thicken, may yet be as fluid
as water in our Bodies. As for example, the Serum that is in the Blood, and is
its Vehicle to help its Circulation in the Veins and Arteries, is like water,
as we see it in the vessels when we take Blood; yet put this into a Saucer, and
set it on the fire, and immediately it turns thick like Starch. I knew a worthy
Knight in Yorkshire, who out of some such persuasion, was wont to dehort
others from drinking of Sack, showing them that a glass of Sack poured into a
red hot fire-shovel, would leave a thick sediment like Pu^ or Starch, when the
thin parts were evaporated; but I suppose no wise Man, or good Fellow, would
like it the worse for that. And therefore upon the whole matter, I may very
well and truly deny that any such filings of Stone, or Clay, or Sand are left
in our Bodies while we drink this Water, to breed the Stone or any other
malady, or the least ill symptom; and I am certain, that in the large
Experience that I can pretend to in things refering to this Water, there is no
ground to believe it.

petrifying property, so as it may turn any thing into a Stone, and yet in a
large Tract of Experience, it may be found safe to be drunk, yea and be an
excellent Remedy against the Stone. Did my Friend never read Dr. Fuller's
Worthies, who was a most learned and ingenious Gentleman? In his Description of
Warwickshire, ( p. 117.) he tells of a Spring at Newenham Regis that is so
p^trifying, that it turns sticks into stone, (which Mr. Speed his Author whom
he cites, says he was an Eyewitness of) and yet withal he adds, that its found
to be very Soverain against the Stone. If I were disposed, I could tell where
our Author has commended the dropping Well to some to drink a long time of it,
when sure he had no jealousy least it should breed the Stone in those Patients.

he is of opinion that whatsoever is stony, is apt to breed stones in the body,
and consequently is dangerous for such as are inclinable to the stone. So he
argues ( p. 32, and 35.) why then how comes it to pass, that our most excellent
Writers do prescribe such things against the Stone? Marcellus one of the
Princes in Physic, commends the powder of a Crab-shell to be drunk in white
Wine against the Stone. And Aetius another, commends that very stone that has
been bred in the body, and is expelled by urine, to be powdered, and drunk as
an excellent Remedy against the Stone. ( Petrab. 3. sermon. 3. cap. 10.) I could
multiply instances of like sort out of our best Writers.

By this reckoning we should lay aside Pearl, Coral, Crabs eyes, and all sorts
of precious S^ones. We should abandon all our compound Species and Trochisks,
and what not. The Lady Kents powder and Gascoigns powder, with many more, must
be held dangerous against the Stone, and we should use nothing but the fiery
hot spirits of the Pseudochymists, of which we shall hear anon. But assuredly
this doctrine will not easily go down with the wise Men of this generation, nor
will the great Ladies believe it.

Nothing is more ordinary then to see the powder of Spar, which is a hard
mineral Stone, to be taken inwardly with good success, even by wise and
intelligent persons, as also the powders of Egg shells and Gromel-seeds, which
is almost as hard as stone, who never can be made to believe that they breed
the Stone.

fancied it; but it must of necessity be thrown by the purging property of the
water into the bowels, where no manner of detriment can ensue, and so go out by
siege; nor did ever any thing happen upon the drinking of these waters, that
could afford any the least ground of jealousy, that there was any such cause,
notwithstanding his pretenses.

But seeing our Author is so severe in his charge against it, A digression
about petrification.
as having a petrifying property, and thereupon compares it to the
Dropping-well, I judge it requisite to make some enquiry into the parallel, and
to consider of the causes of petrification that is in waters, and more
particularly that of the Dropping-well, how it makes stone, and so we shall the
better discern what sutableness there is in this his parallel; where by the
way, somewhat I shall say concerning the nature of stone.

Of the nature of stone.
It is a point of no small difficulty that I am now fallen upon, there being few
that have written of the subject unto any competent satisfaction. Fallopius (
de metallis cap. 6 found it so, and therefore he implored the help of Marcus
Antonius Janna about it: But at last he adventures upon it, and defines Stone
to be a mineral substance concrete, that is not capable of dissolution either
by heat or moisture: And whereas some stones will dissolve or melt, he imputes
to the mixture of some mineral or metal. -- But this is not a full or complete
definition, for as much as we see there are some stones, in which we cannot say
there is any mineral or metal, that will neither endure the fire, nor yet the
air, and are therefore accounted improper for building.

But this is observable, that the more pure and fine the matter of any stone
is, the harder it is, and the more incapable of dissolution either by heat or
moisture, as Diamonds, Amethists, Cornelians, etc. Nor does it agree with the
nature of those stones that are bred in the bodies of men, some of which we
find are dissoluble by the help of these waters, though others are not.

Of the generation of stones.
But the cause of the generation of stones is still more abstruse and difficult.
Some will have them all to be originally nothing but water, but then they
should all be pellucid and clear. Some to be only earth condensed, but then
none of them should be pellucid. Besides, why should any of them be heavier
then earth, since they are drier; for we see the same piece of earth when it is
dry, is far lighter then when it is moist, unless we shall attribute it to its
more close and compact substance, which is not enough.

The best account we can give, is that every sort of stone has its Succus
Lapidescens (as metals have) before it be concrete, and that concretion is
furthered sometimes by cold, and sometimes by heat. Thus by cold, those Springs
that have imbibed any sort of Lapidescent juice, may petrifie or make a stone
of the same kind, and the sooner if there be any mixture of a fixed salt in it,
and the water be kept from motion. By the other (to wit) heat, may any crasse
matter be turned into a stone; as the clay in a Potters furnace, is by the
fiery heat condensed into a stone.

Stones often found in the body.
There are also stones generated in the concave parts of men's bodies very
frequently, by the immoderate heat of the parts condensing crasse matter, as in
the Gall, the Reins, the Bladder, the Stomach, the Womb, as have been found in
d^ssections frequently; so likewise in the very Arteries and Veins. Kircher
tells, that he was present when Joannes Trulla a Surgeon found many stones,
and much urtarous matter in the great Artery, near to its union with V^na Cava,
in one Barthelinus Cenventinus, which stopped the motion of the blood and
spirits, and brought sudden death. The like was found lately in the Ar^^ry of a
Noble Peer of this Realm, which rendered his disease incurable, as I had a
relation from my Friend Dr. Troutbeck, who was present at the dissection. Many
stories of like sort may be found in Schenkin's Observationss, as also in
Laurentius's Historia Anatomica. Yea and sometimes stones have been found in
the solid and mustulous parts. I have seen a stone as hard as a flint, and in
all respects like one, as one flint can be like another, that after much pain
in the part and of long duration, was cut out of a man's buttock at Doncaster,
which would strike fire upon steel.

Springs that have imbibed stones.
I read in good Authors of several Springs that are impregnated with stone, as
the Aqua Aponitana which Fallopius says has Limestone, as also the Baths of
Eugesta according to Gesner, and that at Corsena has shreds of Marble. So at
Giret near Vienna in Savoy there is a Spring whose water petrifies into flints.
This must necessarily from the diversity of the Lapidescent juyces which those
Springs have imbibed.

A rare Spring in France.
But the most stupendous is a Spring at Clarmont in Averne, a Province in
France, which though it flows as limpid and clear as any other water, yet it
turns all its substance in^o stone, if it be suffered to stand still in any
vessel; and being put into a glass of what shape you please, it will turn
presently into a stone of the same form. Petrus Joannes Faber a French
Physician, in his Hydrographum Spagyricum ( lib. 2. c. 14.) reports of this
water that they are wont to make Bridges of it to pass into their Gardens, over
the Rivulet that comes from it, by placing timber, and then pumping up the
water upon it, they have a complete stone bridge in 24. hours. This water he
says kills any beast that drinks of it, for as much as it turns into a stone in
the stomach -- The said Author undertakes to give a reason for i^, (to wit)
That the Spiritus Mundi with a peculiar influence of the Stars upon this Spring
more then any other, does excite the astringent and coagulating property that
is in the Sal, one of the three Chemical principles, whereby the water upon
r^sting, or ceasing of motion, shall convert into a stone. But in my judgment,
he had as good have said nothing, for so he may easily solve all the Phenomenon
in Nature, be they never so difficult, which have puzzled all the Sages of the
World, by attributing them to the activity of the Spiritus Mundi, and the Stars
influences upon one or more of their three principles, to wit, Sal, Sulphur,
and Mercury.

But in all probability; the true cause must be this, that this whole matter
that runs out of the Spring, is a Lapidescent juice, and not water, which when
it ceases to move, as it does in the Spring or Rivulet, immediately it hardens
into a stone. For motion hinders the concretion, as we see in water, which in
the coldest weather never frezes while it is kept in motion, but let it rest,
and then it converts to ice.

And so I may say of our petrifying Springs, which only differ in magis and
minus, several of which I have seen in this County of York, which do cover a
stick, straw, or moss with a stony crust, and these of several colors,
according to the nature and color of that sort of Lapidescent juice, which the
water has imbibed.

Of the Dropping-Well.
But the most famous of them all, and most petrifying by far of any that this
Kingdom affords, is the Dropping-Well at Knaresbrough; it is a Spring that
bubbles out of the Earth in a Meadow Close, near adjoining to the River of Nid,
that runs under the Walls of the Town, belonging to Sir Thomas Slingsby: It is
as clear as any other Spring Water, and the Cattle drink of it. After thirty or
forty yards from the Spring, it runs by a very small channel into a spungy
porous Rock, about twelve yards long, which hangs upon the edge of another
stony Rock, (all the earth thereabouts being rocky) there it diffuses it self,
and continually distills through the pores of the spungy Rock, like a plentiful
rain, into the ground that is under it, much lower then the Meadow. That ground
into which it drops, is all become a solid Rock, wherein if a stick or moss be
suffered to lie some while, it covers it with a stony crust, and in time
converts it into a stone, somewhat like Limestone, but clearer and smother;
from thence it runs into the River of Nid, which is within a dou^en yards of
it, where the Spring Water has made a Rock, that stretches some yards into the
River.

There are no symboles of any petrifying property in the Spring or Stream that
runs from it, upon straws or moss, till it comes into the Rock; which to my
apprehension seems to be made by the petrification which the water at the
beginning might receive from the Rock upon which it hangs, from which it might
derive a Lapidescent juice, and doubtless it is now eminently exalted in its
coldness from the spungy Rock, for it is a very cold water which quality
meeting with the Lapidescent juice, and a small proportion of a fixed Salt,
does produce the petrifying property.

This water is in esteem for staying of inveterate Fluxes of the belly, of
which they use to drink a long time together without any harm at all; and I
have sometimes observed, without any benefit as to the staying of the Flux. If
it be evaporated away, it leaves in the bottom of the vessel a very sharp and
gretty stone-powder, somewhat salt and brackish, for the fire fixes the
Lapidescent juice. Our Author calls it Nitre, following therein Kircher; but I
have proved it already to be inconsistent with the nature and property of Nitre
to make a stone. Nor does that salt, which is found in the sediment of the
Dropping-Well, shoot into stiria's, as the Nitre does at Scarbrough, and
wherever else it has been found. -- Now it being plain, and that by his own
confession, that Scarb. Spaw has in it abundance of Nitre, ( p. 34.) it is
impossible it should be petrifying, or make a stone. And since it is also
manifest, that the Dropping Well has no Nitre in it, it follows that the
parallel is naught and frivolous.

A rare case of help in the stone.
To sum up all in a few words: while Doctor Tonstall has designed to charge it
on the Spaw, that it breeds the stone in the kidneys and bladder, he has in
truth proved by an instance drawn from himself, tha^ it is an excellent water
against the Stone, forasmuch as when he knew not from any foregoing symptoms,
that he had any stones in his kidneys, save only that he had formerly been cut
for the S^one, and his private constitution might again incline him to it: It
did not only like a light brought into a dark r^om, discover a lurking Thief,
(as I had occasion to express it else where) to wit, a Stone and that within
the space of one fortnight, but had also so much power and efficacy as to expel
it, and also to set nature on work some weeks after, to clear it self of the
stones and gravel which it had dislodged, which if they had been retent within
the body, would undoubtedly have increased to a greater bulk, perhaps in a
little more time impossible to be expelled, and so have drawn him into a
necessity of another cutting.

I have been the longer in this Argument, both because in this he seems herein
to be most earnest, often protesting in choler enough, on purpose to gain
Proselytes and beget belief (though I think there are but few to be found, that
will judge the overflowing of his Gill, to add any force to his Argument) and
because some others even of eminent Quality of my Friends, whom I very much
honor, had some such jealousy, upon this very ground, that they never
discovered that they had the symptoms of the Stone, till this Water found it
out, and expelled both stones and gravel; while yet scarce any of that Family
have been free from the Stone, that lived to any competent years: And further,
because on this Hypothesis, Hang all the rest of the Arguments of accusation
which he brings against the water.

What need I say any more in p^i^t of Reason, to convince wise men of the
ungroundedness of this his charge; I shall add a little more in point of
experience, that I have lately met with very many intelligent Persons, who
having had large experience of the benefit by this water in the Stone, either
in themselves or their relations, have read this his charge with some
indignation, and have willingly effered their testimony. I Will mention but two
for brevity.

Mr. John Beaumont of Frankfesse in Yorkshire, Another
his Wife had been very many years subject to grievous fits of the Stone, for
which she had taken much advice, though with little success; she went
afterward to Knaresbrough and drank those waters, but found no benefit; then
her Husband brought her to Scarb. which water brought away the matter of Stone
in Gravel and Sand to a great proportion, even in one weeks time, since when
(being now five years) she has had no necessity of returning to the Spaw, being
free of all symptome^. -- Himself also very much subject to Hypochondriack
Wind, which much disturbed his head with strange fantasies, finds perfect cure
by these waters, having frequented them now these twelve years, and so resolves
to continue while God spares life, being aged sixty and five.

Another special Case.
The other is the Experience of Mr. George Waugh of Newcastle, a neighbor of Dr.
Tonstals, expressed in his letter to me.

Sir, I judge my self obliged to give my testimony of the Spaw, and its good
effects in my cas^. And first, I bless God that he has afforded me so great
help by it; and also I let you know, that it proved eff^ctual almost beyond my
first belief of the water, even to my admiration. In the year 1669. at my first
visiting of the Well, the water did not only bring away a confi^m^d stone, as
large as any Date-st^ne, with its bed in which it lay, but as I found did also
soften and dissolve what was more in my Body, so that at one Urine (as I
remember) I voided above a dozen stones, most of them as large as a white
pease, which did lie in the basin as stones; but I draining the water off, and
thinking to take them up, they would not bear their own weight, but betwixt my
fingers became sand, and these I voided the very day I left the Spaw. At my
return in 1670. I had not arunk eight pints of the water the first morning,
until a large quantity of the tartarous tough matter that breeds the stone came
away, which I know was caused by the virtue of the Water.

I am your, etc. GEORGE WAUGH.


Here I think fit to insert a story that I have heard from a Gentleman of
Quality who asserts the truth of it. A Gentleman that was sorely afflicted with
the Stone of the Bladder, was cut for it, and a stone of great bigness was
taken out, his Friend begged it of him, and made a knife-haft of it; as he was
sitting at dinner one day with other Friends, they held long in discourse,
while his knife laid still upon his trencher, which when he took up, he found
the haft to have a dimple in it on one side, and observing, he judged it to
have proceeded from a Radish upon which the have had laid, which had dissolved
it: this gave occasion to another Gentleman, who was wont to be severely
tormented with the Stone, to eat Radishes much, which he found to dissolve the
Stone in his Bladder, and bring it away in abundance of Gravel and Sand, so as
he was afterward freed from his disease.

p. 15.) where our Author tells a story of Mr. Stone's Son, (its the Printers
mistake, for it should be Mr. Stow a Gentleman of Newton upon Trent in
Nottinghamshire how that the Spaw at Knaresb. helped toward the healing of his
wound in the neck of the Bladder, after he had been cut for the Stone, for
which great cure (says our Author) he did frequent that Spaw many years
after. -- I Will go on with the story* this Gentlemen and his Son having heard of
the fame of Scarb. Spaw, did about eight or nine years ago make a journey
thither, in which water they found so much more real benefit in that disease of
the Stone then they had before, that to this day they never returned to
Knaresb. but have been constant drinkers of Scarb. waters, either going
thither, or else sending for the water to Newton, though it be near thirty
miles further distant then the other.

Another story he tells ( p. 35.) of one that was brought very low in a Hectic
Peaver, and sadly troubled with a shortness of breath, but found no Remedy till
drinking of Knaresb. Spaw he coughed up stones every day. If this Patient
(says he) had been sent to Scarbrough, what had become of him? -- I dare say
he knows not, for it well appears he does not understand that water, either
through defect of opportunities of observation, or from a judgment swayed
aside by design, or blinded by interest. But it is not my disposition now to
make a comparison betwixt these two waters: Let them agree till they meet say
I, and then if they fall out, I know which is the nimbler, and better mettal'd
too. But our Author should have done well to have informed himself what
intention the Doctor designed, that in a difficulty of breathing he should
advise him to drink that water, and whether he knew there were any stones in
his Lungs, and could expect that the water should help their expectoration, or
whether it was not rather some accidental cure that he expected not. He should
also have told us what manifest quality there is in that water to promote the
coughing up of stones, more then there is in Scarbrough, and whether it was
expected to be performed by some occult quality: And whether or no a mistaken
fantasy in Dr. T. will hereafter prove a real impediment in Scarb. Spaw for
the doing of cures.

Of clay and sand in the Spaw.
But I may not pretermit that he accuses this water to have sand and clay in it,
whereby it hurts feeble stomachs, and be undertakes (p. 23.) to tell what
proportion there is of it in the water. -- This has been in part answered
already, while we were discoursing about the stone particles, wherein he placed
the petrifying property. We have said before, that the fire does condense some
fixed parts of the mineral and metalline substances, or the Earth through which
it passes, yet exceeding short of that proportion that he mentions, nor indeed
is it worth enquiry, since never my harm came by it, be it more or less, these
thirty years to my knowledge, that might be reasonably ascribed to any such
cause. But let us examine it first in Reason, and then we will come to
Experience.

All sorts of water have ear^^y matter.
This is certain, that the most pure simple water in all the world, being
torr^fied in the fire, as we do in extracting the minerals out of this water,
will be found to have sand and other earthy matter in it, as Mr. Boil has made
out: For he says, take the purest and most common Spring Water, and distill it
in the purest glass retort an hundred times over, and there shall ever) time be
found a quantity of sand as a bottom sediment. Especially Mineral-waters.
But this is more especially true in Mineral-wate^s, and still more in such of
them as have imbibed Mineral-juyces, whether they be hot or cold Springs, and
never till now did any* man of Art esteem them the worse for it: Such as that
at Bourbon in France, the minerals whereof have been shown me by the Noble Lord
Falconberge, and yet by the Advice of all the Physicians that water is taken
inwardly, as also our own at Bathe. So the Acque Acetese at Rome, the Pouhout
and Sauvenir in Germany, Epsam, Tunbridge, Barnet, Astrap, Ieatham, yea and
that of Knaresb. upon my own knowledge, which upon the evapora^ion of the
water, (as I do at Scarb.) yields a great proportion of clay and sand (as he
calls it) and scarce any thing else. Yea Dr. French in his Book of that water
confesses it.

Petrus Johannes Faber in his Hydrogr. Spagyr. ( lib. 1. cap. 4. page 16.)
treating of Mineral-water, and wherein consists their virtues, has these words.
-- Nam distillatis aquis quacunque Art ex nonnullis Fontibus infinitarum quasi
vir^utum, nihil repertum est in fu^do distill^ti^nis, praterquam Limus, and
Terra quaed^m crassa and faeculenta nullius virtutis and efficaciae etc. (to
wit) by what Art soever the Waters of some springs be distilled, which are yet
of infinite virtue, nothing is to and in the bot^om but mud, and some gross and
earthy dregs of no virtue, and efficacy a^^^^l. And thus I am certain it is
with Kn^resb. which this year he ex^ols so much, and which either our Author
has not observed, or out of design is not willing to acknowledge.

And therefore either he did not know this when he writ this Book, or he did.
If he had not known it, then it betokens ignorance in a considerable point of
Philosophy, and in that part wherein he ought especially to have been better
instructed. -- If he did know it, and yet goes about to buz it into the heads
of the vulgar as a peculiar fault of Scar^rough, it savours still worse, he
might as well accuse any of them as this; nay upon this Hypothesis, no water in
the world should be wholesome to be drunk, because of the sand or gravel that is
in it, which fire discovers. Although for any man to repine at it, were
doubtless an Atheistical presumption, and a grievous sin against God, who has
so ordered in his infinite wisdom, while either its not worse for our bodies,
or if it be, it depends upon his Will, who not only in his Statute and Decree
has determined us all to be subject to death, but also in his wise provision of
things most necessary for our being, will gradually dispose our bodies to a
state of mutation and corrptibility.

What could our Author expect (I wonder) to find the element of water? No
element of water to be found,
Surely no: all Fountains are mixed bodies made up of the four elements, and in
respect of the earth which is the matrix within which they are generated, and
to which they are so nearly united, they partake largely of a terrestrial
matter.

Scarb. Spaw excellent for a feeble stomach.
I do seriously profess, I could never observe any the least harm to feeble
Stomachs, but have always found it highly to sharpen the appetite, and also
further the concoction. Nay I am certain there is not in Nature a more speedy
Remedy for a debilitated Stomach. Never did any feeble Stomach (if that was the
main fault) return from these waters without eminent good success, when they
were regular and would be advised. My Lord of Suffolk's stupendous cure which
I mention ( p. 174. of Scarb. Sp. Edit. 2.) confirms this, with others that are
there recited. Nor if you mind, does he bring any instance to confirm this
charge, but as in the former indictment about its breeding the Stone, he has no
witness but himself, nor one plausible argument to prove it; so here he stands
alone to make good this accusation against that cloud of witnesses which I have
produced, although I am certainly informed from some that know full well, he
did earnestly endeavor to procure some to attest them both, but was severely
rejected.

I have know some Persons of quality, who when they came, could not sit down at
the Ordinaries with others, lest they should give offense by their con^inual
belching, which always seized on them at meat, who found a perfect cure by the
waters, and some additional helps which I thought fit. (...) may confidently
say, I have know many scores that through debility of the retentive faculty of
the Stomach, were wont to puke up their meat before it was half concocted, that
have found cures, even when all other means have failed, and when they have
been supposed to be far in consumptions.

A rare cure.
Major Samuel Tailor a Gentleman wel^ known to our Superiors, and the high^st
Grandees of the Kingdom, by a Comm^ssion he has from his Majesty for the making
of the Mould at Tanger, was about n^ne^een years ago so low brought with a
lingering weakness, attended with a constant Cough, and ioss of appetite, that
his legs could scarce bear him, and was wholly given up by all as in a
Consumption, found here a perfect cure in a very short time. The two or three
last years finding at Tanger the old symptoms returning, which brought him so
weak that he could not attend his employment but on h^rseback, he obtaind leave
to come for England purposely to drink these waters at Scarbrough, wherein by
the way (especially at London) he met with sufficient discouragements from many
(otherwise knowing) persons, fearing the waters would kill him (...) grounding
their jealousies upon this Book of D. ^^nstal, but his former experience had
fixed his resolution, so as the last Summer ( viz. 1670.) he came to Scarb. and
staid about three weeks, then after a few weeks respit and recess he come
again, and staid nine or^ten days at the waters, and was reduced (God be
praised) to his perfect health, strength and stomach, as ever he had in all his
life.

An appeal.
I appeal to all the Lords, Ladies, Gentlemen, and others that were ever advised
by me at these waters at Scarbrough, for I cannot justify the drinking of them
abroad, when perhaps it may be adulterated by the Carriers, or else become
putrid, whether they have not found their stomachs advanced by it, both in
point of appetite and digestion. Our Landlords tables in Scarb. find we want
not stomachs, where we feed like Farmers, and are heartily merry, year and he
himself in the two Summers that he visited the waters, know it to be true.

Its very usual for many to come in various cases on their own accords, and so
drink largely and boldly without any advice first had, or direction in
drinking, and they think all is well because the water passes freely with them,
if such return without success or get harm, where is the fault? Possibly our
Author may have met with some of these, which he could not redress, though
perhaps another might; must it needs be charged upon the water or its
principles?

Several Indictments against Scr. Sp. answered.
He is indeed very forward in his Accusation, and in this very point he
confesses ( p. 21) he preferred an Indictment against the Water before the Lord
Falconberge about the sandy faeces, while yet he acknowledges he was not
certain, but that much of it came by the carelessness of the Porter that brought
him the water. -- I could reply to the purpose if I were disposed, but I know
my limits. Sure. I am that noble Lord is so well knowing, and thoroughly
satisfied with the innocence and excellency of this water, that no man can
impose upon him, nor will his Lordship own any thing that tends to its
disparagement.

But there is yet another fault which he fancies to ensue from the sand and
clay that he has told of, and the stone faeces, (to wit) that they are
plastered upon the inner coat of the bowels, disturb the peristaltick motion,
and obstruct the attraction of the lacteal veins. -- Hard words indeed, enough
to fright children, but they that are wise will not be startled at Bugbears.
Posito uno absurdo mill sequuntur; the cause and the effect are much alike.
The truth is, it is nothing more then a frivolous conceit, and not worthy to be
replied to.

But this effect of the sand becomes a cause of still furthers mischief, (to
wit) that after you have drunk a month with success, it takes a testy jadish
fit, and will neither go backward nor forward, ( p. 25.) and says he, ( p.
26.) Is this the manner of other waters? -- Yes, I can tell him, that Knaresb.
water will not go through at any time in ordinary bodies, Scarbr. compared with
Kuaresb.
unless it be either drawn or driven; and shall I say it is from the sandy
sediment which I found upon evaporation? Surely no, but for want of another
thing which he calls the essence of a Spaw, which should carry it through. But
I am not quarrelsome against that water. He had told his friends the last year
when he invited them to come to Scarbr. that it was a nimble and well working
water, and if he could have brought about his design, it would so have
continued this year.

Compared with the German.
I am certain no water in the world that I read of, is less guilty of this fault
then Scarb. nay let them find me another that will pass a month together with
like success. I am certain the German come far short of it, for as Dr. Here
confesses in his Spadacrene, ( p. 122.) they have scarce one stool in eight
days that drink of it, even such as were wont to retrograde once every day at
home. But it after so well working there happen to be any obstruction, must the
fault needs be in the water? Is it not possible that Nature may be weary after
a month, and so become a slug? Or may it not arise from some accidental thing
in the Patient? Do we not see freequently that the same dose of Diet-drink
which we prescribe, comes sometimes far short of what it operates at another
day, and if so, where is the alteration but in the body?

Accidents at all waters.
Its very ordinary for accidents to happen at all these waters, and therefore
there is need of Physicians that understand them, and know how to correct them,
although as rarely at Scarb. as at any other in the world. As for the Lord he
mentions, in whom it stopped after a months well working, I know whom he means;
that Lord told me he could never get quit of him, till at length he yielded to
take something of him; and I profess seriously, his Lordship told me, he found
no manner of alteration: So I gave him somewhat to take off the waters, and he
returned home with benefit, having come above two hundred miles.

The truth is, its against my will for any one to drink this water a whole
month together, but rather I advise to a little intermission, and then go to it
again, if the work be not done.

Dr. T. wrests the Authors sense.
But he seems to confirm this assertion from my own expressions in my Book, as
you may see in his twenty sixth page -- Thus where I am laying down cautions
about orderly and regular drinking, that no man hurt himself through want of a
Rule, he converts them to arguments against the water, as is observable
throughout his whole discourse. Do not all Authors that treat of such subjects,
lay down rules and give cautions for orderly drinking of the waters they treat
of? As Dr. Heers and others of the German, Dr. Dean and Dr. French of
Knaresbrough, Dr. Roosy of Tunbridg, etc. and must all these be wrested to a
contrary sense, as that they imply some faults in their waters; certainly
nothing can be more disingenious. Sure I am none of these ever met with such
contradiction, and wresting of their sense as I have done. But I allow every
man his humor, though it costs me some Trouble, provided the end may be good,
as here it will. -- I now proceed.

Of the Essence of Spaws.
He says in his Preface, that the Essence of Scarb. Spaw is fit for the Cup of
a Prince, but the Caput Mortuum, which is that he calls the Stonefillings, Clay
and Sand, is for nothing but the Brick-Layers Trowel. -- It Is well there is any
any thing in it that is good. -- Now by the Essence he means the refined parts
(to wit) the Mineral Salts, which are extracted by force of Fire. But I wonder
why the grosser of fixed parts should be excluded from being Essential to the
Water, any more then the Body, which is of a grosser substance then the Soul
should be excluded from being the Essential part of a Man.

Sca^br. compared with Knaresb.
If the Salt be the only Essence, then it will follow that Knaresb. Water which
this year he magnifies so much, has little or no Essence, for in the
Evaporation of 10. Gallons, I had a great quantity of Clay and Sand, as I said
before, and but 17. Grins of Salt, 3. pints of Scarb. Water affording as much:
So the consequent must b^ that there is nothing n Knaresb. Spaw fit for a
Prince, since it has little or nothing of Essence.

The the Volatile spirits.
But the truth is, there is yet another thing that is Essential to all these
sorts of Waters, and that is their Volatile parts which being Aetherial do
easily van^sh by the innate heat of Fountains even without Fire, and cannot be
catched by any Project of Art, and their consists much of their Virtue,
although their purging property lies mainly in their S^lts. and much of their
Deoppila^ing too: And if it were not for this Knaresb. Spaw were not worth a
Rush, while yet we know it wants not Virtue, although it rarely passes by
Siege, only by Urine, which so much whey would do, or common Water, although
not with that Benefit. And hence it is as I am certainly informed from some
that know it full well, that he himself sends for Scarb. Water to Newc^stle,
out of which he extracts that which he calls the Essence, and gives it with
Knaresb. Water (even at Knaresbrough) as a great Secret, which other Phisicians
there must not know, on purpose to further its Operation.

But as for those gross Parts which after Evaporation will not pass the Filter,
and are common to all Mineral Waters (as I said before), they are for the most
part nothing else then the Fixed parts of these Mineralls or Metalls which the
fire condenses, though in our Bodies they are not Discoverable, and are of
singular use for the making of the Waters more safe for inward Uses and ends,
conducing to the fortifying of the Natural Parts. For if the piercing Salts
were in the Water alone, they would open the Obstructions of the Liver and
Mesentery very well, but then they would go nere to spoil the Tone of the
Liver, by purging and attenuating too much, but having the Virtue of the gross
and fixed parts, there is joined an Ast^iction, by which the Natural Parts are
strengthened, Scarb. Fortifies the Liver, etc.
and the Tone of the Liver preserved, besides that it secures the Body from
running into fluxes; And from hence also comes it, that though it be an
aperient Water, yet it stays the immoderate Fluxes of women.

And this that I say is according to the Doctrine of Galen, who (lib. de
Curand. Morb. Cap. De Hep. affect.) advises that in all Hepatick Medicines,
some things be added which are Moderately Astringent, otherwise Apperient,
Piercing and Purging Medicines will undoubtedly debiliate it. And to this agree
all our best Writers, and we find it true in our Practice.

Another charge about the Jaundice.
Another grand Indictment that he prefers against Scarb. Spaw is, that it is
Obstructive and causes the Jaundice, for proof whereof he cites the Lord E's.
Case, ( p. 37.) This is the Case I glance at, ( p. 149) of Scarb. Spaw Edit 2.)
in dark Language having no mind to have it publicly known whom I meant. Dr.
T. asked me again and again with very much importunity one day last year at
Scar. in great Friendship, at least pretended, whose Case it was; If I was
prevailed withal by his soothing words to tell him privately, being a Brother
of the Faculty, etc. He did unworthily to tell it to the World, so as to
charge it as a Fault in a Person of such Honor in hurting himself with
drinking wine. (...); What pump me, and then tell abroad my secret? the very
Schoolboys will ^^ame him for this, and are better taught, Nec retinent patulae
commissa, etc. This is not done like a Physician, but -- This brings to my mind
a story in Plutarch (de Curiositate) of ^n Egyptian that was carrying something
in a Basket covered. One came to him, and asked what it was that he had covered
so close. Ideo (inquit) obv^lutum est. Tu vero cur curiose vestigas quod
occultatum est? Si nihil esset mali non fuisset occultatum: (to wit) It is
therefore hid that thou may not curiously enquire what it is. Had there been
no evil in it, it should not have been hid. I must confess, this frets me more
then all his Book beside. I Will only add one Advice to every ingenious Reader
upon this occasion, which I have out of Publius Cyrus, vi^. Ita Amicum h^beas
posse ut furi hunc I^imicum putes. -- So treat your Friend, as if you should
suspect he might in time become an Enemy.

He says the wat^^ brought his Lordship into the Jaundic^ that killed him, p.
37. I do seriously profess my Lord was in a decaying condition by a Ca^h^xy,
and also sick when h^ came to Scarb. and more fit for his Bed then a Journey of
sixty miles. His Lordship drank but three quarts in a whole week, and that
altogether against my will and adv ce, and that at twice, (to wit) three pints
at a time, and with two days intermission betwixt his two doses, both which
passed thoroughly. What wine was drunk in his Lordships company at Scarb. or in
his return by York, where he stayed two days, is impertinent either for Dr. T.
or me to mention; But sure I am, neither the water nor the wine did him any
great harm, so as to have any influence into his death. Nor had be any J^undice
but a Cachexy, which he brought with him, neither does D. Tailor (whom he
mentions) blame the water in the least, against whose per^^asion his Lordship
undertook that long journey, and after ten or twelve days died of sickness.

Of the Alderman of Newcastle.
His second instance is of an Alder man of Newcastle, (p. 40) yet he conf^sses
the Jaundice did not manifest it self other by urine or the color of his body,
which gave him cause (he says) to suspect that the water had petrified the
Gall. -- But I pray how came he to know it ^as the Jaundice, since it appeared
not i^ the color of the body nor the ^ine? If Galen's authority be of any
value or credit with him, he will tell him by his definition of Icterus, that
it is an inseparable difference whereby that d sease must be known, that the
choler is diffused through the whole body in the skin. Icterus est effusio
hilis in cu^em. So Aetius; Est effusio biliosi humoris circum corpus, ob
secernentis cum Facultatis debilitatem. And to these agree all the Princes in
Physic, as Aretaeus, Paulus, Celsus, Actuarius, etc. as the Learned may see in
their. Writings. Yea and all our modern Writer too make it a necessary Adjunct,
without which no man can call it a Jaundice, if it appear not in the skin. Yea
if he will consider Hippocrates or Helmon^ either, (...)
which are his two great Lights, (as he tells us) they will let him see the
Jaundice is not to be judged without it do appear in the skin. Helmo^^ has
indeed a large dispute ( cap. 4. de Hum. decept.) from whence the effusion of
the choler proceeds, but yet all along he denominates the Jaundice from its
appearance in a yellow color through the whole body in the skin. And therefore
I wonder our Author did not consult better for his own Reputation in describing
this Disease like an Artist, especially engaging in such a design as this,
wherein he could not think to escape unsistted, either by my self or some
other. -- Which gave me cause to suspect (says he) that the water had petrified
the gall. Dr. T. his new way of demonstration.
-- I must confess I can find out no ground for this his suspicion that the
gall was petrified, nor will any wise man think it a sufficent proof. Had he
told us of the signs of it, in all probability they must have been of ^he same
size with those of the Jaun^^ce. The Jaundice he fancied, and that is all the
sign we have of it, but ^^ece it appeared not, it gave him ground of suspicion,
etc. I will leave it to any man of reason to judge of, and especially to those
of our faculty.

The Alderman I well remember ^ayed at Scarb. about sixteen days, and ^he water
passed well with him, yet in that space his gall is suspected to be ^^trified.
-- Why! this is as speedy (...) petrification as that which was made to himself
in his kidneys, and far quicker then that which is made by the Dropping-well,
and its to be su^pected to gratify him further in his ^ealousie, 'twill become
as speedy as that of the Spring at Clarmont, and so by that time a draught of
this water get down, it will turn into a stone in the stomach. But I wonder all
this ^hile that he does not name the Alderman, being his Neighbor and Patient,
and so have gained it under his hand, which doubtless would have added greater
force and authority to his attestation.

But to give a true account of this case, I shall relate what I have from the
Alderman himself though he is not willing to be named. He writes to me, that he
was adv^sed by Dr. Tonstal to go to Scarb. telling him it was good for his
goutish distemper, with which he had been grievously afflicted, the waters
operating very well during his stay. About a month after his return home, he
was afflicted with an indigestion and purging which confined him to his chamber
his stools being of a white color; this Dr. T. said was a symptom of the
Jaundice, and another Physician prescribed him some Chalybeate drinks which did
him good, to which Dr. T. added some drops which he called the Essence of
Steel, and blamed the petrifying waters of Scarb. for it, though h^ worthy
Alderman says it was but his bare assertion, neither was he persuaded that his
infirmity did deserve that denomination, having never had any the least
symptom of that disease, nor ca^ he say that the water was the cause of that
Malady. -- But I pray what ground is here for him to say the Gall was
petrified, or that it was Jaundice, or that the Water drunk a month before was
in fault. It seems rather to have been a Flux arising from the debility and
indigestion of the stomach, then any thing else, and it is well he cured, though
he did not know wha^.

Of the Merchants wife.
His third instance to prove the Spaw to breed the Jaundis is of like force and
Authority with those precedent: It is of a Merchants wife with child, who
after some few days drinking of this water at Scarbrough, and within (...)
days after she gate home was taken with a pain in her Right side ( p. 41)
Phlebotomy was thrice ordered, then an Antimonial v^mit, yet (says he) so
obdurated was the Gall by the Petrifying property of Scarb. Water, as I
suspected, that none other sign appeared of the Jaundice, but a return of her
pain three or four times over, at length a ternary Spirit of Wine. Niter and
Mercury Elixerated dissolved the congealed Choler, and then did the disease
shine forth in it Saffron Color; after three recidivations she was plucked out
of the jaws of death, beyond the hopes of all her Friends.

Let us now examine the Case of this Patient as it is here laid down by Dr. T.
Who because he is so severely bent from this disease to deduce an Argument
against the Spaw, I shall take the more liberty to consider of it, and do not
at all doubt to evince, that this Argument is as weak as those that preceeded,
and altogether groundless; Yea that he labored under a grievous mistake in
reference both to his Diagnosticks about this disease, and also the cure.

It is a Woman with Child, and as I am certainly informed from them that know,
betwixt five and fix Months gone. The disease is the Obduration of the Gall,
the Cause whereof is the Petrifying Property of the Spaw; the Evidence or Proof
-- as he suspected -- To this was joined the Jaundice, this proved by a return
of pain in her Right fide three or four times over. The Remedies were
Phlebotomy unto 36 ounces, as I am ascertained by them that made Observation,
then an Antimonial vomit, and lastly a Mountebank Medicine of fiery hot Spirits
of Wine. Niter and Mercury Elixerated does the feat, and the Saffron Color
appears in the Skin.

Of the Obduration of the Gall and Jaundice.
I pray what proof is here of the Obduration of the Gall more then what we had
in the Aldermans Case, (to wit) his Suspicion, which is a new way of
demonstration, which I do wonder he would offer now the second time to public
view. And what have we to prove the Jaundice? Why, nothing but his Jealousy --
a return of pain in the side three or four times over -- I wonder where he
learned, or over read of this to be a Sign of the Jandice; I dare say neither
out of Hippocrates nor Helmount his two great Lights, no nor out of any solid
Author.

As to the means he used for the Cure of this Patient (to wit) to take blood in
one so far gone with Child, three times over, unto 36. Ounces besides the
Vomit; I Will not join with the Women in Censuring him: The Case might be
extraordinary, and then Extremis Morbis Extrema Remedia. Yet this I shall say,
a Physician had need be upon a very sure ground, that in such a Critical case
as this was, shall go in an extraordinary method, -- But I must confess I
cannot but laugh at his Medicine. The D^sease was a violent Fever with an Acute
pain in a part, and here is a violent, hot Medicine, which must needs inflame
the part more, and increase both the Fever and its Symptoms, and so bring on
Relapses. Besides that Niter in the Spaw in suspected to have petrifyed the
Gall, and Congealed the Choler, and here Niter is fancyed to be the d^ssolvent.
I am sorry I am forced to point at these things, but I cannot avoid it, since
they lie in my wa^. -- But really it is such a H^dgpotch of Art, as I never met
with before.

Dr. T. under a gross mistake.
I am afraid my Friend will suffer more from his Brethren in the Faculty about
this Disease, and its Sign, Symptoms and C^re exp^^ss^d then he did by the
Women about so often bleeding and vomiting this Gentlewoman. The truth is, I
had good grounds of Jealousy by his Description of the Case, that he was
mistaken in the disease, and therefore I writ to a Friend at Newcastle, that
had oppertunities of Observation, enquiring if there were not joined to the
rest of Symptoms mentioned by him, a bilious Vomiting and a Singultus: The
return I had was that they were both joined. This did ascertin me that the
disease was an Inflammation of the Liver, which had beguiled him all the while;
and no marvel she relapsed so often since the Remedies were so hot. Had he
consulted Hippocrates, he would have cou^celled him to another Method, namely
cooling and opening Medicine^. So Galen, Paulus, Celsus.

But its may be he will say, he does not approve of the old Me^hod, but uses
hot things in Fevers. -- It appears so indeed; In the mean time that Patient
is to be pitied that must be so treated. I have had occasion to speak to this
point in my Answer to Hydrol. Chim. ( p. 139.) and therefore I Will say no more
now, since there is little danger of any young Students to become Proselytes to
our Author, that shall observe either his description of Diseases, or the
Success of his Medicines.

But the Truth of the story is this. It was taken at the first for a Plurisie,
and so was managed for twenty days, till the method proving altogether
ineffectual, Other Physicians were called into Consultation, who modestly
confess they looked upon the disease as desperate, little Room being left for
Action; and do threfore blame Dr. T. for chalenging to himself the honor of
this Cure, which was due to God alone, who beyond all hopes, and in defect of
due means, does oftentimes grant a Signal Recovery.

Nor is there any the least ground to think that either the Gall was obdurated;
or the Choler congealed; but even the diffusion of the Choler into the Skin
does still more plainly evince, that it was no other then the Phlegmon or
Inflammation of the Liver, which happening in the Declination or latter end of
the Fever afforded a good Judication, and that the Fever would soon terminate.

Now because it shall appear that I offer nothing of my own private opinion in
this particular; I will produce the Testimony of some of our P^incipal W^iters
in P^^^sick, to prove that Symptoms here reckoned up as conconcurring in this
Patient, do most cer^ainly denote the Inflammation of the Liver, and no other
disease. And ^f a Physician mistake the disease, he must undoubtedly fail of
the Cure, or hazard the Patient with frequent Relapses. And in this I refer to
the Judgment of all the Learned Brethren of our Faculty.

Of the inflammation of the Liver.
Aretaeus ( lib. 3. de re med. Cap. a Morbo Regio) Expresses it thus. St
[M^rbus Regius] cumfebre and biliosis ejectionibus fiat, and gravitas sit circa
dextrum praecordium, inflammatio fervens judicatur ipsius Hepatis, ob quam
bilescens Sanguis per totum Corpus fertur. To which I Will add that of Cornelius
Celsus (lib. 2. de re med. cap. 7)) Frequent Singultus and praeter
consuetudinem continuus, jecur inflammatum esse significat; and a little after,
-- Si Hepar inflammatum est, dolor in communiomnibus adest in dextro
Hypochondrio, transiens sursum ad Claviculam (this I guess made our Author
think it to be a Pleurifie.) D^orsum ad spurias usque Costas, ebris acuta,
tusses siccae, sitis, cibi inappetentia, spirandi difficultas, and alvus
Suppressa est. And Actius reckoning up the signs of the Inflammation of the
Liver, mentions these -- Febris acuta inaequalis, spirandi difficultas,
tussiculae parvae ut plurimum siccae, vomitiones biliosae, Costae ut plurimum
condolitant, Corporis Color Subvertitur, and in Arquati speciem permutatur,
singult^s quoque consequuntur. -- From hence nothing can more plainly appear,
then that this disease was in truth the Inflammation of the Liver; The yellow
color of the skin being one sign among the rest, coming in the close of the
fever, and consequently it was not the effect of the Spaw, but of the Phlegmon
of the Part,

And as he mistook in his Diagnosticks or judging of the disease, so I must in
kindness to him and his Business for the future, (if he will accept it so) let
him know, that he was out of his Therapeuticks or the Remedies, that ternary
Spirit of Wine, Niter. etc. Being as improper as any thing he could have pitched
upon, which who so uses in like case, must expect nothing less then a long
disease, as this proved to be, and frequent Relapses, to the extreme hazard of
the Patients life. Ad calidam Hepatis intemperiem utendum ^sset
perfrigerantibus, and corroborantibus Viscus moderate, etc. A Vino in totum
Aegri abstineant, ni ob aliam Cansam nempe stomachi debilitatem utantur, and
tunc ten and parum aquae fet^ns aquosum ipsis detur. So says Paulus Aegineta
( de re med. c. 46. de hep. effect) Here a cooling diet is prescribed, and Wine
wholly forbiden, and much more Spirit of Wine.

Thus I have sifted these three Cases, which he brings in to pro^e that this
water caused the Jaundice, or petrifyed the Gal, and have found them all very
weak, and not to have been bottomed on Reason or Verity.

The Spaw cures the Jaundice.
I^ I were disposed and it were needful to bring instances of Experience in this
point. I could multiply Cures of the Jaundice by this water. I shall content my
self with two for brevity sake. Sir John Legards Lady of Ganton within a few
miles of Scarb. had a Jaundice that long resisted Remedies in a Rational
Method, and was perfectly cured by the Spaw in a few days, being thereto
recommended by another Lady, who had Experienced a Cure in the same Disease;
and this consented to by Dr. Arnold her Physician, who knew it to be a Rational
advice.

Mr. William Hodgson Minister of Scarbrough was for the space of (...) years,
ever and anon falling into the Jaundice, especially Spring and Fall nay, one
time it continued upon him almost all the year, notwithstanding his Endeavors
after a Cure: I Since he was settled at Scarb. which is now about four years, he
has found a perfect Cure by the Spaw.

But seeing our Author is so extremely severe, as that he has so f^^ stretched
to prove this water to be obstructive, I judge it very pertinent here to tell a
story, which to him is Argumentum ad hominem.

In anno 1668. Dr. Tonstal came to me at Scarb. A rare cure of Dr. T's Wife.
pretending his only business was to take my advice about his Wife, whose belly
never fell after a Child that she had born, not could he with all his Art take
it down, notwithstanding he had used much means about it, as he told me. If
(said he) you can advise to any method that may (...) it, or you think the Spaw
may conduce thereto, for you understand it better then I who am a stranger to
it, then I will send for her, else I Will return forthwith. -- To be short, after
some queries which I made, being resolved -- I advised him to send for her not
doubting of ^^cure; so he did, and within one week she came by sea from
Newcastle. Then he brought her to me, with whom I had some conference while we
took three or four turns upon the sands. I advised her Husband to give her some
preparatives, and something ^se with the water to further the intention. After
a few days her bodies did lace close, that could not meet within three or four
inches before. She continued to drink a month, and returned perfectly well, and
so continues to this day, free from all swelling, it being near ^hree years
since. But we have not a syllable of this in his Book.

He is unthankful.
Now this water that could open the Lact^ae, and small veins of the mesentery,
which was the means of this cure, how can it be thought to be an obstructive
water, and to breed the Jaundice? I leave it to the judgment of wise and
impartial men, nay to himself to pause on, the Cure being sufficiently known at
Newcastle. Certainly its an ill requital which here he makes to the Spaw for
that excellent Cure, and he is extremely disingenious.

Nothing is more ordinary then to see (at these waters) those that are
corpulent, taken down in their bellies more or less, even sometimes a span,
when they are willing to follow advice, that some few other medicin^ may be
joined to further the intention, which could not possibly be done if it were
obstructive. Nor is there a better thing in nature for taking away the relics
of all inveterate Agues, It cures Agues.
which sufficiently makes it out to be aperitive.

It is found in daily experience to be very beneficial against the Scurvy
refining the Blood, So the Scurvy
strengthening the natural parts, and correcting all the symptoms of it, which
fully evinces it to be of a deoppilative or opening virtue: Besides the purging
property which all along he acknowledges, is directly contrary to the
obstructive.

An aged Gentleman Mr. Christopher Adams of Camelsford in Yorkshire, seventy
three years old, well known to our Author himself, in vexation against these
frivolous cavils of his, offers me this his testimony, which he accounts
himself obliged in justice to give. viz. That for six years together he was
miserably tormented with pain in his legs, feebleness in his knees, frequent
faintings, and a dry itch over all his skin. He had advised with several
Physicians, who had ordered him Diet-drinks, Diaphoreticks, Ointments, etc. but
without any success at all. He came at length to Scarb. and upon drinking of
that water found perfect ease in all these said symptoms. He had also been
sore afflicted with dizziness in his head, and loss of memory; his
understanding also was sometimes so clouded, that he could not discern the
quarters of Heaven, or know the E^st from the West, and sometimes was wont to
fall. By the use of the Spaw he recovered out of all the said symptoms, and
never had any fi^s since considerable; for prevention whereof he has continued
his annual visits at Scarbrough these seven years, though he lives at forty
miles distance.

Dr T. is censured by the Women.
But I may not pass it over that out Author tells us he fell under the obl^quy
and censure of the women for ^i^ severity to the Merchant's Wife we mentioned
even now, which puts him to his vindication, ( p. 42.) where he bids them take
notice that it is his principle when he sees his duty, to pursue it to the
hazard of his credit, etc. -- I do indeed take him to be an honest man, and a
faithful Physician, and here to clear up all scruple, we have it now the second
time under his own hand; For ( p. 14.) he had told his Friends, he gave no
worse counsel to them then he took himself, and wishes that all Physicians were
bound with his girdle -- and here he will hazard his credit in the doing of
his duty -- What can a man say more to make out his integrity? though honesty
tends little to the curing of diseases, but that its necessary a Physician
endeavor after other accomplishments, that he may understand aright both the
nature of Diseases, lest he mistake one for another, and also the matter of
Physic that he may apply suitable remedies: Yet it is so valuable a
qualification, that all persons that are ingenious, know how precious a thing a
good name is, when they see it so eminently appear, should forbear to be
censorious, especially when they are not able to discern but that he may be in
the right, otherwife it is the greatest discouragement that a Physician can
fall under.

He taxes his Brethren.
Had our Author desisted here he had been much more innocent, but having
justified himself he condemns his Brethren of the Faculty. And though (says he)
I be singular in this point from the most of my Brethren, whose wisdom it is to
secure themselves from an evil report, by doing nothing in a doubtful case, yet
I have not so learned Christ.

How suits this with Reason or Religion, when he is blaming the Women for their
rash censuring of him, that with the same breath he should censure others?
while he tells us he is singular in this point from the most of his Brethren,
does it not savor too much like that of the Pharisee, I am not like this
Publican? what man's wisdom can suffice to secure himself from an evil report,
when some men's pens or tongues are so lavish as we find them? doubtless he
that has learned Christ aright, will take care to manifest it in love and
charity toward others, and Charity judges the best, and censures no man.

Again in such doubtful Cases its ever the safest for a Physician to call in
for the Advice and help of his Brethren, and not to hazard the precious life of
any person in making dubious and private Experiments. And what hopes can a
Patient have from a consultation of Physicians, when they are not in Charity
one with another?

In this his severe Censure, I would hope he does not fix it upon his Brethren
at a distance, whose practice he knows not: And as for those that are near
about him, I know several of them so well, that I must needs say, I think there
is not any cause, why they should be excluded from having an equal Magnanimity
with himself in this point.

But there is one thing I may not overlook ( p. 38.) he tells us he was present
at Physick-Lecture in London, where the Professor discoursing of the Jaundice,
brought forth three or four Stones that had been bred in the Gall, which he had
caused a Gentltwoman to void (by stool) with a sharp Dose of working Physic.
-- I am afraid our A^thor was mistaken in the Professors D^scourse for what
passage is there from the Gall to the Guts to convey Stones, and how could he
think by any Dose of Physic to excite Nature to expel them out of the Gall? I
suspect the Ductus Cholid chu^ will not afford sufficient passage for Stones,
(which sometimes I have seen to be very large, and in the form of a race of
Ginger) no more then the small veins of the Mesentery will admit of Sand or
Gravel to pass into the Kidneys, to become the matter of stones there.

Of the Gowt.
(P. 43. He accuses it to be ill for the Gowt, and cites his own Cafe, that it
made him go limping a Fortnight after. -- But I suspect he takes Non Causam pro
Causa, but in this as in every thing else, he makes himself both Plaintiff,
and Witness, and Judge. This is so much contrary to the property of it as
Water, which is a good Preservative against the Gowt, and as such a water, that
is impregnated with those Mineral Principles in which we are agreed, that it
deserves no further Reply. -- Besides the Experience my self, who have had some
gentle fits of the Gowt, and several others who have ever found it a good
Preven^^tive, even when there has been some inclination to it by cooling the
Mass of Blood, and correcting and purging the Acrimonious Hamours; only I ever
join some other thing to further the intention.

The Spaw needs preparatives.
(P. 44.) He says no Spaw in the World has less need of Preparatives, and more
need of Purges then this, and that he never observed that any at the first
morning Draught wanted a speedy passage by the back door. -- Herein I declare
his Observation to come short, for though it ordinarily it fails not to pass
through at the first, yet some Constitutions there are especially especially
such as are Melancholic, and others whose Bodies ore wont to be Constipated,
especially women in whom it will scarce find passage in a day or two, in such
there is an absolute Necessity of Preparatives. The water is indeed nimble and
sometimes has wrought ten days together, while yet it has but made a furrow
through the Outs, and has left all the Excrementitious humors behind it, the
party finding therein no benefit at all, when with a Cathartick I used, he
voided Cherry-stones, whereas for those ten days he had eaten no Cherries.
Besides, although we could be assured that it would pass freely, yet as for
those that come with any Chronical Disease of which they expect to find a
Cure, there is a necessity both to prepare the body, and also to furnish the
Patient with other Concomitant Medicincs to be used with the waters, suitable to
the Malady and the Patients Constitution, otherwise notwithstanding the daily
working of the water, they may return as they came.

Nor is it possible for me to lay down Rules to suit every Case, though I
should run out into a Volume; those depend upon daily Observation, and frequent
converse with the Patient, on which account I have been usually there every
Summer these twenty years and upwards, and So may probably continue at the due
season while God spares me life and Health. In the mean time I must take leave
to refer the kind Reader to what I have said more at large upon this point of
direction in the use of the Spaw in my Book called Scarbrough Spaw, Edit. 2.

The inconsistency of his Assertions.
Now the eminent purging property which here he confesses to be in the Water,
does make it much more safe in those very cases wherein he has charged it to be
faulty, then other waters of this kind, which pass not by siege, bu only work
by Urine, (as they express it) which Wine, Whey, or any other kind of liquor
will do.

Stone; Hereby are the gross and slimy Humors that lie on this side the
Kidneys in a good measure cast out by the Bowels, and the Patient is secured
from an Ischuria or total stopping of Urine, which has too frequently happened
at other waters that over pass by Urine; The slimy water being carried by the
sole Diuretic property of those waters upon the narrow passages of Urine, and
thereupon has ensued a total stopping, to the speedy ruin of the Patient,
whereas (God be praised) such a ease never happened at Scarlrough.

Stone-filings (if I should grant any such thing to be in the Water) must be
carried down the broad way by the Bowels, and so cannot possibly be thrown upon
the narrow passages, to become the Material cause of a stone in the Body.

purging property does quite Overtthrow what before he had asserted concerning
the waters Obstructive property, for it is impossible that the same thing should
be so eminently Purgative and also Obstructive to cause the Jaundice.

Gowt, cannot possibly consist with this that here he asserts concerning the
speedy Purging, especially while we consider what he acknowledged in p. 25. to
wit, that it purges well a month together, and what further he will tell us p.
62. that it may endanger a Discentery; For purging is owned by all, and
prescribed as a special Remedy against the Gowt, either to prevent or to Cure
it.

And therefore seeing he had projected to fix so severe a Charge upon the Spaw,
I wonder he did not take care so to draw it up, as that one piece might not
enterfer with and confute another.

Of Vitiral and Iron.
(Page 45. He would pretend to deny Vitriol and Iron to be in the Spaw; so did
Mr. S. and at length recanted, and so will he perhaps in time. But both these I
have sufficiently proved in my Book of Scar, Spaw, and have enlarged upon them
both in my Answer to Hydrol. Chim. and have further made it out from the
Testimony of good Authors that have treated on such Subjects, and more
particularly of the Chimical Writers, that the Acidity, Inky smell, and black
T^ncture from Gall are certain and undeniable Arguments to prove Vitriol. I
will not trouble the Reader with a repetion of what there I have said, but do
refer him to my Book. Nay further within these two years our Author himself was
abundantly convinced of the presence of them both.

I deny not but Nitre may contribute some Acidity to Water, ( as he says p.
59) though I exclude the Spirit of Nitre as extraneous to our Subject. -- As
for his experiment which he propounds to parallel the smell of Scar. Spaw,
concerning which (he says) he will forfeit his Nose, if it do not stink worse
then the Alome-pans at Whithy; I wonder to find him so zealous in this Point,
to fix a stinking smell upon that water, when there are so many thousands to
confute him, I am persuaded not a Countey in England but it affords many that
are able to contradict him in this. And therefore; though hence it may appear
he has lost his Smell, yet I should be heartily sorry, that for so small a
mistake my friend should forfeit his Nose.

The very truth is, it has a perfect Vitrioline smell, which no man will deny,
save those that prosecute a design of contradiction, which being once engaged
in, they are not willing to give over, notwithwanding all grounds of Conviction
that can be imagined, and with which most wise and Learned men of our Nation
have been fully satisfied.

And whereas he tells ( p. 54.) of a Water at Hunwick, nere which Iron-Stone is
dug; that receives a Tincture with Gall, as highly as Soar. Spaw, (though
its mention makes nothing to his purpose.) Why may not that have the Vitriol of
Iron in it, especially seeing the Iron stone is so nigh. However and quae non
prosunt singular juncta juvant. Since all these Properties (to wit) its
Acidity, Vitrioline smell, and Tinging Blackwith Gall are all met together, it
makes an undeniable Argument that here is Vitriol.

Dr. T. has changed his mind.
I do seriously profess, that when in Anno 1668. Dr. T. came first to Scarb. he
owned both the Votriol and the Iron beside the rest, having conviction from the
reasons which I gave him, and fell into admiration to see so many excellent
Minerals meet in that place, which gave me occasion to mention it in my Answer
to Hydrol. Ghim. (p. 107.) with more sincere respect to him then now he
deserves, since he has so ^a^selefly changed his mind. But he that on such
slender grounds can affirm at this rate, as we have found in this his Book, may
as easily deny what he will. That which was Vitriol last year is this year
become Nitre. -- Well! I have proved Vitriol to be in it by such Arguments as
Learned men have contented themselves withal in the like Cases* and by an
Induction of the inseparable properties of Vitriol, which I discern in the
water, and that or large in former Books, yet because I would do somewhat more
for this my Friends Conviction, I shall ex ^bundanti cast him in one Author
more; and he a Chemist too; it is Petrus Johaennes Faber in his Hydrog. Spagy.
Fabers Testimony.
lib. 1. cap. 9. p. 39.) where treating of Springs that have imbibed Sulpher,
Vitriol, etc. Nigrescit (says he) borum Fontium liquor, si gallae in pulverem
redastae in ipsum fontis liquorem proijciantur, quol vitriolum verum ac certum
testatur, to wit, The waters of these Fountains turn black if the powder of
Galls be put into it, and that is as true and undoubted Testimony that there is
Vitriol in it.

So again ( lib. 2. c 11 p. 164. The same Author telling of two Springs at
Vi^le Comt, ^n the C^untey of Averne in France, the one called La Fountain du
Cornet, the other La Fountain du Rocker, he says, they are both of one Notur,
and have a Vitriol in them, which he proves by two Arguments that we have been
mentioning, (vid.) their Taste, and their black Tinctur with G^l. -- Habent
secum vitriolum dissolutum, ut ex gustu ipsam equm in atramentum: quae fique
vera sunt and legitima admix^ Vitrioli, which are says he, the true and
legitimate signs of Vitriol. Besides the admirable virtue which he reports to
be in those Springs, for opening the Obstuctions of the L^ver, Spleen and
Messentery, and for the purging of viscous humors, (eminently true in this of
ours of Scarb.) at the length be adds -- Nullus fere morbus dari potest, quin
hisce aquis curari possit -- You can scarce name any disease (says he) which
may not he cured with these waters.

Now why we should forfeit our reason, and Spurn at the solid Judgment of
Learned Writers in all Ages and parts of the World, who have thus contented
themselves to speak concerning this thing, and submittere fasces to the
Magisterial Dictates and Resolutions of some self-conceited Opinions, I see no
ground for it. And though I cannot say with Faber that this Spaw cures all
diseases, Yet I am certain it is far more innocent then his Springs, which he
confesses do provoke vomit, and sometimes purg unto blood; on which account he
mixes ordinary Spring water with them to correct the Acrimony of the Vitriol.
And this I shall further say, that no Spring in Europe hitherto discovered, may
be further improved for the Cure of Rebellious diseases then this, as may
appear by the particulars I have mentioned in my Book on the Spaw, as also
these I have now expressed on this ocacasion: Nor I think can the wit of man
invent a better Composition, then by Divine Providence is here adapted for the
good of mankind.

(Page 54.) He says no Vitriol but that which is Ferrugineum will take a
tincture from Gall. -- I would fain know then how it comes to pass that white
Vitriol will make Ink, is this ferrugineum, or made out of Iron? surely no, ^^t
I am sure it will make Ink. Will he fall out with the Author of Hydrol.
Chymica, who ( p. 5.) makes Vitriol of Iron, and white Vitriol really to
differ? -- However he makes this an argument to exclude both Vitriol and Iron
out of the number of the Mineral Principles, owning nothing but Nitre and the
Glebe of Alome, both which I have sufficiently proved in my former Books, to
the full satisfaction (I hope) of every impartial Reader.

He says (p. 49.) that he saw a piece of Alome-stone which the Chemical
Apothetary took out of the Earth near the Spaw, which with Gall gave a black
tincture to Spring Water. -- I am afraid the Apothecary was too nimble for the
Doctor, and took that Stone out of the Vitrioline Bed, which I mention ( p.
44.) of my Answer, which indeed will Tincture because it is impregnated with
Vitriol (as also with the Earth in that Bed, from whence he may as well infer,
that all sorts of Earth will with Gall give a Tincture to Water) whereas the
many hundred loads of Alome-Stone, or Earth, that is there besides will give no
tincture, excepting in one other place within a few yards of the Spaw* where I
found another bed of Vitriol last year. But of this I have said enough in that
Book.

He contents himself with proving Knaresb. Spaw to be Vitrioline (p. 57.) by
the yellow color wherewith the Bas^n and Spout of that Spring are tinctured,
which he calls Crocus Martis; and the like (he says) may be observed in every
Runner near the head of any Vitrioline or Chalybeate Spring. -- I now appeal to
his own eyes, whether it be not so at Scarbrough? -- But whether this be a good
Argument to prove Vitriol i^ matters not much, Learned Writers mentioning no
such sign of Vitriol but rather that it denotes Iron. However if it be at all
convincing, as to him it is, then a fortiori it makes eminently for Scarbrough,
because it has a deeper dye than tha at Knaresbr. having also the substance of
that which he calls Crocus Martas, not to be found in the other.

Of the Pinfold.
But while he is debating upon these two Minerals of Vitriol and Iron, and the
Tincture which the Water takes with Gall, he makes himself merry with me, while
he fancies to have gotten me into a Pinfold, ( p. 54.) Why may not I be merry
too since I have found the way out? I wonder where my good Brother learned the
Art of making a Pinfold. I have read of two famous Pinfolds, one at Wakefield,
where sometimes dwelt a very stout and sturdy Pinder, of whom we have an
ancient merry song in York shire. Another was made at Gotam, where the wise men
of that Town did put themselves to a great charge and trouble to impound the
Cuckoo, The Authors Antagonist Mr. S. lives at Wakefield.
which quickly overtopt the Pinfold, and left the Builders in a maze to bewail
their folly. From which of these he derives his Craft, I know no. But the
former could not hold me, I am very well delivered with my bones whole. And the
latter I doubt not to creep through or overtop, unless it be made with more Art
then yet I can discover in the framing.

(Page 5^.) He is discoursing about the Earth, which I mention p. 14. that
falling from the Cliff near the Spaw, is converted into an Iron-stone, and is
fusible in the fire. -- This he is not pleased withal, but declares his opinion
of it, which I must confess I cannot make good sense, unless the Reader help
me, To me (says he) it does appear to be a redish Earth dissolved with the
N^troaluminous Salt, and petrified in the Sun and Air to a hard lump. -- Here
is Earth dissolved with Salt, and petrified! What shall I say? Si non vult
intelligi debet negligi.

But I return. Dr. T. is magisterial.
P. 49. he determines Magisterially. -- I say it is only the Alome-stone that
gives the Tincture -- Let Experience prove it. Take Alome-Stone unburnt, powder
it, add Spring Water sharpened with Spirit of Nitre, that it may dissolve it --
put Gall to it, and it gives you the same Tincture. -- Alas! This with much
more that I have met with in this piece is borrowed from my Antagonist. to whom
I gave Answer fully and at large, nor does he wield the Club much better, or
has any new guard. I say again what have we to do here with the Spirit of Nitre
to dissolve the Alom-stone? Let him keep to his Sample, in Scar. Spaw, there is
no Sprit of Nitre, nor any Fire to Extract it. Indeed Nitre there is, and to
that let him hold close: But I assure him that neither the Nitre that Sweats
out of the earth near the well, not yet our ordinary Nitre of the Shops d
ssolved in water, to which let be joined Alome-stone Crude or Calcined (though
we have nothing to do with latter here) or if he pleases join perfect Alome,
made either with Kelp and Urine, or without them; I say these mix together
shall never qualify Water, to take a a black Tinctur from Gall it Vitrial be
away. And this that I say any man shall find to be true, if he put it to
Experiment. So that upon the whole matter, my first Thesis strands firm, and
unshaken, that it is the Vitriol alone, that gives the black Tincture with
Gall, and consequently that Scarb. Spaw is a Vitrioline Spring.

Scar. Spaw, while yet he pretends to be its great Friend. ( p. 45. If (says
he) the Esurine Spirit of Vitriol be joined with the Volati^e Spirit of Nitre
in the Water, how does it differ from Aqua Fortis, which is a deadly Corrosive?
And if it be said these are not all, there is Alome and Salt also; This makes
it worse, even an Aqua Regia, which will corrod^^^ Gold, and consequently it
must be poison.

Spaw as Joab did with Abner, of whom its sad, 2 Samuel 3.27. That he took him a
side to speak with him p^aceably, or as a Friend, and then he smote him into
the fifth Ril. Is this a token of his Friendship to make it poisonous? I am
glad his W^fe lives to confute him. If it will but dissolve a stone in the
body, no matter whether it will dissolve Gold or no. I say again what have we
to do with the Spirits of Vitriol and Nitre, and what aims he to prove by his
First. Second, and Thirdly? What though Vitriol and Nitre distilled together
raise a Corrosive Spirit? So will Rye-bread Distilled afford an extreme
Corrosive Spirit that will dissolve Metal, if he will trust Master Boil --

Such alteration does fire make in it, and what though, since the World knows
its wholesome, we are not afraid of those Spirits in the wate^, I am certain
they are but Phantasmes, and signify nothing.

Here we find a Water which many thousand of persons of all ages and both Sexes
have liberally drunk of for these forty years, with excellent success in the
Cure of great diseases, when they were well advised, and followed counsel)
working without Griping or the least C^rr^sion, and purging without
Superpurgation. In a word many hundreds there are who will give this or a
further Testimony, when occasion shall be offered, and tell the World that all
his Reasoning to the contrary is but frivolous.

Another Charge
And this Leads me to the last charge, which is the Sting in the Tail, and if it
be proved makes it an unpardonable fault, to wit, that the duplicated Salt may
be in danger to corrode the Bowls, and cause a dysentery. -- I am afraid some
would have it se. But it is enough that he has said it, for as he has not solidly
proved any thing against it, so he does not attempt to do it here, And as he
does not, So neither can I. No water in the world is more safe then this in
that very point. The Conjunction of Alome and Iron, two Astringents, with the
other that are Attenuating and Penetrative, as I have proved to conduce to the
better fortifying of the Liver, and other Natural parts, So they contribute to
the safeguard of the Belly from Fluxes. which never happen to them that do drink
regularly at the Fountain. Nay I have often known inveterate dysenteries and
other Fluxes cured by it.

A rate cure in a Flux.
Silvester Sympson of Driffield Yorksh. had a bloody Flux eight years, so as he
all that Space was forced to rise to stool every night three or four times; It
had resisted all other means he had attempted. He went to Scarb. and was cured
perfectly in two or three days with the water alone.

This I have examined what may seem to be material in his Book, only omitting
some impertinencies, and angry Expressions as not worthy to be reflected on. I
am of opinion that an angry fit is very wholesome for some Constitutions, though
it may make a man uneasy to his Company for the present, and those that come
within his reach: Yet when the Ebullition of Choler is over, it leaves a man
in a far more Sedtae temper of mind for a good while after, then before he was
wont to be, and more gay and Complacent in his humor to others. If my Friend
having given his Spleen this vent, be the better for it in his Cranium, I
should be very glad; as indeed I am informed, he did seem to be much pleased
with what he had done in this P^ece, (...) XII
and became more frolic then formerly.

( P. 45.) It appears by the last Paragraph of his Book that he had some
persuasion that herein he has performed some rare piece of Art, Dr. T. is
conceited of so e merit in his Piece
wherein he expects to be applauded by me, for he cites a place out of my
Answer to Mr. S. p. 2, 8) where my words are, that if Mr. S. has any thing to
m^ke out in point of Art, I would never go about to Eclipse his Honor and
Reputation in it, but would thank him -- And this our Author adds, that as I am
a man of my word, He expects thus much from me. I answer, I cannot but approve
a piece of Art, where ever I find it, and as I shall perform my word to Mr. S.
who is alone concerned in that promise, so in Justice I shall not deny it to
him when I see it. B^t as for this P^ece I ^ee not the least point of Art in
it, from the beginning to the end. I refer it to the Learned and impartial
Reader to judge betwixt u^. Nay I prof^s^ serio^sly were I conscious that these
his Pretended discoveries were true, and that there were any real ground for
this his Carping at this water, (though there be noth^ng of Art in the making
of them out) I would let him ride^ion with his Honor and thank him to boot.
But being assured of his total mistake, and having so made it out. I must
needs let him know, that all his Persuasion of Merit in this P^ece is but a
Melancholic Fancy, and is so far from deserving applause, that somewhiles I
have thought it needed not, nor deserved an Answer, since there are many
hundreds that do but laugh when they read it, being able to confute it from
their own O^servation; and among them some of his own Neighbors and Patients,
who have expressed their admiration, what frame he was in when he writ this
Book.

Now because there are some that are not able to judge of the force of
Arguments, I shall for their sakes add thus much. That as I desire in all
things to be found faithful as becomes me, either as a Physician or a
Christian; so in this dispute I aim not so much at Victory as Truth, which in
Conscience and Reputation, (especially being called to it so often by name) I
think my self obliged to defend, in the maintenance of the Fame of this most
excellent Spring, against the groundless cavils of this Gentleman. Nor do I
think that there is a more innocent Water of this kind in the World, at this
day discovered, in the very particulars he has charged in withal, in all which
cases I declare it in my Observation and Experience to be most Excellent. And
further that the most tender Constitutions need not dread it, provided it suit
their Maladies, for regularly used, it revives both the Vital and Natural
Faculties, and in such I have ever had the most stupendous Cures. Only let not
such adventure on it without very good advice, and daily Inspection of some
Phisician at hand, in whom they may confide, taking it also at the Fountain.

I shall conclude with a story that I meet with in Plutarchs; One Philippides
an excellent Commedian had pleased the King Lysimachus very well, ^o so much as
the King asked Philippides, Quid e meis Rebus tibi impertiam, What boon shall I
give thee? He answered, Quidvis O Rex, Modo nequid Arcanorum, What you please,
only tell me no Secrets. -- I do still profess my self to be a Friend to Dr.
Tunstal, and am ready to make it out in any Civil Kindness, only ( I hope) he
will not henceforth expect that I tell him any Secret.

FINIS.

