A LETTER from HOLLAND, TOUCHING Liberty of Conscience,
Dear SIR,
I Received yours of the 10th Current (Stilo veteri) and cannot but smile to see
you seem so much concerned at the Papers, you say, are frequently transmitted
from hence; for I assure my self, you know the World better than to be really
startled at such petit efforts: However, since you are pleased to Command (for
under that Character I must ever receive the least Intimation of your desires)
my mean Sentiments on that Subject, I shall deliver my Thoughts with all the
freedom due to our old Friendship, and the Secrecy of a Private Letter, for
such I hope your Prudence will make it, as foreseeing how much it may
otherwise redound to my Prejudice from some, that will neither speak Truth
themselves, nor endure to hear it from others.

You are not ignorant that the best Princes, and even for their best Actions,
have been traduced and scandalized by lavish Tongues, the petulancy of
misimploy'd Wit, and mercenary malicious Pens. Therefore the best advised
Statesmen, have always thought such Invectives worthy none of their passions,
but scorn and neglect; Augustus never spoke more like himself, than in that
Expression to Tiberius -- Noli hac in r^ indagare, and nimium Indignari
Quempiam esse qui de me loquatur Male, satis est enim si hoc habemus, ne quis
male facere possit.

I need not give you the Character of the Instruments that chiefly contrive and
promote the Libels you complain of; What may not be expected from Persons
defeated in their Nefarious Attempts? Frustrated of their Ambitious hopes?
Acted by Malice, Envy, Want and Despair? I believe you never knew many of them
much Celebrated at home for any extraordinary strict Piety or Moral Virtue; and
I can assure you, we do not find by their general Conversation here, any great
Inclinations they have to live Saints, or die Martyrs. What Notorious false
Stories? What gross Forgeries (under the Notion of Intercepted Letters, etc.)
have they not Industriously advanced and spread abroad? Nay, some of them have
attempted to abuse Heaven it self, and suborn the Stars to Countenance their
Impostures, whilst they divert themselves over a full-crown'd Rummer, in
boasting how many silly Souls in England they have bubled with these fulsome
Shams -- Yet these are the men that are so wonderously transported with Zeal,
for the Preservation of a Religion, which they always were, and continue to be
a scandal to.

But if (over-looking their immodest Reflections, etc.) you consider the main
scope and design of these Papers, is it not altogether to support the Penal and
Test-Laws, and to prevent the free Exercise of Religion being settled among you?
And on what Topics do they proceed, but little Sophisms, adapted only to Amuse
and Inflame the Vulgar? And begging the main Question, [ viz. Taking it for
granted, that if those Laws be removed, there will not, or cannot be other
sufficient Security for the Protestant Religion established in their stead]
which as it is altogether a mis-stating of the case; so it seems somewhat
unaccountable, that the very same Persons, who ever while complained so much of
Oppression for matters of Relion, or at least the fears on it, and were so fond
of Liberty of Conscience, that to obtain it, they broke through all the Bounds
of Duty and Prudence, and ventured upon a desperate Rebellion (apparently
threatening the utter Ruin of their Native Country) should now on a sudden be
so extremely averse thereunto, when it is freely offered to be settled by Law to
all Posterity, under as firm Security as the Wisdom of a Nation can invent?

Therefore, tho I know Peoples Passions have a strange Bias on their
Judgments, yet a Wise Man may be tempted to suspect something more in this
case, and that the Humor is fomented and encouraged by the secret Influences
of some powerful Interest; for it is That commonly moves the Wheels, though
Religion may be made the pretense: What Is the reason so many cried out against
Matchiavel? Not so much perhaps, for the badness of his Maxims (since they are
every day practiced by such as declaim loudest against 'em) but ill Politicians
were angry that he should divulge their Arcana, and make those Mysteries
common, which they designed to engross to themselves for the support of their
own Grandeur. I intend no more by the comparison, than only to say, That it is
no Miracle, if one that finds some Expedient very advantageous to himself,
shall endeavor to divert others from the use and benefit of it. Even the
Philosophic Adepti, tho they pretend to the most Flaming Charity, deliver
their Precepts under such perplexing Aenigma's, as if they designed to lead men
into Error. and the destruction of their Fortunes, rather than Illuminate them
to the Discovery of the boasted Elixir. That Interest will not lie, is as
certain as any Problem in Euclide; Nor is the Jealousy of State less violent
than that of Love; none enduring a Rival to his Courtship, if he can prevent it.

Since therefore the bottom of your Enquiry seems to reach at thi^, what
advantages a secure Establishment of Liberty for Tender Consciences in England
may be attended with, in respect of the Trade and Civil Happiness of that
Nation? And how far it may probably on that account Affect some of its
Neighbors? I shall apply my self to give you the best satisfaction I can,
wherein that I may not run into Notions merely speculative; I shall insist on
matter of Fact; for what effects it has produced, it may do again (caeteris
paribus) and much greater, if accompanied with other more advantageous
Circumstances; Nor need I step out of my present Lodging for an Instance.

It Is well known, that the free Exercise of Religion was the best Swadling-Band
of this Infant Commonwealth; for by their Original Constitution, the Union of
Vtrecht 1579, it was provided, That every man should remain free in his
Religion, and none be examined or entrapped for that Cause. And the steady
adherence to that Maxim has mainly contributed to cherish and support them
under all difficulties ever since, so that it is one of the Fundamental
Principles of our Policy; the firmest Pile that bouys up our Magnificent
Stadt-House. It Is That to which we owe our Populousness, and consequently our
Trade, Riches and Strength; the Engine whereby we have at once D^ained other
Nations, and mounted our selves to such an Ascendent of Opulency and Power, as
to vye with the most plentiful Kingdoms and tallest Monarchs.

And the Reasons thereof are no less Evident than Universal: For,

1. As Persecution tends to depopulate; so Liberty of Conscience naturally
draws a vast Conflux of People; for as nothing can be more grievous to Honest
Men, than to be restrained in this World from what they believe conductive to
their Eternal Happiness in the next; so tho all have not the Fortitude actually
to suffer in such cases, yet few want the Prudence, if they have the
opportunity, to remove to a place of shelter, where they may freely enjoy those
Privileges which they are denied at home; and for sake thereof, prefer
Wildernesses and Boggs, before the most fertile Soils, or pleasantest Climates.
Hence these Provinces (tho little befriended by Nature) are so full of People,
that they are Calculated to have at least six Souls for every Acre of Land.

2. The People thus kept at home, or invited from abroad, by public permission
of Liberty of Conscience, are not idle Drones or Spend-Thrifts, but generally
the most Sober and Industrious of any Country: None being more diligent in
their Calling, or careful to husband their Time and Parts for public Benefit
and Improvement, than such as make Conscience of their Duty toward God; as
knowing that Sloth, Gluttony, Drunkenness, Debauchery, Vainpastimes, or
Trifling Divertisements, are no less inconsistent with their Profession, than
prejudicial to the Interest of any Nation.

3. Hence it is observed, That the most part of those Refugies consist of
Merchants, Artifficers, or Laborious Tradesmen, that like Bees, wherever they
come, bring in Honey to the common Hive, by Teaching New, or improving Old
Manufactures amongst those where they reside. How often has the grand staple of
Trade been Transplanted from one place to another merely on this occasion? The
French and English Persecutions about 130 years ago, carried it to Antwerp; the
Fury of the Duke of Alva forced it into these parts, whereby Amsterdam from a
poor Fishing Dorp, is raised to one of the Richest Cities, in the Universe; the
severity of some of your Clergy, about half a Century past, adding not a little
thereunto.

Nor want there Instances of a fresher Date; it is not above four of five years
since several Families from the West and other parts of England, harrassed and
wearied out with Excommunications and Forfeitures of 20 l. per Month, for
Nonconformity, etc. came and planted themselves amongst us at Lewarden in
Friezland, and others went higher unto Lunenburgh, offering to set up the
English Manufactory for Cloth, Stuffs, Sarges, etc. At both places they were
entertained with all the Kindness imaginable; having Houses allotted them
Gratis, and great Privileges granted for their Encouragement. And more of
their Countrymen after Monmouths Rebellion (a main ground of which, as we heard
here, was pretended to be for Liberty of Conscience) flying over, and joining
with them, they became considerable; forty Looms at least, being daily kept
going at Lewarden, and a Fund of 20 or 30 thousand Pounds proposed to be
advanced for carrying on the work: whereby we promised our selves no small
advantages; for what with Wool privately Stolen from England, and what with
another sort of some of our Upland Neighbors, and the plenty of Spanish Wool
which we have here. They had got a knack of mixing it to as great advantage as
yours; which skill our People would soon have been Masters of; and that could
not fail of giving a fatal Blow to your Clothing Trade; and your Hamburgh
Company began to sear, if not to feel the Consequences, especially from
Lunenburgh, by reason of its Commodious Situation to Intercept their Markets.

But the Truth is, the King of Great Britain was no sooner advertised hereof,
but he dispatched necessary Orders to his Ambassador, then at the Hague; by
whose Directions, one Everart (or some such Name) was employed, to Treat with
the Principal Undertakers, and by assuring them, of an entire Liberty of
Conscience at home, and Free Pardon to such as wanted it, prevailed with them
to withdraw their Stocks: And so the Design at both Places fell to the ground;
which though we may in Interest resent, yet none can but in-Justice, applaude
His Majesty's Conduct therein, as a Testimony of his Prudent Watchful Care, for
the Welfare of his Kingdoms and People; who otherwise might have felt, the
Ruinating Effects of this Accident, to after Generations.

On the other side, whereas till of late, we bought vast Quantities of
Druggets, Gawzes, and other lesser Manufactures and Knick-knacks from France;
since such Numbers of Protestants have been forced into these Provinces, from
thence: We have made them here so plentifully, as to furnish the Markets, where
there is Occasion: Nor is it probable, that France will ever recover that Trade
again, whereby it got, perhaps more than a Million per Annum.

4. A Fourth Advantage of this Religious Liberty, is, That it incourages the
Inhabitants of any Country, to be more Industrious, and more freely to venture
their Stocks in Trade, being freed from Vexatious Prosecutions, Imprisonments,
etc. And as (I have heard that) most of your Corporations in England, did not a
little decline from their flourishing Condition some years since, when many of
the sobrest, and most, Publick-spirited Inhabitants, were by the Imposition of
Oaths and T^sts, debarred from all share in the Government; and by severe
Prosecutions, forced to give over Trading: So the Influence thereof, we
Apprehended, would have quickly affected the whole Nation, had not His
Majesty's Wisdom interposed his late Declaration for Liberty; of which,
(whatever Sentiments our Ministers of State may have of it) I doubt not, but
you do already feel the Happy Effects, and would to a far greater Degree, if
the same were once Established by Law; and the Fears, Jealousies, and
Distractions of Peoples Minds, fully Cured: For which, That seems to be the
Sovereign Remedy, and only means, to make your King the Great Arbitrer of
Europe. For,

5. Granting Liberty of Conscience secures the Government, and renders it easy;
takes away all Color for Faction or Rebellion: Nothing binds more firmly than
Interest, and no Interest is more strongly obliging, or more beloved than this
Freedom; and therefore ties all the Inhabitants where they have it, into a
strict Fidelity to that Power which grants it, and brings every part to an
entire Dependence thereon; whereas, when only One Persuasion is Caressed, and
others (altogether as good and useful Subjects) Exposed to Losses and
Punishments, for their Religion; such a Government is seldom Quiet, and never
Safe: Nor does it less appease Feuds and Animosities, between the different
Sects, amongst themselves; no man having Cause to be offended, at another Man's
Liberty, because he enjoys the same himself.

The Happiness of these Province^, in this Respect, I have seen Elegantly
Expressed, by an Eminent Statesman of yours, formerly Ambassador here. -- In
this Commonwealth (says he) no Man having Reason to complain of Oppression in
Conscience, nor any Hopes, by advancing his Religion to form a Party, or break
into the State, The Differences in Opinions, make none in Affections, and
little in Conversation, where it serves but for Entertainment and Variety: They
argue, without Interest or Anger; They differ, without Enmity or Scorn; and
they agree without Confederacy: Men live together like Citizens of the World,
associated by the common Ties of Humanity, and Bonds of Peace, under the
Impartial Protection of indifferent Laws; with equal Encouragement of all Art
and Endustry, and equal Freedom of Speculation and Inquiry: The Power of
Religion, where it is, lies in every Man's Heart; and where there is only the
Appearance, it has not however so much of the Hypocrite, and nothing at all of
that Fierceness, as elsewhere. But rather, is like a piece of Humanity, by
which every one falls most into the Company, or Conversation of those, whose
Customs and Humors, whose Talk and Disposition they like best. And as in other
places, it is in every man's choice, with whom he will Eat or Lodge, with whom
to go to Market, or to Court; so it is here, with whom he will Pray, or go to
Church, or Associate in the Service and Worship of God; nor is any more Notice
taken, or more Censure past, of what every one chooses in these Cases, than in
the other.

I know not how relishing this Description may be to your coy English Pallates;
but as I can assure you, it is perfectly true; so to me it seems very inviting,
much accommodate to the Civil, Quiet, and Prosperity of any Nation; and (if I
mistake not) is one of the greatest Charms, as well as chiefest Supports, of
this Flourishing Republic.

Now, (to turn the Tables) if the free Exercise of Religion, have been able to
yield such excellent Effects in These Provinces; who sees not that the same
firmly Established in England, must needs there produce far Greater Advantages?

For not to urge, that this Liberty is advanced amongst you, from a Nobler and
more Christian Principle, and so may hope for a greater share of the Divine
Blessing: Ours owning its Birth, only to little Accidents and great Necessity,
and continued for Poncy and Reasons of State: Whereas, yours is the Child of
Election, I mean, the choice of a well-informed National Judgment; drawn Ex
puris Naturalibus, from the Limpid Streams of Primitive Christianity, Natural
Equity, and Undisturbed Reason; Granted, not as a Convenience, or an Alms, but
a Right; not only, because fit in Prudence, but because requisite in Piety; nor
so much for its Advantages, as its Justice: The contrary Practice being
declared an Invasion on the Almighty's Prerogative, as well as a Tyranny over
the Souls of Men. Omitting, I say, this more refined Consideration, I shall
only offer, That you must needs, in mere Civil Advantages, weigh down the
Balance.

Because England is more aptly Situate, and Accommodated for the same. For (if
I may pour a bold Truth into the Bosom of a Friend) your happy Britain, as she
is the Queen of Isles, so seems designed by Nature, to be the Sovereign of the
Seas, Mistress of Trade, the Grand Magazine of Commerce, and chief Empory of
the World, as Enjoying,

1. A most Excellent Temperate Air, with its Sweetness and Salubrity, inviting
Strangers to a Climate, where they shall never need Stoves in the Winter, nor
Grotta's in the Summer.

2. A large and Plentiful Soil, (England alone being Ten times as big as our
United Netherlands) affording all things necessary, or commodious, for the Life
or Delight of Man, and able to sustain many Hundred Thousands more of
Inhabitants, than she has.

3. Furnished with diverse Gallant Navigable Rivers abundance of safe Commodious
Harbors, and bold strong Ports, (therein exceeding all her Neighbors, if not
all the Countries in the World.)

4. Stocked with more plenty of Native Commodities, and fit to be improved,
into Useful and Vendible Manufactures; so that none need want Employment, if
they do not want Industry.

5. Extraordinary Plenty of Provisions, and those of the Best, and Heartiest,
and most Substantial of your own Product: For I find it asserted, in Notitia
Anglica, That there is yearly, as much Flesh and Beer consumed in England, by
over-plentiful Tables, as would serve Three-times the Number of People.
Whereas, by Computation, these Provinces are not able of themselves, to yield
Sustenance for above one Eight part of our Multitudes; which, together with the
Heavy Impositions to the State, renders all Necessaries dear, and living here,
very uneasy and chargable; your meanest Boors and Porters, Eating and Drinking
better than our Burghers.

From these, and many other Advantages that might be Enumerated; it is easy to
foresee, That if Liberty of Conscience should be once firmly settled in England,
it cannot fail to Attract a wonderful Concourse of Strangers, thereby greatly
advancing the Rents of Lands and Houses, and the Prices of all sorts of
Provisions, and consequently, a mighty Increase of Manufactures, Trade and
Riches.

After I have said thus much, I need not add who, or What People in the World,
would find themselves losers on the Foot of the Account. It being morally
certain, That Liberty of Conscience Established by Law in England, (adding
thereto an Act for Naturalization of Strangers, and a Registry for securing the
Titles of Purchases, one of the greatest Defects in your Nation) would more
mortify them in seven years time, than a War so long managed against them,
with Success. And if you are pleased to believe, that they have so much Wit, as
to understand their own Interest, it will appear no wonder, if they make use of
all the Arts they can, to prevent such Consequences.

Which, without the help of an Oedipus, may bid fair for the Salving the Riddle
of your first Enquiry: But having wearied you with a Tedious Letter, it is time
I beg your Pardon, and entreat you to take the Liberty I have used herein, as a
further Argument, that I am altogether

Amsterdam, April 27. S. N. 1688. Your most Humble, and Affectionate Servant,
C. D. W.

Printed with Allowance, for E. R. 1688.


