A Visitation and Warning Is this unto all MAGISTRATES AND LAVV-MAKERS,
TEMPORAL and SPIRITUAL, to Repent of PERSECUTION, and to forsake the Evil
thereof, that so they may obtain Mercy, and find a Hiding Place in the Day of
God's Wrath, which is near to be revealed against all such: Even from Him that
sits upon the Throne, and unto all his inferior Officers and People in
England whatsoever; to him that opens and shuts the Prison-doors. The Lord
will teach his People, the Lord will judge his People, and therefore let all be
warned how they teach or judge in matters of Religion and God's Worship, Them
that are taught of Him, and have received the Law from his mouth; by whom God
speaks in these latter days, whose voice is heard, and words received.
Persecution will undo this Generation, the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it, IN
HuMFRY WOOLDRIDGE.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1662.

A Visitation and Warning is this unto all Magistrates and Lawmakers, Temporal
and Spiritual, to repent of Persecution, and to forsake the evil thereof, etc.
PErsecution in all Ages was of the Devil, the enemy of Mankind; it was always
against the appearance of God wherever he made himself manifest; yet did the
spirit of the World and births that are of the Devil's begetting, never want a
cover to hide themselves withal, nor slanders or names of infamy to cast upon
them they persecuted; so that I may truly say, his visage is more marred than
the sons of men: But as it was in the days of the Jews, so is it now; they
called the Master of the house, Beelzeb^th, and did not want a refuge of lies
to hide themselves, saying; For a good work we stone thee not; but, because
thou being a man, make thy self the Son of God. So I say is it now in this
day of the appearance of the Son of God; they in whom he has m^nifested and
revealed himself, are not persecuted as righteou^ and good men, but as
unrighteous and such as are not (...) to live upon the Earth: not as them that
know the Truth, and walk in it, but as Deceivers and Blasphemers, and such as
bring in strange Doctrines, and movers of Sedition, and ^u^^ the World up-side
down. Under these names of reproach and slander do we, whom the sco^ners call
Quakers, suffer mo^^ cruel usage from this persecuting Generation, as we did
from them that went before; and under these deceits and falsehoods do the
Enemies of God and his eternal Truth hide themselves, saying, You are a People
against Ministers and Magistrate^ you are Rebels to the King, and will not
conform to the Law which he has made. This was the Charge the Enemies of God
charged Daniel and the three Children withal; These m^n O King, regard not thy
Laws; when they in their own wickedness had caused him to make a Law to his own
hurt. Thi^ was charged upon poor Mordecai, he regarded not the King's
Commandment, in bowing to the pride of Ha^nan. And thi^ was the Charge-against
Jeremiah, he was no friend to the King, say they, but sell away to the
Caldeans. This was the ^harg^ which the false Prophets and Priests, and men
void of th^s^ (...) of God, which they charged upon the Servants of the Lord in
all Ages. In the days of Ahab King of Israel four hundred ^^d ^i^ty Prophets,
all encouraged Ahab and Jehoshaph^^ to go up to R^moth Gilead to battle, and
cold them they should pros^^^^: but one Micaiah, whom all the Prophets mocked
and (...), who ^old the King the Truth, he must not be believ^d, but ^ust b^
put in P^ison, and fed with bread of affliction, and (...) of affliction. And
this has been the reward of the Righteous from the Unrighteous in all Ages,
because their d^^ds have been righteous, and the others wicked. This made (...)
to kill righteous Abeb. This made Corah and his co^^p^^^ ^o ^is^ up against
Moses and Aar^n, and gainsay them who h^d ^h^ Spirit, and were obedient to it;
yet did they (...) ^o cast upon them, saying, Are not all the (...) ^oly? why
do you then lift up your selves above the Con^^^^^^ of the Lord? you take too
much upon you, you sons of (...). (...) they that gainsayed the Spirit, charged
the meekest (...) upon* ^f the Earth, to be proud. And so they that con^^^
(...) christ, said those things which he did, was not by the Spirit of the
^ath^^, but by Beelzebub, the chief of Devils. and ^hris^ said, ^f it be so in
the green tree, what will be done (...) they h^ve h^ted me, they will hate you
also: If they (...) they will persecute you; and this will they do (...) know
not the Father.

So th^^ (...) which know the Truth, do not wonder to see wise and (...) and
Rulers and Magistrates, Priests and (...) it with one consent as Heresy and
Delusion; (...) consider the Generation of the Righteous (...) th^n that are
beloved of the Lord in the (...) old ho^ Truth and Righteousness, with them
that loved it, (...) ^loth^d with the black name of Infamy: but God i^ (...)
^ill sw^ep away your refuge of lies, and he will wo^k (...) will bring to pass,
and no one shall let it, the (...) spoken it. Woe he to the Wicked, it shall
(...); their covering is too narrow, the Lord will (...) has begun to rent it
already; Therefore all ye Persecutors weep and howl, all ye Bishops and
Spiritual men (so called) mourn your part, the Lord is risen against you, the
spirit of Persecution is taking root in your habitations, the Spiritual Weapon
of the Lamb is wanting; and though your wickedness swell as the Sea, and rise
as a flood, yet we know him that is above the pride of man, even him that sits
upon the floods, in him does my Soul trust, that is able to restrain all your
wrath, but only so much as shall make for his Peoples good, and the pure praise
and glory of our God that suffers it so to be; and you that persecute us,
where are the Apostles Weapons they warred withal? where is the Sword of the
Spirit that proceeds out of the Lamb's mouth? O mourn all ye Bishops and
Priests, and such as call your selves Ministers of Christ, ye are unlike him;
the Sheep of his pasture are men whom ye seek to devour, and make a prey to
your greedy teeth: the Lord is risen against you, in his pure Name is he hiding
his Babes, and unto his Children is become a hiding place as in the Generations
past: Blessed be the Lord he has not left us desolate of his tender Mercies,
even in a day when we find this saying true, The tender mercies of the wicked
are cruelty: and all you by whom we suffer, you say we suffer not for
Conscience sake, but for evil doing, and because we are not subject to the
King, nor Governors by him set over us.

To you all I say in the Name and Power of the Lord, give unto God the things
that belong unto God: O all ye great ones of the Earth, give you unto the Lord
the honor due unto his Name; do not you limit the Lords pure eternal Spirit by
making Laws how he should be served and worshipped; in this thing you rob the
Lord of his honor, who is a Spirit, and does teach his People in Spirit how to
worship him: therefore limit ye not the Holy One of Israel, for he is a great
King above all kings, and a God of gods, which says, My Glory will I not give
to another.

And unto all you Magistrates and Governors, and all the rest of your inferior
Officers in England, high and low, from him that sits upon the Throne, to
him that opens and shuts the Prison doors, this is the Word of the living
and true God, Persecution will break you all to pieces, but if you honor me,
and give unto me that which alone to me does belong, which is to ^ule in the
hearts of my People, let me be Lord, Judge, and ^aw giver in all spiritual
things, and let me be heard of all my Saines in all matters of Worship and
spiritual Service, then will I honor you, and all my Children whom I ^^^ch my
self, they shall honor you also for my Names sake; and if your Souls be
subject unto the higher Power, the ^ight of the World, Christ, unto whom I the
Lord have committed all Power in Spiritual matters, then shall all the Souls
whom I have begotten into my Power, and gathered from all the false ways and
worships, that they should not be (...) prey any longer to the teeth of the
greedy Wolves, unto the chief Bishop and Shepherd of their Souls, be subject
unto you, and all your righteous Commands, for Conscience sake* but if
otherwise ye will still exalt your s^lves above s^y Throne, which is the lowly
and contrite Spirit, ye shall be lightly esteemed by me; and all my Saints and
Children also, they shall bear their Testimony against you and your unrighteous
Laws, whereby you would force them to worship God, contrary to God's Witness,
which I the Lord have placed i^ their Consciences, to be their teacher and
guide in ^ll things.

And though you seed them for these things with Bread of Affliction, and giv^
them Water of Adversity to drink, and are killed ^ll the (...) long by you, yet
their Teacher shall never be r^moved into a corner any more, I the Lord (who
will not leave th^^^ comfortless in a Prison, but will rend through Rock^ and
W^lls of stone, to comfort and consolate the lowly heart) (...) spoken it.

And all the while ye are causing them to suffer, and filling up the me^sure of
your sin, even in going beyond your Commission, as they did whom God overthrew
before you; for ye have a time set with the Lord, and a work for him ye have to
do, which is to make manifest Hypocrites, and that the thoughts of many
deceitful hearts (who have made a Profession of God, but are enemies to his
Life) may be revealed, and their work (...) manifest of what sort it is; and
all Coverings r^nt but only that of the Spirit of the Lord, which his Children
and Lambs are covered withal; this ye cannot rent, though ye are pulling hard
at it: And all Foundations may ye overturn which are not upon the Rock, and
break al Gatherings and Assemblies which are not gathered into the Name of the
Lord; and every Church which has seemed, but has not been the true House of
God, may ye dash to pieces; and all may be made to change their Religion, and
Conform to any thing, and lick up their own Vomit again, but only those who are
translated by the Power of the Lord out of Darkness into Light, and gathered
out of all the false Churches in England (which are many) into the true Church
in God which is but one, the pillar and ground of Truth; these things before
mentioned may ye do, and yet stand; but ye have not to do with the Lords
Anointed, which are covered with his living Spirit, which is eternal and pure:
Woe be to them which touch these that have no help but what stands in the Name
of the Lord, neither any foundation have they but that of God, which all the
Prophets and Apostles, who, as a cloud of Witnesses against this Generation,
suffered Persecution, which is Christ in them the hope of Glory, yea, Glory it
self, Righteousness, Peace, and Joy, which is full of glory, which (blessed be
the Lord) the World cannot take from us; if ye touch these, and number these
with Transgressors, ye touch the Apple of God's Eye, and ye your selves will be
found Trangressors if ye persecute and spoil these. O ye Magistrates and
Bishops, the Lord will break you with breach upon breach; yea, you have
persecuted and spoiled many of them already, and it will be your ruin unless
ye speedily repent: it is the eternal Word of the Lord God unto this
Generation, Persecution will undo you.

Yet thus is it written by the Prophet Jeremy 18. At what time I speak
concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down,
and to destroy it, if that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from
their evil, I also will repent of the evil I thought to do unto them: O that
there were but such a heart in you to consider this before it be too late, and
the Lord destroy you with double destruction.

And thi^ does ^y Soul believe, and it is established in my heart for eve^,
that all your Weapons of Cruelty, your grievous and unjust ^^ws which ye have
made with the Consent of your Lords Spiritual, to waste and destroy Families,
and banish the inno^^^^t People of the Lord called Quakers, shall all work
together in the end for their good, and drive them, even the Chil^^^^ and
People whom he has blessed, so much nea^^^ unto himself; and the more they are
oppressed so much the greater will be the Cry of the Oppressed against you: and
it will be with the oppressed Seed of God as with Israel in the ^and of Egyp^,
the more they were Oppressed the more they Multiplied* and all the wisdom of
this World, and the persecuting Po^^^s of Hell and Death shall never hinder it,
nor stop the Work which God is working, nor quench the Light and Spark which
^ust become a strong Nation, the Holy One of Israel has spok^n it.

Neverthel^ss, ye are doing your endeavor, and taking wise Counsel and Advice,
as Pharaoh did with the Magicians of Egyp^, how ^o ^oot out the Name of Israel
from under Heaven, and to that and y^ have established your cruel Commandments,
and s^^l^d your Decrees of Oppression against them, and all this will but op^n
the ears of the Lord to hear them, and cause hi^ ^o st^^t^h out his Arm to save
them in your destruction; for the Lord hears the cry of the Afflicted, the
Lord lo^s^^h ^h^ ^onds of the Prisoners, and ill will it be with you, wh^^ the
Souls of the wounded cry out. This mad^ J^^^^^i^h cry unto the Lord, Chap. 17.
Let them be confounded tha^ p^^s^cute (...), but let not me be confounded; let
them be dis^^id, b^^ l^^ not me be dismayed; bring upon them the day of evil,
and des^roy the^ with double destruction: I say, these things will cry for
Veng^anc^ from the God of Heaven, as in the days of old, when Christ came near
unto Jerusalem, the conside^ation of these things caused him to weep over it,
saying, O J^r^s^l^^, J^rusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest
th^^ th^^ are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thee* This is thy
state, and this is thy condition O London, with thy Magistrates and Rulers, how
often has the Lord wa^ned you, and ye would not be warned to leave off
Persecuting for matters of Conscience in the Worship and Servic^ of God in the
days of your former Rulers, which were many; how often were they warned by the
Servants of the Living God concerning this thing?

And now, in this your Day, you have been often warned, both you and your King,
to let Conscience go free; and you have made Promises, and the words of your
King have been, we should never suffer for Conscience sake so long as we lived
peaceably. And again, you are warned at this time, both you and your King, that
you leave off Persecution, and let the Spirit of the Lord teach the Children of
the Lord how to Worship him; for it is written in the Scriptures, that the
Spirit teaches them how to Pray and Worship as they ought, and as many as are
the Sons of God are led by the Spirit of God; therefore do not think or believe
that such can be limited to any dead Form of Prayer or Worship set up by the
Precepts and Commandments of men; therefore be warned of these things, and if
you are not, it will be your utter ruin; and it is not for evil-doing, nor
rebellion against the Lord, nor the good Laws of your King, that we are killed
thus all the day long, and counted by you as Sheep for the slaughter, but
because we keep our Consciences clear, in being obedient to his Living Word and
Spirit, which purifies our hearts, that we are so used by you, and because we
that know the Lord are resolved, though he suffer you to kill us, we will not
fall down to your dead Image (nay, it is not so much as a true Image of a true
Worship) nor Worship in any other way but the same which he himself shall teach
us, for he is a Spirit, and in Spirit will be Worshipped; and all they that
Worship him after the Precepts and Commands of men, Worship they know not what.

Now all this Cruelty and Persecution is done and suffered to be done, that
that saying might be true, spoken by the Spirit in Generations past, They hated
me without a cause; and he which is born of the Flesh persecutes him that is
born of the Spirit; for the enmity of the Serpents Seed is against the Seed of
the f^^e Woman, because it is begotten and born of God which cannot sin, in
bowing to that which is begotten and brought forth by the wicked one; for there
is a Seed begotten, and a Birth brought forth by the undefiled God in England,
that serves the Lord in bearing Witness, as it did in all Ages and
Generations, against the Seed of Evildoers. And in the Persecutor is this Seed
a prick: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? it is hard for thee to kick
against the pricks. This is that Seed of the Kingdom which Christ told the
persecuting Jews, Luke 17.21. was within them: And this is that which Paul told
the Gentiles of, Romans I. that which may be known of God is manifested within
them. This is a Talent given to the evil and slothful servant, and a Prize in
the hand of a fool, he wanting an heart to improve it to the praise of the
Giver. This is the day of small things, and the weakness of God, it being
compared unto a Leaven hidden, and a grain of Mustard Seed not grown. This is
small in its beginnings yet chosen of God, elect and precious: A precious Stone
and sure Foundation to all that have tried, believed and proved it, he is
precious, and the head of the corner; but to the wisdom of man, and
wise-builders, such as build up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity,
is he a stumbling stone, and rock of offense at this day: and had not the Lord
God of Sabbaths left this Seed in fallen man, even we had all been as Sodom and
Gomorrah, whom the Lord overthrew, and repented not. This is the Candle of the
Lord, which all ye Persecutors put under a bushel; and that Light, by which Job
that righteous Magistrate walked through all darkness, which all ye oppressors
of the poor in spirit lie in: This is that which did convince the persecuting
Jews in themselves that Christ was a good man, and Pilate also, so that he,
notwithstanding all the cry of the multitude, Crucify, crucify him, could
find nothing worthy of death in him. And this was it which almost persuaded
King Agrippa to be a Christian. And this is it which all Persecutors and
Compellers about Religion, grieve, and do violence to in themselves first.

The light of the body is the eye, God said. I will guide my People by mine
eye. This all blind guides put out in themselves. It is the god of this world
in you Spiritual-men (falsely so called) with the seeming honor and glory
thereof, which blinds you, and shuts your ears, lest you should hear what
this good Spirit of God says; as it is written by the Prophet, If thou can
read thy state, do. Who is so blind as he that is perfect? and deaf as the
Lord's Messenger that I send? seeing many things, but thou observest not. Hear,
ye deaf, and look, you blind, that you may see the Lord is w^^^ pleased. For
his Righteousness sake he will magnify the Law, and make it honorable: but
this is a people robbed and spoiled; they are all of them snared i^ holes, and
they are hid in prison houses: they are for a prey, and none delivers; for a
spoil, and none says, Restore. Who among you will give ear to this? who will
hearken and hear for the time to come? Thou that art compelling to worship in
the Form thou set up with carnal Laws, thou would blind all them whose
eyes the Lord God has opened in this day of his Power, in which he has caused
his day to spring from on high, which will cover thy day, and stain thy glory,
whose fading crown is mortal, and does not endure throughout all generations,
but it is upon the head of the fat valleys, where run the pleasant streams, and
where the springs of waters are, ye Persecutors drink not of. The Lord has
caused his Day to spring, and he has enlightened the Earth; from his holy
Habitation everlasting Glory is revealed, which will stain the glory of the
World. England shall be as a Garden whom the Lord waters with the dew of the
everlasting Hills; as a Vineyard with pleasant Plants, the planting of the
Lord, that he may be glorified: He is pouring his Waters out of his Buckets,
and his Seed shall be in many Nations: His King shall be higher than Agag, and
his Kingdom shall be exalted. The Lord has spoken in his Holiness, he will not
lie unto David and his Seed for evermore. He will rejoice over Palestina; over
Ethiopia, Egypt, and Edom will he rejoice. He will reveal his Glory, which
shall cover the Earth as a morning without Clouds; and as the Sun at noonday,
so will he shine out of Zion: many shall be gathered into his Rest, and he will
beautify the place of his Holiness. And this is a Charge to all you
Magistrares: in the Name of the Lord of Host take heed what you do against
Israel, they are a People whom he has blessed, and whom he will honor with a
Crown that is immortal, and with the right hand of his Power will he sav^ them
throughout Generations; and he will break their Enemies, and they shall never
prosper, but shall be confounded for ever that owes ill will to Jerusalem. The
daughter of Zion has laughed you to scorn; the daughter of Jerusalem shall
rejoice in her God for ever and ever; who has f^rmed Jacob, he will preser^^
and save the distressed of Israel. The Lord lives, and blessed be our Rock,
and magnified for ever be the God of our Salvation, who hides us in the hollow
of his hand, and in whose Name and Might we who know the Lord, are confident
that he will never leave us nor forsake us utterly, nor give us as a prey into
the hands of the wicked; and though he suffer you to plow long furrows upon our
backs, as it was with the same Seed in all Generations; yet cannot we forget
the Lord, because we love him who is a present help in all times of trouble. We
are persuaded, and that by the Love which he has shed abroad in our hearts,
that all your Cruelty whatsoever, your spoiling of Goods, and Banishments, and
whatsoever more he who limits all shall suffer you to do, shall never be able
to separate us from the Love of God, who has united our souls in a perpetual
Covenant, which can not be broken unto himself.

The Lord our God whom we serve, will break all unrighteous Laws, and the Yoke
of Oppression, as in the day of Middian, so will he rise up for our help; and
Woe be unto them which stand in his way when he rises: he will roar out of
Sion, even as the Seas; for the indignation of the Lord is upon all Nations,
and his Fury upon all their Armies: He will utterly destroy them, and deliver
them to the slaughter; for it is the day of the Lord's Vengeance, and the Year
of Recompenses for the Controversy of Sion, which has long sat solitary in a
Wilderness; which has been black as the tents of Ked^^, because of the clouds
of the night; the rain and storms of the Winter have all passed over her, the
Se^s and the waves thereof have covered her, and the reeds have been about her
head: she has mourned sore in the night because of the oppression, because of
the rage of the Dragon has she been hid in the wilderness, and sitten desolate
in a Desert, as they that are dead of old; covered has she been with the robe
of unrighteousness, and rapt up as in a mantle of violence: great has been her
wrong, and grievous the violence done unto my flesh, do the Inhabitants of Sion
say; and great will be the deliverance, and the glory that is to (...) upon thy
head for evermore. Arise and shine forth, for (...) ^ight is come, the Glory of
thy God is risen upon thee, which shall dazzle the eyes of all that hate thee,
and persecute thee without a cause: the Lord will cover thee in the hollow of
his hand, and make thee a sharp threshing instrument, wherewith he will thresh
the Mountains, and beat the Hills to pieces. With thee will he plant Nations,
and pluck up Nations: With thee will he strike the Horse and his Rider: With
thee will he break the Chariot and his Driver; With thee will he break the
Scepter, and fling the Crown to the ground.

He has made thee as a polished Shaft in his Quiver, wherewith he will strike
through the reins of his Enem^es: With thee will he bind the Dragon, and cast
the Beast and the false Prophets, which deceive the Nations, into the Lake of
Fire: For the Wrath of the Lord is come, and the time of the Dead that they
should be judged, and thou should give reward unto thy Servants the Prophets,
and to the Saints and them that fear thy Name small and great, and should
destroy them which destroy the Earth: and though the Woman with the Man-child
have been in the Wilderness, long hidden in a place prepared them of God; yet
is the time come wherein she is come forth again, even out of the Wilderness;
fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun at noonday, and terrible as an Army with
Banners will she be to her Persecuters; the everlasting Gospel is preached
again, the Angel that has it is come, and he will have the Victory, and break
his Enemies as a Potter's vessel. Now is come Salvation and Strength, and the
Kingdom of our God, and the Power of his Christ; for the Persecuter and Accuser
of the Saints must be cast down, and they shall overcome him by the Blood of
the Lamb, and by the Word of their Testimony, which they hold who love not
their lives unto the death, shall have domininion over the Mighty: But all you
Persecuters, you are they which Christ prophesied of should come, Matthew. 7. and
Mat. 24. You are known by your fruits, to be the corrupt trees of whom men do
not gather figs: for we find that saying fulfilled even amongst you Bishops and
Spiritual men, the most upright amongst you is but as a tho^^-hedge, scratching
and tearing the wool, and devouring (...) ^^eep of God's Pasture (which are
men) with your Spiritual Courts: your Weapons also we are sure are not the same
Christ and the Apostles warred withal, when they warred against Spiritual
wickedness in high places; (mark) Spiritual wickedness was against the true
Apostles. Paul himself was a Bishop, and Timothy; but we do not read that
ever* they had such Councils and Decrees as are now made, to banish and destroy
them that will not conform in matters of Conscience. Read Act. 15.6. when the
Apostles and Elders were come together, to confider and determine concerning
them which troubled the Church, (and we know they had the mind of the Lord, I
believe you will not deny it) verse. 28. it is written, It seems good to the
holy Ghost, etc. Mark, what they did, seemed good to the holy Ghost. But in
their Decrees we read not of any banishing or imprisoning, or of any such
Decrees as are made by you Lords spiritual. And when the Apostles cast any out
of the Church, we do not read that they took such a way as you do when you
excommunicate, that they must neither buy nor sell: for Paul says, I write
unto you, that you should not accompany with Fornicators; yet says he, not
altogether with Fornicators of this world, for then must you go out of the
world. But if any that is called a Brother be a Fornicator, or covetous, or an
Idolater, or a Railer, or a Drunkard, with such a one do not eat: For we have
nothing to do to judge them that are without, but them that are within, says
Paul, 1 Cor. 5.11, 12. but these we read of in the Revelations to be the
Dragon's, and Beast's and false Prophet's weapons, which slew the Saints, and
killed them that had the Testimony of Jesus, which is the Word of God. And
there you may read all this Compelling is not of God, but the Devil; not of
Christ, but Antichrist: neither was it ever found in the true Church, but in
the Synagogues of Satan. You may read your selves, your ^oot is one with
Judas, whose Bishopric was taken from him, because he persecuted the poor and
need man; and your Weapons are not Spiritual, but such as the High Priests
were, that came with Judas to apprehend Christ; so all your Decrees and Laws,
whereby ye imprison, spoil, and banish such as cannot Conform to your Worship,
nor deny the Lord who has taught-them how to Worship, is not of God, but of
the Devil; so ye are they in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly ravened from the
Spirit and Power the true Bishops had, which Christ said should come: And John
which wrote unto the little Children in his Epistles, said, were come already:
by which he knew it was the last times. And John in the Revelation says, All
the World wondered after the Beast; (and this was sixteen hundred years since)
and said, Who was able to make War with him? and they received his Mark and his
Names, which were Names of Blasphemy, who blasphemed the Temple of God, and
they that dwelt therein; but only they who loved not their lives unto death,
whose Names were written in the Lamb's Book of Life before the foundation of
the World, they followed the Lamb wherever he went.

Now they that are blind in heart, and Hypocrites, may believe you are true
Bishops and Ministers of Christ, and your Church the true Church; the fearful
and the unbelieving, who are with you without the Gate of the City of our
Solemnity and Place where the Saints worship, and serve him day and night, they
may say, Who is able to make War with the Beast? False Prophets, they may fall
down and bow to any thing; and all they whose Names are not written in the
Lamb's Book of Life, they may Worship the Beast; and so that Scripture will be
fulfilled in England, written in John's Revelations, Chap. 17. where the false
Church is compa^ed (even Mystery Babylon) to a Woman decked with Gold, Pearls,
and precious Stones; this Woman was drunk with the blood of the Saints, and yet
in her hand was there a golden Cup, so fair and beautiful to look upon and
behold, that she made all the Kings and Great Men to drink of it, and so they
became subject to her, even her in whom was found the blood of all the Saints
and Prophets that were slain upon the Earth; verse. 18. The Woman that thou
saw is that great City, which reigns over the Kings of the Earth: But I
say, and it is the Truth of God, There are a few notwithstanding all this, that
are Redeemed out of that Earth, out of which that Beast which did carry the
Woman, rose, that have not defiled their Garments with this Woman, nor bowed to
this Baal, nor kissed him; in whom the Lord has opened a pure eye, that sees
an end of all things which had a beginning, and are come to the beginning it
self, the first and the last, where there is no darkness, nor shadow of death,
where there is no Oppression nor Cry, but the voice of Rejoicing and Salvation
is in the dwelling place of the Righteous, in which Righteousness is the Lord
establishing many: And though our outward man perish daily in Prisons and
Dungeons, under the hands of unmerciful men, whose tender mercies are cruelty,
yet we can rejoice in the Lord, and glory all the day long: Even in this your
day, and the power of darkness, is the Lord a Light unto us; and when all men,
even almost all say, there is a casting down; then can our Souls truly say, The
Lord is the lifter up of our head; and though we die daily, and are as men
appointed by you for destruction, yet have we a Life hid from you; we have
bread to eat and drink ye know not of, and in that do our hearts live that seek
the Lord and his face continually, which all Persecuters, and such as do
violence unto the blood of any man cannot enter into, but are shut out, even
without the gate among the Dogs and the unclean, that can never enter in, the
portion of whose Cup is not like the portion of Jacob, but lamentation,
weeping, and woe.

All you Bishops, which own your selves to be Ministers of Christ, it is in my
heart for Truth's sake, which I love before my own life, that Truth and the
Ministers thereof may be made manifest, to ask you a few Questions:

First, How shall one know a true Bishop and Minister of Christ from the false,
but by their fruits, the marks and symptoms the chief Bishop and the true
Ministers set them forth by in the Scriptures? 2 Cor. 6.4, etc. where the
Apostle says, In all these things they have proved themselves to be Ministers
of God, in much Patience, in Afflictions, in Necessities, in Distresses, in
Stripes, in Imprisonments, in Tumults, in Labors, in Watchings, in Fastings,
(Mark) verse. 6. By Pureness, by Knowledge, by Long-suffering, by Kindness, by
the Holy Ghost, by Love unfeigned, by the Word of Truth, by the Power of God,
by the Armor of Righteousness on the Right hand and on the Left, by Honor and
Dishonor, by evil Report and good Report, as Deceivers, and yet true; as
unknown, and yet well known; as dying, yet behold, we live; as chastized, and
not killed; as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich;
as having nothing, yet possessing all things: (Mark) They were in God, whose
was the Earth and the fullness thereof; they cast their care upon him, who said,
The Labourer is worthy of his meat, and he cared for them. Whether these things
did not always attend the true Prophets, Christ and his true Apostles, before
mentioned? And whether these be not the marks of the Lamb and his true
Ministers? And whether they that are found in the contrary, living in
pleasures, as Lords over Gods Heritage, not ruling in the Spirit and Power of
God, but with cruel Laws made by the Powers of the Earth, whether these be not
false Prophets and Ministers of Antichrist, let them go under what Name they
will? and whether it be the Name of a Minister and Bishop that makes him truly
so, or the Nature and Power of God which first gave them the Names, Yea, or
Nay? And whether these Marks and Characters are found in your Church and
Ministry, or whether they be not rather found amongst the Church and Ministers
of the People called Quakers, which by your consent and advice are made this
day in England to suffer such cruel things as they do, and are like to do?
Whether the marks of the Beast and Characters of the false Prophets, and
Merchants of Babylon, which traded with the Bodies and Souls of men, be not
rather found amongst you, by whose consent and advice they are caused so to
suffer?

Again, Whether Paul were not a faithful and true Bishop, who said, Though we
live in the flesh, yet do we not war after the flesh; but the weapons of our
Warfare are spiritual and not carnal: Moreover he said, We are counted as the
offscouring of all things; being defamed, we entreat; neither, says he, do we
wrestle with flesh and blood, (mark this ye that have put, or at least suffered
it so to be, so many thousands of innocent People in close Prisons, wherein
many of them have lost their lives) but with Principalities and Powers of
Darkness, and with spiritual Wickedness in high Places, (mark) Spiritual
wickedness was against Paul, as at this day it is against them that follow his
steps: And whether your Warfare be the same Paul's was, and against the same?
if yea, then why do you not use the same weapons the Apostles used, namely,
found Doctrine? for a Bishop must be blameless and faithful, as the Steward of
God, holding fast the faithful Word, that thereby he may be able with sound
Doctrine (mark) not with Prisons, spoiling their Goods, and banishing, which
destroys the handiwork of God, and spills their blood; but with sound
Doctrine he must, Paul says, be able both to convince and stop the mouths of
gainsayers. Now if ye be found in the Faith, as they which watch for the Soul
ought to be, even in that Faith which is a Mystery to all that mingle their
Sacrifices with Blood, and was once delivered unto the Saints, then Answer
these Queries, and do not cry out, Heresy, a Blasphemy, and run to your Car^al
Weapons, and Car^al Laws for help, as the persecuting Jews did against Christ
and the Apostles, when they were not able to resist the Spirit and Power by
which they spoke.

Again, If your Church be true, and Ministry also, then why is it not upheld
according to the Truth, as it is in the Scriptures declared to be in Jesus?
then according to Paul's words, 1. Cor. 5.12. What have ye to do to judge them
that are without? or to sue them for Maintenance that are without? are ye not
greedy, which would feed upon the Milk of the Flock ye keep not, and eat the
Fruit of the Vineyard ye neither dress nor plant? them that are without your
Church, if it be true, leave them to God's Judgment, as Paul says, What have I
to do to judge them that are without? So I say, What have you to do with us,
who have denied both you and your Church, root and branch, many years since?
What have ye to do to Excommunicate and cast them out, that for the Lord's sake
have separated themselves from both your Church and Ministry, because they have
no Faith to believe it is the true Church and Lamb's Wife (and, whatsoever is
not of Faith, is sin) but rather that Mystory Babylon, which John ( Rev. 17.
verse. the last) said, Ruled over the Kings of the Earth, and all Nations have
drunk of her Cup, and were become unstable as Waters, even her Cup in whom was
found the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus; and your Ministers, the Merchants
thereof, which must weep and mourn over her, for men will not buy her
Merchandise as afore-time; the Merchandise of Gold, and Silver, and precious
Stones, and of Pearls, and fine Linen, and Purple, and Silk, and Scarlet, and
Cinnamon, and Odours, and Ointments, and Frankinscence, and Wine, and Oil, and
fine flower of Wheat, and Beasts, and Sheep, and Horses, and Slaves, and Souls
and Bodies of Men; the Merchants of these things, which are made rich by her,
shall stand a far off for fear of her torment, weeping and wailing, saying,
Alas, al^^^ I that great City which was clothed in fine Linen, and Purple, and
Scarlet, and decked with Gold, and precious Stones, and Pearls; and every
Ship-master, and Company in Ships, and Saylors, and as many as traded by Sea,
stood a far off and cried, when they saw the smoke of her burning; What City is
like unto this great City that reigns over the Kings of the ^arth? For in
this day, even in this day that is dawned in England, must Babylon be
destroyed, and all her Merchants mourn, and all their great Riches brought to
naught; and she that has sat as Queen upon many Waters, and has been called
the Lady of Kingdoms, shall know Widowhood, and loss of Children: Therefore
rejoice over her thou Heavens, and holy Apostles, and Prophets, for God has
avenged you of her. And a mighty Angel took up a Stone, like a great Mill-^one,
and cast it into the Sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that great City
Babylon be thrown down and be found no more at all.

Again, I do not read in the Scriptures among any of the Acts of Christ's
Apostles, and Churches by them gathered, who had all Power in Heaven and Earth
committed to them, that after. Excommunication, or casting them out of the
Church, they did ever spoil the Goods or Imprison any such, and that they
should not be suffered to buy or sell, but be banished, as is done in England,
by the consent and advice of you that seem to be Pillars of the Church. These
things has my Soul weighed, and upon Consideration of good advice, and in the
counsel of the holy and pure God, I am bold to Conclude that these Marks and
Characters are not of the Lamb or his Ministers, but of the Beast, and false
Prophets, and Apostles transformed, being found amongst you.

I charge you in the Name of the Lord, not to be true Bishops and Ministers of
Christ, neither were ye ever made so by the Holy Ghost and the Power of God, as
they were we read of in the Scriptures; nor your Church true but false, and a
Nest of unclean Birds, and Synagogue of Satan, and place where his seat is set;
witness all the Prisons of England, and the spoiling of their Goods, who for
Conscience sake are imprisoned; witness also Newgate in London, how many of the
Lord's People have been kept there until death; a sufficient witness is the
whole Nation, of them that fear the Lord, in whose heart is his Law, against
both you and your Church.

Again, Whether Christ be not come, the unchangeable High Priest, he which puts
an end to all Shadows, changeable Priests and Worship? whether he be not given
for a Covenant of Light? and whether all the Nations of them that are saved
must not walk in it, the same that Moses by the Spirit, the man of God, spoke
of, saying, A Prophet like unto me shall the Lord your God raise up, him shall
you hear in all things? and whether that Soul must not be cut off out of the
Land of the Lord which hearkens not unto him only, even him who says, Learn of
me, and ye shall find rest to your Souls; and that when I go away, I will send
you the Spirit of Truth, the Comforter, which shall lead you into all Truth?
And what do you think of them which have heard and learned of the Father, and
are come to the knowledge of him, which to know is Life and Peace eternal, as
he is obeyed, and his voice followed, who says, My Sheep hear my voice, and a
stranger they will not follow? What will become of them, I say, that have eaten
of the true Bread, and drunk of the living Fountain, which, as a Well of living
Water, springs up in them, even them that believe in the Name of Jesus? if
these shall fall away, and in their hearts turn back into Egypt to you again,
and feed upon the Husks which satisfy not, and drink Water out of your broken
Cisterns, even the puddle waters of Babylon, from which all that fear the Lord,
let them be separated as we are whom ye persecute, lest they partake with you
of the Woes and Plagues he is bringing upon you, because of the blood of the
Innocent, and the oppression of the Poor. I speak, that I may be refreshed, let
come on me what will, good is the Lord, and his mercy endures for ever, the
Lord is gracious and full of compassion, but the tender mercies of the wicked
are cruelty; the Lord will most certainly do by you as you have done by us, and
such a day is the Lord bringing upon all Persecuters, the like was never seen
in England; the mean while in patience we possess our Souls, and commit the
keeping both of them and our Bodies, whom ye shut up for his Names sake, whose
witnesses we are in cruel Prisons, as into the hands of a faithful Creator.

Thus says the Lord, Hear me O my People, hearken unto me O my Nation, for a
Law shall proceed from me, and all my Children shall be taught of me: What may
you judge of your selves then, that say, Hearken unto us, Pray, Sing, and
Worship God as we teach you, for a Law is proceeded from us, and all that will
not Conform thereunto, all that will not Pray and Worship God according to the
Precepts and Commandments we have prescribed, they shall be esteemed Rebels to
the King, and all their Goods taken away, and at last, after long imprisonment,
they shall be banished out of the Nation; and all this is done, and intended to
be done by the consent and advice of you Lords Spiritual; Whether Chiist, who
is the chief Bishop of the Soul, and Shepherd of the Sheep, ever gave you, or
any, which were true Ministers and Bishops, such authority? Or, whether all
this be not from Antichrist's Power, and the Dragon's, that slew the Saints
which had the Testimony of Jesus and Word of God.

There are several Scriptures which speak of forcing and compelling, which the
Persecutors make themselves a Covering of: but this was in the time of the Law,
when their Worshi^ was outward, and they were compelled to it by an outward
Law: all which Christ put an end to, and said, God is a Spirit; ^^d they that
worship him acceptably, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth.

But this I say unto all you, high and low, great and small, that persecute and
imprison about Religion; You have imprisoned and done violence to the Just and
Holy One in your own hearts, the good Spirit which God who is a Spirit has
given to instruct you, that you have grieved and rebelled against; and
therefore all that will not do the like, must be imprisoned, their Goods
spoiled, and their Persons banished: All that will not kill the Witness in
themselves, must by you be killed for its sake all the day long; All they that
will not make shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, and lay the Heritage of
God waste, and tread the holy City under their feet, and blaspheme the Temple
of God and them that dwell therein, their Families must be laid waste by your
consent; and they themselves who fear before the Lord, and at the remembrance
of his Holiness, they must be counted Heretics and Blasphemers by this
Generation: You have rejected the Word of the Lord, and will have none of
Wisdoms Counsel, and therefore must they, which walk in the Light of the Word,
who are Wisdoms Children, and justified by Christ who is God's Wisdom and
Righteousness, be condemned by you, who are only wise to do evil.

The god of this world he it is that blinds thee with the seeming glory and
honor, so that thou can not see nor discern the things that be of the Spirit
of God; and now thou being blinded thy self (thou Persecuter about Religion,
whoever thou art) thou would with cruel tortures make all to see with thy
veiled eye, thy own house being left desolate, and overthrown by strangers;
desolate, I say, of the Spirit (any otherwise than to reprove and convince
thee) and the true knowledge of God; thou would lay waste the Temple of God
without thee, and the House which is a House of Prayer indeed would thou have
to become an habitation of Devils, and De^ of Thieves, like thine own: thou
have banished the go^t^e reproof^ of the good Spirit of God, and the Word which
is nigh thee, out of thine own heart, and have set up another thing besides the
Fear of the Lord, which is to depart from evil; and now thou being banished,
like Cain, for thy rebellion, from the presence of the Lord, art wrath; and
thou will spoil all their Houses and Goods, and lay their Dwellings desolate;
and though thou cannot banish them from the presence of the Lord, as thou art
thy self, thou will do thy endeavor to make them miserable upon the Earth; if
thou can not kill them, thou will banish them under the name of Traitors, and
they shall be whipped and imprisoned under the names of Vagabonds: thus thou art
building thy City with blood; but still thou art in a Land of fear, and but a
Vagabond thy self in the Earth, whilst we poor despised People, called Quakers,
who are free born of the Seed that is immortal, by this Generation have not so
much as a place whereon to lay out heads, but in Prisons and nolsom Dungeons:
and all this is, because we cannot bow to the false Worships, the false
Prophets, the Beast and Dragon is setting up, and establishing with carnal Laws
and weapons of Cruelty, which God will break: therefore are the Wicked angry,
and rage like the swelling of the Seas, and send out their own shame, and
execute their cruelty on the People whom the Lord has blessed, and united to
himself in a perpetual Covenant and firm Decree, that can never be broken. All
this is done that Wrath may come upon you to the uttermost. Yet the Lord has
said, Though all the Powers of Hell do rise as Mountains of darkness, and Gog
and Magog gather all their host together, whose number is numberless, and their
weapons the same the Dragon, Beast and false Prophets used in all Ages. All
this is nothing with the Lord, in whom we have believed, he will go through
them as an Arrow shot through the Air; he will save his Children, and not one
of them shall be desolate that trust in him; though they walk in the midst of
the stones of fire, and through the deeps of the Seas, he will save them and be
with them there; he will be ever mindful of his Covenant, and of his Oath, to a
thousand Generations: he will come unto them, and will not leave them
comfortless there.

O that all that have known the living and powerful Arm of the Lord, would
believe and trust in it for ever, in which is Salvation and Deliverance from
all fears of destruction when it comes; which Arm is revealed, in which we
have believed, and in which Faith we stand, and witness Peace and Truth, the
stability of our times; and God is become our God, our Lord, our Lawgiver and
our Judge, and of his Name will we make mention, and we will walk in the light
of his Law for ever and ever; and are resolved to keep his righteous Judgments
at all times, and therefore do our Enemies hate us: The Lord is our Judge and
our Justifier in this day when men condemn us; he has restored us into the
liberty, and brought us unto the beginning of that Day which shall never end,
and for which our souls have groaned and traveled long, pure Praises be unto
him that lives for ever and ever. The Lord has brought us into his Rest, which
remains for ever, even we that have and do believe in the Light that shines in
our hearts, have by this Light walked through all Darkness, unto Him with whom
there is no darkness nor shadow of turning; so that the shadow of death is
become as the eyelids of the morning, and we through the tender Mercies of our
God are entered into the Rest, where the Prisoners rest together, and where the
weary be at rest. Glory, glory and praise be unto the Lord of Sabbath, the
inner Gate of the Temple is opened in this Rest, which has been shut the six
working days: Praises to our God, that opens and none shuts. Bless the
Lord, O my Soul, and praise him whilst thou have a being in the Land of the
living.

The dead praise not the Lord, there is not a Persecutor gives him thanks,
their singing is no better than the howling of Dogs; they that lie in the
grave, and wallow in their own filth, over whom Death and Darkness has
dominion, they celebrate not the loving kindness of the Lord; their Songs are
over the Dead, they rejoice over the slain Witnesses of God in themselves; the
Songs of the Temple must be turned into howling; the mouth of the Lord has
spoken it.

Come down, O thou Virgin Daughter of Caldea, weep bitterly, says the Lord,
who knows thy outgoings and thy rage against the precious Sons of Sion, and
Virgin Daughter of Jerusalem, the time of whose Controversy is already come
into my heart: wherefore look upon Sion, the City of thy Solemnity, thine eyes
shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation (O thou Mourner) a Tabernacle that shall
not be taken down, nor one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, nor any
of the cords thereof broken: thine eyes shall behold the King in his beauty,
thou shall dwell in the Land that is yet far off. O thou that art afflicted,
and tossed with tempests, but not comforted; tempests within, and tempests
without: in the Name of the Lord I say unto thee, thine is the Kingdom, and the
righteousness thereof, the Power and the Glory belongs unto thee; and she that
is thy enemy shall be trodden down, as the mire in the streets: for the
Indignation of the Lord is kindled against Babylon, which shall not be quenched
night nor day; the smoke thereof shall go up for ever, from Generation to
Generation shall it lie waste, no one shall pass through it for ever and ever:
They shall call the Nobles thereof to the Kingdom, but none shall be there, and
all her Princes shall be nothing. Seek ye out of the Book of the Lord, and
read; nothing of all this shall fail. And the line of confusion shall be
stretched over it, and stones of emptiness: and all thy Merchants shall mourn,
and they that are made rich by Seas shall weep bitterly; for thy Tacklings are
loosed, they cannot well strengthen thy Masts, they cannot well spread thy
Sails: But the Inhabitants of Zion shall not say, I am sick; the People that
dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity.

Our God is the living and true God, his habitation is in the holy Mountain: he
has chosen Sion to dwell in, let all the Idols of the Heathen that know him
not, but would limit him, that does teach and lead his People in the Way
Everlasting, be confounded for ever; and all the Idol-makers, which are like
unto them, be broken, and let not their hands perform their Enterprises; for
the Breath of my God scatter them as the Dust of the Mountains in the Desert,
and as the Chaff before the Whirlwind, fling them out of their place; Amen,
says my heart and soul for ever. The Lord our God is rising against all
Persecutors, woe be to them if they be not warned; yea, he is risen already in
the persecuted; he will shake Mountains to pieces, he will rent all Hills
before him, and there is no darkness so thick, where the worker of Iniquity can
hide himself from the fierce anger of the Lord; though he make his nest in
Hell, and hide himself under the Mountains of the Earth, yet the breath of the
Lord shall breath upon him, and his Spirit which created him, shall rend him to
pieces as a rotten rag, until he make a way for him who Rules in Peace, whose
Scepter is a right Scepter, he it is that must Reign, the mouth of the Lord
has spoken it.

And he will cause them to remain, even them which have suffered with him, who
has been a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, hated and rejected of
men, them will he cause to reign with him upon the Earth; yea, they shall have
dominion over the Mighty: the Lion is come out of his thicket, the Destroyer of
the Gentiles is on his way, he will not fail nor be discouraged, he is risen as
a valiant man, and as a Giant refreshed with new Wine, his hand will not spare
his Enemies, his eye will not pity his Persecutors; but the Lord will spare
them that serve him both small and great: Blessed are they that hear and
believe unto the end of sin and transgression, which God is finishing and
putting an end unto, they shall have dominion over the Mighty.

But woe be to all Hypocrites, and woe be to all double-minded, and them that
forsake the Lord, the living Fountain, in whom all fresh springs are; and woe be
to all persecuting Magistrates and Lawmakers against the Innocent, Temporal
and Spiritual, a day of wasting and destruction, wherein your stink shall be
great, and wherein you shall not find a hiding place to hide you from the
furious vengeance of the Lord, who is risen to shake terribly the Earth, and
plead the Cause of the Oppressed and Innocent, by you persecuted; wherefore
this I say unto you all in the Name of the Lord, Repent and humble your selves
you Magitrates spiritual and temporal, and every inferior Officer, even from
him that sits on the Throne, to him that opens and shuts your
Prisondoors, Repent both you and your King, and persecute the Innocent no
longer; imprison and spoil their Goods no longer, because they cannot worship
as you do, even you that mingle your Sacrifices with blood, that it may be a
lengthning of your tranquillity; but if otherwise you go on, Persecution will
undo you, the mouth of the Lord has spoken it; for whose sake I am a witness
against your persecuting power,

HUMFRY WOOLDRIDGE.
For which Cause I am close Prisoner in Chester Castle, which I shall here
relate, and of which I have no cause at all to repent, or be ashamed for ever.
Upon the second day of the 10th Month, I came to Chester, it being the end of
the Assize, and many of the Lord's People being close Prisoners, taken from
their own peaceable Meeting, but were not called at all before the Judges; upon
the First day it was moved in my heart, by the Lord that made me, to go to
their Church called the Cathederal; the Judges and Magistrates which should do
Justice, and loose the Oppressed, and open the doors of the Prisoners, being
there, to cry out against Persecution; I came in in the Peace and Power of the
Living God, where I found the Organs playing, the Men and Boys singing, which
songs the Lord will turn into mourning; but David's Harp was not amongst them,
nor the Living Spirit which only praises the Lord; but the persecuting spirit
of Saul, which was ever an Enemy to the Spirit of the Father: when their Song
was ended, I came into their inward place of Worship, the Word of the Lord
being in my heart as a spring shut up, and a fountain sealed, I said, Let me
speak, that I may be refreshed, let come on me what will; it is better to die
than to live in rebellion against the Lord: So I stepped upon the side of a
Pew, and bid them hear the Word of the Living God to them all: but before I had
spoken all that was in my heart, they violently pulled me down as if they would
have torn me to pieces; but an Officer with a Silver Mace, whose heart the Lord
touched, saved me from the rude multitude; so I was carried away toward the
Castle, where I remain to this day.



THE END.

