TO THE KING and both Houses of PARLIAMENT sitting at Westminster, And to
every particular Member thereof; This is a timely warning that they do not make
Laws against the Righteous and Innocent People of the Lord called Quakers, as
the unrighteous Rulers whom God overthrew before them, did.

Pro. 20.8. The King that sits in the Throne of Jugdement, scatters away
all evil with his eyes.

By Humphrey Wolrich.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson at the sign of the Black spread Eagle and
Windmil in Martins le Grand.

O Parliament.
DO not ye establish that which the Lord has determined to overthrow, neither
do ye endeavor to destroy by unrighteous Laws, Truth which the Lord has
determined to establish, and his worship in Spirit will he exalt, and all other
worship taught by the precepts and commandments of men are abomination, and
the Lord will overturn and root it out of this Land in his season; and though
Idolatry be taking root, and spreading it self over this Land as the branches
of a green bay tree, yet the Lord will arise, and his enemies shall be
scattered as the chafe of the threshing floor before the wind, and the
whirlwind of the Lord shall fling them out of their place, for the Lord has a
mighty and a strong One, whom Nations, Councils and Parliaments have too too
much rejected, and set at naught, and the wise builders in all ages, yet a
remnant in all generations has he saved, and to them has he been a tried
stone, elect and precious, and to the generation of the righteous who have
sought the Lord in all ages, has he been a rock, a shelter, and hiding place,
and a sure foundation unto them where they have been hid from the persecution
and cruelty of men, even of such men which would not have them to rule over
them, such in all ages have been making Laws, and sealing unrighteous decrees
against the innocent, to bind the Consciences of the Servants of the Lord that
they might not worship him in the liberty of his own Spirit, such would never
own Christ (the light) in their Consciences which says, whatever ye would that
men should do unto you, do ye the same unto them) for their Lord, King, and
Lawgiver: For thus says the Lord, it is by me that Kings reign, and Princes
decree Justice, by me Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the
earth, Prove. 8.14. I wisdom dwell with prudence, and find our knowledge of
witty invention. Friends, this is spoken of Christ, who is the wisdom and power
of God, and in whom are found treasures of wisdom and knowledge, who says
counsel is mine, and sound wisdom, I am understanding, I have strength, this is
he who has given a measure of his true Light into all your Consciences to be
your Counselor, this is the power of God, to which every soul must be subject,
and every one that would act for God in the Parliament, must take counsel at
this Spirit which stands in the Congregation of the mighty, and judges among
the gods, who is for a Spirit of judgment to him that sits in judgment, and
whose name is called wonderful Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting
Father, the Prince of peace; (mark) this is he which says open thy mouth for
the dumb, in the cause of all such as are appointed unto destruction, open thy
mouth, judge righteously, and plead the cause of the poor and needy; this is he
of whom it is said, Esa. 11 from the 2. to the 5. the Spirit of the Lord shall
rest upon him, the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel
and might, the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord, and shall make
him of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord, he shall not judge after
the sight of his eyes neither reprove after the hearing of his ears, but with
righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of
the earth, and righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and
faithfulness the girdle of his rains, this is he which Job put on as a
garment, Job 29 14. I put on Righteousness and it clothed me, my judgment
was as a robe and diadem; (mark) this was the light by which Job walked through
darkness, and a Spirit of judgment when he sat in judgment, the Princes
refrained talking before him, the Nobles held their peace, and their tongues
cleaved to the roof of their mouths when the ear heard me, mark, blessed is the
ear that hears, and the eye that sees, for they are satisfied, then it blessed
me, and when the eye saw me it gave witness to me; Friends mind the testimony
of God and have the witness in your selves, as Job had, who said, I hold fast
my righteousness, my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live, because I
delivered the poor that cried, and I caused the widows heart to sing for joy: I
was also eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame, I was a Father to the poor,
and the cause which I knew not I searched out, I brake the jaws of the wicked,
and plucked the spoil out of their teeth; unto me men gave ear, and kept silent
at my counsel, and waited for my words as for the latter rain; [mark] here was
no complaining when true judgment did run down as a stream, then was the door
of the prisoner opened, and the widows heart did sing for joy, then did truth
spring out of the earth, and righteousness rained down from Heaven, then did
the branch of righteousness grow, and the arm of the poor was strengthened, and
the high arm of the wicked was also broken, then did glory spread it self, and
the life was revealed as in the days of old, when Moses the man of God judged
the tribes of Israel.

So Friends, many eyes are waiting upon you, the many eyes of the Beast which
the Lord will blind are looking for some unrighteous decree, that the Merchants
of Babylon in whom the cry of the righteous is great, and in whom the blood of
the Innocent has cried for vengeance, their eyes are looking toward you, and
their expectations are great, that ye will stablish their false worship by a
Law, which if you do, and compel all to worship in a form which is now setting
up, utterly contrary to the Scriptures, and form and power of godliness, the
Lord will destroy and confound you and them together; For he has determined,
the Lord has said, and will most certainly bring it to pass, that he will be
as an enemy, and stand with his everlasting arm as an adversary against all
that would bind the Consciences of those that fear the Lord, or by any Law or
Decree would compel to worship in any form, but in that which his own Spirit
leads into, the Lord has said it, and his word is settled and established as
a Decree for ever, that he will overturn all false worship, and all such as
have a name of Ministers of Christ, but are found in the way of Balaam, running
after rewards, and seeking their gain, each one from his quarter, whose God is
their bellies, and who mind earthly things, and whose end is destruction, the
Lord has said it.

Also the eyes of the Innocent are toward you, and though our expectation be
to the Lord for deliverance, yet we know right well, that the coming in of King
Charles, and the assembling of you together by him, is not without his hand;
and as we are free born English men, we have just cause to expect so much from
You, that we should not lie in Hoses, Prisons and Dungeons as we have done, and
be kept in slavery in the Land of our Nativity, many of us have been Prisoners
very long, for the breach of no manner of Law, and our Persecutors expectation
is, that you will confirm what they have done; but the just Lord, whose throne
is established in Righteousness, his eye runs through the Earth, and his
eye lids try the sons of men.

The Lord has said, The Rock of Israel spoke by me, be that rules over men
must be just, Ruling in the Fear of God, he shall be as the light of the
morning when the Sun arises, even a morning with clouds, as the tender Grass
(mark, as the tender Grass) springing out of the Earth by clear shining after
rain; But thus says the Lord, the Sons of Belial and such as set themselves
and the Rulers that take council together against the Lord and against his
Anointed shall be dashed to pieces as a Potters Vessel, and foulded up and
thrust together as Briars and Thorns for the burning Furnace; the Lord has
raised up a Plant of Renown out of a dry ground which many are smiting at, and
a Vine most dear has he brought out of Aegypts Land, where it grew not well,
and many, yes Multitudes and Peoples and Tongues are spoiling this tender vine
and wounding the Branches that spring from this Holy Root, the Lord himself
has planted it, and to you this is the word of the Lord, he will pluck up and
supplant all that would destroy it. Woe be to the wicked, it shall go ill with
them, the reward of their hands shall be given them that would destroy the
Mother with the Children, that take away the clothing from the naked, and the
sheaf from the hungry, and leave him desolate that has no deliverer in the
earth.

To you all that sit in Parliament, this is a timely warning which the Lord
has put into my heart, and in whose good will and everlasting love, I put my
life in his hand, that I may be clear of your blood, and also in the sight of
the Lord which moved me thereunto; and though this be a thing scorned by many
who are setting up a false worship, to speak of the leadings or movings of Gods
Spirit; yet shall you have cause to confess that it was the infallable Spirit
of the Lord that cannot lie, which warned you of a sore destruction that is
like to come upon you, and as surely as ever the Lord overturned Parliaments,
Committees and Protectors which were Persecutors of the innocent before you, so
most certainly will the Lord deal by you, and double as you double your
Persecution and cruelty in binding and wracking by unrighteous Laws, the
Consciences of his Servants and people, the Lord has said it, the strength of
Israel will not lie, whose word is in my Heart, and whose two edged Sword is in
my right hand; if ye seek to waste and destroy his people, he will waste your
strength, and your might shall be mightily to destroy one another; and you and
your King, for whom I take up a Lamentation, and it may truly be for a
Lamentation, that after such an unheard of deliverance, which if he did but
mind or see the hand that was merciful to him, in bringing him to his Throne,
and that by his own arm was he wonderfully delivered and redeemed out of many
and diverse tribulations, not by his own Sword or Bow, and settled him in a good
Land, and planted him in so fruitful a soil, contrary to his own expectation,
and when there was none of his Friends could in reason look for such a thing,
in the time when it was brought to pass, that so soon after the banished was
brought back, there should be such unheard of cruelty against the Lords people,
in so much that England never saw the like; never did England see its Prisons
and Dungeons so filled with a people, that were so clear from all Plots,
Treason, Conspiracies, Plottings and Insurrections; testify against us, show
us if you can, have we used any Carnal Weapons? Or have our Weapons been Carnal
since we were a people? Bring in your Witness, and if it be true, we will
confess to it; when did we ever cause either you or your King to suffer by
outward force or cruelty? But in Patience and Quietness have we suffered by
all those Persecutors which went before you, whose measure of wickedness and
cruelty you are filling up apace, that ye may drink the remainder of his Wrath,
and the cup of his fury filld and prepared for you, who are standing up like
Amaleck, that thought to have stopped the way of Israel, that Jacobs Seed should
not go into the Land of Rest, for which cause the Lord said, he would root out
the name of Amaleck from under Heaven; and I say concerning you; ye shall never
be established, neither shall you prosper, but your own doings shall pursue
you, and (the swift Witness of God) the Light in your consciences shall
condemn you so long as you are Fighting and Warring against the Lambs of
Christ, and persecuting a people whom the Lord has blessed, and the Lord has
promised, and his promises are sure to the Seed of Abraham throughout all
Generations, the Seed is Christ the Light, this whom the Lord has said shall
increase abundantly; he it is that goes before us, the shout of a King is in
the midst of us, he will be with us and save us, and for his own Name sake he
will not leave us nor forsake us; Therefore are we not dismaled, though we are
persecuted, yet are we not forsaken of him, who has said, fear not, I the Lord
am the same and change not, I the Lord kill and make alive, I bring to the
Grave, I the Lord open the door of the Prisoner, and my everlasting arm is
underneath to lift him out of the pit; I Will preak to pieces, I Will dash to pieces
says the Rock of Israel them that loose not the band of the oppressed and
opens not the door of the prisoner; God has determined, and his everlasting
Decree is sealed and established, as the earth which cannot be moved, that
Christ shall reign in the midst of his enemies, Righteousness, Truth and
equity shall the earth be filled withal as the waters cover the Sea, God has
said it, his people he will save that are appointed for destruction, his Lambs
will he carry in his everlasting arm whom the Wolves, Bears and Lions seek to
devour.

We hear the voice of God as his Sheep always did (though this may be counted
blasphemy with the persecutors, which never heard his voice themselves, nor saw
his shape at any time, and this was Daniels God, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, the God of Shedrach, Meshach, and Abednego, the God of Mordecai who was
a Jew inwardly, the God of Moses, and of all the Fathers who dyed in the faith,
and in obedience to the Lord, not fearing the wrath of the Kings and Rulers who
have set themselves in all ages against the Lord and his Anointed, and hidden
ones; these all dyed in the faith which the persecutor is out of, of whom it is
said Heb 11. the world was not worthy of, and as John the beloved of the Father
says concerning himself, and they that had fellowship with him, the world
knows us not, therefore does the world hate us.

These had cruel mockings and scourgings, consider this ye that ought to do
Justice and break the bands of oppression: Oh! consider ye Parliament men, to
you am I moved of the Lord to write, There is work enough for you to do in
England to stop the swearers mouth and the flood of wickedness that is
overflowing this Nation; this is not your work to tread upon the consciences of
men that cannot swear at all; Conscience is Gods Throne, and the place where
his Honor dwells is the lowly heart, and the Lord will not give his Glory to
another, neither must any but himself who is the God of the Spirits of all
flesh prescribe his children a way to worship the Father of Spirits in, for the
Scripture says, John ^. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him not in
Spirit, Christ says, they worship they know not what; Now little does the
persecutor know what he is doing, who is justifying the wicked, and condemning
the righteous whom the Lord does justify in not Swearing, in obedience to
Christ's Command, who says, Swear not at all, this is a thing very pleasing to
the Lord, who is that Spirit of Truth, and leads men to speak the Truth, and
do that to their Neighbors and all men, as they would have men do unto them
with-without Swearing; and have ye not read in the Scripturs, that the Kings
Throne is established in Righteousness! And is not Christ the Prince of Peace
and King of Righteousness! And do you believe that this is like to establish
King Charles the Second, to imprison so many thousands as he has done, because
they cannot break the Righteous Commands of Christ by Swearing at all? Is it
better to obey God or man, judge ye with the measure of his own Light? Is not
this to be subject to the higher power, which power is a terror to the evil
doer, to obey the Commands of Christ, who is the Power and Wisdom of God, unto
whom all Power in Heaven and Earth is given? Do ye believe that all your Souls,
and the Soul of King Charles ought not to be subject to Christ? Or do you
believe your Power is above his, because so many thousands are Imprisoned
because they cannot break the Command of Christ, whose Spirit spoke in Paul,
and said, Whosoever resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and
they that resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation. For Rulers are not a
terror to good works but to evil (mark) Christ says Mat. 5.34. Ye have heard
say by them of old time, thou shall not forswear thy self, but I say unto you
swear not at all, verse. 37. but let your Communication be yea, yea, nay, nay;
for what is more comes of evil; also read James 5 verse. 1^. Above all things
my Brethren Swear not; Now I believe you will not deny but that Christ and
James an Apostle of his were truly obedient to Magistrates in that which was
meet, and that their Souls also were subject to God; and though Paul says, an
Oath among men was on end of strife; yet it is plain, it was not so among the
Brethren that were in Christ Jesus, the word of the Oath, which was since the
Law, and puts an end to all strife which the Swearers are in, and against which
the Law and Oaths were added, until (the Seed) Christ came who is the end of
them both for Righteousness sake; for the Law was not added against a
Righteous man, but against the wicked, the lawless and disobedient.

Now the Apostle says, They that Rule well are worthy of double Honor; and do
you believe in your Consciences, that they which rule for God, will ever be a
terror to such as for Conscience sake dare not break the Commands of his Son,
of whom he has said, all shall hearken unto; and though (Angels) Prophets, and
the Fathers which were under a Cloud in the days of old did Swear, yet Christ
was greater then the Prophets and before Abraham; and when he was brought forth
into the world, it was said (and the Word of the Lord endures for ever) Let
all the Angels of God worship him, who says, Swear not at all; and this I say,
neither I nor any of us deny Swearing from any thing that is in our Hearts
against King Charles or his Government, or that we cannot willingly be subject
to any of his Righteous Commands (and that for Conscience sake toward God) but
because we are persuaded in our Hearts and Spirits by the Lord (and not only
since King Charles came in) that Swearing is unlawful in any case, because it
is contrary to his Command, by Christ his Son, whom he has said all must
hearken to, but this has been our Principle to deny Swearing, for which we
were persecuted by all the Governors that went before you for many years.

But ye may consider, were they not such as did Swear to be true to King
Charles the First, that afterward cut off his head? Were they not such who
Swore to be true to King and Parliament, that afterward proved the greatest
enemies to them both? Time would fail me to mention all the Treacheries that
have been wrought in England within this twenty years, by such as have taken
Oaths and Covenants to the contrary; in a few words Christ has said, Swear
not, but speak the Truth, and whatsoever ye would have men do unto you, do ye
the same to them, and thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and
thy Neighbor as thy self, and he that does this is the end of the Law, and
greater then the Prophets which did Swear, which thing we have labored to do,
both in the light of God and men, not in our own strength, for we are nothing
but in the Name of our Lord Jesus who bears up our heads in our Sufferings, and
is our all in tribulation, for whose Names sake we Suffer patiently, praying to
the Lord that he would forgive them which know not what they do; and we have
the testimony and the sure witness of the Lord in our Consciences, that we do
not suffer as Thieves, Murderers and evil doers, neither are we guilty of the
breach of any good Law of King Charles's, but only in this are we looked upon
as guilty, because we meet together to Worship the Lord as his Spirit leads
us, the King having commanded the contrary, which Law should I never speak
more, I bear my Testimony against as unrighteous; for as Children newly born
are we clear from all plottings, either against the King or any other
Government, since we were a people called of the Lord, not to fight with Carnal
weapons as many have done, but with Spiritual Weapons which have been mighty
through God, not to the destroying of men's Bodies, but the bringing down and
destroying of that wicked spirit which has captivated, oppressed and destroyed
the Creation of God, under which the whole Creation travelleth in pain, and
groaneth greatly, waiting for the redemption and manifestation of the Son of
God, who comes not to destroy the World or men's lives, but the works of the
Devil, which have been wrought in man, whereby man's life has been a burden
too heavy for himself to bear; And the Lord has raised us up, and we are his
witnesses against all hireling Priests which Preach for hire, and we bear our
testimony, and it is the Lords against all false Prophets which are in the was
of Balaam, running gredily after rewards; these are they which withstand the
Lord and his people, and though they say they are Ministers of Christ, yet we
testify by the Spirit of the Lord, that they are no better then the false
Prophets which Jeremiah, Esaias and Ezekiel cried against, and such as Paul,
Phillip. 3. complained of verse. 18. For many walk of whom I have told you
often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are enemies of the Cross of
Christ. Whose end is destruction, whose God is their Belly, whose glory is in
their shame, who mind earthly things. These are they which the Lords
controversy is against, and against whom he will stand as an adversary, until
he have destroyed them, Root and Branch; and as Jannes and Jambres withstood
Moses, so do these men withstand the Truth; (Mark) How did they withstand
Moses? not by denying the signs and wonders which he wrought, but by doing
lying wonders, by the enchantments and witchcraft which Moses did by the Power
and finger of God, so these men whom England has taken for Ministers of
Christ, even these men which have run to every Power, King and Parliament to
establish them a Law for their Bellies, these men do not resist the Truth, in
denying Prayer, Singing and Preaching, and such things as the Spirit of God led
the Saints to formerly, but by living in the form of them, and Singing,
Preaching and Praying by the Spirit of the World, as their Fruits make them
manifest, to have another Spirit, then what the True Ministers and Prophets of
God had, which is not of the Father, but of the World; When did you ever read
in all the Scriptures, that the true Ministers did run to the Magistrates for
their bellies, as this generation of false teachers for many hundreds of years
have done? When Christ sent forth his Ministers to preach, he bid them go and
enquire in the Towns and Cities where they came who was worthy, and such things
as they set before them they were to eat, this was their hire and maintenance
which Christ the chief Bishop did allow them, for says he, the Labourer is
worthy of his meat, he did not bid them go into such a Town or City, and
bargain by so much a year, or how much will you give me and I Will be your
Minister, but says he freely have you received, freely give; Is not Englands
Ministry and their gift of preaching bought in Oxford and Cambridge, and sold
in Cities and Countries all over this Nation; so that which can be sold and
bought for money is not the gift of God, for all the gifts and graces of God are
free and freely to be distributed, as they are freely given, and not sold for
money; So you may read Acts 8.20. where Simon the Sorcerer would have bought
the gift of God for money, Peter said unto him, Thy money perish with thee,
because thou thoughtest the gift of God can be purchased with money. Balaam the
Sorcerer who had the gift of God freely given him (a thing which the Ministers
of England know not, but are enemies thereunto) he saw the goodly Tents of
Jacob, and the pleasant dwelling place of Israel, but his heart being divided
he would have sold the gift of God for money, and the gift which God gave him
freely, if he could have done it by his enchantments, he would have cursed the
people whom the Lord had not cursed, and in whom (he himself confessing) was
the voice of a King, and perceived that there was no divination nor enchantment
against them Therefore he bemoans himself, and says unto B^lak, if thou would
give me thine house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the Commandment
of the Lord; (Mark) The holy One of Israel which will not be limited, limits
his enemies; And to you all, this is the word of the Lord, You shall not go
beyond your limit, nor destroy the people whom the Lord has blessed; do not
harden your hearts against the Lord as Pharaoh did, for you have had many
warnings by the Servants of the Lord already, as Pharaoh had when he would not
let Israel go, but increased their bondage, and doubled his cruelty against
them, and as the governments which went before you were often warned of a sore
destruction and overthrow that was coming upon them, and though their hands
were strong, and the Kingdoms were strengthened in their hands, yet did the
Servants of the Lord often warn them and foretell of all that is now befallen
them; And though they could not believe it when it was declared unto them,
neither did they relieve the oppressed, nor loose the bands of the prisoner,
but as it is in this your day, they waxed obstinate against the Lord, and
hearkened to the false Prophets, and hireling Priests, which were their ruin,
and mocked the Prophets, and abused his Messengers which he sent unto them
(because he had compassion on his dwelling place) so that the wrath of the Lord
brake out upon them until there was no remedy; He gave them up to the spoilers
as it is this day, and them which were become tributaries to them has he
brought in subjection, and made tributaries themselves; how did they prosper,
judge in your selves? was any able to stand before them; while the Lord was on
their side, did they not prosper? did not the dread and fear fall upon the
Nations round about? then was there no oppression of the Innocent, nor wounding
of tender Consciences in this Land about Religion, when did they grow weak and
feeble, and the mighty men became as women? was it not when they begun to bind
the Consciences of men, and would take upon them the seat of God in the
Conscience, and prescribe the Spirit of the Lord a way and dead form to worship
in? did they not whip, persecute and imprison as ye have done the Servants of
the Lord for not swearing? and because for Conscience sake they could neither
hear nor maintain a false Ministry, in giving them the tenth of their labors,
and when the Lord had given them rest from all those whom they called
oppressors and tyrants, did they not then settle upon their lees, and establish
themselves, and take upon them as great things, if not greater, then these
things which before they had so long fought against as tyranical? did not the
Lord become their enemy then, and was not all their might which they had lest
mightily to confound and overturn one another? were they not then restless,
and silled with disorder? and did they not seek themselves, and that which they
called The good old Cause was wholly neglected? did not oppression wax strong,
and the cry great in the Land? and did they not begin to get up into the seat
of God as ye have done, by making unrighteous Laws against the innocent?

Did not God arise then as a mighty man, and rob them of their strength, and
their strength was wholly to betray and destroy one another, so that no man
could trust (scarcely) his Brother with whom in the day of their straits, and
when as one man they cried to the Lord against oppressors, they could as one
man join and engage together? And their lives, gold, and silver, lands, wives
and children were not dear unto them in that day: But alas! alas! how do I pity
them, and in the day of their prosperity, when afterward they kicked against
the Lord, how did the servants of the Lord mourn over them, and oftentimes warn
them, precept upon precept, line upon line, of a dismal day that was coming
upon them; but alas! they would not believe, for their hearts were waxed
gross; so that this Proverb may be truly taken up against them; how has the
oppressor ceased, the golden City ceased? the Lord has broken the staff of
the wicked, and the Scepter of the Rulers.

And now Friends, this will be your condition, and a lamentation may truly be
taken up for you, if you go on as you have begun. God was merciful unto you in
bringing you to the Government in peace, without bloodshed, and his mercy and
loving kindness should have engaged you to have been merciful to them which
were cut off by you; did the Lord God of Israel bring you from so great a
captivity that you should go on in a way of cruelty toward them whom the Lord
delivered into your hands? Friends, I take my life in my hand, and testify in
the name of the Lord, that the foundation of your Government should not have
been laid in blood, but in mercy and righteousness would your days have been
prolonged, and your Throne would have been established as long as the Sun and
the Moon endures; but you have reasoned against your own souls. Amend your
ways, seek judgment, and love mercy, that the Lord may repent him of the evil
that is near you, and a sudden destruction as a whirlwind from the Lord which
will fling you out of your place: It Is mercy and peace when they meet together,
causes truth and righteousness to embrace each other, but violence and
cruelty cries for vengeance, and the blood and oppression of the innocent, for
a sudden destruction; now this I testify in the faith of our Lord Jesus, for
whose sake I am willing to suffer the loss of all, and from whose love
wherewith he has loved me, I am persuaded, neither death, nor life,
principalities, nor powers, shall be able to separate me; This I believe
therefore I speak, Kingdoms shall be rooted up, Parliaments shall not prosper,
Councils of men shall be confounded by the Lord, and come to naught, that would
bow the Consciences and souls of men to worship a strange God, or the true God
in a false manner, or in any other way but what his holy Spirit leads unto;
God will dash the pot sheards and kingdoms of the earth one against another,
until he make a way, and a way be prepared for the Government and Kingdom of
Christ in the Consciences of (...) people; and this I say, if you continue in
persecution of the innocent, that have done you no harm, The Lord will bind you
in chains of utter darkness, and in the dark places of the earth will he shut
you up together, who make Laws to bind the Consciences of his people, which to
you and the King have done no harm; for you are not of the same mind in these
things as Moses, that Magistrate and Lawgiver was, who said, when complaint
was made to him, as it is against us, for prophesying and speaking as the
Spirit of the Lord leads us; he answered those envious accusers, and said,
Would God all the Lords people were Prophets, and that he would put his Spirit
upon them all: Now these are enemies who are accusing us to you, as the false
Prophets and Priests, Jer. 26. who said Jeremy was worthy to dye, even these
are you establishing by a Law (which the Lord will break) and persecuting the
accused which are innocent, and as greatly wronged as ever Jeremy was, them are
ye preparing war against, and making unrighteous decrees, which the Lord
himself will break, in the day wherein he makes inquisition for the blood of
the innocent, and brings out the prisoner, and such as be oppressed out of the
prisonhouse: And as for those Merchants of Babylon, who make a trade of the
souls of men for dishonest gain, and bare rule by your means, and laws made for
their bellies, And whoever it be that puts not into their mouths, they prepare
war against him, I have seen with the eternal eye of God their destruction is
near to come, and their day shall not be prolonged, I have seen them as a wall
whose covering is taken away, and every storm and turning of the wind shall
shake them to pieces, as a rotten fence, because they have provoked the Lord to
jealousy, and by grieving his Lambs and Children; and as for persecution and
cruelty there is none like them in this Nation; The Lord has said, and he will
most certainly bring it to pass, righteousness shall be established as in the
day when God created man upon the earth, in which Dominion man was to rule with
God, and for God, and not against God and his Children, as ye do; who has
heard of such a thing in Christendom as is brought to pass in England, that so
many thousands should be imprisoned, indangering the utter ruin of their
Families, and the destruction of their outward lives, and yet the breach of no
just Law either of God or man can be justly proved or charged against us? but
only because we cannot make shipwreck of our Consciences, by violating the
righteous command of Christ, who says, Swear not at all, but love your
enemies, pray for them that persecute you and despitefully use you; Consider,
is this to love your enemies, to persecute your friends? is this to be subject
to God the higher power, your selves, to persecute, imprison and spoil them
which cannot break the commands of the Son of God? O let not such a thing be
published in Askelon, nor declared in the streets of Gath any more by
Christians. O how have you caused the uncircumcised in heart to rejoice, and
let loose a Sea of cruelty and persecution over this Nation; May not we truly
say as David did, concerning Saul, I say may not we say the same being innocent
as he was, whom do you and your King come out against with all these weapons of
cruelty and war, is it not against worm in Jacob whom God has blessed? As Saul
came out against David, who in spirit said, I am a worm and no man; Were not
the Promises of God sure to David, that he would build him a sure house? and
did not the Lord say concerning his seed, which is Christ, Sit thou at my right
hand until I make thy enemies thy footstool? Is God changed now, and is not the
seed unto which all the promises are, the same yesterday, to day, and forever?
blessed of the Lord, chosen of the God of Jacob from generation to generation.
What have we done either against you or the King, that we have had no other
place in the Land of our Nativity, but Holes, Prisons, and Dungeons? Are not we
called by the Name of the Lord, and does not our subjection to you in all
lawful things declare that we are innocent? Why then are we numbered by you, as
Christ was by the Jews, amongst Transgressors?

THE END.

