AN ENQUIRY INTO THE Causes of Diseases IN GENERAL, AND THE Disturbances of the
Humors IN MAN's BODY: Wherein the Nature of the Blood, of the Air, and of a
Pestilential Constitution, are briefly considered. Together with some
Observations, showing wherein the Venom of Vipers, particularly that of the
English ADDER, does consist. By Stanford Wolferstan, M. A.

(...).

Hippocrates lib. de Flatibus. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Basset, at the George
in Fleet Street, 1692.

To the Right Honorable FRANCIS, Ld. Carrington, Baron of Wotton, Viscount
Berrisfore, in the KINGDOM of IRELAND.
My Lord,
THere are Two things the world may, perhaps, wonder at: First, My Confidence
in divulging my own Opinions after so many great Men, in so learned an Age. And
Secondly, My Presuming to present them to so Honorable a Person.

In answer to the First, I must needs say, That the Dissatisfaction I have met
withal in Books, (as to most of these things) made me resolve to speak my own
Thoughts. And, as to the Second, Your Lordship's great Judgment in these
Studies, and Regard for them, lately Honoring the Faculty, with Encouraging so
near and worthy a Relation of Your own in these Studies: Together with Your
Lordship's condescending Attention, and favorable Regard to my weak
Discourses, sometimes on such Subjects. These things, my Lord, have emboldned
me to present these Physiological Enquiries; which I offer with a very grateful
Acknowledgment of Your Lordship's condescending Favors to,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Obedient humble Servant, Stanford Wolferstan.

THE PREFACE.
NOtwithstanding the voluminous Authors that we have in Physic, both Greeks,
Arabians, and latter Commentators, Physic till of late (since the days of
Hippocrates) has received but small improvement; for if the Circulation of the
Blood (on which both the Theory, and Practice of Physic ought to be built) was
discovered by Solomon Aenigmatically by a Wheel; he was never till of late
understood. If Andreas Caesalpinus knew any thing of it, that knowledge till of
late was never improved; no Methods of Practice were built on it. The present
state of the Art of Physic is just like that of War, both have received
considerable Improvements, the one to save, and the other to destroy Mankind.
The Practical part of Physic, without the Theory, is like downright fighting
without the Wisdom and Conduct of General Officers; and we see more Towns
taken, and Countries overrun by the prudent Conduct of Commanders, than either
by the use of Gun, or Pike. The Practice of Physic without the Theory, being
just like a great House, built without Foundation, which, however it may appear
fair at first unto the Eye of the beholder, will quickly tumble into ruin, and
disorder. For, as I remember an eminent Physician has lately told us, Dr.
Walt. Harris.
If the Art of Physic did consist only in telling Medicines, or writing
Receipts, the Apothecary will excel the most learned Physician, the prating
Shop-Boy his Master, a Nurse or talkative Woman, full of her antiquated
Book-Receipts, will carry the Prize, and Glory from them all: Whereas if the
true Theory of Diseases were first well known, fewer Medicines would serve
turn, and Practice would be much more successful than generally it is. I have
here only showed, what gives the first disturbance unto the Humors of our
Body; the next Enquiry will be, What Humors are the first disturbed; the manner
of their disturbance; the Effects of, and Remedies to each particular disorder:
And if the Success be answerable to the Hypothesis, then it will appear, that
the Theory of Physic is a most necessary part of that Study.

I must confess I have laid aside my Books, in these Physiological Enquiries,
to speak my own Thoughts; so that if the Reader finds here any Opinions
contrary to his own, or his beloved Author, let him not too much blame me for
it, there being a Libertas Philosophica, as well as a Licentia Poetica; which
Liberty I hope I have no way abused.

If he reap any Benefit, or Satisfaction from it, he is partly obliged to that
great and general Want or Defect, that first occasioned it; for which you may
take the word of our learned Professor, Dr. Brady, in his Epistle to Dr.
Sydenham: Nemo uspiam Medicorum, adhuc vim aeris and influentiam in humana
corpora attente perpendit, nec in vita nostra perennanda quas agit parts eorum
quispiam consideravit satis, etc.

An Enquiry into the Causes of Diseases in general, etc.
CHAPTER I.
FOrmer Physicians were wont diligently to enquire, what solid Parts in their
sick Patients were ill-affected, and to look for the Cause of a Disease, either
into the solid Parts they found so ill-disposed; or the four (...), humidi
formas, vel species, as Hippocrates calls them: Hae vero sunt, as it follows,
Pituita, Sanguis, Bilis, and Aqua: Whereas indeed there is but one of these,
humor Corporis, in a true Sense, which is the Blood it self; the other three
being only the Recrements of that Blood.

No wonder then that the Ancients were mistaken in the true Causes, and right
Names of Diseases, since they did not well enquire into the Nature of the
Blood; and were indeed very ignorant of many Humors in the Body.

But our Modern Physicians finding this Error, (especially since the Days of
Dr. Harvey) have both Chimically anatomized the Blood, and other Humors of our
Body, and diligently endeavored to observe their Nature, Variations,
Alienations, and Effects; they more justly seem to find the immediate Cause of
many Distempers in the Humors; who in their wandering Motions about the Body, do
disaffect, and disturb the solid Parts, which else before were very sound, and
quiet.

From hence, in the Writings of the Moderns, we find new Diseases, new Causes,
and new Names, according to the various ill Disposition, Alienation, (or
supposed ill Fermentation) of those Humors.

But what gives Disturbance first unto those Humors, is now become the grand
Question amongst learned Men.

Some believe the Cause to be in the Humors themselves; and as the Ancient
Physicians very often placed the Cause of a Disease in the solid Parts, so now
we have the Morbi Salivae, Morbi Chyli, Succi Pancreatici, Lymphae, etc.

And yet the several Humors are so fitted for each others Service, and the
great Ends they are designed for; they so regularly perform their Offices, and
are so well prepared for one another, that we may rather wonder we live not the
Age of the Patriarchs, than that we are so often disturbed by any Intestine War
amongst them; for if the Mouth receive nothing but what is fit as to the nature
and quality of the Aliment; if it exceed not in quantity, if it stay there its
just time, Mastication is performed regularly, the Saliva will mix with it, and
the Stomach will perform its office, in the Maceration, Digestion, and
Expulsion of it; the Pancreatick Juice, Lympha, etc. are fitted for their
several duties, of Separation, Attenuation, and Dilution of the Chyle, without
any preternatural Commotion, to disorder or disturb one another: Nor does the
Blood quarrel with the well prepared Chyle, but amicably receives it, from the
Ductus Thoracicus into the Subclavian Vein, and as amicably passes with it into
the right Ventricle of the Heart; where, though in the Diastole they are more
mixed together, yet they stay not to make that bustle some have thought; but by
the Systole, or Contraction of the Heart, are soon driven out again, the Chyle
accompanying the Blood to the greatest amongst all the Viscera for
Sanguification; I mean the Lungs, where they both receive a florid Red, and by
the admission of new Particles, are more perfectly assimulated, or united with
each other.

So that even in Fevers, which seem to give the greatest disturbance to the
Humors of our Body, the disturbance does not first arise from a quarrel raised
amongst the Humors of our Body; for as long as no strange ill Guest comes in to
disturb them, they all perform their natural offices in their wonted order; but
if they are hindered, or disturbed in their Operations by an Enemy, they then
fall into tumult and disorder.

The Blood does not quarrel with its self, nor one part of it with another; for
really there is no Fermentation truly and properly so called in it, neither
(according to the supposed Fermentation) does one part act upon or against
another: For,

I consider the Blood, not as it is Chymically analyzed into their Principles,
but as it is a viscous Humor, whose Particles are not fermented, but combined
together, by an Aereal Salt, receiving Heat from its own Motion and Circulation
round the Body, whose Recrements are separated from it, by the various and
admirable Contexture and Configuration of the Vessels through which they pass,
whilst the viscid Humor, or thick part of the Blood, keeps close and entire,
and by the Anastomases, which, I suppose, (whether visible or not) of the Veins
and Arteries, is brought back to the Heart, a languid Pulse being continued by
the extremities of the Arteries to every Vessel, which helps forward the
Separation, Secretion, Percolation (or which you shall please to call it) of
the thinner Humors.

I shall not stay here further to show, either the incapacity of the Blood, or
unfitness of the Vessels through which it passes, nor the danger of such
Heterogeneous fermenting Liquors, especially near the extremity of such small,
fine, and thin Vessels through which these Liquors, of such different
fermenting Particles, must violently pass; neither shall I show how the Viper,
and several other Animals that sleep all Winter, whose Blood is not denied to
Circulate all that while, neither void any Excrements all that while; nor is
their Bladder of Gall fuller when they first come forth in the Spring, than
when in Winter they first took their Beds; to demonstrate that either the Blood
does not always Ferment, or that the Gall is not thrown off by such a
Fermentation. So that as I cannot believe Diseases, with the Ancients, so often
to arise from the solid Parts, nor the Blood to consist of their four Humors;
neither can I believe such a bustle kept in our Body, as has of late been
talked of; I neither believe the solid Parts, nor Humors of our Body, to
conspire our ruin.

CHAP. II.
SO that whatever Commotion, Fermentation, Ebullition, or Disturbance there is
raised in the Blood, or Humors, must arise preternaturally, and ab extra; for
else neither Blood nor Humors will, of themselves, raise such violent
Commontions, or Disturbance in Man's Body.

It is unquestionably true, That the Air, above all the other Non-naturals, is
the great Cause of our Epidemick Fevers; the best way therefore to know the
nature of such Fevers (next to the knowledge of the Blood) will be to consider
the Nature of the Air we breath in.

I shall not enlarge here concerning the various Opinions of Philosophers,
concerning the Nature of Air; neither shall I determine from whence it does
arise, or of what composed, it being two larger discourse for my present
purpose; but I shall only suppose the Air to be a very thin and fluid Body,
combined most strictly with a Nitrous Salt, and by the pressure of other
Particles, together with its own natural fineness and subtilty, pervading every
Patulous Pore in Earth and Water.

I say Patulous, because I deny not, nay, I affirm there are many Pores,
especially in the Earth, which the Aereal Particles are not fine enough to
enter; and indeed both Earth and Water do resist its penetration, but not with
equal force, for the Air cannot enter very far into the more strictly united
and combined Particles of Earth; but the grosser parts of the Aereal Salt, are
necessitated to stick fast; from whence, with easy trouble, we extract our
common Niter.

Whereas the Particles of Water being more flexile, and not so closely combined
together, recede, and give way to its penetration.

So that this Aereal Salt enters to the bottom of the deepest Waters; without
which the very Eels (though bedded in the Mud) cannot live; and Carps have been
known to live by Air only two or three days out of Water; both which
Experiments are best manifest in extreme cold and frosty times, when the Ice
does prevent the ingress of Aereal Particles into the bottom of the Water, and
the Cold does condense them for the others preservation.

In great Frosts I have known, in Ponds quite frozen over, multitude of Fishes,
for want of Air, sometimes as it were smothered, sometimes sick, and faintly
swimming toward small vent-holes, where Air was let in to them, by breaking
the Ice to keep them alive.

But to this I have heard some answer, That they have never broke their Pools
at all, add yet their Fish have done well: and it may be so sometimes; for in a
great Frost the Water is very apt to sink from the Ice, and leave a hollow in
the sides for the Air to enter; and I have been certainly told of Eels that
have crept out of the Deep, and their warmer Mud-beds, for want of Air, and
have lain dead at the sides, in the extreme cold Winter: Which, had they been
so much offended with cold, as some have thought they are, they might easily
have kept their former stations, and so have remained ab hac coeli inclementia
tuti.

Or else perhaps such Pools had Quick-springs running into them; unto the heads
of which Springs the Eels will commonly swim up for Air, when the body of the
Pool is quite froze over. Where, by the bye, let me also make this further
Observation, That the greater and more subtle Fish, though they swim near the
bottom, yet they choose to be directly under those holes; by which it is
apparent, that these Aereal Particles are neither reflected, nor refracted, but
by the interposition of another body, which they cannot enter, being otherwise
pressed directly downward. But to return.

CHAP. III.
THe Air having this penetrating force upon Earth and Water, let us next
enquire how it does enter human Bodies: And there are four ways by which it is
commonly believed the Air may enter them. Either,

First, By its Mixing its self with what we eat, and so is carried to the
Stomach: Or,

Secondly, It is received by Inspiration into the Lungs, and so is carried to
the Heart: Or.

Thirdly, By the Pores of the Body, and from thence to the Mass of Blood: Or,

Lastly, In Inspiration to the Ventricles of the Brain.

The two first of which I think are only true.

As to the First; I think it is undoubtedly true, That the Air does, or Aereal
Particles do, mix themselves with what we eat; for whatever we eat must have
numerous Pores, or else we could never chew it with out Teeth, nor digest it in
our Stomach, or separate Chyle from it; and I believe the Air may sometimes
enter these Pores; however it does enter the Mouth, and is pressed down the
Oesophagus, either by the Aliment, or force of the Aereal Atoms naturally
descending downward.

Secondly, It is apparent, both by dissection and inflation of the Lungs, that
the Air does enter from the Larnix and Bronchia into the Vesiculary Cells; and
there, whether by Adhesion of Dissolution, does deposite at least some part of
this Aereal Salt; where, meeting with the occurring Humors, is directly carried
to the Heart, and by its pungent Particles, molesting and irritating the
straight and oblique Fibers of the Heart, does stir them up into a Systole, or
Contraction; and so by streightning its Ventricles, to drive forth the Blood
contained in them into the Arteries: And this I take to be the true Original of
all Pulsation, and first Motion of the Heart, and Circulation of the Blood
throughout the Body.

For when I observe the Motion of the Hearts of several Creatures, exempt from
their Bodies, and exposed to the open Air, I can never believe either the
Influx of Animal Spirits, much less the Ebullition, Accension, or Dilatation of
the Heart, to be the Cause of its Motion, but rather the Effect of these
pungent Particles, pricking upon the Fibrous Parenchyma of the Heart in their
natural descending Motion.

As to the other two ways of receiving Air, viz. by the Pores of the Body; when
I consider the Nature of these Atoms pressing directly downward, when I
consider the great Quantity of Effluvia that are continually transpired by the
Cuticulary Pores; when I consider the Nature of those Pores, and their action
to be continued suitable to the utmost extremity of the Arteries, from whence
they originally are derived: I cannot see how the Air can enter without either
penetratione Corporum, or an inversion of Natures constant Course, a centro ad
circumferentiam Corporis.

The Arguments that are brought to prove the Porosity of Animals, by the taking
in of Effluvia from without, by the application of Oils and Plasters, (if
rightly considered) make nothing to this purpose, to prove the entrance of this
Aereal Salt by the Cuticulary Pores; for setting aside a particular enquiry
into the Nature of those Plasters, their subtle, active, igneous, violent
cooling, drying, irritating, stupifying, obstructing, and preternaturally
disposing Particles, the Cuticulary Pores are not placed for the due reception
of this Salt; nor have the points of this Salt a force upon them, since they
naturally descend perpendicularly downward. Neither when I observe the
difference between the Florid, Aereal, Colored Blood returning from the Lungs,
and the Atropurpureal Blood contained in the Veins, can I believe this Aereal
Salt does enter by the Pores; or is mixed with the Venal Blood, when I see the
Venal Blood both changed in color and consistence from what I either find in
the Lungs or Arteries.

And, as to the last of these ways, when the Authors acquaint us how the
Particles of Air are parted assunder in Inspiration, part of them ascending by
the Mammillary Processes ad cerebri Vasa, and Ventriculos, and part descending
to the Pulmonary Vessels; when they can, I say, explicate with any great
probability, how this is done, for what end, or use, the Air thus impregnated
with this Salt should come thither, it will deserve further Consideration. For,

Although the Mammillary Processes may be affected by the Points of this Salt,
and according to the various and different Modification of them, so various and
different smells may be conveyed unto the Brain: Nay, although the Particles of
this Salt are very different, as to their shape and bigness, size and figure,
yet do I not see how, nor for what end or use, by these nervous Processes, they
should ever be conveyed; neither can I see how these Nerves, or even the Brain
it self, should escape a strong Vellication by them, which, being communicated
by the Nerves, might cause a Convulsive Motion in every Member in the Body.

CHAP. IV.
NOw as I have owned but only two ways by which this Aereal Salt can be
received into human Bodies; so do I very much question, whether any thing else
is left, in a healthy Air, to join either with Chyle or Blood, but this Aereal
modified Salt only; which of its self is able to produce these great and
following Effects:

First, This Salt as it is variously mixed or modified by the Aliment we take
into our Mouths, so different Tastes appear unto us, and either descending or
pressed down by other Particles, causes that disturbing Vellication on the inner
Membrane of the Nerves, that seem as it were placed there on purpose to
communicate that Vellication to the Brain, do occasion that Desire in us which
we call Hunger; and from hence the taking the fresh Air does make us hungry,
because we then receive this Aereal Salt both into our Lungs and Stomach.

But it is not the Fibers of the upper Orifice alone, but descending to the
bottom of the Stomach with the Aliment, or what we eat, it has the same
Operation on the other Fibers, and moves them to eject out at the Pylorus, and
irritating all along on the Fibers of the Intestines, is a great cause of, and
a considerable advantage to their Peristaltick Motion.

But though this Salt is so highly useful to the Motion of the Stomach, yet the
Stomachical Operations are not performed by it alone; for I have observed, near
the Rugae of great Animals, certain Papillae, and a constant Juice lodged in
them; which I believed to be an acid Lympha, brought thither by invisible
Lymphatick Vessels; which, we have great reason to believe, do moisten the
Fibrous Tunicles of the Ventricles, although they are not perceptible to our
sight.

I know I might have traced the generation of Animals, and have shown not only
how the prima stamina vitae, the Motion of the punctum saliens; nay, even the
birth it self, is owing to this Salt.

As likewise I might show the Effects of different occurring Salts that meet
together in the Duodenum: But, designing brevity, I must hasten next to show
what great Effects this Nitrous Salt does commonly produce upon our Blood: And,
First, as to its Color, it does change the Blood from an Atropurpureal Venal
Color, into a Coccineous Florid Red, which is performed even by common Salt
mixed with Blood.

Secondly, to Combine, which is the proper Nature of all Salt mixed with Blood,
as does appear even from the vulgar, and commonly known, Methods of Lutation,
Cementation, etc.

Thirdly, To hinder the Coagulation of the Blood.

Fourthly, By its lancinating and irritating Particles (supposed by some of a
Comical Figure) to molest and vellicate the Fibers of the Heart, and give
occasion to its Motion; from which Motion, round the Body, does depend, its
Heat, and all things else will follow in their order.

The first Effect of this Salt may yet more particularly be observed in the
Blood returning from the Pulmonary Vessels, and from the Heart too, even to the
Capillaries of the Veins and Arteries: Whereas the Venal Blood is changed both
in Color and Consistence, by the returning sub-acid Lympha, as Acids are used
to operate upon it; especially by Coagulation, and changing its Florid Red,
into a Venal Atropurpureal Color.

The Second Effect is also manifest by the exposing Venal Blood, newly emitted
from the Orifice, unto the open Air; for this Aereal Salt it is, that does not
only change its Color, but as far as it does penetrate its Pores, it firmly
combines its Particles together.

Thirdly, To hinder the Coagulation of the Blood; which is another very common
Experiment for these Salts, whether taken inwardly, or else outwardly mixed with
Blood; which it does Effect by intimately mixing it self with the Blood, and so
preventing a Dislocation of the Sanguineous Particles.

Fourthly, It Is this Salt that by its irritating Particles, is the great
promoter of Secretion in our Bodies, and yet maintains the Vinculum and due
Crasis of the Blood entire; for as it gives a Saltness to most, so does it
facilitate the Separation, Secretion, and Expulsion of almost every Humor.

And now we may see what gives disturbance unto the Humors of our Body; for
from the universal necessity of this Salt, we may easily discern what will
ensue upon a total or partial Deprivation of it: Or, Secondly, what will follow
upon a Depravation, or Contamination, especially in our Blood and Humors.

Now as to the first of these, upon a total Deprivation of this Aereal Salt,
this Vinculum Mistorum, and Naturae, what can ensue, but as total a dissolution
of Nature, a returning of all things to their Primitive Chaos and Disorder, an
universal Mortality, not only to Mankind, but to all Creatures living? Beasts
and Serpents, Fish and Fowl, must all tumble together in one common ruin. So
that with a little variation I may use Lucan's Expressions for it:

-- Sic quum compage soluta,
Secula tot mundi suprema coegerit hora,
Antiquum repetens iterum Chaos, omnia discors
Machina divulsi turbabit faedera Mundi.
Lucan.de bello Civ.l. 1. Of partial Defects, there are some more and some less
destructive unto human Nature: And so Secondly, may Depravation, or
Contamination be considered, as the Air is more or less depraved; but as a
total Defect of this Salt was never yet known, so the direful Effects of a
total Depravation were yet never felt, since a total Depravation; and a total
Deprivation would prove alike equally pernicious: So that the Plague its self,
and all other Pestilential Fevers, must arise from either a partial Defect, or
partial Contamination, or Depravation of this Salt; from a total they can never
come, because that such a state there was never yet known, in the which Mankind
were all destroyed together.

For neither the Suffocations of Lightning, nor hot Coals, make such a total
Defect; nor the Damps in the Cryptae, and Subterranean Vaults, or Caverns, are
such a total Depravation of this Salt; yet, approaching only something near
that Nature, generally bring with them very sudden swift destruction; and Death
is either more swift, or slow, as this Aereal Salt is more or less deficient or
depraved.

As for those partial Defects of this Salt, that are occasioned by the default
of the Organs of our Bodies, some way or other hindered in their Natural Motions
or Operations, though they occasion a Defect, yet generally very little,
compared with the Defect is made for want of this Salt in the Air we breath in,
which Nature cannot otherwise repair. And yet even in these partial Defects,
when only one part of one Lobe of the Lungs is ulcerated, yet in how short a
time is the Motion, Color, and Consistency of the Blood changed from what it
was?

There needs not therefore any thing, but a Defect of this Salt, to make those
Mutations in the Humors of our Body, from whence these Disturbances which we
call Diseases do arise; as I might more particularly show, if I did not design
brevity in this discourse: Nay, even the Air its self does more or less suffer,
according to the greater or less Defect of this Salt; and I question not, but
even that venenate Miasme (as Hippocrates first termed it) owes its Original to
this want; and that his careful Description of a (...), does not so much argue
a Corruption, or Putredo, as his Commentators call it, as this Defect which I
plead for; from the want of which, the Humors of our Body will not only of
themselves corrupt, but if the want be great, there will infallibly ensue, some
fatal or Pestilential Constitution.

Which Pestilential Constitution, giving the greatest Disturbance unto our
Blood and Humors, must consequently be the most Destructive to Mankind: For
when the Air is most deficient of this Salt, then other Heterogeneous Particles
crowd most into it, and do most corrupt; whilst, in the mean time, for want of
this Combining Salt, the Particles of our Blood are dislocated, its Crasis made
Lax, and prepared very ready to Receive and Combine with this Aereal
Depravation.

Haec ratio quondam Morborum.
Lucretius lib. vi. A Plague, thus raised, laid learned Athens waste;
Through every Street, through all the Town it past;
Blasting both Man and Beast with poisonous Wind;
Death fled before, and Ruin stalked behind.
Mr. Creech's Lucretius. CHAP. V.
SInce I have asserted a Pestilential Constitution to be nothing else but a
Depravation of the Air, arising from a great Defect of this Aereal Salt; I need
not determine on either side, whether this Depravation (arising from this
Defect) does consist in Acido, or Volatili Aeri. As for the Body, the
Consistency of the Blood being so almost totally altered, Acidity, Coagulation,
etc. will naturally ensue, as the Stagnation of the Bile will render it more
Acrid.

Now there is nothing as I have (yet) observed, does more exactly represent, or
express the Nature of the Plague unto us, whether we respect the dreadful
Symptoms, or the vulgar Method of Cure, than the first biteings of a strong
Viper, whose Venom does not consist of a dull, heavy, sluggish Poison, like
unto those Poisons Authors commonly represent, and express the Nature of the
Plague by; but in a brisk, active, quick, piercing, subtle, aereal Poison.

But when it meets with good Blood, whose Particles by this Salt are closely
combined together, its Effects appear most by Stagnating the Bile, Vide Willis
de litero.
(though perhaps not directly so as some great Men have imagined:) So that the
Symptoms I must confess differ in both, as well as they do in several other
Diseases; which difference of Symptoms in Diseases does often arise, not so
much from the different Nature of the Disease, as from the different Nature of
the solid Parts or Humors of our Body, as to Strength, or Weakness,
Combination, or Relaxation in several different and distinct Constituitions.

It will not perhaps be thought so generous in me to engage against either of
the two late diligent Enquirers into the Nature of this Animal; who, like two
expiring Combatants, by mutual Wounds, have ruined one another, having given
such demonstrative Experiments against each other, that unless the Vipers of
Italy have their Poison in the Yellow Liquor, and those of France theirs in the
enraged Spirits, (which I can never believe) neither of their Opinions can
possibly be true.

Letting therefore these two Gentlemen alone to their irreconcilable (thought
friendly Debate) it will not perhaps be thought amiss, if I give a short
Account of our common Adder, the true English Viper; who, although by some she
is thought not so dangerous as those of hotter Countries, yet whoever will but
observe the dreadful Symptoms that did ensue upon the poor Man of Warwick,
being bitten as Dr. Stubs mentions, whom I have also sent for, and enquired of,
will perhaps be quite of another mind: As to the dangerous biting of our Adder,
if present Pain, extraordinary Swellings, if Benumnedness, Blisters, Blackness,
Deadness, Gangreen, cold death Sweats, etc. may be thought so.

He told me the Story, just as Dr. Stubs relates it, very certainly and
confidently affirming, That it was the sucking of the Venom (as he called it)
from the bitten place, that made his Speech falter, and his Tongue swell; which
the Doctor confesses, and therefore tells us how unsafe that Direction of
Celsus, Vessalius, Forrestus, and others is, who advise that a Man should suck
the bitten place; and in Amatus Lusitanus you will find (says he) a relation
of one who died by sucking of the place bitten by a Viper: The same is avowed
by Matthiolus, as Paraeus records the Story out of him, and instanceth
further in a Patient of his own, whose Life was much endangered by sucking upon
the bite of an Adder. Nay, Dr. Stubs confesses, as in the last Page, that
there is a Virulency in the Wound, as appears, says he, by the evil Accidents
upon the sucking; and yet notwithstanding he jumps after Charas, and tells us,
That it seems to him indubitable, that the Venom of this Animal proceeds from
its Indignation: Which Opinion Poterius, Helmont, and Zwelfer proposed before
Charas.

I wish these Gentlemen had better explained their own Opinions, and more
plainly declared what they mean by Enraged Spirits, Indignation, Idea, and the
like terms; and, but probably (at least) have shown us how these, or any of
them are conveyed into the Body, and so conducted in it, as to produce these
many various and strange Effects immaterially; for if they confess these
Enraged Spirits have a Vehicle, they grant all, and sufficient for me to
affirm, that That Vehicle, whatever it is, is of its self able, proper, and fit
to produce these strange and dreadful Symptoms.

I am indeed so far of Signior Redi's mind, as to believe there is some Venom,
or Virulent Juice, or Matter, does attend the Teeth of an Adder when she bites;
as I have observed a little moisture to attend the sting of a Be, which will
cause strange Swellings, though the Sting does not remain behind, the Sting has
done its business, and made a passage to put in that little Venom, which I hope
they will not call the Enraged Spirits, Indignation, or the Idea of the Be.
Now, what that moisture is? From whence it comes? Which way it passes, in the
Body of the Be? What Sort of Bees only have it? What Taste it has? What
Effects both this, and the Adders clear moisture have when mixed with Acids, or
Alkalies? might be material here more strictly to exmine; especially the
Effects they have on human Blood, Chyle, Serum, Lympha, etc.

But to return to our Adder, I will put the Matter to a fair issue, by a few
certain Experiments:

First, By giving the several and distinct Parts of Adders to Dogs, Cats,
Crows, etc. I found that no particular Part was hurtful to those Creatures.

Secondly, By making angry Adders bite on the ends of well pollished Sticks, I
found a thin (not yellow) but a clear transparent Water left behind, on the
place where they had endeavored to bite.

Thirdly, I found that the place bit (in a living Creature) always Swelled,
looked Black, and the Blood seemed to Coagulate.

Now I confess here seemed a great difficulty; for if this thin, transparent
Water is the Venom, from whence can it come? since there is nothing Poisonous
in the Adder when dead, and taken inwardly by these Creatures; not the least
Sickness, or Illness appearing in them, upon taking even the most suspected
part of this dangerous Serpent.

Besides this, the Adder hastily pursuing, catching, and (in a seeming Rage)
biting hard upon the Neck of a large Field-Mouse, no more Effect afterward
appeared upon the bitten place, than if her Neck had been pierced by four small
Teeth of any other Creature.

To enquine therefore from whence this Water came, I looked within the Mouth of
an Adder, but I saw no show of any such Water; then I took out her Tongue,
commonly (though falsely) termed her Sting, which I found divided into two
Forks, each about half an Inch long apiece, both of a very black Color, which
continued so after the two Forks were united into the same Stem, or Trunk;
which Tongue I found placed exactly under the Larinx, or entrance of the Aspera
Arteria; so that under this Larinx, when alive, she could withdraw, and nimbly
hide her forked Tongue, leaving a free and open passage from the Larinx to her
Teeth and Jaws. Next I carefully observed both Jaws, which to me seemed double;
the one Jaw having at least eight or ten very small Teeth; and the other not
above two on each side, but very long, in comparison to the other, and placed
over against a vacant place in the other Jaw; most of them (especially the
great ones) bending inward, much like the Talons of a Hawk, or Kite; and when I
viewed them in a Microscope, they seemed more like the forementioned Talons,
than the Teeth of other Creatures.

I looked for the yellow Juice at the Roots of the Teeth, and in the hollow
part of the Jaws, which I then found not, I only found there some florid Blood,
mixed with a kind of Water, like its Serum, but of both a very small quantity.

I searched the Ductus Salivares, and their Glandulae for this Water; all which
appearing very white, and nothing yellowish at all in them, their whiteness I
suppose they received from the pure whiteness of the Saliva contained in them:
And thus I was, as I thought, frustrate of finding the clear Liquor
beforementioned; for from the Nerves, or Lymphatick Vessels, although they
were visible enough, yet for many reasons I thought it most improbable for any
of them to carry such a Liquor forth unto the Teeth.

In the next biting of an Adder I observed two things: First, That she held her
Chaps, in the very instant of biting, to the place she bit upon, so exactly
close, that nothing either of Breath or Water could pass out that way, her
Mouth and Lips seeming naturally fitted for that purpose.

Secondly, I discerned an apparent Motion of Expiration, at the very instant of
biting; which being upon the Throat of a strong Dog, of a thick Skin, I suppose
the Teeth entered only the two Skins, and yet a Tumor presently arose, to the
bigness of a large Bladder; whereupon I caused that Adder and another to bite
the same Dog in another place, always taking care at the time of biting to
hinder expiration some way or other, as well as I could; and I always found
that either the biting had no Effect, or else the Adder had no mind to bite,
though never so much enraged before; nay, though with great force I squeezed
the Teeth into the place they were fastened unto, that they might enter very
deep, holding his Chaps very hard together between my Finger and Thumb, and
pressing both the over and lower Jaw together; yet no considerable Effect would
follow, except the Adder had the liberty of his own way of biting, and close
shutting of his Lips to the bitten place.

Whereupon I began for to suspect, that the very dangerous biting of our Adder,
was truly caused from her Breath, and the close shutting of her Mouth, and
forcing either depraved Breath, or the steams of such Breath into the Body, by
those little Orifices, which the very action of biting seemed more fully to
declare.

In which Opinion I was the more confirmed, when inspecting the Windpipe, I
found two great Recipients for Air; but the Lungs so conveniently situate in
this Animal, as it were to deprive the descending Air, of the greatest part of
this Aereal Salt, which they naturally will do, beyond any thing that Art can
perform: And therefore, says a learned Author, Aer e pulmonibus egestus,
respirationi, vitaeque sustentandae nequaquam idoneus est. Circa respirationis
ergo usum affirmare fas sit, nonnihil, quicquid sit, Aereum ad vitam
sustinendam necessarium, in sanguinis massam transire. Hinc Aer e pulmonibus
egestus, e quo particulae istae Vitales exhauriuntur, non amplius ad
respirationem idoneus est.

And the Air being thus deprived, we may from what I have said conclude, that
it will naturally deprave; for as the Air in Mines, deprived of this Nitrous
Salt, and pent close up, is the true Damp; so this Air in our Adder, deprived
by the Lungs of its wholesome parts, is the true Venom, or Verulency, as some
phrase it. For,

By the contraction of this long Bladder, and of their neat Anulares, together
with the extraordinary length of their Windpipe, and the close shutting of
their Mouths to the place bitten; the deprived Air is forced with their Teeth
into the wounded or bitten place, and by this Motion through the Windpipe,
either, from the Sides or Glandulae bring that clear Lympha along with it.

And thus having given a considerable instance, to show the true Nature of a
Pestilential Constitution, to consist in an Aereal Deprivation, arising from a
Defect of this Salt, it is as easy to conceive, as in the Adder, how the same
Deficiency is made in the Air we breath in, and what Effect that Deficiency
will have upon the Humors of our Body.

I do not by all this deny the Existence of several Subterraneous Steams, or
Exhalations, no question but that they are ready to crowd in, upon the least
defect of this Aereal Salt; and to render the Air more or less depraved, either
as the Air is more or less defective to make room for them; or they in their
own Nature are more or less pernicious; For as in Subterraneous Damps,
according to the different Nature or Quality of the Mines, so on the Surface of
the Earth, (according to the variety of the Soils) on the defect of these
Nitro-Aereal Particles, several Heterogeneous Steams do get into their places,
and very ill supply the defect of this most useful Salt.

CHAP. VI.
BUt some may enquire, perhaps, from whence all this Nitro-Aereal Salt should
come, with which it is very manifest the Air we breath does so plentifully
abound? In answer to which Enquiry, I do confeses, I am inclined to believe,
that this Nitro-Aereal Salt, which does so evidently abound in wholesome Air, is
Chymically raised and sublimed from the Sea by the Sun's Heat; the more
Volatile part carrying with it the grosser part beforementioned: And this I am
still more inclined to believe, when I consider Saltpeter it self is only Sal
Gemma, or Sea Salt, more abounding with Volatile Aereal Spirits; as, indeed,
there is great reason for it why it should.

Others may enquire what it is that does most cause a Defect, and consequently
an ill and a depraved Air? To which I answer, Not all those Mutations of the
Air observed by Hippocrates, and his followers, nor all those notable
Alterations of the Air mentioned more particularly by Silvius de le Boe, and
his Scholars, have this Operation or Effect upon the Air, as by diligent
Observation I can yet find, but only some of them have; especially an extreme,
great, long, or lasting cold Frost: An extreme, great, long and lasting Heat,
Dryness, or Moisture, in the like manner; any one of these, accompanied with a
long quietness or tranquillity of the Air, may first cause a Defect, etc. As for
Example, in the canicular Days, when the overviolent Sun's heat has too much
rarefied and sublimed this Salt, that we can scarcely breath, then Defects, and
Depravations, Death, and Ruin are very apt to follow one another, which have
much sooner an Effect on some Constitutions than others, according to the
various Consistency, or Dislocation, Combination, or Relaxation, Firmness, or
Weakness of the Particles of the Blood or Humors.

And this I take to be the true reason of our so frequent Autumnal Epidemick
Fevers, although they are perhaps not suddenly felt at that time, (in the
Canicular Days) but stay longer before they appear, they are so much the worse
for it, and argue that the former Deprivation has had a longer time to deprave,
according (as it falls out) sometimes to deprave both the Air and Humors of our
Body; and when the returning Cold, and more plentiful Aereal Salt, does begin
to bind up the relaxed Particles of Blood, the depraved Particles of so
disagreeing Nature, must needs cause a very dangerous Conjunction, since in
their own Nature they are not only very different, but also very destructive to
those other Particles of our Blood and Humors, and yet they are got so crowded
in, and associated amongst them, that they are very difficult to remove.

To sum up what I have said in a few words, The Diseases and Disturbances that
we find in our Bodies, do not arise from the solid Parts (except it be from
some hurt or violence from without) nor from a quarrel or disagreement amongst
the Humors or fluid Parts of our Body, but from a Defect of this Aereal Salt,
which gives occasion to Heterogeneous Steams to crowd both into the Air and
Humors of our Body, and in time to contaminate and deprave one another; from
whence generally Diseases, Epidemick and Pestilential Fevers do arise, so
destructive and pernicious unto Mankind; so that the want of this Aereal Salt,
is causa per accidens privativa; that is, per sui absentiam causa, as the old
Philosophers are wont to speak of all the Diseases and Disturbances in Man's
Body.

Now although hitherto I may seem to discourage both Physicians and their
Patients, because no Advice or Counsel can secure us always against ill Air; I
mean Air deficient or depraved; yet we may by the wise and learned Physician's
Advice, be taught how in part either to correct ill Air, or avoid it, or at
least how to fortify the Humors of our Body against it; and when nevertheless
ill Air is got into our Blood and Humors, and the Particles of our Blood are
ill affected by it, then to assist Nature Materiae morbificae exterminatione.

So that here is nothing to discourage either, but rather to remind them, that
(...), etc.

Far be it from me to seem to lessen the overruling Power of God Almighty by
all this, I rather show how easy a thing it is for him by a Defect or
Depravation, to destroy the World and all Mankind together in a moment, as well
as to punish one particular Place or Country.

According to these Principles I have laid down, I cannot but recommend an
open, free, and uninterrupted Air, a sandy Soil, a situation upon the highest
Ground, free from Hills, Woods, or any thing else that may intercept this Sweet
and Balsamic Air: And I wonder that our Ancestors did so little regard these
things, when even some of the Poets took notice of it. As Lucan, describing the
Plague in Pompey's Army, tells us, how free Caesar's (though near him) was from
it upon the higher Ground, while it raged in Pompey's Army below; At liber
terrae spatiosis collibus hostis
Aere non pigro, nec inertibus angitur undis;
which may serve for a good Caution to all Encamping Generals.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some BOOKS printed for, and are to be sold by Tho. Bassett, at
the George in Fleet Street.
THe London Practice of Physic, or the whole Practical Part of Physic;
contained in the Works of Dr. Willis. 8 o. Pharmacopoeia Londinensis, or the
New London Dispensatory, in Six Books, 8 o. By William Salmon, Professor of
Physic and Astrology. 8 o. Doron Medicum: Or, a Supplement to the New London
Dispensatory. In Three Books, 8 o. By William Salmon, Professor of Physic and
Astrology. Kitchen Physic; by way of Dialogue: With Rules and Directions how
to prevent Sickness, and cure Diseases, by Diet and such things as are daily
sold in the Market. 12 o. An Essay concerning Humane Understanding: In Four
Books. By Mr. John Lock. Fol. Remarks in the Grand Tour of France and Italy,
lately performed. By a Person of Quality, etc. 8 o. An Essay of Transmigration,
in defense of Pythagoras; or, a Discourse of Natural Philosophy, 8 o. By
Whitelocke Bulstrode, Gent. The Great French Dictionary, in two Parts: The
First, French and English: The Second, English and French, according to the
Ancient and Modern Orthography, etc. sol. By Guy Miege, Gent. The Politics of
France. By Monsieur P. H. Marquis of C. etc. 8 o. Poems on several Occasions:
written by Charles Cotton,Esquire; 8 o. An Exact Journal of the Siege of Coni in
Piemont, etc. 4 o. Sent in a Manuscript from Turin, to a Person of Quality in
London. Two Letters to a Friend; containing certain Considerations relating to
the Pulpit. 4 o. A Sermon preached before the House of Commons at St.
Margaret's, Westminster, on Thursday the Fifth of November. By William
Fleetwood, Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's. 4 o. Discourses upon Trade,
principally directed to the Cases of the Interest, Coinage, Clipping, and
Increase of Money. 4 o. The Monarchs of England from the Heptarchy, to Their
present Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, taken from Medals and Original
Paintings; with a Compendious History of their several Reigns. By Guy Miege,
Gent. The Effigies of the Right Honorable Edward Russell, Esquire, one of
Their Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, Admiral of Their Majesty's
Fleet, and Treasurer of Their Majesty's Navy, etc. Taken from the Original, and
curiously Engraven on Copper. Price 1 s.

