The CASE OF DIVORCE AND RE-MARRIAGE thereupon Discussed.

By a Reverend Prelate of the Church of England and a private Gentleman.

Occasioned by the late Act of Parliament for the Divorce of the Lord ROSSE.

I know that Messiah comes which is called Christ, when he is come he will
tell us all things,

Joh. 4. 25. LONDON, Printed for Nevill Simmons at the Prince's Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1673.

READER,
THese Papers were drawn up when the Business of the Lord Rosse was debated in
Parliament, and had their rise from That transaction. The first part of them
was Written by a private hand, and was occasioned by a Discourse with a learned
Bishop now with God upon that Subject, and being presented to him, he returned
the following Animadversions upon it, to which the Answer Here set down was
Then given by the same hand. The whole is now made public for thy information
and satisfaction about this matter.

Touching Divorce and Remarriage thereupon.
AN incapacity for the ends of marriage, previous to it, makes a Nullity of the
marriage upon a subsequent discovery of it. This needs no determination by any
positive Law; For the Law of Nature, and the reason of the thing it self gives
an universal determination of it every where.

By the Law of Moses, unchastity before Marriage or contraction (if concealed)
and all unchastity after Contraction or Marriage, was to be punished with
death, and no mention made in the Law of any such thing as Divorce in that Case.

Moses in the 24th of Deuteronomy, gave This allowance for Divorce, verse. 1, 2.
When a man has taken a Wife, and Married her, and it come to pass that she
find no favor in his eyes, because he has found some uncleanness in her: Then
let him write her a Bill of Divorcement, and give it in her hand, and send her
out of his house; And when she is departed out of his house, she may go and be
another man's wife; which was but an allowance in some Cases, and in those too
did rather liberare a Poena than a Vitio. We need not inquire farther why this
was done: our Savior has given us a perfect account of it; such a permission
was granted to them, because of the hardness of their hearts, and the unruly
stubborn behavior of the Jews toward their Wives in that particular. Moses,
who we are to consider as a Legislator to a State, as well as a Church,
suffered it to be, as the most tolerable remedy that That people were capable
of, and in favor chiefly of the Women.

This permission of Moses came in the practice of it to be so far extended
amongst them, that whoever desired to put away his Wife, was allowed to do it
without giving any reason at all, besides his own pleasure why he did it. This
we may see in Mr. Selden' s Vxor Haebraica; and Grotius tells us, Quod
Consuetudo legis interpres Nullam a marito causam dirempti Matrimonii exegerit;
and adds, Alioqui enim nou potuisset Josephus Maria clam dimittere: Potuit
igitur Maritus dicere quod Romae dixit Paulus Emilius, sibi optime notum qua
calceus urgeret. This custom was in it self greatly inconvenient, and as one
says of it, For a man, Nulla aut levissima de causa uxorem dimittere, ut Jam
de primaeva dei institutione nihil dicam, vel sola charitatis lex prohibebat,
sive uxorem respicias, quae veluti supplex ad Mariti Tutelam confugit, sive
communes etiam liberos. Heathen Nations rarely practiced any such thing, the
Romans in particular, of whom an ancient Author says, Romani, cum nulla lex
repudium vetaret, annos tamen quingentos and viginti sine exemplo repudii
^gerunt: Nec quisquam ferme scriptorum, est qui non graviter reprehendat Marcum
Tullium Ciceronem, quod levibus de causis Terentiam dimiserit.

Our Savior in the Gospel, before the Pharisees asked him any Question about
this matter, (which they did, and their Question and his answer is set down in
the 19th. of Matthew, and the 10th. of Mark) determines it in the 5th. of
Matthew in his Sermon upon the Mount, there being indeed nothing wherein That
people needed more Reformation than in That particular; His words are verse the
31; It has been said, whosoever shall put away his Wife, let him give her a
Writing of Divorcement; And verse the 32. But I say unto you, that whosoever
shall put away his Wife, saving for the cause of Fornication, causes her to
commit Adultery and whosoever shall marry her that is Divorced, commits
Adultery. By this it is plain, that whatsoever toleration they had from Moses
about putting away their Wives, and whatsoever farther liberty they took to
themselves in That matter, it is totally repealed and condemned, and no cause
of divorce and putting away allowed to be good, but in case of Fornication and
Unchastity.

There arises this difficulty from the consideration of our Savior's words;
whether he he did thereby intend to institute a new Law in the Case; or,
whether he only spoke Interpretatively with reference to the Law of God Then in
being. Those who are inclined to think he did institute a New Law, urge it from
hence, That our Savior speaks of Fornication and Unchastity as a ground, and
the only ground of Divorce, which by the Law had another punishment appointed
for it, and such a one as made Divorce impossible and impracticable, for they
were to be put to death that were so found guilty, and of That Law, our Savior
takes no notice; say they, the punishment the Law appointed to be inflicted for
Fornication and Adultery, and the direction our Savior gives about it cannot
consist together, the one directs Divorce, the other appoints death. I suppose
our Savior in what he Here determines about this matter (as in many other of
his determinations about other things) speaks so, as that he gives a full
satisfaction to men according to the present state of things then in being; and
also establishes a Divine Law upon such grounds that shall last for ever in
the Church.

For the first, That he spoke with reference to the Law Then in being, and to
settle the Consciences of men, who desired to perform their duty as things Then
stood, I gather from hence. First, because he spoke to such who were then all
of them under an obligation to the whole Mosaical Law, for so were the Jews,
and Christ's own Disciples to whom he Preached.

Secondly, He plainly seems all along that Chapter to comment upon the Law of
Moses and Evangelize it, and to give the true and genuine meaning of it,
against the corrupt and perverse interpretations of the Scribes and Pharisees;
And when he says, But I say unto you, he does not so much oppose himself and
what he said Then, to Moses and what Moses had said Before, as to what the
Scribes and Pharisees had falsely said in Moses name, and so rather vindicates
the true sense and intention of the Law under his own name. And though his
determinations in some things exceed the Law, yet in all things they contain
the true sense and end of the Law.

Thirdly, When the Scribes and Pharisees asked our Savior in the 19th. of
Matthew about this matter what lawfully might be done in it, our Savior
answers them with the very same determination, and therefore it is plain he
spoke with reference to what was at that time to be accounted Legal, according
to the Laws and institutions of God Then in force; and there is nothing in what
our Savior says, that does any way contradict the Law of God in being, but
gives a satisfaction to men's Consciences how they were to behave themselves
under it.

We must note this, that our Savior is singly upon the point of Divorce and
putting away, he meddles not at all with the Law about Adultery, but leaves it
to its due execution; His saying, That crime was the only lawful cause of
Divorce did not prejudge it from any greater punishment due to it, he only
determines about the matter of Putting away and Divorce, and he determines thus
in opposition to the Jewish practice, and the first permission of Moses to
them, that there is no cause at all upon which a Wife may be put away, but
where the marriage-bond is dissolved, which is only in the case of Fornication
and Adultery, where the Woman was Then legally dead, and ought to be put to
death, if prosecuted and the fact proved, and that all putting away the Wife
upon any other ground is unalawful and sinful. Now this determination of our
Savior about Divorce might be a satisfaction to men in Conscience, and a
ground for them to put away their Wives for Fornication and Adultery, though
the Law of God against Fornication and Adultery to punish it with death was
unrepealed, and they under the obligation of it, and that in three Cases.

First, The Law did not oblige the Husband to go to the Judge, and prosecute
his Wife for Adultery; Nor does our Savior impose farther in that case then
the Law did upon him, and therefore such who were Lenes mariti, as Joseph was,
and had no mind to prosecute their Wives to extremity, were by this delivered
from a necessity, either to live with an Adulteress, or else to prosecute her
to death, and are set free in Conscience to give her Libellum repudii, and part
from her.

Secondly, Supposing a man could not have Justice done upon an Adulterous Wife,
when he did his best in prosecution of her, (and this was like enough to be the
condition of many a man in that corrupt state of things amongst the Jews at
that time, and was actually so, the execution of That Law having been for a
long time forborne, and well may we ^hink it should be so, for all Capital
punishment was at that time taken from the Jews, and not in their power, so the
Sanhedrim confess, John 18. 31. It Is not lawful for us to put any man ^o
death,) in that case our Savior gives free liberty for ^he Husband to divorce
himself from her, and make use of that freedom the Jews took ^f putting away.

Thirdly, Supposing a man were inwardly satisfied o^ his Wives unchastity, and
certainly knew within himself, she were guilty of Adultery, yet had not such
proof^ as would make it out in a Judicial way to gain Execution of the Law
against her in putting her to death in such a case, (which we may easily
suppose might often fall out) our Savior sets the man's Conscience fre^ to put
her away, and Divorce himself from her; In all these cases our Saviour^
allowing Divorce in case o^ unchastity was of great u^^ Then to settle the
Consciences of men, who were obliged to the Law, and no infringement at all of
the Law it self: He gives a rule to limit that exorbitant liberty men took to
themselves of putting their Wives away, and tells them in what case only it may
be done, which was in case of Fornication, and that might very well happen to
be the Case, though the Law for punishing it with death were still in force,
and so our Savior speaks of it as(...) Then accidentally (...) Divorce and
putting (...) but no way lays any A^^^^ upon the punishment the Law inflicted
upon it. The truth is, our Savior promulged such a general Law in the case, as
gave a sufficient determination as things Then stood, and might satisfy men's
Consciences what Then to do in the point of Divorce, and was to be also a Rule
to the Church about that matter to all future Ages. That our Savior intended
it so, is very evident from those general grounds upon which it is established,
and all the circumstances that attend it* Nor is there one word in that whole
Chapter but is of that nature, it is Evangelical as well as Legal, and looks
forward to the Gospel Church to come, as well as it contains a direction to the
present Church of the Jews; Wherever throughout that Chapter our Savior
speaks of any Law in force amongst the Jews, even of the Judicial Laws, he
induces by his determinations about them that Equity that was moral and
perpetual in them, and to last for ever in the Church. It seems also necessary
there should be some direction left by our Savior in this point, or else the
Church under the Go^pel would have been wholly without any Rule about it, and
there could never have been upon any terms whatever any such thing as Divorce
practiced in the Gospel-world, for what Moses permitted about it was accidental
and temporary and peculiar to the Jews, and our Savior shows us the rise of
it, and the reason of it, and forbids all farther practice of it; The Law
against Adultery and uncleanness determined those crimes another way, and
besides That Law of punishing Adultery with death was purely Judicial, as much
as punishing a di^obedient child with death was so, and wholly relating to the
Jewish Economy; It Is true, the offenses in these cases were moral and natural
evils, and do still so continue, but That manner of punishing them Then, was
Judicial and temporary. We see at This day it is not a general established Law,
no not in the most Christian Nations to punish Adultery with death, and
therefore our Savior, who was guided by infinite wisdom in all he did, spoke
so as might give satisfaction to every Conscience under the Law at That time,
upon what terms only to make use of the liberty of Divorce and putting away,
Then so frequently and commonly practiced, and also gave a perpetual Rule to
the Church, that the bond of marriage should be preserved Sacred, and upon no
account but that of Fornication dissolved, and in That case whatever the Laws
of particular States might be about it, yet the obligation of marriage ceased,
and the Consciences of men were for ever set free.

This Doctrine of our Savior about Divorce established in the 5th. of Matthew,
is again repeated by him in the 19th. of Matthew in answer to the Pharisees,
who there questioned with him about the same matter; He there tells them, there
is no cause lawful for a man to put away his Wife, but only Fornication, and
that he admits to be a lawful cause, and the only lawful cause. In the 10th. of
Mark our Savious discourse is set down without the exception of Fornication,
and runs general, that whoever puts his Wife away, and marries another, commits
Adultery, and so in the 16th. of Luke our Savior says, without any of the
circumstances in his other discourses of it, in the general, and without the
exception of Fornication, That whosoever shall put away his Wife and marry
another commits Adultery. It must be noted, that what Mark sets down, in the
10th. of Mark, is the very same story recorded by Matthew chapter the 19th, and
both the Evangelists give an account of the same discourse between our Savior
and the Pharisees at one and the same time; That is so clear, that it is not to
be denied, and therefore whatever is set down by Matthew must be admitted to
belong to the story, and be employed in it, though omitted and not expressed by
Mark, and so whatever is in Mark, that Matthew has omitted, must be likewise
supposed to belong to the story, or else we must imagine the Evangelists not to
be both in the right in their relation of the same story, which cannot but be,
and therefore Matthew expressing that our Savior added That exception, (except
in the cause of Fornication) it is to be supposed and employed in the relation
Mark makes of the story, though he express it not, neither in what he said to
the Disciples nor to the Jews themselves, for the answer is There general to
both; Calvin in his Harmony upon the Evangelists says upon this place, that
it is the same story related in both places, and there is no other difference,
says he, but that one sets down the matter of our Saviors discourse more
fully than the other, it being, says he, most usual for one Evangelist to omit
some passages and circumstances in the same story mentioned by another.

Saint Luke in his relation of what our Savior said about this matter, omits
all the circumstances of his discourse, and only mentions in short this general
expression of our Savior, That whosoever should put away his wife and marry
another, committed Adultery, which is evidently spoken of those unlawful
Divorces daily practiced amongst the Jews, and directed against Them.

Some conceive that our Saviors determinations in this point were intended
with a distinction; that is, that when he spoke in general against putting away
without any exception, he spoke relatively to his Disciples, and to the
Gospel Church to come; but when he spoke of it with the exception of
Fornication annexed to it, he intended That only with relation to the Jews, and
so the exception Now concerns not us, but was only meant to Them, and
terminated There.

Very many things strongly oppose this apprehension; First, in the 5th. of
Matthew, where our Savior gives the first, and most solemn determination about
this point, it is plain he spoke to his Disciples, as well as the multitude of
the Jews; For the Chapter begins, And seeing the multitudes, he went up into a
mountain; and when he was set, his Disciples came unto him; And he opened his
mouth and taught them saying, etc. And he often in that Sermon directed his
discourse particularly to his Disciples, for so he did in the 14th. verse,
where he tells them, ye are the salt of the World; A City set on an hill cannot
be hid; which must be spoken to them: Nor was there any reason why our Savior
should Preach one Doctrine in this matter to his Disciples, and another to the
Jews; For the Disciples were equally obliged Then to the Law, and concerned in
all that the Jews were, and therefore the same Doctrine must needs be common to
them both.

Secondly, We find not the least ground from any thing our Savior said any
where to make any distinction in this matter, to believe the Rule was given
general to one sort of men, and with an exception to another, but we find the
Rule often generally laid down by our Savior with this general exception
annexed to it, and in that case where our Savior once gives a general rule,
with a general exception annexed to it, wheresoever our Savior after repeats
the same Rule, we must suppose the exception, or else we can never be able to
make our Savior to agree with himself. Nothing more usual than to imply remote
exceptions under generals to reconcile the Scripture with it self, much more in
This case, where our Savior himself so often joined the Rule and the exception
together. Our Savior bids us positively in the same Chapter not to swear at
all, in general terms, yet every man that is sober will, under This general,
imply all the lawful swearing the Scripture any where else enjoins or approves,
because we must not make the Scripture militate with it self.

Thirdly, There can be no good reason to limit what our Savior said about
Divorce in the 5th. of Matthew and the 19th. of Matthew to the Jews only, but
we must needs admit it to be a general Law given in the case to all Ages,
because he grounds his determination about it, not upon the Judicial Law, but
upon reasons drawn from the general Law of Nature, and the first institution of
marriage by God in the Creation of man and woman at the beginning, and such
general principles, as had no peculiarity at all to the Jews, (though they were
obliged by them) but such wherein all mankind were equally concerned: Our
Savior opposed the Pharisees and the Judaical practice, and establishes the
Law he introduces about it, by reducing the matter of Marriage and Divorce to
the primitive rule of it, and to the natural and perpetual reason of the things
in themselves considered, and therein spoke not only to them, but to all
mankind, and to the whole world; He directs them to look to the first rise and
original of Marriage, God made at first but one man and one woman, a male and a
female, and appointed Them two in those two kinds to be in the relation of
Marriage one flesh, so that Nature and Institution, the very Laws of man's first
Creation, make the marriage-Union very sacred, and from thence our Savior
derives his direction about it; And for Divorce, whereas the Jews upon every
trivial occasion allowed it, our Savior denies it to be lawful upon any
occasion but one, and that grounded upon the natural and general reason of the
thing in it self considered: The very essence of the marriage-Union, both by
nature and primitive institution lies in this, that two are one flesh; where
fornication is committed the Union is dissolved, for as St. Paul tells us,
whoever joins himself to an Harlot, is one flesh with her, and so in cases of
such turpitude two are no longer one, but three or four or more in that
marriage-sense of oneness, and so the oneness of two in marriage, which is the
essence of it being dissolved, the marriage it self must needs be so likewise,
nor can it in reason be supposed to continue, where the ends of God and Nature
in that relation are frustrated and made void: And this could not be limited to
the Jews, nor have a peculiar and single respect to Them, being founded upon
principles that are common and universal, moral and perpetual, and wherein the
interests of all men concenter, so that if it were lawful Then for a Jew, or
any man, to put away his Wife for Fornication, upon those grounds upon which
our Savior declares it to be lawful, it seems reasonable to think it must
continue to be so for every man to the worlds end, because those grounds are in
their own nature general and perpetual, and will Justify the doing of the
thing for ever.

Fourthly, There seems to be no ground* of belief, that our Savior should
indulge the Jews in this point, and frame this exception only for Them, and not
intend it to others, but rather the contrary, That he should have particularly
restrained Them in this matter more than others, because of their enormous
practices this way above any other Nation in the World; Besides that the
general Rule without the exception, has a fairer interpretation toward Them
than any, and our Savior might well say, pointing only to Them Whoever puts
away his Wife, (that is, as your manner of putting them away now is) and
marries another, commits Adultery: There seems no reason at all to appropriate
that exception to Them, especially when it is made upon grounds common to all.

Fifthly, To confine that Rule our Savior Then gave about Marriage and
Divorce, as he conjoined them, to the Jews only at That time, and to extend it
in that conjunction no farther, is to confine it to that interpretation,
wherein it is most hard and difficult to be understood, and deny the effects of
it, where the interpretation lies most plain and easy. To our selves under the
Gospel the direction of our Saviors Law is plain and evident, and without any
difficulty may be put in execution, but in its relation to the Jews, and the
state of things Then, it seems somewhat obscure, and without an admittance of a
non-execution in some cases of the Law of God Then in force, for punishing
Fornication and Adultery with death, very hard to be understood, and therefore
it is no way reasonable to relate the Law solely to Them, and deny the benefit
of it to our selves.

The practice in the Christian Church seems to have been regulated by our
Saviors direction, and Divorces admitted in case of Fornication. The Emperor
Theodosius, who, as one says of him, was Christianus and pius, and Episcoporum
quotidiano usus concilio, made Laws for a man to put away his Wife in case of
Fornication and Adultery, and extended it to the very suspicion of it.
Sufficere Judicavit, si mulier viro ignorante, vel nolente extraneorum virorum
convivia appeteret, si ipso invito sine Justa and probabili causa foris
pernoctaret, nisi apud suos Parents, vel si Circensibus theatralibus, vel
Ludis and Arenarum spectaculis ipso prohibente gauderet. The Emperor Justinian
made many additions to these Laws, which although for the manner of them, we
must suppose accommodated much to the Customs of those times, yet were all
built upon our Saviors direction in that case. St. Jerome is positive, That,
Vbicunque est Fornicatio, and Fornicationis suspicio libere uxor dimittitur;
which yet we must not extend to every Jealous suspicion, but suppose spoken, Ne
ad legum subtilitatem res semper exigatur, and must be understood with
restriction; It Is no way fit a man's own Jealous apprehension should be always
the rule in the case, and yet in matters of That nature it may so fall out,
that a man may be certain of that of which he can make no evident proof. St.
Austine plainly takes our Saviors direction Then to be the rule Now in this
matter, in his 89th. Epistle, says he, Dominus praecepit, ne quisquam uxorem
dimi^tat, excepta causa Fornicationis.

Divorce a mensa and toro seems to be a fiction in the Canon Law, and to have
no ground, neither in any Law of God, nor in reason. Not in any Law of God, for
wheresoever divorce was allowed by any Divine Law, it was a total Divorce, and
the persons were allowed to marry again; It was so amongst the Jews, whoever
was Then Divorced, might go to a second marriage; It is so in what our Savior
says, he evidently implies it, (putting away and remarrying are conjoined)
whoever, says he, puts away his wife, and Marries another, except for the
cause of Fornication, etc. where the implication is evident, that in that case
of Fornication, he may both put away his wife, and also lawfully Marry another,
the first marriage being dissolved: the word (...) constantly used by our
Savior in the New Testament for Divorce and putting away implies a nulling of
the marriage and discharge of the obligation, and signifies to absolve, loose,
release, discharge; so that if what our Savior has said about Divorce in case
of Fornication be a rule to the Church Now, it is plain the Divorce allowed by
him in that case admits of a second marriage: If it be not a rule to the Church
Now, then there is not the least positive allowance under the Gospel for any
Divorce at all, and if so, all Divorces a Mensa and Toro are without any Divine
warrant.

Not in reason, for whatsoever can be sufficient to Justify a Divorce from all
the ends of Marriage, must needs be sufficient to Justify a Divorce from the
obligation of Marriage, the one being but in order to the other; It seems no
way reasonable to bring any man into that condition, that the obligation of
marriage should remain, and the helps and advantages of it be taken away; It Is
to divide what God has joined, for he never appointed the one to go without
the other; It seems very undecent to say, two shall continue one flesh, and yet
be excluded from all converse each with the other. If the essential bond of
marriage be broken (as in fornication), That gives a rational ground for a
Total divorce; If it be not, while the bond continues unbroken, the duty ought
to be performed, there appears no ground to suspend the one, and continue the
other.

The practice of marrying again after Divorce has been frequent; The Greek
Church practice it generally. Grotius says, some Christians have thought better
to forbear it, Quam sententiam, says he, ex bonitate peculiari magis ortam,
quam ex communi receptaque lege, tum ex aliis, tum ex Tertulliano apparet, qui
non uno loco ostendit, solitos suo tempore ad matrimonium alterum admitti, qui
ob Adulterium uxorem dimisissent. Origin tells us, that in his time many
Bishops allowed it. It Is not without the authority of some Councils, who have
determined it lawful; Conciliis, Eliberino, and Aurelianensi, and Arelatensi
primo decretum est id licere.

Animadversions upon the foregoing Discourse.
1. UNchastity before marriage, in a Virgin, not in a Widow.

2. Unchastity to be punished with death, if proved by two witnesses, if but
one witness Divorce, if only strong suspicion the water of Jealousy.

3. Found some uncleanness; some is a word superfluous, (...), the 72.
Interpret. which is summam foeditatem carnis.

4. The learned men, Seldom and Grotius have their opinion, yet the Rabbis
say; Albeit the liberty of the Law, few or none did use it: No instance of
taking that license in Scripture; Joseph finding the blessed Virgins Womb
swelled, presumed he had Just cause to dismiss her: for he knew she could not
contend with him in point of Law.

5. It is a strong argument to me, that whereas God says, the nations round
about the Jews would admire their wise Laws, yet none of the Heathen had such a
loose Law, as to divorce at every exception the husband took; It is Tertullian
in his Apology, who says, that from Romulus to Sp. Camilius for 500. years
Divorces were never heard of in Rome, and he began it upon the barrenness of
his Wife. Tully broke good order above all men; For he married a young
Gentlewoman, his Pupilla, his Ward, as we call it, that he might pay his debts
with her Portion, he never prospered after it.

6. The Jews to this day confess in their writings, that the penalty for
Adultery was not inflicted, as it ought to have been, chiefly because it was so
hard to prove it by two witnesses, and the confession of the nocent party would
not serve; because no such Trial appears in their Law.

7. In Matthew there is mention of putting away, not a word to allow the
innocent person to marry again: but here is a strong argument indeed, that the
Law of Moses never allowed their petulant putting away for every cause; For
Christ, as you well observe rendered the right sense of the old Law, gave no new.

8. When the marriage-bond is dissolved; That is presumed not proved.

9. Matthew. 19. 9. is not every way the same determination with his doctrine,
Matthew. 5.; for chap. 19. he speaks in his case that marries another, but Matthew.
5. in his case that marries her that is put away. The Woman was not legally
dead, if not convinced by two witnesses.

10. The first case of Lenes Mariti, and the third of a prosecutor that could
not prove, in the Event come all to one, That with a good conscience he might
put the Adulteress away. I concur for putting away, but no farther; But for the
second member, when he prosecuted openly against her and could not prove,
Surely she ought to have the common benefit of all Law, to be recta in curiis,
and the utmost must be to take the water of Jealousy.

11. If you speak of the 5th. of Matthew (not of the 19th.) it is true that it
is a complete exposition of the right understanding of some points in Moses
Law, in the morality so to be in force for ever.

12. Punishment by death for Adultery not a general Law. But far more Nations
have it, than others with whom it prevails not.

13. That Christ intended the obligation of the marriage should cease;
Presumitur non probatur.

14. Mark sets down the same story recorded by Matthew, that not to be denied.
Yes, it is evidently to be denied, Matthew. 19. 3. The Pharisees asked him him
about divorce, so Mark 10. 2. the Pharisees asked him about that matter; but
read further, verse the 10th; and in the house the Disciples asked him again of
the same matter, and he says unto them, whosoever puts away his Wife, and does
marry anoother, commits Adultery, Luke 16. 1. The chapter begins, He says to
his Disciples, not to the Pharisees; Then at the 19th. verse, whosoever puts
away his Wife, and marries another, commits Adultery, etc. To his Disciples our
Savior spoke in Gospel rules, repealing the license given to the Jews in their
Law Judicial to marry again, if Divorced for Adulter; I dissent from Calvine,
who will have the same carriage of the story in in all the three Evangelists.

15. Very right, his Disciples were present at the Sermon, Matthew. 5. but there
is no mention of a giving allowance to marry after Divorce; If you argue from
Christ's silence, that he forbids it not, it is your own assumption, but no
argument.

16. Second Reason.] What need you more ground than the express words of
Christ; you say, Why should the rule be general to one sort of men, with
exception to another? Nay, the general Doctrine is not to one sort of men, but
to all the Children of God and Disciples of Christ, the exception is to the
Jews, for the hardness of their hearts.

More strict duty required of Christians, for the exuberance of grace given us;
Abundantia spiritus sancti est Elogium regni Christi; They are Calvines words.
A command not to swear at all, is never in any place limited by exceptions,
(except to swear by the name of the Lord) but has an hundred Texts to allow it
justly done, so has not this case which you put.

17. The third Reason makes against you. Christ cites original Scriptures,
light of Nature, grounds not to be shaken but by the God of Scripture and
Nature, who indulged to the Jews, that albeit those great obligations, they
might marry after Divorce for Adultery; those times of infirmity God winked at,
as he did at many superstitions of the Gentiles, but these are the times of
reformation under the Gospel.

18. If either commit Fornication, the Union is dissolved. Gratis dicitur; For
may not the innocent person remit the fault of foul lust to the other?
deductosque jugo cogat alieno; may they not live together as Man and Wife?
which could not be, if the union were intrinsecally dissolved; As the Prophets
do often challenge the Jews for spiritual Fornication of Idolatry, yet the Lord
took them again to him for his people, and it has a great Evangelical
consideration in it, that for any trespass, while the offended and the offender
live together in this world, there may be a way left for reconciliation, and to
take that admonition, sin no more lest a worse thing come unto thee: but
marrying another while the offender lives, excludes all possibility of
charitable pardon.

19. Fourth Reason.] Our Savior did not restrain the Jews more than Moses had
restrained, but expounds Scripture, that they had taken license above what God
had indulged to them for the hardness of their hearts; It was the hardness of
their hearts, that caused the wisdom of God to give them a latitude, the Lord
being gracious to their infirmities; But you would have God lay more burden
upon them, because of their perverse hearts, which is not Gods method, but to
whom much is given, of him much will be required.

20. Fifth Reason] soon satisfied; whoever said that Christ's precept about
Divorce was enjoined Then to the Jews, and only at That times* It was in force
from the beginning without indulgence but in force with that indulgence from
Deuteronomy. 24. a^^ no time so opportune, as when Christ was on the earth, and spoke
with his own mouth to his Disciples, to let them know, they were not
privileged like the Jews, if their Wife were an Adulteress, but to take up
their cross and bear it.

21. Divorce admitted in the Christian Church for Fornication, but
superinduction of another Wife is another thing.

There were great mistakes in the Imperial Laws. Did not Valentinian make a Law
for marrying within degrees prohibited? Others for Bigamy? I have not leisure
to search the Books. I lay St. Austine against St. Jerome, who did not write
transcursorily, but two studied Books upon the Argument.

22. Why should not the orders of the Canon Law be as rational as the Laws of
Theodosius and Justinian? Separatio a toro and mensa is for peace sake, till
opportunity of attoning. Must all directions to keep them aloof, that are
imbittered one against the other, and to prove them for a time how they will
piece again, be grounded upon Scripture? Shall humane Prudence have no hand in
such things? These are no fictions of the Canon Law, for they falsify no Text,
but make trial of such ways as may conduce to the good of both parties. What if
a toro and mensa have no divine warrant, is there any divine warrant against
it? They that look for divine warrant express in all frames of Government, in
all circumstances of Gods worship, have been told sufficiently how much they
mistake the purpose and use of Holy Scripture.

23. You say, It Is not reasonable, that the obligation of marriage should
remain, and the helps and advantages of it be taken away; why, what if a man or
a woman be taken Captive? Incur an irremediable diseass? or the Wife, though
chaste, will not render due benevolence? or, her Jointure she brought be
consumed by fire? Here are helps and advantages subtracted, yet no wedlock
broken.

24. By Divorce a toro and mensa they are not shut from all converse with one
another, they may return to mutual embraces again; though the bond of marriage
be not broken, the use and comfort may be suspended.

25. Far more Bishops by thousands have disliked it, than that have allowed it.
I reverence the Councils, yet they were but Provincial; Had I leisure to peruse
them, I should know to interpret them.

26. Grotius lived in the Netherlands, and wrote after their practice and
doctrine. It has been the practice of the Church of England but once in
Parliament, Edw. 6. and once in this late Session of Parliament. I take no pick
at any man that is of a contrary judgment to me. But the first instance of
Parre Marquess of Northampton, who had two Children in secret, before the Act
of Parliament passed on his side, makes his case far worse than the Lord
Rosse's, but the Marquess and his posterity sunk quite away, and let survivors
behold the end of this last Instance.

For an Appendix, I will ingeniously add the unreasonableness of the Church of
Rome, who generally deny him that puts away his Wife for Adultery, to marry
again, yet they consent to the sentence of Pope Gregory the first, who resolves
this upon a question moved. Question est, quidam parents, mulieres presertim,
proprios filios susceperunt in lavacro; An illiviri and mulieres ad suum
proprium redire possint usum? Imo separent se mulieres; vero cum separata
fuerint pro hac illicita re a propriis viris, totam precipimus recipere dotem,
and post expletum annum recipiant alium virum, similiter and viri uxorem; which
is easily thus refuted by their own doctrine, Si proprios filios in casu
necessitatis baptizare, non solvit matrimonium, quanto minus eosdem e Baptismo
suscipere?

27. To end, such as hold to my opinion, lay it the more to Conscience,
foreseeing that the contrary may stir up some wicked Husbands to suborn false
witnesses upon Oath to convince innocent Wives, that They being divorced, it
may admit them to marry where they like better. Moreover it may fall out, not
seldom, that a wicked Woman will confess her self an Adulteress, upon assurance
of some ample compensation. More might be added.

The Answer to the Animadversions.
Animadversion.
1. UNchastity before marriage, in a Virgin, not in a Widow.

Answer.
The direction in the 22. of Deuteronomy. for conviction of unchastity before marriage
relates peculiarly to a Virgin, and cannot be applied to a Widow, yet should a
Widow by other evident proofs be convicted of unchastity after the death of a
First Husband before marriage to a second, the equity and reason of the Law
seems to reach her; It Is a firm Maxim in the Civil Law, ut ubi eadem est ratio,
jus idem valet, I find no exception any where made in that case, nor any
particular direction given about a Widows previous unchastity to a second
marriage to punish it any other way.

Animadversion.
UNchastity to be punished with death, if proved by two witnesses, if but one
Divorce, if only strong suspicion the water of Jealousy.

Answer.
The first is evident, that unchastity when punished with death was to be
proved by two witnesses, not by reason of any particular direction about the
proof in That case, but because God established That as a general rule for all
Judicial proceedings, that by the testimony of two or three witnesses every
sentence should be established, Deuteronomy. 19. 15. One witness shall not rise up
against any man for any iniquity, at the mouth of two witnesses or three shall
the matter be established.

The second, that if unchastity were proved but by one witness, it was Then
matter of Divorce, I crave leave to dissent from; Unchastity, if proved, could
never be ground for Divorce, for death was to ensue, so that if one witness in
case of unchastity were sufficient proof, it produced death, if it were not, it
amounted to no more than suspicion; Nor do I find any direction for any proof
at all to be made as Necessary in case of Divorce, nor in any case, where proof
was Judicially required was one witness sufficient, Neither by the first
allowance of Divorce, Deuteronomy. 24. Nor in the subsequent practice of it amongst
the Jews was there any proof required in case of Divorce, nor any Judgment to
be passed by the Magistrate about it, farther than that there should be
libellum repudii given to the Woman; It seems to me that the judgment in case
of Divorce rested in every man's own breast, though every man was in his own
private conscience obliged by rules in his actings therein, and sinned if he
transgressed them; For as one says, God would by that expression in Deuteronomy. quae
probrum, aut ut 72 Interpr. verterunt (...) significat, admonere Hebraeos ne
temere uxores dimitterent, and says the same Author, Notum est quosvis Judices
quorum summae and liberrimae potestati res aliqua permittitur, insontes non
esse, si abaequi bonique regula discedant, jus ergo fuit, ut quavis de causa
uxorem maritus possit expellere, sed ea notione qua Praetor jus reddere
dicitur, etiam cum injuste discernit, ut Paulus Jurisconsultus loquitur, qui
and alibi dixit, non omne quod licet honestum esse, licere enim in Communi usu
aliquid dicitur, quod extra poenam est, and quominus fiat a nemine impediri
potest; The words of the Text cast it that way (And it come to pass, that she
find no favor in his eyes) of which himself could only be the proper Judge; In
the 19th. of Matthew, where the Pharisees urged upon our Savior, that Moses
required no more in the matter of Divorce, but to give a writing of
Divorcement, our Savior does not deny it, but seems to admit it, only tells
them, Moses did it for the hardness of their hearts, but from the beginning it
was not so; The ancient form of their Divorces imports thus much. (Mea sponte
nullius coactu te uxorem hactenus meam dimittere, a me deserere ac repudiari
decrevi, Jamque adeo te dimitto desero ac repudio atque a me ejicio, ut tuae
sis potestatis, tuoque arbitratu ac lubitu, quo licet discedas, neque id
quisquam ^llo tempore prohibessit, atque itae dimissa esto, ut cuivis viro
nubere tibi liceat.

Crotius Seems upon good grounds to be positive in this case, his words are,
Errare autem eos, qui putant Judaeis non licuisse uxorem dimittere, nisi causa
apud Judicem probata, satis ex hoc loco apparet, Dictum enim esse, ait
Christus, qui uxorem dimissam vult, libellum det repudii; Dubitationem omnem
nobis Josephus eximit, qui de se agens ita ait, (...). Verum tamen est hunc
actum, non minus quam haereditatis Cessionem, atque alios solenniores solitos
coram Judicibus peragi, quod nos Digesta Talmudica docent, sed erat hoc
jurisdictionis voluntariae non contentiosae, quomodo manumissio apud Praetorem
Jure Romano; Cognitionem igitur suam judex non interponebat, nisi de dote aut
donatione propter nuptias controversia inciderat, plane ut and apud Romanos.

And he adds after, Caeterum ut graviora mala evitarentur, and veritatem and
gravitatem causae noluit ad alienum arbitrium referri, sed ipsius mariti animo
id aestimandum permisit; Quod mirum non est, cum veterum Gallorum, aliarumque
Gentium leges jus vitae and necis in Vxores Maritis concesserint.

For the third, If strong suspicion, the water of Jealousy, I assent to it, he
that doubted his Wives chastity, and in case he could be assured of her
chastity, resolved not to part with her, and if she were found unchaste,
desired the execution of the Law upon her, obtained his end by the Water of
Jealousy; But I much question whether That, being of an extraordinary nature,
were enjoyed by the Jews till our Saviors time: I rather suppose they never
had the benefit of it after the Captivity, but that the use of it ceased, as it
did of the Vrim and Thummim, That Church being to determine, God removed the
Pillars of it by degrees; I believe in our Saviors time in fact things stood
Thus; The Law against Adultery was not executed, nor indeed was it in their
power to have it executed, for the Romans had reserved matters of life to their
own Judicatories, (though sometimes the people would violently stone some
persons as they did Stephen) and upon that account amongst others they thought
to ensnare our Savior in the 8th. of John, when they brought to him the woman
taken in Adultery; The water of Jealousy, they had not the use of, and so
nothing was done in these cases, but only they made use of the liberty Moses
allowed for Divorces.

Animadversion.
Found some uncleanness; some is a word superfluous, (...), the 72. Interpret.
which is summam foeditatem carnis.

Answer.
There is great disagreement in understanding the Hebrew words translated (some
uncleanness in her); I shall make evident, it cannot be restrained to
unchastity, for which the Law had otherwise provided, if either proved or
suspected: the Jews I confess differed much about it; I find in Mr. Seldom
there were three Schools amongst them, that maintained three several opinions
about it; The School of Hillel, the School of Sammai, and the School of Aquiba:
That of Hillel maintained it lawful for a man to put his Wife away for any
cause, but not singly upon his own pleasure; That of Sammai for somewhat of
Turpitude only; and That of Aquiba, that a man might put away his Wife upon his
own pleasure without any ground at all; That which was the most general
received opinion amongst the Jews, he says, was, that for light causes, as
dislike of Beauty, age, and many other such things, Wives might be put away,
and he adds, idque ex sacrae legis mente, according to the sense of the Law,
and it is most certain they did so interpret it for the most part.

The School of Sammai, as Grotius observes, had the fewest disciples, and yet
under the notion of turpitude they extended Divorce so far, that they thought a
Woman's going with open breasts a sufficient ground for it. Philo says, a man
may Divorce his Wife for any occasion; de spec. l^g. ad praec. 7. Josephus
says, for any dislike of manners, and he practiced accordingly, for he says
of himself, that he put away his Wife after he had had three Children by her,
only because he disliked her manners. Chrysostom in his Homilies upon Matthew
speaking of what the Pharisees said to our Savior about Divorce, says he,
Erat hoc in veteri lege mandatum, ut qui prepriam quacunque de causa odisset
uxorem, non eam prohiberetur ejicere, inque illius locum alteram ducere*

Erasmus has with very great learning in his Treatise about Divorce proved
that by Uncleanness in the 24th. of Deuteronomy. Unchastity cannot be meant, he is so
confident and positive, that he stakes his credit upon it. Ainsworth and our
best late Commentators render it exactly from the Hebrew, (matter of nakedness)
or by transposing the words (any thing of nakedness) which, says Ainsworth, is
not meant of Adultery, but of some evil thing in her conditions or actions that
displeased her Husband, and he adds that the phrase is so taken in the same
sense for any thing unseemly in the 23 of Deuteronomy. v. 14 Nor did I ever yet meet
with any that thought the Hebrew word used in the 24 of Deuteronomy. as the ground of
Moses permission of Divorce, could be rendered by the word (...), which is that
used by our Savior. But to put it out of all farther question, that the
license Moses gave to Divorce, cannot be restrained to Adultery and
Fornication, there is this undeniable evidence; If that were so, we must make
our Savior palpably to contradict himself, and at the same time to establish
what himself repeals, and to do the same thing which he finds fault with as
done by Moses, being not that which was from the beginning, but that which was
done only temporarily and occasionally for the hardness of That peoples hearts;
our Savior's speech would Then run Thus, Moses for the hardness of your hearts
suffered you to put away your Wives for Fornication and Adultery, which was not
so from the beginning, (and so ought not to continue) But I say unto you, that
whosoever puts away his Wife, except for Fornication and Adultery, and marries
another, commits Adultery in so doing; There needs no more than our Saviors
own-words to assure us that the liberty Moses gave for Divorce, and That Christ
gave were upon different grounds: The plain meaning of our Savior seems to be
this, Moses heretofore upon a particular reason, because of the hardness of
your hearts, suffered you to put away your Wives upon grounds that were not
intended to be a lawful cause of Divorce from the beginning, I Will have that to
be so no more, but I Will have it to be as it was from the beginning, and from
the beginning there was no good cause o^ Divorce but Fornication, and This
cause was a good cause from the beginning and the first institution of
marriage, and appears by our Saviors interpretation of the first Institution
of Marriage to be so, and to be employed in the general institution at the
first, and reserved as much as the service of the Temple, and liberty to works
of mercy and necessity are declared by him to be reserved and employed in the
first positive institution of the Sabbath, though not expressed; so that, if we
look to the liberty given by Moses, our Saviors Law about Divorce is a new
Law, for he repealed That, if we look to the Law of Creation and first
institution of marriage, it is the same that was from the beginning, only the
Mosaical indulgence had interposed, and our Savior by repealing That settles
the matter upon the old and lasting foundation, wherein Jews and Gentiles, and
all men to the worlds end are to acquiesce, and declares that exception of
Fornication, though not expressed to be virtually contained and employed in the
institution of marriage from the beginning.

Animadversion.
IT is a strong argument to me, that whereas God says, the nations round about
the Jews would admire their wise Laws, yet none of the Heathen had such a loose
Law, as to divorce at every exception the husband took.

Answer.
It is a consideration of moment I grant, yet our Savior giving the reason of
it and thereby seeming to admit the thing, determines us; It was rather a
Toleration than a Law, a permission of impunity, rather than an institution,
and we have good reason to think, as things then stood, the best and most
prudent expedient That people were capable of. Calvin speaks wisely of it, says
he, we give general liberty without restraint for men to go to Law, yet that
justifies no man's going to Law beyond the bounds of Charity; St. Chrysostom in
his excellent Homily upon the 5th. of Matthew speaks more fully to th ground of
it. Si enim retineri etiam exosam praecipisset uxorem, facile profecto illam
qui oderat occidisset, Talis quippe erat natio Judaeorum, qui enim ne filiis
quidem propriis parcere, and Prophetas solebant frequenter occidere, ut aquam
ita effundentes humanum cruorem, multo illi minus odiosis conjugibus
pepercissent, Moses, inquit, propter duritam vestram haec scripsit, ne clam
mactaretis sed ejiceretis. The Christian Roman Emperors gave much the same
liberty to the Husband; Grotius says, Christiani Imperatores extra Adulterium
aliquot scelera enumerant, quibus probatis, maritus sine ullo damno uxorem
repudiet, and quod est amplius, ea si probare nequeat, non simpliciter repudium
vetant, sed in arbitrio mariti relinquunt, malitne uxorem retinere, an dotem
reddere, and amittere quod propter nuptias donavit.

Animadversion.
Matthew. 19 9. is not every way the same determination with his doctrine, Matthew.
5.; for chap. 19. he speaks in his case that marries another, but Matthew. 5. in
his case who marries her that is put away.

Answer.
I conceive both places are alike to this purpose, to make remarriage upon
Divorce lawful, for in the 5th. of Matthew, remarriage is plainly intended by
our Savior, for he says, whosoever puts away his Wife except for Fornication,
which is to be understood such putting away as they Then used, which was to
remarry after it, for he says expressly, whoever puts away his Wife and marries
another: and he says, if the woman marry again (except put away for the cause
of Fornication she commits Adultery, the exception plainly implies her
remarriage is no Adultery, if put away for Fornication, and if the woman so put
away may lawfully marry again, much more the man that did put her away: if it
be lawful for either to marry, it must needs be for both, for it must be upon
supposition of the Marriage-bond dissolved.

Animadversion.
IN Matthew there is mention of putting away, not a word to allow the innocent
person to marry again: but here is a strong argument indeed, that the Law of
Moses never allowed their petulant putting away for every cause; For Christ, as
you well observe rendered the right sense of the old Law, gave no new.

Answer.
No new Law, if we respect what Law was from the beginning, which the Jews were
obliged by, but new in this case, if we respect the permission of Moses, for he
positively repeals That; The Law the Jews were to submit to was the Law of
Creation and first institution which Moses revealed to them, to That our
Savior reduces them; The permission about Divorce was accidental and
temporary, that our Savior positively repeals, and it is very plain that in
Both cases, That of Moses for Divorce, and That of Christ for Divorce,
remarriage is admitted; in Moses, in terminis expressed, and by our Savior
plainly and undeniably employed.

Animadversion.
THat Christ intended the obligation of the marriage should cease; Presumitur
non probatur.

Answer.
Christ must needs intend the obligation of the marriage should cease, where he
gives liberty to a second marriage, as he plainly does in case of Fornication,
both in the 5th. and the 19th. of Matthew. Christ reasons about marriage from
the Law of creation, and the first institution of it in Paradise, and carries
it up to the highest grounds of the obligation, and There gives liberty to
Divorce and remarriage in case of Fornication, and therefore Fornication must
needs be reckoned a dissolution of the marriage, and a dissolution of it
considered in its strictest ties; our Savior would never have gone about to
prove the sacredness of the marriage-bond by the highest Proofs, and then have
given liberty to divorce, where the bond of marriage was not directly broken,
for in that case his proofs would only have served against his own indulgence,
and therefore he proves the sacredness of the marriage-bond to overthrow the
Jewish divorces, and establishes divorce in That only case, where the bond it
self was dissolved.

Animadversion.
MArk sets down the same story recorded by Matthew, that not to be denied. Yes,
it is evidently to be denied, Matthew. 19. 3. The Pharisees asked him about
divorce, so Mark 10. 2. the Pharisees asked him about that matter; but read
further, verse the 10th; and in the house the Disciples asked again of the same
matter, and he says unto them, whosoever puts away his Wife, and marries
another, commits Adultery, Luk, 16. 1. The chapter begins He says unto his
Disciples, not to the Pharisees; Then at the 19th. verse, whosoever puts away
his Wife, and marries another, commits Adultery; To his Disciples our Savior
spoke in Gospel rules, repealing the license given to the Jews in their Law
Judicial to marry again, if Divorced for Adultery; I dissent from Calvine, who
will have the same carriage of the story to be in all the three Evangelists.

Answer.
I humbly conceive that the two Evangelists relate the same story, both from
the matter of it, and all the circumstances that attend it, it is said in the
19th. of Matthew, in the beginning of the Chapter* our Savior came into Judaea
beyond Jordan, and in the beginning of Mark 10. it is said he came into the same
place, and in both the Evangelists it is said the multitude came unto him, and
the discourse related between him and the Pharisees appears evidently in both
Evangelists to have been the same, at the same time, and in the same place, and
before the same company, only somewhat varied in the relation, which is usual;
In the 10th. of Mark there is no mention made, that our Savior gave to the
Pharisees any allowance of Divorce in any case, which is expressed in the 19th.
of Matthew, and it is granted our Savior admitted it to the Jews; what our
Savior says about it in the 19th. of Matthew, was as much spoken to the
Disciples, as what he says in the 10th. of Mark, as appears from hence, that
the Disciples themselves make immediately the answer; In the 19th. of Matthew,
where our Savior says, Whoever puts away his wife, except for Fornication,
etc. If the case be so, say the Disciples, taking it to themselves, it is good
not to marry, looking upon it as a strict doctrine, even with that exception
and such a one as the world had not been acquainted with, and which they
thought unsupportable. Calvin says, it is the same passage that is reported in
Mark, only Mark reports 'twas spoken in the House to the Disciples, and
Matthew omitting that circumstance sets down barely our Saviors speech; Dr.
Hammond agrees with Calvin in this matter, speaking of these places and about
this very occasion, says he, that these places, That in Matthew on the one
side, and in the other two Evangelists, at least in St. Mark on the other side,
are a report of the same passage of story, and of the same part of Christ's
speech, appealing from the Mosaical permission to the first institution of
marriage, there is no ground of making any question, and therefore it follows
that one must be interpreted by the other, so thinks he. But suppose it were
otherwise, when several of the Evangelists relate discourses of our Savior
about the same subject, by all judgment of reason those Evangelists that are
more explicit and large must interpret those that are more implicit and
brief, and there is no fitness at all in it to interpret those that are most
large, and say most upon a subject, by those that are more brief and say least
of it.

But that which overrules me in this case is, that I find our Savior no where
Preaching one doctrine to the Jews and another to his Disciples, and that must
be proved in this case, or else the point of Divorce and remarriage is visibly
established in case of Fornication, if our Savior gave that liberty only to
the Jews, and made the exception singly for them, Then when he speaks generally
to his Disciples, he must not only repeal the liberty Moses gave to the Jews,
but the liberty which himself gave to the Jews, which is not fit to suppose;
Nor indeed has our Savior throughout the whole Gospel given any one new Law
peculiar only to the Jews, which this about Divorce in case of Fornication only
must needs be, if it be restrained to Them, for they had no such Law before;
Moses permission of Divorce, and this of our Savior could not be the same, for
our Savior would never have condemned what Moses did, and immediately have
instituted the same thing himself: Nay, it must not only, if restrained to
them, be a new Law to them, but a new Judicial Law, which were strange to
suppose our Savior should Then institute; for if we deny it to be Judicial,
and acknowledge it to be (as indeed it is) a Law moral, sounded upon man's first
Creation and the first institution of marriage, then it cannot be restrained to
the Jews, but must needs by the nature of it belong to all.

Animadversion.
THE third Reason makes against you. Christ cites original Scripture, light of
Nature, grounds not to be shaken but by the God of Scripture and Nature, who
indulged to the Jews, that albeit those great obligations, they might marry
after Divorce for Adultery; those times of infirmity God winked at, as he did
at many things in the superstitions of the Gentiles, but these are the times of
reformation under the Gospel.

Answer.
I conceive Christ would never have established marriage upon those grounds,
and then have given a dispensation for divorce that those grounds would not
admit of; our Saviors speech must then be thus understood, by the Law of man's
first Creation, and the first institution of marriage this divorce for
Fornication and remarriage upon it, ought not to be, yet I will give you
liberty to do it. Without doubt the divorce our Savior then allowed was very
well corresponding with those principles upon which he established marriage,
and those principles being general and perpetual, his allowance of divorce must
needs be so too; Christ's time was no indulging time, not a word in the Gospel
of Christ's winking at any thing, he settles every thing upon its true and
lasting foundation, they are times indeed of reformation, and from whence can
we more reasonably expect That reformation than from Christ's own mouth; He
allows not the Jews in any one Title of their corrupt practice, but exactly
reduces them to the rule, and in this case he plainly tells them, the
dispensation they had from Moses was not the rule, but the law of Creation and
Gods first institution was the rule, and that admits of no exception but this
of Fornication: it is not reasonable to think Christ should indulge them for the
hardness of their hearts in any thing, because he came to reform every thing,
but especially not in this matter, because he plainly repeals what Moses had
done in it before upon that ground.

Animadversion.
WHere Fornication is committed, the Union is dissolved. Gratis dicitur; For
may not the innocent person remit the fault of foul lust to the other.
deductosque jugo cogat alieno? may they not live together as Man and Wife?
which could not be, if the union were intrins^cally dissolved; As the Prophets
do often challenge the Jews for spiritual Fornication of Idolatry, yet the Lord
took them again to him for his people, and it has a great Evangelical
consideration in it* that for any trespass, while the offended and the offender
live together in this world, there may be a way left for reconciliation, and to
take that admonition, sin no more lest a worse thing come unto thee: but
remarrying another while the offender lives, excludes all possibility of
charitable pardon.

Answer.
When we say the vinculum matrimonii is dissolved, we speak not of actual
dissolution, but virtual cause of dissolution; In this and in all other
obligations arising from contract, when the bond is broken, it is a rule, Potest
innocens cedere Juri suo, and if the offended will not take the forfeiture, the
bond continues: Adultery does not ipso facto dissolve the marriage, but gives
right to the inn^cent party to dissolve if he please, puts the power into his
hand, which he may ad libitum make use of or not, for as Divines say, Divortium
non est praecepium, sed tantum permissum and probatum, it is a liberty given in
favor to him that is wronged in the matrimonial contract, which he is not
bound to make use of unless he will; God seems to intimate so much in the
Prophet, Where is the Bill of your mothers divorcement? there was cause enough,
the Covenant was broken on their part, yet God pleased to forgive it and not
take the forfeiture, no Bill of Divorce was actually given, if it had, they
could have returned no more, the separation had been irremediable. Now that
Fornication in this sense is a dissolution of the marriage-bond, that it is a
sufficient ground to dissolve it, if the innocent party please, will appear,
both from Christ permission about it, and from the nature of the thing it self.

First, From Christ's permission about it, he plainly admitted Fornication to be
a good ground of Divorce, and permitted remarriage upon that Divorce: let his
permission be to whom it will, our Savior would never have given liberty to
any man to remarry upon Fornication, unless That had dissolved the first
marriage, for it had been to permit a positive sin upon those very grounds,
upon which our Savior himself in that very place does establish the bond of
marriage; If the bond of marriage can be broken in no case, our Savior would
never have allowed putting away and remarrying in any case.

Secondly, From the nature of the thing it self, it cuts the very knot of the
marriage-contract, which is, that two shall become one flesh, and in that case
two are not one flesh, which they covenant to be, and are to be, in a chaste
and peculiar enjoyment of each other in the marriage bed, for St. Paul says,
He that joins himself to an Harlot is one flesh with her; By the marriage
contract they have resigned their bodies over each to other, and have not power
in that respect over their own bodies; In case of Fornication, there is the
highest breach of That obligation.

All other things whatever relating to marriage may be enjoyed upon other
accounts and in other relations, but only the body and the concerns of it, and
therefore when the Faith about the body is broken, Faith is broken about that
which is the peculiar property of marriage, and that which does formally
distinguish it from all other relations.

A charitable pardoning spirit is very suitable to the Gospel and becoming a
Christian, but I think a man ought not to be imposed upon in this case, where a
man is wronged, and Christ has provided a way to right him, justice in That
case must not be denied him, if he require it; A man may, if he please forgive
an unclean wife and continue to live with her, But I incline to Calvin's
opinion, that he will do much better to put her away and cleanse his house (nay
his bed) from defilement and wickedness.

Animadversion.
YOu say, It is not reasonable, that the obligation of marriage should remain,
and the helps and advantages be taken away; why, what if the man or woman be
taken Captive? Incur an irremediable diseass? or the Wife, though chaste, will
not render due benevolence? or, her Jointure she brought be consumed by fire?
Here are helps and advantages subtracted, yet no wedlock broken

Answer.
I conceive it not reasonable any thing should be thought of validity to take
away the ends of marriage that is not sufficient to dissolve the obligation;
because they are relatives intrinsecally conjoined each to other, the ends and
advantages of marriage ought never to be suspended, where there is not
sufficient ground to dissolve the bond of marriage; because the bond being
entered into for the sake of those advantages that belong to it, by the Law of
God, and by the Law of Nature, those advantages ought never to be denied, where
the bond is continued; our Savior says, Whom God has joined, let no man put
asunder, that is, not put asunder as God has joined them, and he has joined
them so, that the duties to be performed and the obligation should go together;
whoever divides in That kind, I think falls under the Text, if we ground
divorce upon our Saviors exception, That is plainly for a total Divorce in
that case of Fornication and remarriage after, He divides as God has joined,
from duty and obligation together. A divorce a mensa and toro seems
unreasonable, because unequal, and it is unequal, because the innocent party is
as much a sufferer by That as ^he nocent, and instead of being relieved, is
farther punished, and all the help a man has by this partial divorce, that is
abused and betrayed by an unchaste wife, is, to be put unto a kind of
Matrimonial Purgatory, and be rendered hereby incapable to enjoy, ^ither the
advantages of a married man, or the freedom of a single man.

When by providential dis^bilities in either party, the duties of marriage
cannot be performed, yet the marriage-bond continues unbroken, though the ends
cannot be attained, this I assent to, but it will not reach this case; Ability
to perform is employed in all contracts, providential disability no way cancels
the matrimonial obligation, because it is entered into with a supposition of
them; But although God in his just Judgment, and as a punishment upon both,
may bring married persons into such a condition, yet it is not a ground for men
to make a rule to go by, especially for the offense of one, it is There matter
of necessity and not of choice, There the ends of marriage cannot be attained,
Here they may, only we obstruct them. God does that many times providentially,
and Judicially, which we can neither do reasonably nor regularly; it is men's
duty to submit to God when he takes away those helps marriage affords, but that
is no ground for us to take them away, while he continues them. A man obliged
by an oath of Allegiance to his Prince may providentially be brought into such
a condition he cannot perform it, but That will never warrant us to bring any
man into such a condition, where the obligation to a duty is necessary, and the
suspension of it is voluntary; It may so fall out, a Prince cannot protect his
subjects, nor his subjects obey him, yet the obligations upon both remain, But
this will never justify us upon any account to bring things into such a
posture. But suppose the woman refuse due benevolence, where there is no
disability. I say she lives by so doing in a notorious sin, and it is not fit
that what is a sin in either party voluntarily to do, Both should be enjoined
to do, which they are by divorce a mensa and toro: The woman in that kind is
liable to punishment for not performing matrimonial duties, and in case all
means used to reduce her to her duty prove ineffectual, it is worthy
consideration, whether she may, not at last come under the equity of St. Paul's
didirection about desertion, which is nothing as I take it, relating to divorce
or putting away in that sense our Savior speaks of it, but a help that the Law
of nature (which is ever employed in all divine institutions) affords to an
innocent wronged person unjustly forsaken, and actually or perhaps virtually
put away, the Apostle says, A brother or a sister (...) is not inslaved in such
a case.

The truth of this whole matter is, our Savior has in the Gospel established a
Law for Divorce and Remarriage in the single case of Fornication instead of
That liberty given by Moses under the Law, it must be proved that he intended
That part of the Gospel as a rule to the Jews only, which he never intended any
other part of it to be, nor does any where say he intended This to be, or else
the matter is determined. Amongst the Jews never any Divorce heard of without
liberty to remarry, and it was only intended for that purpose. Calvin upon that
passage (He that marries her that is put away, commits Adultery) speaks fully,
says he, This sentence has been most corruptly expounded by many Interpreters,
for they thought generally and confusedly that is was commanded to live sole
after Divorcement, so, if the Husband should put away the Adulteress, of
necessity They both should live unmarried, as if This were the liberty of
Divorcement, only to lie away from the Wise, as if also Christ did not
evidently in this case permit That to be done, which the Jews were wont
generally to usurp unto themselves according to their own pleasure; Therefore
their error was too gross, for when Christ condemns him for Adultery that
marries her that is put away, it is certain that this is to be understood of
unlawful and frivolous Divorcements.

By the Roman Laws all Divorces admitted of a second marriage; In the Christian
Church in the beginning it was so: Nor indeed was Divorce ever thought of any
where but in order to a second marriage, till this contrivement of a Divorce a
mensa and toro came in, the effect of which in the Roman Church, where it has
been chiefly practiced, has been such as does no way credit it; Cajetan, one of
their own, is so ingenuous, that upon the 19th. of Matthew, he says, Intelligo
igitur ex hac Domini Jesu Christi l^ge, licitum esse Christiano dimittere
uxorem ob fornicationem carnalem ipsius uxoris, and posse aliam ducere; And a
little after adds, Non solum miror, sed stupeo, quod Christo clare excipiente
causam fornicationis, torrens Doctorum non admittat illam mariti libertatem.
Wherever that kind of Divorce has been practiced, the consequence has most
commonly been, that the innocent party has by temptation fallen into sin, the
offending party into farther transgression; for it is not a thing probable or
likely, that such who would not live chastely in a married condition, should do
so in a single condition, and at last greater inconveniences and animosisities
have arisen from such a separation and the parties very rarely if ever again
united. It inslaves mankind into a very sad dilemma, either to lie in a
polluted bed, and yield to every impudent Adulteress, (for so they usually grow
at last, or else to udnergo all those temptations men are subject to without a
Wife in a single and unmarried condition: God no where seems to have given the
woman such an advantage over the Masculine Sex, as to be able to entrap the Man
in such a snare.

Animadversion.
TO end, such as hold to my opinion, lay it the more to Conscience, foreseeing
that the contrary may stir up some wicked Husbands to suborn false witnesses
upon Oath to convince innocent Wives, that They being divorced, it may admit
them to marry where they like better. Moreover it may fall out, not seldom,
that a wicked Woman will confess her self an Adulteress, upon assurance of some
ample compensation. More might be added.

Answer.
It Is a thing likewise to be feared, that if no better remedy be provided for
innocent Husbands than a Divorce a mensa and toro, it may provoke them to rid
themselves of their Adulterous Wives by some undue means; the rage of a man is
great in those cases, and truly sometimes unconquerable even in good men, sad
events have ensued and may ensue in such cases. For suborning proof in this
case, there is no more danger than in all other men's estates and lives and their
highest concerns depend upon proof by witnesses, there is no surer or better
ground to proceed upon in all humane determinations, this matter has the
greatest advantage against proof of any, being rarely within the reach of it,
and for one fact of That nature that can be brought to light by due proof, many
will pass in the dark without proof, and so without punishment. A woman's own
confession in this case will not prevail, the rule in the Civil Law takes
place. Revelanti turpitudinem suam fides non datur.

In the reign of Henry the eighth, when the Popes power was excluded, an Act
passed to enable the King to elect thirty two able persons to reform
Ecclesiastical Laws; This in the 6 year of Edward the sixth's Reign was put in
execution, and the Quorum of them by letters Patents reduced to eight, they met
and took great pains, there was present Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury,
Goodrich Bishop of Ely, and other the chief of the Bishops, Peter Martyr and
other eminent Divines, and the most eminent Canonists, Civilians, and
Common-Lawyers then in the Kingdom, they set forth a Book called Reformatio
legum Ecclesiasticarum, which we may well reckon the judgment of the Church of
England at That time about those things, being composed by such men empowered by
the supreme Authority, and in That Book the lawfulness of Divorce in case of
fornication and remarriage upon it is fully asserted and justified.

I shall only add, that amongst learned men I find great disagreement in
resolving this Question, whether the same right of Divorce belong to the Woman
that does to the man; some say the superiority of the Sex makes this a peculiar
prerogative to the man, who is the head of the Woman; `Tis certain, in the
Mosaical Law no such thing as a Woman's putting away her Husband was ever
allowed, sometimes in fact it was illegally and irregularly practiced, yet very
rarely, we find in all the Jewish Writers but one instance, and that is in
Josephus; The Roman Laws allowed it; Those who espouse the Woman's cause in this
point, urge that passage of our Savior in the 10th. of Mark, where he says
(And if a woman put away her husband, and marry another, she commits Adultery)
and so seems to make the right of putting away equal; Calvin upon this place
says that although the Husband be superior in other respects, yet in the
marriage bed the man and the woman are equal, therefore says he, when as the
Adulterer shall fall away from the knot of matrimony, the Wife is set at
liberty: they also urge that of St. Paul, who says, in case of desertion a
Brother or a Sister is not bound; and so seems to put the matter between Man
and Wife upon even terms in all conjugal respects. The Christian Church affords
us but two instances that look this way; The first of one Thecla, who refused
to marry one Thamyris in Iconium, after she was contracted to him; This story
Mr. Seldom relates at large, from the report of Basil of Selencia, but seems
not much to credit it himself, however it was but a refusing Marriage after
contraction, Mr. Seldom calls her only Sponsa, and says, Nuptias noluit, and
sponsalibus renunciavit, and it was to one that most bitterly detested
Christianity; The other instance is that in the beginning of Justine Martyrs
first Apology, where a Christian woman made use of the Roman Laws to put away
her Husband, and he commends her for it, but that was evidently upon St. Paul's
permission in case of desertion, for her Husband was a notoriously wicked
person and departed from her.

In this matter I shall make much a better choice, to submit to your Lordships
learned Judgment, than to declare my own.

FINIS.

