A True and Impartial Account of the Present State of Affairs in Londonderry
in Ireland, BEING A Relation of a late Great Fight betwixt the Protestants and
the French and Irish Papists: With the Number of Persons Slain, and Prisoners
taken.
In a Letter from Captain Woosley, from on Board the Fleet with Major General
KIRK, lying at Anchor in the Mouth of Londonderry Harbor. 13. July. 1689.
Licensed.

J.F,
and Entered according to Order.





THere is just now gone off, one Captain Bowls, with an Express from Major
General Kirk to the Court, giving an Account of the posture of Affairs here.
Left you should have an Imperfect Relation, and (because I know you to be
curious in this particular) I have, by the same Hand, sent you a short Journal
of our Adventures since we Arrived before this place.

We will not trouble you with the tediousness of our Voyage, nor through what
difficulties we past the Garrisons on the Sea-Coas;t, before we Weathered this
point. As soon as we cast Anchor in the Mouth of the Lough, a Council of War
was called what to determine, finding the Bombs so strong, and the River so
narrow that it was impossible for us to make any nearer Approach. That day we
lay off, and at Night sent a Diver into the Town, who Informing the Garrison of
our Arrival, was to set up a Signal on the Church-Steeple, to give us an
account of the State of the Garrison, which the next day we accordingly
Discovered with our Prospective-Glass to be in a good Pos;ture. At Night our
Messenger swims back with the s;ame success he went, although the River was so
narrow in some places, that he was many times within Pistol s;hot of the Banks,
which were well-lin'd all along with Canon and Small-shot. We expected they had
desired our Relief into the Town, and that they had put us upon some Expedition
to attempt our Landing, when on the contrary, the Governor sent us word, that
they had no need of our Succors, the Garrison being 13000 able yet to Defend
themselves, and had Provision enough for Two Months; and desired, that if the
Major General had not positive Commands from the King to come in, that he might
run no hazard to get a shore, but rather keep out beyond the reach of the
Enemies Canon, till being reinforced by the Regiments coming to his Assistance,
he might make a more Prosperous Attempt by Land, where there were 10000 Scotch
ready to join with us, and the Garrison of Londonderry to Sally out if there
should be any Opposition of the Enemy betwixt us.

This same Messenger brought us an Account of a small Salley from the Garrison
some Nights before, in which they had taken a great many Horses, an Hundred of
which they Killed and Barrelled up, in cas;e, after Two Months time, the
Garrison should be put to any Extremities for want of Provision. This Inspired
the Enemy with the hopes they would soon Surrender; and King James himself gave
it out in Dublin, that the Besieged had lived on Horseflesh a Fortnight, and
that it was impossible but that they must in a few days Surrender. The
Besiegers thereupon make their Approaches nearer the Town; but the Governor,
Colonel Walker (which he had a a long time before designed) having made
himself Master of the Wind-Mill-Hill, put a stop to their Carreer.

This Important Place is within three quarters of a Mile of the Town, where the
Governor with a considerable Army Entrenched himself, and within four Nights
made a sharp and vigorous Sally upon the Enemy, in which (they s;ay) were
killed some hundreds of the French and Irish; Colonel O Connors whole Regiment
being cut off to 15 Men, and Frogmorton the Lieutenant Colonel.

Our Diver is again sent ashore, who returns the next Night with the same
prosperous Account of the good State of the Garrison; That there was yet no
want of Men, Ammunition, or Provision, only of Arms. The adjacent Scotch (who
were disarmed by the Irish, having had a great many out of the Garrison,
besides Eighteen thousand lately sent out of Scotland, to be distributed
amongst the Protestants. Major General Kirk upon this made an Assay to Land Ten
thousand Arms; but finding some Difficulty in the Attempt, and not willing to
lose so Valuable a Treasure, took them again on Board, where he might more
safely distribute them upon his Landing.

The Animosities between the French and the Irish increased daily: The Irish
are jealous of the French, and the French of the King, whom they upbraid with
Hunting and Feasting instead of Marshalling and Fighting; Upon which some
French-Officers have desired to be Recalled, and it is believed, when those
expected Forces arrive to a Number sufficient to Land, the very Discontented
Irish will fligh to our Assistance, as choosing rather to be Subjects to
England, than Slaves to France.

LONDON, Printed for W. Downing, 1689.


