THE Rock of Ages known, AND FOUNDATION Of many Generations discovered, After
this long and dark Night of Apostasy, which shall never cover us again, because
of the Anointing; And though Darkness may cover the Nation, and gross Darkness
the People a little season; yet the Lord shall be unto his People an
Everlasting Light, and their God their Glory.

Also a Prayer that the Lords People may be preserved to the end.

Also a few Words to the KING, and his Council, from the Everlasting Counselor
and Prince of Peace.

Also the Lords Testimony against all Persecutors of the Innocent Lambs of
Christ, in whose Light the Nations of them that are saved must walk: And
against all Forms of Worship whatsoever, taught by the Precepts and
Commandments of men, which themselves are not led and guided by the Spirit of
the Lord.

Also a few Words in Answer to the last Book of Common Prayer.

Psalm. 53.4. Have the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who cat up my People as
bread.

Verse. 6. When the Lord brings back the captivity of his People, Jacob shall
rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.

This is written in the Fear of the Lord, and in the Counsel of the Everlasting
Counselor, whose Name is the Lord of Hosts, In HUMPHRY WOLRICH.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson in Martins Le Grand, 1661.

The Rock of Ages Known, and Foundation of many Generations Discovered, after
this long and dark night of Apostasy, which shall never cover us again, because
of the Anointing, etc.
IN Patience, Meekness and Quietness, do we suffer, in Joy and Peace, and in
the everlasting Love of the Lord Jesus do we lie down and rest in him,
notwithstanding all the rage of the wicked, and their many ways of cruelty
toward us; yet in all this, do we in patience passesse our souls, and a hiding
place we feel in him who is the Lord our Righteousness, in him only do we
trust and hope, and of our hope shall we never be ashamed we know, for in us we
feel it as an Anchor to our souls in this stormy day, that is rising as a
mighty Tempest, to sever the Chaff from the Wheat, that the finest of the Wheat
may be eaten, and the Honey out of the Rock; O Lord, what shall become of
London? O London, with thy Magistrates and Rulers, why should ye be called a
persecuting people, after all your Fighting and Engagements for Liberty of
Conscience to serve the Lord, as moved by his Pure Eternal Spirit, and after
the Tradition and Precepts of men no longer? O London, Repent, go not on in
this cruel way of persecuting an innocent people; return to the Lord, lest thou
be hardened as Pharaoh was, to his own destruction; O why should ye be called a
Bloody City? Why should ye be reckoned with the Persecutors in Queen Mary's
days, in the Generations to come? why should ye be ranked with Jerusalem and
her Rulers, out of which a Prophet could not perish?

O London, I pity Thee, I pity Thee, great is the misery that upon thee and
thy Rulers is coming, thy day is dark and gloomy, that is dawned, and come up
to cover thee as a Garment. O London, Do not go on to thy own ruin, the people
whom thou fightest against, are blessed of the Lord that made Heaven and Earth,
the Lord is their Strength and their Shield; and when he has humbled them, and
brought them low in Spirit, and purified them, and made them more pure in
heart, and more perfect through sufferings, then will he arise for their
Salvation, yea, he will arise, the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it; it is good
that we trust in the Lord, even in the Name of the Lord all the day long; he
that stood by us and in us, and has delivered us out of many Trials, and
diverse Tribulations, good is it for us to trust in him to the end of our
Pilgrimage; for we are strangers to them that persecute us, and they that hate
us without a cause, know not our dwelling plac^: O England, with thy Rulers,
why should ye be as Cain, Vagrants in the Earth? Why should ye be droven out
from the Presence of the Lord, into the Land of Nod: Why will thou lay a
burden on thy own Conscience, and gather Vexation and Anguish on thy own soul?
The way ye take will not destroy us, the greater our burdens are, the more
will the Palm Tree grow, and the Root shall spread it sell abundantly, and the
Branches shall break forth as a Morning without Clouds, in due season, in his
own time, that is, our Root, and bears up our heads under all our sufferings,
that we undergo for his own Names sake, in Patience we bear, giving our Backs
to the Smiter, and our Cheek to them that pull off the Hair, because of the
Testimony to the Truth which we bear, and the Word of his Patience which we
keep; Therefore, in this day of darkness does the Light shine forth, and in
this time of temptation, are we kept and preserved, who have believed in the
Light Christ Jesus, and whose hearts are fixed, trusting in the Lord, they are
not afraid of evil tidings, nor of sudden destruction when it comes. O, let
the House of Aaron trust in the Lord, He is their Hope and their Shield; O let
all that know Him, trust in Him at all times, and fear the Lord and his
Goodness for evermore; him that has withdrawn the Face of his Covering, and
caused the Light of his Countenance to shine forth in our Tabernacles; He is
unto his, that which Eye cannot see, nor Tongue express; and for declaring it,
but for the sakes of others, it is no matter, if hand should be still always,
and Tongue dumb for evermore; so that the Peace and Love of the everlasting God
and Father of all consolation be but possessed, felt and enjoined in the Heart
and in the Soul; It is pure Liberty to the Captive, and that my Soul does feel
and witness; it is bread of life to the hungry, and water of life to the
thirsty soul; it warmes and refreshes in the coldest night that ever came; it
does strengthen the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees; it makes the
desolate to rejoice and break forth into singing, and the womb that has been
barren a joyful mother of many children: what shall I say to all that fear the
Lord? be where ye will, he is company, and in the midst of wars, famine, and
want, he is peac^ life, and fullness of every good thing; And though I am but of
yesterday in companion, yet I set to my seal that the God of the despised
Quakers is the living and the true God; and their Worship, which is in Spirit
and Truth, is only acceptable to the Lord: And further, for the Lord in this
day of darkness that over thee, O England, is coming, and thou layest it not to
thy heart; I say in the Light of the eternal God of Heaven and Earth, that
plucks up Nations, and plants them again, I bear my Testimony, and it is the
Lords Testimony against all Forms of Worship, Forms of Prayer and Confessions
of Sins, that are out of the life and power of Godliness, being only taught by
the precepts of men, and not led thereunto by the pure eternal Spirit of the
Lord; I do witness against it all as a vain Worship, and in the sight of the
pure holy God, abomination.

O England, in vain do thou worship; thy fear toward me, says the Lord, is
taught by the precepts of men, and yet thou layest it not to thy heart. O
England, what have thou been fighting, plotting, and swearing so many years for
a Reformation? do thou not yet consider? will thou yet be so blind, as not to
see that the Kingdom of Christ will not be set up with carnal weapons? O turn
ye, turn ye to the Spirit of the Lord, that by your fighting, swearing, and
destroying one another, has been grieved: O that will show you what ye are
doing against the Lambs of Christ, which says, Swear not at all; Love your
Enemies; Pray for them that persecute and despitefully use you, that ye may be
like your heavenly Father. O King, and Parliament, and Council, let all your
Wise men of understanding consult this matter, Was this the Lords way with you
when he brought you in to the Government? was it not in peace? did not his love
and strange acts toward thee, O King, almost persuade thee there should be no
persecution in thy Dominions? Why art thou drawn aside against the Lords
Heritage, that can neirher plot, fight nor swear, either for or against any
one? O consider thine own Promise: Newgate in London has above two hundred
Prisoners that have lived hitherto peaceably, men with their wives and little
children in stinking holes, by virtue of a late Proclamation set forth in thy
Name, to the wasting and ruin of many Families, which will lie as a burden
upon thee, if thou lay it not to heart: All this is done against the Lords
People, even against a People whom he has blessed in this Generation, and
chosen for his peculiar Treasure in whom he delights to walk and dwell, and all
that rise up against them will he rebuke for their sakes, as he rebuked Kings in
the days of old, saying, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm;
for them has he chosen for a Peculiar People, and a Royal Priesthood, and
People in whom he will be glorified. O the eternal love of our heavenly Father!
O the ancient Hills, the Hill of the Lord which is everlasting, is known again
to be what all the holy men and Prophets declared it to be! O that men would
praise the Lord for his goodness and for his wonderful works to the children
of men! Who is a God like unto our God, or a Rock save the Lord? Happy are the
People that have the God of Jacob for their shield, who hides them in the
hollow of his hand that fear him, and carries them in his everlasting arms of
love, so that their strength is renewed daily, and in their many tribulations
they faint not; for in our hearts has the pure eternal God shined forth, and
the Creator of the ends of the Earth has made known himself unto us; so does
his love shed it self in our hearts, constraining us willingly to suffer the
loss of any thing that in this world has been dear unto us, so that Christ,
his love, life and virtue may be but enjoyed (the loss of all is counted gain)
ruling in our hearts, we in him, and he in us, our Lord and our God, putting
down all Rule and Authority, and subjecting every high thought which in us has
ruled and lorded over the Heritage of God, binding his Fool to the Vine, and
his young Colt to the choice Vine. This is our Victory over the World, which
our Faith in the Power gives us continually; In this do we rejoice and glory
over the Persecuter within and without: and as for our Cause, our righteous
Cause, which is the Lords, and our Design, which is no other but that his Truth
may prosper, the Lord and his glory exalted in our hearts, teaching us to
worship as we ought, as he has promised in the latter day he will do; And as
for us, let him do with his own what he pleases, he has bought us with a
price. To the false Worship of the Nation we cannot bow at all, though the
Furnace should be heated seven fold hotter than it is; and we suffer as
Plotters, and unjustly numbered with Murderers; yet we know me are clear as
newborn children, and many of our enemies know it also, and have nothing to
lay to our charge, but in the matter of our God and his Worship, and ere long
it will appear it is, because we cannot bow to Baal, nor kiss him, in drinking
the Whores Cup of Fornication, which is now handing out again to this Nation by
the Merchants of Babylon, whose day of wailing and bitter lamentation is nigh,
even at the door: and as for us, let the Lord suffer them, if his will be so,
to make merchandise of out bodies, as they have begun already, yet our souls
are the Lords, and by his righteous power which we have put on, he is able to
keep us from falling, or entering into any of the many temptations and snares
that are laid for the Innocent; And as we stand with our confidence in the Lord
our Righteousness, and of his Righteousness only to make mention, our Faith in
the power of an endless life, our hearts shall not reproach us so long as we
have a being, and our Sufferings are for Righteousness sake, because we cannot
turn Idolaters, in setting up Days, and observing Times that the Lord did
never command, but worship him as led and moved by his eternal Spirit.

And we know the Letter does not move at all, much less does it move any to
confess Sin; as in the Common Prayer Book is said; that is the Swearers, Liars
and Persecuters prayer, which to the Lord is an abomination, we cannot own for
his sake, neither do we confess our sins, as taught of men, for this is
hypocrisy; but as the holy Spirit that gives us power to forsake them,
teaches us.

O Friends, ye are all out of the way, that think God will be served or
worshipped acceptably any other way but as led and guided by his holy Spirit. O
what are ye doing? will ye limit the Lord in his People? this has been the
overthrow of many Governments. O consider, will ye limit the Holy One of Israel
to a few dead words in a Book, or a dead Confession, taught by dead man whilst
in his sins? What, do ye think the great God dwells in a dead Temple made
with hands, and dead stones? Is this the Church of the Firstborn, which Church
is in God, whose names are written in Heaven? O ye Bishops and learned men,
will ye indeed be lords of our Faith? How can this be? My glory, says the
Lord, will I not give to another. What, will ye be Lords over Gods Heritage? O
will ye cause the poor to wander without bread, and take away the clothing from
the naked, and leave him desolate that has no deliverer in the earth? O what
are ye doing? will ye put out our eyes, whom the Lord has opened, and then
cause us to grind in your Mill? Is this to be eyes to the blind, and feet to
the lame? O consider, what ye are doing, ye Leaders of the people; Why should
my people be destroyed for lack of knowledge, says the Lord? What, shall the
Lord always be limited, that ye will not suffer him to teach his People? O
consider, consider the Eternal sees you, and all your ways are naked and bare
before him, whose eternal eye runs through all the dark parts of the Earth, and
neither the Evil nor the Good is hid from his all-seeing Eye. O why will ye
plot evil against the Lords Heritage? ye little know what a work ye have
undertaken; the People whom ye are fighting against are blessed of the Lord;
the dust of Jacob that cannot be numbered, are they of, and they are of the ten
thousands of Israel, and the offspring of Jacobs God, which himself has
determined to establish, and bring them into a Land, a good and a large Land,
where he will make them a praise to Generations, and the Children unborn shall
call them the Blessed of the Lord, because of Righteousness, which is the
girdle of their loins, and the savor of their ointment which is poured forth,
shall their names be had in everlasting remembrance.

O pure righteous living Father of Heaven and Earth, do with thy People and
Children what thou will, they are thine own, only keep them faithful in thine
own life, power and dominion; preserve them, God eternal, thy Word of Patience
to keep, and Testimony to bear against all the false ways and Worship that is
now setting up and establishing by a Law; Lord God Almighty, arise in the
Consciences of thy Enemies, and in their inward parts do thou convince them
that are making void thy Law, thy pure righteous Law; in their own Consciences
show them they are persecuting thy People, and wasting thy Heritage, whom thou
have chosen for thy peculiar Treasure.

O Lord, what are we? do with thine own what thou please, we are thy People,
and the sheep of thy pasture; Thy Name is one, and thy People one; what will thou do for thy great Name? Do what is good in thine own eyes, only bless thy
People, and in thy Arms carry thy Lambs, that none may take their Crown from
them, O Lord God Almighty.

A Form of Common Prayer, that is, the Swearers Prayer, the Liars and the
Drunkards Prayer, which prays in the drunken spirit; but the Spirit of the
Lord is not known by any such, to teach them how to pray as they ought:
Therefore woe to the crown of Pride, to the Drunkards of England, whose glorious
fading beauty is on the head of the fat valleys. Woe unto them, says the Lord
God, that are covered, and not with my Spirit; that pray, and not with my
Spirit: these are a stink in my nostrils, and as a fire that burns all the
day long; that dig deep, to hide their counsel from the Lord, and whose work is
in the dark, that none should know it.

Woe unto them that go down into Egypt again for help, and whose hope is not in
the Lord, but in the broken Reed of Pharaohs house, which house must be laid
waste and desolate, without inhabitants, and the memorial thereof from
generation to generation, warred with: Now come to the Spirit, which is within
the Vail; the Lord is that Spirit, and when ye turn to the Lord, the Vail shall
be rent, and the Covering destroyed and taken away that is on the head of the
fat valleys; then shall living Waters flow out of Jerusalem in that day, and
the Spirit poured from on high, that shall teach you how to pray as ye ought.

Then shall ye look upon Him whow ye are now piercing and persecuting; piercing
by your prayers, which are sin, whilst in the persecution of the innocent
Lambs of Christ ye are found; I say, then shall ye be in bitterness, and mourn,
as one that mourns for his firstborn, that must be destroyed; and then it is
not your calling the Innocent, Plotters, and declaring against them as
Murderers, which will clear you from the just and righteous judgments of the
righteous God, who hears the sighing of the Prisoners in the Pit, and whose
ears are open unto their cry: The Lord opens the eyes of the blind, the Lord
loses the bands of the prisoners.

Then shall ye Bishops mourn, and ye Priests mourn, and all ye Magistrates,
every one that have a hand in persecuting, shall mourn apart, when ye look upon
Him whom ye have pierced, both in your selves and the Lord Children, which in
his sight are dear and precious, and by him compared to the most fine Gold. O
how are the precious Sons of Sion counted and esteemed by you builders of
Babylon, who are in Confusion, and covered with thick darkness? What, do ye
teach the poor people to pray, and call God their Father? What, do ye teach
them to sing David's Psalms, and the Songs of Sion, in the Waters of Babylon,
and Land of Darkness? Is not that vain Worship that is taught by the
Commandments and Precepts of men? Can the dead praise the Lord? And have ye not
read, that the Prayers of the Wicked is Abomination to the Lord? Did not Peter
bid Simon Magus first Repent, and then Pray, that the thought of his heart
might be forgiven him: which was, that the Gift of God could be brought and
sold for Money? And have ye not need to repent of this sin as well as Simon,
which are selling your Gifts for Money all over the Nation? What, will ye pray,
and teach others so to do, whilst in the gall of bitterness and bond of
iniquity your selves? O consider what ye are doing! will ye whip, persecute,
and imprison any that pray and preach only as the Spirit of the Lord guides and
gives them utterances? Are these the weapons which the Apostle Paul did fight
and War withal, or are they Antichrists weapons, and such as the high Priests
and those learned Rabbis did use against Christ our Lord and Master, which
said if this be done in the green ^^ee, what will be done in the dry?

Consider these things ye Bishops and all that would be counted Ministers of
Christ, what a foundation are ye laying for persecution? have ye so soon
forgotten your own sufferings, that ye are causing them thus to suffer that had
no hand at all in yours?

Consider the words in your own Book of Common Prayer, do ye desire that ye may
show forth the light of a good example for the glory of the Lord, and
conversion of your enemies? Is this the way Christ took and commanded his to
take, to fill prisons, holes and dungeons with such as were Heretics indeed,
and to be cast out and rejected? did he bid them banish, imprison, and whip
them? Now thus do you serve, your friends which tell you the Truth, and such
which cannot observe days for his sake, that has commanded, saying, six days
shall thou labor, and do all that thou have to do: Therefore consider your
ways and turn to the Lord, for he is jealous, and a God that will not be
mocked with words.

This Way ye take may make many Hypocrites, and seeming friends, and they may
bind themselves with Oaths and Protestations, and yet in their hearts wait an
opportunity to break all again. But by all your Jayles, spoiling of' our goods
and bodies in stinking Prisons, two hundred and fifty together, having scarce
room to lie one by another; I say this, by all these things you may make, your
selves manifest as ye do, to be persecutors of the innocent Lambs of Christ,
but never shall ye convert enemies, nor turn one to the Lord by these things;
and England shall see that saying fulfilled, The blood of the Martyrs, the seed
of the Church. And as for our Religion, it came not up after this manner,
namely by the change of a King, a Parliament, Protector; but through all these
changes that have been, it has stood the same, and we the same in it, and to
none of their commands in the matters of our God and his worship could we
submit, but chose rather to suffer patiently by them all; and our persecutors
are fallen, and we yet stand, and our confidence is the same as it ever was,
not in the Arm of flesh or weapons of War, but in the name of the Lord of hosts
that made Heaven and Earth, does our hope stand; the Sea is his also and his
hands prepare the dry Land, but as for the wicked they shall deal yet more
wickedly, and they that hate us without a cause will become our cruel Enemies,
that the Faithful may be made manifest whose love is to the Lord, and such as
are Hypocrites fearfulness may take hold on them.

And now to your own Book, return a little and consider it. First, ye teach the
Priest what he shall say, which is utterly contrary to the Scriptures, and
Command of Christ therein, which says, Take no thought what ye shall speak
before hand, for it is not you but the Spirit of the Father that speaks in
you, he does the work; and also contrary to their Practice, who waited at
Jerusalem for the Spirit, and as that gave them utterance they spoke. And it is
better, as Paul faith, to speak five words with the Spirit and understanding
then ten thousand in an unknown tongue; And it does not profit at all to read,
or hear read, Prayers, Praises, or Confessions of sin, taught by the Traditions
and Commandments of men, whilst the tongue of the Learned is not known to speak
a seasonable word to the weary, and also to the wicked.

And also the people, which ye teach to say after him, consider in what a sad
state their Souls are in toward the Lord, whose Holy Name ye teach them to
pollute with their unclean lips, whilst they are filled with iniquity, and
unconverted: Is he the Lord their God ruling in their hearts? And whether they
that live in persecution, pride, covetousness, and all manner of vanity, which
the Lord hates, whether these be his people and the sheep of his pasture? as in
your Common Prayer is taught to all manner of wicked persons, altogether unlike
David or the sheep of Gods Pasture, which for his Names sake were killed all
the day long, and counted as sheep for the slaughter? Let them that fear the
Lord judge in these things, whether the despised Quakers be not the People whom
ye are persecuting without a cause, and filling your Prisons, holes and
dungeons withal; O let the Lord look down on our unjust sufferings, in whose
sight we are clear as Children newly born into this world, from all manner of
plotting or inventing either in thought, word or deed against the King, this
present government or any other, since we were a People, called and chosen of
the Lord to bear our testimony against the persecution, oppression and cruelty
in them all; thus are we rewarded evil for good, to the spoiling of our Souls,
and accounted your Enemies also because of these things.

And now, what and if the just and Righteous God should turn your own words
upon your own heads again, and say, be it to you as in your morning Prayer you
have said, for his Elect sake which cries day and night, and for Jerusalems
sake which gives him no rest until he make her a praise in the midst of the
Earth. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou will be a burdensome stone to this
generation of persecutors; If I forget thee, then shall my right hand forget
her cunning, and my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth. I say, what if the
Lord give you the answer of your own Prayers, which you say and teach others?
These are the words, first spoken by the Prophet in the integrity of his heart,
and the same good words have ye stole, and speak them again, whilst in your
heart lodges persecution.

O Lord my God (mark and be moderate and consider your own words) if I have
done any such thing, or if there be wickedness in my hands; If I have rewarded
evil to him that dealt friendly with me, (yea, I have delivered him, that
without any cause is my Enemy) then let my Enemy persecute my Soul and take me
let him tread my life upon the ground, and lay my honor in the dust. Now must
ye either condemn David's words, and the Common Prayer Book also, or else deny
persecution and leave it; else your own words will be fulfilled upon yon and in
your selves. Behold he travelleth with mischief, he has conceived sorrow and
brought forth ungodliness, he has graven and dug a pit and is fallen
himself into the destruction that he made for others; but the Lord; has
prepared for him the Instruments of death, he has ordained his arrows against
the persecutors; and as for us which suffer and are persecuted for
Righteousness sake, our help comes from the Lord our God: and though the Lord
suffer you to plow long and deep surrows on our backs, for the trial of our
precious Faith, yet when he has searched our very hearts, and tried our reins,
then shall we be made more pure, as Gold that is tried in the fire is, add that
saying fulfilled, The Lord delivers the Righteous, and preserves them that
are true of heart; then shall the Righteous be delivered out of all
temptations: For the Lord knows how to deliver the Righteous out of them all,
and to reserve the Wicked to a day of Judgment to be punished: the righteous
Lord knows how to do all this in his season. O the pure, endless, infinite
love of our Father that bears up our heads, that in all our sufferings we faint
not, but in our heart can forgive our Enemies, and pray for them that know not
what they do.

And Friends, in your Morning-prayer, you pray for the King, that the Lord
would set his watchful Providence as a continual fence about him, to be his
guide and Counselor, and never leave him; which in the truth of my heart do I
desire: which the Lord most certainty will do, if at the Spirit of the Lord he
take counsel only, and not at you who limit it in his Lambs and Children, into
whom he has poured out of his Spirit, according as it is written, I will pour
out my Spirit in the latter days upon my Servants and Handmaids, and they
shall prophecy; this will I do unto them, and not forsake them, says the
Lord. And now Christ being come, and his Spirit given, which leads into all
truth, even the Word of the Oath; (Mark) the Word of the Oath, which was before
and since the Law, He says, Swear not at all: and though Abraham, Solomon, and
the Prophets, which were not come to the end of it, did Swear; and them that
did Swear in Judgment, Truth and Righteousness, the Oath was to them an end of
all strife, as says the Apostle: but Christ when he came, which was greater
than Solomon, and was before Abraham, he says, Swear not at all: And though ye
may read the Angel in the Revelation did swear, that time should be no longer;
yet in a certain place is it written concerning the Son, (which says, Swear
not at all) When he brings his first-begotten into the world, let the Angels
of God worship him: So whether they be Angels, Thrones or Dominions,
Principalities or Powers, things in Heaven or things in Earth, they must all be
subject to the Word of the Oath, which was since the Law; by whom, and for whom
all things in Heaven and Earth were made and created; who is God eternal, and
King immortal, that in all things he might have the pre-eminence, who says,
Swear not at all. But this I say, the Lord did never, counsel King Charles the
second, nor never will, to fill all the Prisons, Holes and Dungeons in his
Dominions with an Innocent People, for these things; As not for Swearing, and
observing Days and Times, as Manasseh did, who filled Jerusalem with innocent
blood; or as Jezebel did, when Ahab stoned and took possession of the Vineyard
of Naboth; but it was the Enemy of the Lord and his People, and the Council,
when the Quakers, which are innocent as children newly born, were numbered with
Murderers: It was no better than the Counsel of Ahithophel, which the Lord turn
into foolishness: I say, these were the Lords Enemies, and to King Charles in
the end will not prove Friends; the Nation shall see, and consider it
diligently.

For the Nation knows, yea, our Enernies themselves will confess, the Quakers
will not fight or plot against any for Conscience sake toward God; but after
they have owned the Light Christ, which is the Way and the Truth, many have
left the Army both private Soldiers and Commanders, in so much that the
Commanders, some of them, have said, That if they should not fight, th^^^ing of
the Scots would soon come in; and so by them were we persecuted, as friends to
you, and not meet to live in a Commonwealth, because with carnal weapons w
could defend our selves no longer: but their wisdom di the Lord confound, and
both them and their honor lies in the dust, which durst not trust in the Lord,
but made flesh their Arm; but we remain the same, our Weapons the same, not
carnal; and the Lord whom we serve, the same, and as able to deliver them that
fear him as ever he was; his hand is not shortened, nor grown weak, but he is
the same, and his years fail not; and to his People is he the same, and
changes not; ant therefore the Son of Sion, and Daughters of Jerusalem are not
consumed, whose hope is in the Name of the Lord, and not in Sword or Spear.

And though the Prisons in London, and all over the Nation, be filled, that we
can scarce lie one by another, two hundred and fifty in Newgate, men, their
wives and children, yet dare we not Swear, nor observe Days, Christ having
commanded the contrary, unto whom we do commit our Righteous Cause, and the
keeping both of our souls, bodies and families, which ye are vvasting and
endeavoring to destroy without a cause, who is the Prince of Peace, and ends
the old Covenant, and puts an end to Swearing, observing of Days? Times and
Seasons, and brings in to the Rest that remains, and was with, and in God
before either Days, Times or Seasons were commanded to be observed; But man
being gone into the Darkness, out of the eternal and everlasting Day, out of
the Life, Power and Virtue that made him, and was inwardly ravened from the
Spirit, and altogether restless and unstable as waters that fail, knowing not a
rest in him that made him always to keep holy day, and with himself at all
times to be satisfied with peace, rest and all manner of unutterable felicity;
as it is written, Eye has not seen, nor ear-beard, neither has it entered into
the heart of man (in that state) to conceive of the glory that is prepared for
them that love him. O the infinite, endless, eternal depths of love, past
finding our, which Paul was come into, in Christ the beginning and the end of
Days, New Mons, and Sabbaths, and all such things which he calls Carnal
Ordinances, and mad^ nothing perfect, being imposed until the time of
Reform^^^on, and no longer, till Christ the better hope comes, who says, Old
things are done away; all thing are become new.

Blessed is he that reads and understands: for the time is at hand, the Spirit
and the Bride says, Come: even so says my Soul, Come, Lord Jesus, come
quickly, Take unto Thee thy Great Power, and Reign in the midst of thy Enemies.

THE END.
Let this be sent to all Magistrates and Bishops, by Friends, as moved.

