A WARNING AND TESTIMONY FROM THE LORD Who Lives and Abides forever, That all
that have known the Lord get into the Name of the Lord, therein only to have
their Confidence.

And that all such who have truly known him, who is the great High Priest, wait
upon the Lord out of Self, in the true Light that shows every Thought and
Reasoning, for the buddings and bringings forth of the Spiritual Rod of his
Strength out of Sion, in his holy Tabernacle and Temple, whose Fruits being
brought forth praise him in the midst of the Church World without End.

By Humphry Woolrick.

Printed in the Year 1680.

A Warning and Testimony from the Lord, who Lives and Abides forever, etc.
FRIENDS;
WHo is that happy Man or People, that are in such a happy State and Condition
to whom the Lord's Power is a Hedge and Walls of Salvation, as it was to the
Just and Upright Man Job, who put on Righteousness, as a Garment, and whose
Crown was true Judgment, who feared the Lord, and eschewed Evil; Was not his
Root by the great Waters? and did not the Dew lie upon his Branch? Did not the
Lord give him according to that good man's Blessing, the Fatness of the Earth
and the Dew of Heaven? Was not the Secret of God with him, and his Glory fresh
in him? who did not set before his Eye any Evil Thing, but put it all away from
his Tabernacle (with his holy Eye) which had brought Death, and filled the
Temple of God with Darkness: for whilst Solomon saw with that Eye, he drove
away the Evil from his House; then he saw it was the Slothful's Vineyard that
was overgrown with Weeds; he saw also the Place of Judgment and Transgression
was there; the Place of Righteousness and Iniquity was there; read Isaiah 5. to
the 8th verse: see what the Lord would do to his Vineyard, I will take away the
Hedge thereof (says he) and it shall be eaten up; and break down the Wall
thereof, and it shall be trodden down; for the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is
the House of Israel, and the Men of Judah his Pleasant Plants; from whom (after
all his Labor upon them) he looked for Judgment, but behold Oppression; for
Righteousness, but behold a Cry; and for this Cause have many great and fair
Houses and Buildings been left desolate without Inhabitants, even for want of
the Judgment of Truth being executed within their Gates.

But consider; could the Devil, or them that are Co-workers with him, get over
this Hedge, which the Lord made about Job, to touch him or any thing he had,
until the Lord gave them leave, that so his Patience and Faith might be tried
and proved as Gold is tried in a Furnace of Earth, and he come out more pure,
as he himself said on this wise, I know when I am tried I shall come forth as
Gold: and his most holy Faith and Patience, which the most holy and living Word
was the Author and Finisher of, might be found to the Glory and Praise of God,
whose Kingdom and Dominion rules over all, and he himself our First and our
Last, before and above all in the Hearts and Souls of his People, might be God,
blessed, admired and praised in the midst of that House, whose Walls are
Salvation World without end; as Solomon says, To do Justice and Judgment is
more acceptable to the Lord than Sacrifice: Such that neglect it I know may
force themselves to Sacrifice, like Saul in the Trangression; but Samuel told
him, It was a Foolish Sacrifice; Behold, (says he) to Obey is better than
Sacrifice, and to do his Will and Commandment than the Fat of Rams, or all
these, which thou say the People have brought to sacrifice to the Lord my
God in Gilgal: For, who keep not their own Hearts clean, all they do is unclean
as to them; and therefore unto Cain's Offering, nor the Hypocrites long Prayers
and Praises, which are out of the living Spirit, out of the clean thing, the
Lord has no regard; and this is one with the Apostle's words, which says, To
the Pure all things are Pure; and why so? because it never leads into any Sin
or Impure Thing; all that is an Effect of Man's departing from the Living God,
his going out from His holy Will and Counsel, which ever purifies and keeps the
Heart clean, and sanctifies throughout.

But says the Apostle, To the Impure all things are impure; nay further,
Whatever is not of Faith, is Sin; the Prayer and the Ploughing of the Wicked is
Sin, because their Hand is not to God's Plow, which should plough up the Fallow
and Thorny Ground of their Hearts, that so the Plant and Lilly of God might
grow, and the Man-child whose Name is the Branch might grow and spring up upon
the holy Hill of Sion to Reign before the Ancients gloriously, which is his
right and place, the Father who is greater then all has allotted him, and into
whose Hand he must deliver his Kingdom, that he may be seen and known to be all
in all, and that all the various Ministrations and diversities of Gifts he has
given to men, be effects of his goodness, for the perfecting of the Saints
until we come to this holy fullness, which is all in all in his holy People,
who by him for his great Mercy sake, wherewith and wherein he loved us when we
were Enemies, has and does wash from all Sin; and so in that that is without
Spot or Putrefaction comes the Church to be cleansed, and presented to God
without Spot or Wrinkle or any such thing, in and through that which is all
fair and altogether lovely, and has no spot in it: and you that know this you
know the Golden Altar and the hidden Manna ye eat of, and the holy Incense, in
which the Lord smells a sweet Savor; and the holy and pure Hand of the holy
and pure Angel, through which it ascends to the holy Lord God, as did the holy
Apostle, Offerings which the Unholy and Sinners in Heart have no right unto;
and this Altar must be known in the Heart of his Kings and Priests, and they do
know that this holy Altar is raised through the true Fear and Awe, and in the
Name of the Lord; For they that Fear (as says the Prophet (which Fear is to
depart from Evil) their Heart shall be enlarged, and their Understandings shall
be opened; their Ear and their Eye that was shut, and closed up as within a
Cloud of Darkness shall be opened, because the Abundance of the Sea shall be
converted to them; for they be come to that one, in which God reconciles all
things to himself, whether they be things in Heaven or things in Earth; and
blessed are they of the Lord God that made Heaven and Earth that read and
understand, and wait to witness in a daily Cross to self these things; for they
are the Redeemed and the Blessed of the Lord, and their holy Offspring with
them: And my Heart is overcome with the Goodness and tender Mercies of the
Lord, in which I send this Epistle abroad, but more chiefly to all you who be
found in the Spirit of Opposition, and Gainsaying the Order of the Power, and
those things which be no other but Effects and Branches thereof, and the good
Order which is in the God of Order, and the things which be Lovely, and of a
good Report, and which have Praise and Virture in them, and be good before the
Lord, and before his Saints, yea, and before all sober People. My Desires to
you all, in the Love of our Lord Jesus Christ (even you who be not Violently
Willful, resolving to go on, because you have begun) to refrain your selves
from this evil Work, and turn to the Lord, from whom indeed you have swarved
aside, and turned your back, as did the men of Ephraim in Battle, who kept not
the Covenant of God, but dealt falsely with that which should have made them
strong and wise, and given them counfel how to order the Battle; for the
Trumpet always gives an uncertain Sound, where the Covenant of God is not kept.

I do desire you to come down out of your own Wisdom, Thoughts, and Reasonings
out of the House of your Imaginary, wherein ye by searching can never find out
God, nor the things of God, as in him and his People they are: Oh! come into a
perfect stillness of Mind, and be not as the Horse and Mule without the good
Understanding; and humble your selves under the mighty Hand of God, who would
not the Death of any that dye in their Sin, but rather they would turn, and
that Iniquity might not be their Ruin; and wait upon him in the Singleness of
Heart, which cannot be done by you, but as ye take up a Cross daily, which will
Humble Self, and make it of no Reputation, as did Christ Jesus, and then will
the living Father hear you, and in things you know not he will teach you; and
as he shows you that ye have done foolishly, do so no more; your own Souls good
is concerned in it: I speak as one that seeks your good, and will not do nor
take that Evil Way which some of you have done to me, whose Tongues have
devised Evil, like a sharp Rasour, speaking deceitfully; for I say, Woe to me,
and all that can rejoice to see their Enemy fall, or tread upon him when he is
down, that vaunteth himself, and is puffed up at the Sin of others, and
mourns not rather for such that have sinned, that God may give them
Repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth, and that does not in the midst of
Judgment remember Mercy; and that rather Loving Kindness from the Lord may
over-shadow such: And several of you being Aged men, having done and suffered
much on the Lord's Account, I would not have you to lofe that full Reward that
is in God, or have your good Deeds blotted out before him; for you know, in the
Day we Sin, Death will enter, and Darkness will darken the Understanding; and
who can see the Lord, when our own Sins hide his face from us? But that you may
come to dye the Death of the Righteous, and that your Last End may be like unto
his, that when you come to receive the Sentence of Death, as did Hezekiah from
the Spirit of God in the Prophet, you may then say with him (and not Lie) Lord,
thou know how I have walked before thee with a Perfect Heart, and have done
that which is right in thy Sight: This is my earnest Desire and fervent Prayer
to the Lord for you; for my Heart Lamenteth, and a breaking Pity there is in
the Bowels of my God toward such that have once tasted how good the Lord is,
that they should turn out of the Way of Peace into By-pathes and Crooked-wayes,
where the Serpent is Leader and Teacher, who is a Teacher of Lies, of
Slandering, false Accusing and Backbiting such as love the Lord and hold their
Integrity, as if they were the worst of men, and greatest Apostates; whereby
the Way of God, and his Truth, which is a perfect Guide, and a Shield and
Buckler comes to be blasphemed by your means, who are glad to take hold of
loose men to help you, to run them down whom God will build up; and to despise
those things as Idols, which are no other but effects as Branches and Leaves of
the good Spirit of God; but alas! will not this Covering be too narrow to hide
you? Can you stretch your selves upon this Bed long, where ye lie at ease above
the Witness of God? not regarding the Afflictions of Joseph, nor the Sighing of
the Poor, nor the Cry of the Needy! but are become one with that Spirit, which
makes it to Cry and Sigh in secret, for your Pride and High-mindedness, who are
become Full, Rich and Wise, and say you see, too like those fat and full
Cattle, whom the Prophet speaks of, whom the Lord would feed with Judgment, who
had indeed drunk of deep Waters, as many of you have done, but now are fouling
them with your feet; and have eat of the fat Pastures, but be treading down the
Residue thereof with your feet; but Woe be to you that be filled after this
Manner, to kick against him that fed you, that have any thing in your Heavens,
but the living and true God, or in the Earth that ye have desired, or set up in
your Hearts in comparison with him: Ye have played the Prodigals part with your
Portion, and be gone out from that living Root and Spring, that first divided
to you goodly Talents, that for the Lord, and not for Self, ye should have
improved: I say, out of Humility, and that living Fear and Dread of God, that
was at first in the Heart, be many gone, who be wise and honorable, but not in
the true Wisdom nor Honor, to whom the Apostle spoke in his day; Ye are
Honorable, but we are Contemptible and Despised; ye reign as Kings (even above
the true King) without us: I would to God ye did reign, that we might reign
with you; and to whom Christ spoke when he wept over Jerusalem, where great and
mighty Works had been done by him, and in whom great Salvation was wrought for
the poor of the Flock, and for the weak and diseased, who saw a true need of a
Physician, and saw their Sickness, and Sore, their Bruises and putrified Wounds,
which could not be bound up nor healed by another hand than the Lord's, which
is not shortened this day; Glory, Glory, Praises and Thanksgiving to him be
given in the midst of the Church, for his Mercies which endure forever; who
made bare his holy Arm that brought Salvation, and caused his Day of Salvation,
in which Abraham rejoiced and was glad, to spring forth in this our Age and
Generation, for his Mercies sake that endures forever, that we might tell to
our Children, and they might tell to another Generation what the Lord has done
for the poor of the Flock that waited upon him, who has the living Words that
be Spirit and Life, and give Life to all that believe and receive them, which
thing is true in him, as God is true forever; and in them also, who have an Ear
open to hear, as David, and all the holy men, the Prophets and Apostles had, to
hear him who speaks in Righteousness, and makes War in Righteousness against
all Unrighteous Spirits of men, by whom the Man of Sorrow, that has been
acquainted with Grief, has deeply suffered, and does still suffer in their
mortal Bodies, who know and love him, and be filling up the Sufferings of
Christ, that are yet behind, for his Bodies sake, the Church.

And this I say, for the Encouragement of all who love Justice and Equity, to
see it run down our Streets, to sweep away all that is loose and filthy, and to
make clean and white, even as a Flock of Sheep newly come up from the Washing;
you that have suffered, or do yet suffer for Righteousness sake by Unruly and
Unreasonable men, who hold not the Head, nor the Mystery of his Faith in a pure
Conscience; be ye not afraid of their Revilings which comes on you, by such as
are turning back again into Egypt in their Hearts, and making themselves By
and Crooked Paths, and a wider Way to dwell in, than that which the pure God
owneth, or gives or walks with his People in, to their great Joy and his own
Glory; who be the men that have Eyes and see not, as God sees (who has not
Eyes of Flesh, nor sees not as Man sees) that cause the Just and Innocent to
suffer by their Slanderous and Reproachful Tongues, who are not afraid to speak
Evil of Dignities, and Dishonor them, (as Christ said to the Jews, whom his
Heavenly Father did Honor:) I say, as any ones Sufferings abound by these men,
who are against Justice and Equity, and against good Orders, and so against our
God of Order, so shall your Consolation abound, and your Comforts be renewed,
as the Morning upon the Mountains; so that you will not be weary nor faint in
your Minds, whilst the Eye is to the Lord only, neither shall this heavy Work
of yours (which be doing Gods Work diligently) become a burden too heavy for
you to bear, because of the Hand that helps, and the Everlasting Arm that is
underneath all, to sustain and uphold all that love him, and dare not be
negligent in the Work of God's House and Vineyard for their Lord and Masters
sake, who is calling all out of the Idle state, to be workers together with him
therein, and Counselors with him, who is the First and the Last, the only
Potentate, the Wonderful Counselor, the Everlasting Father, and King of all
our Peace, which every one of his true Subjects ought to see diligently kept in
his Church, which is his House. But as for the Weeds, Thorns and Briars, which,
as David says, be the Sons of Belial; and which I say be Coworkers with their
Prince of Darkness, who in all Ages stands ready as a Red Dragon, filled with
Wrath against the Rule and Government of the Man Child, whose Right it is to
Rule; and he shall Rule for evermore, when the Wicked, our Enemies shall be
brought under; they shall be caught in their own Pit they have dug for the
Innocent, and in their own Net which they have privily laid for others, shall
they be taken, and they shall be silent in Darkness.

But if these things grow up amongst us, how will the Ways and Walks be
prepared and cast up, in which the Lord delights to dwell and walk with his
People? Does not he walk in the midst of the Golden Candlesticks? And is it not
through the Golden Pipes that the holy Oil runs from God, and empties it self
into the Souls of all such that love God's Charge, so as to keep it, which is
to judge his House, that they may be with him on his Throne, who is the chief
Judge, judging with him and with his Spirit of Judgment, which is a free Gift
from him, which he has promised to give to them that sit in Judgment, and walk
by the way of his Righteous Judgments, and such as be of Moses's Mind, of
Paul's Mind, and of David's Mind, that the Righteous Judge in Israel he has
said, He will never leave them nor forsake them: Hearken what a pure Mind was
in all these three men for Justice and Judgment; the Substance of their Words I
shall hereafter insert for your sakes, who have either lost your Zeal for
Justice, or that be climbed up above the Door, the meek Spirit, into God's
House to tread his Courts, to offer your vain Oblations, to stop Justice and
Judgment from running down as a River, even as Corah and his Company, with
their Censers, their Incense and Offerings with an intent to withstand the holy
Spirit and holy Offering in the holy Men, Moses and Aaron; this is several of
your States and Conditions, as before the Lord, who has showed it me, and that
searches me, and sees my end in writing to be your Salvation, and Deliverance
out of your own Net and Pit; and what are such better than Balaam, who had seen
the Vision of God, and had his holy Will and Counsel revealed to him, That God
was not minded to Curse, but to Bless Israel his People altogether; and yet
after this he would fain have Cursed them for a Self-end, even for the Rewards
sake of Unrighteousness, which Balack King of Moab, and Confederate with
Ameleck, another Unrighteous People had promised to give him, and to promote
him to very great Honor, if he would come and Curse but the uttermost parts of
Israel.

So Balaam went into the Error (as Peter says of him) when he went to ask
Counsel of God for a Wicked End, whom the Lord answered according to the Idol
he had set up, and bid him, Go; but his Way was perverse before the Lord, and
his Heart not right in his sight, who knows and sees full-well what is in the
Darkness of man's Heart; but the Dumb Ass speaking with Man's Voice told the
Prophet of his Madness, and yet he would go from place to place with his
Offerings, with his Master Balack; for with Balaam he and his Promotion was
esteemed better than the Lord, his Counsel and People, just like Baal's
Prophets, who cried Peace to the Wicked, at whose Table they did eat; and like
too many of our Parish-Masters and Priests, who speak Peace even to all which
put into their Mouths, and against the rest they prepare War, although with
God in Jesus Christ they be in Rest and Peace: But Woe to them from the Lord
that rejoice the Wicked, and make the Heart of the Righteous sad with their
Lies and Lightness, that be pufft up in their Fleshly Mind above the Fear of
the Lord, where their Tongue is not bridled, but what they list almost they can
say; they can pervert and wrest words and things to gratify the Evil-doer, and
to condemn the Innocent, although it be to their own Destruction, and to the
darkening the good Understanding, till they be past feeling of the holy Spirit
to lead them out of Darkness, the Land of the Shadow of Death, where the
Firstborn of Death rules and reigns without any good order; and in this
Confusion saying in Word, and gainsaying in Deed, with your Words as smooth as
Oil, but War in the Heart; of that Seed and Spirit yea ejoyned to and led by
against the very Heart of God, and his Light and Life which his People live
with him in; and yet can cry, You have nothing but Love in your Hearts to all,
when the Poison is flung out before against the holy Child, and against his
holy Government and Order in his Church, which all the Upright in Heart delight
to see, and in which the Apostle rejoiced when he wrote to the Church after
this manner, I am rejoiced greatly to behold your good Order, and the
Stedfastness of your Faith in Christ Jesus. And again, he says in another
place, Now we live, if you stand fast: And what must they stand in, but even in
that holy Liberty which God (who is not a God of Confusion, but of Order) gave
them, which is but one, and of one Mind in all, and all that be led by it, and
stand in its Counsel, they be by it made of one Mind, Heart and Soul, there is
no Division nor Rent amongst them; for they all be for Christ their Head, who
purely put on and keep within this holy Vesture and Garment, although ten
thousand times ten thousand together, this Holy Order that is in the Power
being observed, we have all but one Spirit, the Author of our Faith and of our
Hope, which is but one, and stands in one, and makes all of one Heart and Mind,
having all things common, where we all speak one and the same thing, where we
all seek the things that be Jesus Christ's, and not our own; these shall not
hit each other, nor break their Ranks; nor fall before their Enemy when he
shoots sore at them, that they might fall and never rise again; but they that
put on this holy Garment, must be girt about with Righteousness also, and out
of the Armoury of God, which is built as the holy Tower of David, where be the
Shields of thousands of holy Men and Women, which they wore and put on in their
time of War and Distress; but when the War was ended, and Peace with God
proclaimed over their Enemies, the World and the Devil, then they laid them
down there again, giving Glory to God and the Lamb, whose Weapons they were,
crying, Thou and the Lamb are worthy to have the Praise and the Honor of all
our Salvation and Deliverance now and forever and ever.

And so I come to re-mind you of those Scriptures which some in their Darkness
say I slight, that ye may see whether you be in the same Love those holy and
true men were in, or in that Love that is of the Spirit of this World, that is
Enmity with God; for they said, even Paul and Moses, Thou shall not hate thy
Brother in thy Heart, nor suffer Sin to lie upon him; but thou shall in any
wise rebuke thy Brother: and this is the Love which the Lord owneth, and which
he himself is the Author and Root of, which hates the Evil, and loves the Good,
and loves to see it exalted in Righteousness and in Judgment, over all Deceit
of Men, that be Cunning and Crafty, inventing Ways to hold the Truth in
Unrighteousness, and to press into the Kingdom and holy Inheritance among the
Saints in Light, but yet have not known the holy, equal and just Law of God
fulfilled in them, which fits and makes meet to inherit it.

And Paul says* who was a man that dyed daily to the Love, the Friendship and
Fashions of this Evil World, through the Rejoicing he had in Christ Jesus, the
true Light (he had Power to do this) and to testify what manner of Love the
Love of God was; and said, Let Love be without Dissimulation; abhor that which
is Evil: or as Peter says, Hating the Garment spotted of the Flesh.

And now hear some of the Sayings of David, who hearkened to the Lord, and to
his words, which were pure words, to his Precepts and Statutes, which were Life
to his Soul, and rejoiced his Heart greatly; nay, says he, I took the
Testimonies of the Lord for my Heritage in the House of my Pilgrimage, and all
thy Precepts were before me; and I did not put away thy Righteous Judgments
from me: more are they to be desired (by me) than Gold, yea, than much fine
Gold: and at Midnight will I arise to praise the Lord, for his Righteous
Judgments; for Sion 's Children, which be God's Children, they be saved through
Judgment and Righteousness. So you may see who be turning Judgment backward
with your feigned Love and Pity, like old Ely to his Sons, whilst they were in
the Transgression, whilst he that made them would not have Mercy on them; and
he that formed them from the Womb, as it were, to be his Servants, and to wear
an Ephod and a holy Prieft's Garment before him; but seeing his Covenant was
broken by them, and the Sacrifices kicked at, which he appointed in his
Habitation, therefore would he show them no Favor, but judged them and their
Father's House forever.

But how did this good man David love to be judged, searched and tried by the
Lord! he was afraid of his Ways, like Job, lest there should be any Iniquity
in him, hid in his Heart as a sweet Morsel, and lest he had not a true Respect
and Regard to all God's Commandments, which he said were pure, and gave Light
as a Lamp and Lanthorn to his Understanding, and to the making Wise of the
Simple. And I do beseech you all, who say, You are led by the same Spirit, to
consider whether the same Fruit be brought forth by you in this respect, or
whether you love it in its Root and Buddings forth; or whether the other thing
that is contrary be not budded, even whether Pride be not budded and broken
forth into a Rod of Violence, to smite the Innocent with, who in true Love dare
judge nothing in you but the Bad.

I will sing of Mercy and Judgment, unto thee O Lord will I sing; I will behave
my self wisely in a perfect Way: Psalm. 101.
O when will thou come unto me. I will walk within my House with a perfect
Heart. I will set no wicked thing of Belial before mine Eyes. I hate the Work
of them that turn aside (from the path of Vprightness) it shall not cleave to
me: a froward Heart shall depart from me. I will not know a wicked Person (and
we all in so doing shall know the Heart of God a coming to us; for I am sure if
we open to him when he judges, he in Bowels of tender Mercy will open to us)
Whose privily slandereth his Neighbor, him will I out off. Him that has a
High Look and a Proud Heart, will I not suffer; but mine Eyes shall be upon the
Faithful of the Land, or perfect in the Way, that they may dwell with me. He
that walks in this Way, he shall serve me: he that works Deceit, shall not
dwell within my House: he that tells Lies shall not tarry in my Sight. (This
was a right mind in David; and be not you wrong who be in any measure
gratifying and giving ease to any Lying Slanderous Spirit.) I will early
destroy all the Wicked of the Land, that I may cut off Wicked Doers from the
City of God.

Shall I hide from Abraham that thing that I do? shall be not surely become a
great Nation? Genesis 18.17.
for I know him, that he will command his Children and his Household after him,
and they shall keep the Way of the Lord to do Justice and Judgment* that the
Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him.

Read what Moses said of Levi; Let thy U^im and thy Thummim be with thy Holy
One, Deuteronomy. 33.
whom thou did prove at Massah, and with whom thou did strive at the Waters
of Meribah; who said unto his Father and to his Mother, I have not seen him,
neither did he acknowledge his Brethren, nor know his own Children, for they
have observed thy Word, and kept thy Covenant. (So here we see, God and his
Covenant was more than all Relations and Affection.) They shall teach Jacob thy
Judgments and Israel thy Law; they shall put Incense before thee, and whole
burnt-Offerings upon thine Altar: Bless, Lord, his Substance, and accept the
Work of his Hands; smite through the Loins of them that rise against him, and
of them that hate him, that they rise not again. And consider also what the
Lord said of Judah, who was his Law giver; Thou art he whom thy Brethren shall
Praise; thy Fathers Sons shall bow down to thee: And Aaron was to bear the
Iniquity of the Children of Israel upon his Heart in the Breast Plate of
Judgment before the Lord when he went into the holy Place: and they that be
come unto Christ Jesus, who is Judge in his own House, and over his own House
in Judgment: They that are one with him do know there is no other way to bear
Iniquity, but upon the Breast plate of Judgment.

God spoke to Moses, saying, Phinehas, the Son of Eleazar, Numb. 25.11.
the Son of Aaron the Priest, has turned away my Wrath from the Children of
Israel, while he was zealous for my sake (in Executing Judgment, Psalm. 106.)
and that was accounted unto him for Righteousness unto all Generations for ever
more) wherefore say, Behold, I give unto him my Covenant of Peace, and he shall
have it, and his Seed after him, even the Covenant of an Everlasting
Priesthood, because he was zealous for his God, and made an Atonement for his
People.

And, Friends, God loves to see Judgment still, even the Judgment of his holy
Spirit set up in his House and Church, as ever he did: And did not Saul lose
his Kingdom for want of Executing Judgment upon Ameleck, and Ely his
Priesthood, and his Family destroyed forever? And did not the Lord make a
Promise to Jehu, That his Children to the fourth Generation should sit upon the
Throne of Israel, because he had done well in Executing the Judgment of the
Lord upon the House of Ahab, who gave up himself to do Wickedly?

And consider that holy-minded man David, how sweet and pleasant a thing it was
to see Brethren dwell together in Unity; he said, It was like to that precious
Ointment that was poured upon Aaron 's Head, that had so swest and fragrant a
smell; or like the Dew that descended upon the Mountains of Sion, where the
Lord commanded his Blessings, even Life for evermore: And David knew where the
hand of the Evil-doer was not cut off through Judgment, which was a hand of
Falsehood and Deceit, which Christ says does offend, and must be cut off and
cast away; he knew this blessed Unity and Fellowship would soon be lost. And
so, if thine Eye offend thee, blind it, and pluck it out, through Judgment,
this must be done; For out of the Heart proceeds the Evil Eye, that hunts for
Mischief, and watches for Iniquity; for thou were better enter into Life,
having one Eye, than having two to be cast into Hell Fire. So all we that know
the Lord, and desire to be true in Heart to him, we know he is a God of
Judgment, and that it is through Judgment that Mercy over-shadows; and it is in
that just and holy Spirit which leads to confess and forsake Sin that purges
us and cleanses us from all Sin, and in which we have fellowship with the
Father and the Son, and one with another, to our great joy; its not in another
thing, but in the true Light that leads out of all Darkness we enjoy this.

And I do desire all that Love Christ Jesus, to love his daily Cross that
humbles down Self into the Death; and take heed of that Spirit that would make
it void and of none effect in any thing, for that will establish Iniquity by a
Law; for have not I my self, with many others, traversed the Ways of that
Spirit that teaches how to make the Cross of our Lord void and of none effect,
in things not to be blamed by any man, but him only that sees the Heart, that
has not Eyes of Flesh, nor sees not as man sees? But did I ever find Rest or
Peace there? which the Lord has suffered sometimes, that man might see himself
to be nothing out of him, and also to magnify the Riches both of his Patience
and Mercy, which the Vessels of Mercy have been a sitting for, to whom be the
Glory Eternally, who out of all Names and Things is bringing and drawing the
Minds and Spirits of his People to himself, and to that holy Name in his House,
and Place within his Walls of Salvation, that is better than a Name of Sons and
Daughters: Oh! into that pure Mind come, that seeks nothing but the Lord and
the Kingdom that is in Righteousness; that is the Mind forever in Christ and his
true Followers, in which pure Mind he drew nigh to the Father in the day of his
deep Distress, in which he feared, crying out to him, If it be Possible,
Father, let this Cup pass from me; nevertheless, if it may not, unless I drink
it, not My Will, but Thy Will be done: And in this Mind, and no other but that
which ever cries, Thy Will be done, can we be answered; this is that holy and
acceptable Will that Sanctifies forever, and where we and all that be helpless
do find Help and a place of Succor in time of need; for God is a consuming
Fire to that Mind and Spirit that is not subjected down into the holy Will of
God that Washes and Sprinkles the Conscience from the dead Works, which have no
fellowship with the living God: And Cain offered in that Mind, and the Jews
prayed in that Mind and Spirit, but the Lord regarded them not, as he did
Righteous Abel, and the Cry of the Innocent; therefore read James 4.2, 3. Ye
lust, and have not; ye envy, and desire immoderately, and cannot obtain; ye
fight and war, and yet get nothing, because ye ask amiss; ye ask, and receive
not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your Lusts, or that you
might lay the same out upon your Pleasures. So I do desire you that have known
the Lord and his holy Counsel, to stand therein, for to such I speak in
Tenderness of Heart, that ye may not make it void and of none effect by letting
your Minds reach out to an easier and wider Way, than what the Cross that
mortifies self admits of; for a true Word it is and steadfast forever to the
Children of men; no Cross, no Abolishing Death, no Crown of Life, no Crown of
Glory will Wisdom deliver to thee; for thou art no Child of Wisdom that do
not justify Wisdom in all her Ways; thou that can own her in some, but not
in all her Ways, art not Freeborn from above; thou art a Bastard, and not a
Son of the Freewoman. And Friends, that Man or Woman that is not willing to
stand in the holy Will and Counsel, when it is once known, will hearken to the
Witch for Counsel, as Saul did: And whoever forsakes the Lord, the Fountain of
living Waters, they will be hewing to themselves broken Cisterns; as says the
Prophet, Cursed be the man that trusts in Man, or makes Flesh his Arm, whose
Heart has departed from the living God. O foolish Galatians! (says Paul) who
has bewitched you, that ye should not obey the Truth? Have you begun in the
Spirit? and what do you think to be made Perfect in the Flesh? Were not they
given up to believe a Lying Spirit, who liked not to retain the Knowledge of
the true Spirit? Oh! how many have desired to bend the Lord in his Counsel, to
serve themselves; like as Balaam did, who although he once knew that the Lord
was pleased only to Bless Israel his People, and not to Curse them; yet for his
Promotion sake, and Lusts sake he would fain have done it; he went into Error
when he went to ask Counsel of God again about that matter, whose Madness and
Folly, and his Way which was perverse before the Lord, the dumb Ass reproved:
So such as be Convinced of the Lord's holy Way, who love it so as to walk in it
without any reservation, be Obedient till the Death, and then will the good
Spirit never be grieved, nor with drawn from you; for says the Lord, Woe be to
you when I depart from you; for about the Throne of God and the Lamb, which is
for true Judgment, be many Spirits, even now, as in the days of Ahab; and they
have now, as then, Commissions given them to wait on them that wait not on the
Lord with a pure simple Mind, and to be their Counselors, who like not to
retain God and his Counsel, when he is once known; and this Spirit will become
their King and their God, which they shall Curse one day, and look upward as
did the Rich and Full Man, who when in his Torment would fain have been
comforted with a little of that which the Poor man in Abraham's Bosom did
enjoy, but it could not be given him; and this is a Ministration of Justice
from the Just God and the Lamb, upon such that have known the Lord, but have
not liked to retain him in their Knowledge, and so have been given up to
Unrighteousness, until their Temple and House, which was once in part swept and
garnished, came again to be filled with Darkness; and here it has happened with
them according to the true Proverb, The Dog is returned to his Vomit again, and
the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the Mire.

And therefore its good that we all take heed to him who is that most sure and
living Word of all the Prophets, so as to abide in it, then will it keep us in
the hour of Temptation and Trial: for some which Peter spoke of, and the Author
of that Epistle to the Hebrews spoke of, who had tasted of the good Word of God
and of the Power of the World to come, and was clean escaped the Polutions of
the World, through the true Knowledge of the Lord and Savior, these were again
entangled and overcome with Sin, to the seperating of their Souls from God, and
so their Last End was worse than their Beginning; for better had it been for us
if we had not known the Way of the Lord, if after we have known it we turn from
the holy Commandment; for now is God putting a difference between Cattle and
Cattle, and between the Sheep and the Goats; and Woe to them that dig deep to
hide their Counsel from the Lord, whose work is in the Dark; saying, No Eye may
see them. So consider, ye that be for a wide and easy Way, that do the Work
overly and slightly at home, so must you needs do it abroad; they that pity not
the good in themselves, but can live at ease in the Flesh above the Cross of
Christ, which would mortify the Deeds of the Flesh, such be apt to pity and
take part with the bad in others and so the Root of Bitterness, which bears
Gall and Wormwood springs up apace to the defiling of many; for their Vine is
of the Vine of Sodom, and of the Fields of Gomorrah; their Grapes are Grapes of
Gall, and their Clusters are Bitter: And this is the Fruit of that Evil Root
and Spirit that is risen up in opposition to the Lord and his holy Will and Way
this day, who be in the Willfulness and Presumption, calling those things that
be Good, Evil and Idols, and as Jeroboam's Calf, which be nothing else but
Effects of that good which is in the Power; and such be as the strong Oaks of
Bashan, whom the Lord with his stormy Wind and Tempest will break to pieces,
and come upon them, as upon Mortar, and as the Potter when he treads Clay,
and then shall ye know ye have sinned against the Lord in with standing and
slandering his Servants as Apostates, and so your Wells will be without Water,
and your Clouds without Rain from the Lord; your Root will be dried up from
beneath, and your flourishing Branches which be but in the mixture, and not
truly grafted into the living Vine, they shall wither; you shall be as when a
Hungry man dreameth he eats, but when he awakes he is still Hungry, and his
Soul within him has still Appetite; or as when a Thirsty man dreameth he
drinks, but when he awakes he is still Thirsty; so shall they all be, whatever
they have known or seen, that fight against Mount Sion; for Corah and his
Company, who cried, Are not all the Lord's People Holy, every one of them?
Wherefore then do ye, Moses and Aaron, take so much upon you, as to lift up
your selves above the Congregation of the Lord? These were famous men, men of
Renown in the Congregation; and it was themselves that loved to have the
Pre-eminence, which they charged upon that Meek man whom God honored, and they
were usurping the Priesthood which the Lord had given to Aaron: These men, I
say, doubtless had seen great things, and were men of Understanding, which made
them honorable in the Eyes of the People; but they being puffed up in the
fleshly Mind, and having darkened themselves with Belial's Spirit, who is a King
over all the Children of Pride, they said to Moses, Will thou put out the Eyes
of this People? and charged him as a Liar in the face of the Congregation,
without all fear of God in their Hearts: Moreover, said they, thou have not
brought us into a Land that flows with Milk and Honey; They would fain have
been there to satisfy their Lusts with the good things thereof, whilst they
were unfit to partake of them.

And as I was considering what would be the End of these men who obey not the
Gospel; whither will they lead their Followers, who have not the Lord to lead
them, but even into the Pit and Ditch of Darkness and Miery Places! out of
which the Lord in his manifold Mercies has plucked our feet; for they be not
for Justice, that they esteem harsh and bitter like Wormwood: And these words
came fresh into me from the Lord to send amongst you; This is a People Robbed
and Spoiled; they are snared in Holes, and shut up in Prison-Houses; they are
for a Prey, and none says Restore for a Spoil; and they themselves do not
say, Deliver: And against such the Testimony of Truth is.

But as for such who mean well, and forbear the doing of things, because they
see them not, and be kept simple in their Minds, out of the Emnity, the Lord
will teach such, and guide them in the way he would have them to go, and to
such (God he knows) my Heart is tender; I judge them not, but leave them to the
God of Mercy and Judgment.

And let none be content with Sights or Visions of God only, for Judas, Saul
and Balaam and many others had that, whose Hearts and Ears were not
Circumcised, nor right before the Lord; for man may see great things whilst
himself is yet afar off from him who is the Root and Giver of all good, as Paul
says, 1 Cor. 13.1. Though I understood all Mysteries, though I have the Gift
of Prophecy, though I have all Faith, so that I could remove Mountains, though
I spoke with the Tongue of men and Angels, and have not Charity, I am but as a
sounding Brass and tinkling Cimbal, being out of that more Excellent Way; read
Ezekiel. 16. also, being not subjected down thereunto, in the daily Cross, with
that that comes therefrom, Man will soon be puffed up as a Bubble, and become
as a wandering Star from his own Station and Order; for man being not subjected
down into the true Love, to the Giver, he will vaunt himself, as if he bore the
Root, or had something which he had not received; and so play the Prodigal
until Want and Famine comes upon him: And here is the great Idolatry and
spiritual Whoredom when People run out with God's Gift to Sacrifice upon the
Mountains, without the Leadings and Conduct of the great Captain of Salvation
whose Leadings are always in the living Path of Self-denial, until down into
the Humility Self be humbled, and made of no Reputation, and so is the Eye kept
waking, and the living Keeper and Shepherd, that never slumbers nor sleeps,
comes to be seen Eye to Eye; and the Eye that sees him, is satisfied; and its
Lise and Clearness of Sight is in his Presence; and all that work here and walk
here, stumble not, neither do they labor in vain, or spend their Strength for
naught; for they be Workers together with God, and be the Wise Builders, as
Paul was; for the Lord is the Builder of the sure House and City, which has
the Everlasting Foundations, which John the beloved Disciple gives a Relation
of, when he was in the Holy Spirit of Self-denial on the Lord's Day, where
Christ was his Root and Offspring, his First and his Last, who bid him, Fear
not; I am he that was dead, and am alive, and behold I live for evermore; and I
have the Keys of Hell and Death.

And I do desire all that be newly convinced, that you keep your living Thirst
and Pantings after the living God alive in you, and be not satisfied with any
other thing besides the flowing-forth of the sincere Milk of the Word, and the
goings-forth of that River which parts it self into many Streams, from the
spiritual Eden of God, to the watering of the Souls of the weary Followers and
Flock of God; this is the ancient River, even that ancient River, the River of
God, and the Brook in the Way, which, Enoch and all the weary Travelers drank
of, and so lifted up their Heads, and their Bow was renewed in their Hand, and
their Arm was strengthened by the Arm of the Mighty God of Jacob; thence is the
Shepherd the Stone of Israel, and the sure Foundation for the Righteous to
build upon throughout all Generations; for they be not the Foolish Builders,
raising their Structure with Hay or Stubble, Silver or Gold, or any such thing;
for they hear the Word and keep it, they know the Word and do it, and so be the
Wise Builders, and so their holy Building and House the Gates of Hell cannot
prevail against. So go not forth, nor journey not, whist the Cloud is upon the
Spiritual Tabernacle, until you see the Cloud removed, and it going before you,
to find you out a Resting Place; and as Joshua said to Israel of old concerning
the Shadow of this Spiritual Ark, Joshua 3.4. so may I say to you, Let there be
a space between you and it, that you may know the Way you should go; for you
have not passed this Way heretofore: and so the Fire in Sion, and the Furnace
of the Lord in Jerusalem ye shall know to your Good and not Hurt, who love him
above all, even to take away the Bad, which has separated the Soul from the
chief Good; and when he whets his glittering Sword, and causes his holy Hand to
take hold on Vengeance, and when he lays his Ax to the Root of the Evil Tree
to cut it down into this Consuming Fire, if thou now be patient, and bear the
Indignation of the Lord for Sin, out of the Furnace will he bring thee as Gold,
and nothing shall be consumed but that which cannot dwell with the Lord, nor
ascend into his Holy Hill; and here to pass through Death will be thy Life, thy
Poverty Riches, and thy Loss thy exceeding Gain and great Reward; for thou
shall fear the Lord and his Goodness, and thy Heart shall be enlarged greatly,
and lifted up in his holy Way, because the abundance of the Sea shall be
converted unto thee, the Glory of that goodly Mountain Lebanon, even so
spiritually, wherein dwelt thy Enemy afore-time, shall be given to thee, with
the Excellency of Carmel and Sharon. But now run not out with the Flashes that
come as Lightning out of the East into the West; but keep down in Humility and
Simplicity, and the Lord will teach the Simple, and the living Springs will he
guide the Meek in Judgment.

Oh Friends! it is the Humble that give the Glory to the God of Israel for all
his Benefits, and that render back again to him according as from him they have
received; and to them will he show his Wonders in the deep; he will beautify
them with Salvation, and make them exceeding glad with the Light of his
Countenance.

When David was in the deep Poverty, crying unto the Lord, then did he hear and
help him, and showed him great things (to wit) How the Angels of the Lord
pitched their Tents about the Fearers of the Lord, and the Thousands of Angels
were his Charriots, wherewith he fought, and prevails forever against his
Enemies, who touch and grieve his hidden Ones.

And how did Jacob see the Host of God's holy Angels, and God himself calling
and speaking to him out of Heaven, in the Day of his great Distress, when he
wrestled with him, and made Supplication to him!

And when the Prophet's Servant in Dothan had the Eye of his Understanding
opened, that is shut in the Proud and Haughty, then he saw the Mountain full of
Horses of Fire, and Charriots of Fire round about Elisha.

And the Apostle, who from a good Experience exhorted so much to
Self-debasement and a Dying daily, he said in that great Danger by Sea that he
was in, The Angel of the Lord whose he was, stood by him, to counsel and
comfort him. And when before Nero he was brought, no man stood by him but the
Lord only, and he strengthened him, and he was delivered out of the Mouth of the
Lion.

And so as thy Ear is open to the living Shepherd's Voice of thy Soul, and his
Precepts and Statutes with the Judgments by thee being observed, and not put
away from thee nor slighted, thy Eye shall not be dim, but it shall be by the
Lord held watching, and the Commands shall be to thee Life; and the Precepts of
the Lord will be pure, rejoicing thy Heart, and opening thy Understanding, and
him that is true thou shall see, and no Evil shall come nigh thy Dwelling, and
as Christ said to them that kept his Sayings, they should never see Death; but
they being given up as a whole Burnt-Offering, into the holy Will, where is the
holy Flames of Love, that many Waters cannot quench, they shall see Life and
Immortality brought to light, and so come to be clothed upon with their Holy
House from Heaven, as the Unholy House of the Wicked is broken down and
destroyed.

H. W.

THE END.

