THE WOMEN'S PETITION AGAINST COFFEE.

REPRESENTING TO PUBLIC CONSIDERATION THE Grand INCONVENIENCES accruing to
their SEX from the Excessive Use of that Drying, Enfeebling LIQUOR.

Presented to the Right Honorable the Keepers of the Liberty of VENUS.

By a Well-willer --

London, Printed 1674.

To the Right Honorable the Keepers of the Liberties of Venus; The Worshipful
Court of Female-Assistants, etc.
The Humble Petition and Address of several Thousands of Buxome Good-Women,
Languishing in Extremity of Want.
SHOWS, THat since it is Reckoned amongst the Glories of our Native Country,
To be A Paradise for Women: The same in our Apprehensions can consist in
nothing more than the brisk Activity of our men, who in former Ages were justly
esteemed the Ablest Performers in Christendom; But to our unspeakable Grief,
we find of late a very sensible Decay of that true Old English Vigor; our
Gallants being every way so Frenchified, that they are become mere
Cock-sparrows, fluttering things that come on Sa^ sa, with a world of Fury but
are not able to stand to it, and in the very first Charge fall down flat before
us. Never did Men wear greater Breeches, or carry less in them of any Mettle
whatsoever. There was a glorious Dispensation ('it was surely in the Golden Age)
when Lusty Ladds of s^ven or eight hund^ed years old, Got Sons and Daughters;
and we have read, how a Prince of Spain was forced to make a Law, that Men
should not Repeat the Grand Kindness to their Wives, above NINE times in a
night: But Alas! Alas! Those forwards Days are gone, The dull Lubbers want a
Spur now, rather than a Bridle: being so far from doing any works of
Supererregation that we find them not capable of performing those Devoirs which
their Duty, and our Expectations Exact.

The Occasion of which Insufferable Disaster, after a serious Enquiry, and
Discussion of the Point by the Learned of the Faculty, we can Attribute to
nothing more than the Excessive use of that Newfangled, Abominable, Heathenish
Liquor called COFFEE, which Riffling Nature of her Choicest Treasures, and
Drying up the Radical Moisture, has so Eunuch^ our Husbands, and Crippled our
more kind Gallants, that they are become as Impotent, as Age, and as unfruitful
as those Deserts whence that unhappy Berry is said to be brought.

For the continual sipping of this pitiful drink is enough to bewitch Men of
two and twenty, and tie up the Codpice-point without a Charm. It renders them
that use it as Lean as Famine, as Rivvel'd as Envy, or an old meager Hagg
over-ridden by an Incubus. They come from it with nothing moist but their
snotty Noses, nothing stiff but their Joints, nor standing but their Ears:
They pretend 'twill keep them Waking, but we find by scurvy Experience, they
sleep quietly enough after it. A Betrothed Queen might trust her self a bed
with one of them, without the nice Caution of a Sword between them: nor can all
the Art we use revive them from this Lethargy, so unfit they are for Action,
that like young Train-band-men when called upon Duty, their Ammunition is
wanting; peradventure they Present, but cannot give Fire, or at least do but
flash in the Pan, instead of doing Execution.

Nor let any Doting Superstitious Cato's shake their Goatish Beards, and tax
us of Immodesty for this Declaration, since it is a public Grievance, and cries
aloud for Reformation. Weight and Measure, it is well known, should go
throughout the world, and there is no torment like Famishment. Experience
witnesses our Damage, and Necessity (which easily supersedes all the Laws of
Decency) justifies our complaints: For can any Woman of Sense or Spirit endure
with Patience, that when priviledg'd by Legal Ceremonies, she approaches the
Nuptial Bed, expecting a Man that with Sprightly Embraces, should Answer the
Vigor of her Flames, she on the contrary should only meet A Bedful of Bones,
and hug a meager useless Corpse rendered as sapless as a Kixe, and dryer than a
Pumice-Stone, by the perpetual Fumes of Tobacco, and bewitching effects of this
most pernicious COFFEE, whereby Nature is Enfeebled, the Offspring of our
Mighty Ancestors Dwindled into a Succession of Apes and Pignies: and -- The Age
of Man
Now Cramp't into an Inch, that was a Span.


Nor is this (though more than enough) All the ground of our Complaint: For
besides, we have reason to apprehend and grow Jealous, That Men by frequenting
these Stygian Tap-houses will usurp on our Prerogative of Tatling, and soon
learn to exeel us in Talkativeness: a Quality wherein our Sex has ever Claimed
pre-eminence: For here like so many Frogs in a puddle, they sup muddy water,
and murmur infignificant notes till half a dozen of them out-babble an equal
number of us at a Gossipping, talking all at once in Confusion, and running
from point to point as insensibly, and as swiftly, as ever the Ingenious
Pole-wheel could run divisions on the Base-viol; yet in all their prattle every
one abounds in his own sense, as stiffly as a Quaker at the late Barbican
Dispute, and submits to the Reasons of no other mortal: so that there being
neither Moderator nor Rules observed, you may as soon fill a Quart pot with
Syllogismes, as profit by their Discourses.

Certainly our Countrymens pallates are become as Fanatical as their Brains;
how else is it possible they should Apostatize from the good old primitive way
of Ale-drinking, to run a Whoreing after such variety of distructive Foreign
Liquors, to trifle away their time, scald their Chops, and spend their Money,
all for a little base, black, thick, nasty, bitter, stinking, nauseous
Puddle-water: Yet (as all Witches have their Charms) so this ugly Turkish
Enchantress by certain Invisible VVyres attracts both Rich and Pooor; so that
those that have scarce Twopence to buy their Children Bread, must spend a penny
each evening in this Insipid Stuff: Nor can we send one of our Husbands to Call
a Midwife, or borrow a Glister-pipe, but he must stay an hour by the way
drinking his two Dishes, and two Pipes.

At these Houses (as at the Springs in Afric) meet all sorts of Animals, whence
follows the production of a thousand Monster Opinions and Absurdities; yet for
being dangerous to Government, we dare be their Compurgaters, as well knowing
them to be too tame and too talkative to make any desperate Politicians: For
though they may now and then destroy a Fleet, or kill ten thousand of the
French, more than all the Confederates can do, yet this is still in their
politic Capacities, for by their personal valor they are scarce fit to be of
the Lifeguard to a Cherry-tree: And therefore, though they frequently have hot
Contests about most Important Subjects; as what color the Red Sea is of;
whether the Great Turk be a Lutheran or a Calvinist; who Cain's Father in Law
was, etc. yet they never fight about them with any other save our Weapon, the
Tongue.

Some of our Sots pretend tippling of this boiled Soot cures them of being
Drunk; but we have reason rather to conclude it makes them so, because we find
them not able to stand after it: It Is at best but a kind of Earthing a Fox to
hunt him more eagerly afterward: A rare method of good-husbandry, to enable a
man to be drunk three times a day! Just such a Remedy for Drunkenness, as the
Popes allowing of Stews, is a means to prevent Fornication: The Coffee-house
being in truth, only a Pimp to the Tavern, a relishing soop preparative to a
fresh debauch: For when people have swill'd themselves with a morning draught
of more Ale than a Brewers horse can carry, hither they come for a pennyworth
of Settle-brain, where they are sure to meet enough lazy pragmatical Companions,
that resort here to prattle of News, that they neither understand, nor are
concerned in; and after an hours impertinent Chat, begin to consider a Bottle
of Claret would do excellent well before Dinner; whereupon to the Bush they all
march together, till every one of them is as Drunk as a Drum, and then back
again to the Coffe-house to drink themselves sober; where three or four dishes
a piece, and smoking, makes their throats as dry as Mount Aetna enflamed with
Brimstone; so that they must away to the next Red Lattice to quench them with a
dozen or two of Ale, which at last growing nauseous, one of them begins to
extol the blood of the Grape, what rare Langoon, and Racy Canary may be had at
the Miter: Say thou so? cries another, Let Us then go and replenish there*
with our Earthen Vessels: So once more they troop to the Sack-shop till they
are drunker than before; and then by a retrograde motion, stagger back to
Soberize themselves with Coffee: Thus like Tennis Balls between two Rackets,
the Fopps our Husbands are bandied to and fro all day between the Coffee-house
and Tavern, whilst we poor Souls sit mopeing all alone till Twelve at night,
and when at last they come to bed smoakt like a Westphalia Hogs-head we have no
more comfort of them, than from a shotten Herring or a dried Bulrush; which
forces us to take up this Lamentation and sing, Tom Farthing, Tom Farthing,
where have thou been, Tom Farthing? Twelve a Clock e're you come in, Two a
Clock e're you begin, And then at last can do nothing: Would make a Woman
weary, weary, weary, would make a Woman weary, etc.

Wherefore the Premises considered, and to the end that our Just Rights may be
restored, and all the Ancient Privileges of our Sex preserved inviolable; That
our Husbands may give us some other Testimonies of their being Men, besides
their Beards and wearing of empty Pantaloons: That they no more run the hazard
of being Cuckol'd by Dildo's: But returning to the good old strengthening
Liquors of our Forefathers; that Natures Exchequer may once again be
replenisht, and a Race of Lusty Hero's begot, able by their Atchievments, to
equal the Glories of our Ancesters.

We Humbly Pray, That you our Trusty Patrons would improve your Interest, that
henceferth the Drinking COFFEE may on severe penalties be forbidden to all
Persons under the Age of Threescore; and that instead thereof, Lusty nappy
Beer, Cock-Ale, Cordial Canaries, Restoring Malago's, and Back-recruiting
Chocholet be Recommended to General Use, throughout the Vtopian Territories.

In hopes of which Glorious Reformation, your Petitioners shall readily
Prostrate themselves, and ever Pray, etc.

FINIS.

