FROM THE Shepherd of Israel, TO THE BISHOPS In ENGLAND; With some Queries and
Council to all Courtiers, and Judges, etc. That they Incense not KING CHARLES
against the Lords Heritage.

Also, the Breathings of the Seed, and Cry of his own Elect, that his People
may be preserved, which he cannot but hear, because of the Incercession of his
Spirit, poured out upon his Offspring. This I Believe, therefore I speak.

Also, the arise of the Beast, False Prophet, and Antichrist; and Who they
are, and What their works is, declared.

And the Everlasting Gospel Preached again to all Nations, Kindreds and
People; and the Beast and False Prophet, which deceived them, taken and
destroyed; the Accuser of the Brethren cast out, and Judged.

given forth by Humphry Woolrich.

London. Printed for Robert Wilson in Martins Le Grand

A Bishop then must be Blameless, the Husband of one Wife, Vigilant, Sober, of
good Behavior, given to Hospitallity, apt to Teach; not given to Wine; no
Striker, nor greedy of Filthy Luker, but Patient, not a Brawler, nor Coveteous;
one that Rules well his own House, having his Children in Subjection with all
Gravity: 1 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4.5. For if a man know not how to Rule his own house,
How shall he take care of the Church of God? (naturally) as Timothy, that
Bishop did. Phillip. 3.20. where Paul says, I have no man like minded, who
will naturally care for your State; for all seek their one and not the things
that are Jesus Christ's: But says Paul, Ye know the proof of him, that as a Son
with a Father he has served with me in the Gospel.

And Read ye that have taken the Names of Bishops, or Ministers of Christ,
great is your work, which is to watch for the sotil, as they that must give an
account for it; Heb. 12.17. I say, Read 2 Cor. 6. ver. 3. how Paul and Timothy
served in the Gospel. Giving no offense in any thing, that the Ministry be not
blamed, but in all things, approving our selves as the Ministers of God, in
much Patience, in Afflictions, in Necessities, in Distresses, in Stripes, in
Imprisonments, in Tumults, in Labors, in Watchings, in Fastings; by Pureness,
by Knowledge, by long Suffering, by Kindness, by the Holy Ghost: (Mark) by the
Holy Ghost, by love Unfeigned, by the Word of Truth, (the Faithful Word which
Timothy held) by the Power of God, by the Armor of Righteousness, on the Right
Hand, and on the Left; by Honor, and Dishonor, by Evil Report and Good
Report, as Deceivers and yet True: ver. 8, 9. As Unknown, yet well Known: as
Dying, yet behold we Live: as Chastened, and not Killed: as Sorrowful, yet
always Rejoicing; as Poor, yet making many Rich: as having Nothing, yet
Possessing all things.

Let these things be considered by you Bishops, Doctors or Teachers whatsoever;
in Gods Love I mind you of your Duty, and Work, which is not to live at Ease,
Worldly Honor, and Pleasures; but to perfect the Saints, as Paul, Timothy, and
Titus did, Ephesians. 4.11, 10, 14. Neither as Lords over Gods Heritage, or Masters
over their Faith and Consciences, but as good Stewards of the Mysteries of God,
who is the chief Shepherd of the Sheep, unto whom ye must all give an account,
how you have used your Talent: Blessed is that Servant, when his Lord comes,
shall find him giving them meat in due season, Mat. 24.26.25, 26. And 1 Timothy
3.6. A Bishop must not be a Novice, least being lifted up with pride, he fall
into the Condemnation of the Devil. Verse 7. Moreover, he must have a good
Report of them which are without, lest he fall into Reproach and the Snare of
the Devil. Chap. 4.1. Paul says, The Spirit speaks expressly, that in the
last days, some should depart from the Faith, giving heed to Seducing Spirits,
and Dostrines of Devils: Forbiding to Marry, and commanding to abstain from
Meats, which God has Created to be Received with Thanksgiving of them that do
believe, and know the Truth; for every creature of God is good, and nothing to
be Refused, if it be received with Thanksgiving for it is Sanctified by the
Word of God and Prayer. (Mark) Timothy was not to forbid the eating of meats
upon any pretense whatsoever, it being lawful for them, that did believe, and
knew the Truth; he might not say, the Law of the Land forbids it, and therefore
it is unlawful: but verse 6. He was to put the brethren in mind, that this was
a Doctrine of Devils; and such as did forbid these things, were departed from
the Faith, and knew not the Truth, but were unbelievers, and such as had taken
heed to seducing Spirits: (Mark) If thou put the Brethren in mind of these
things, then shall thou be a good Minister of Jesus Christ, nourished up in the
words of Faith, and good Doctrine. Titus 1.7. For a Bishop must be blameless,
as the Steward of God, not Self-willed, nor soon Angry, not given to Wine, no
Striker, nor given to Filthy Luker, but a lover of Hospitallity, a lover of
good Men, Sober, Just, Holy, and Temperate, holding fast the faithful Word,
that he may be able, by sound Doctrine. (Mark) not by Prisons, Whipping, and
Persecuting, he does not say, But by Sound Doctrine, both to Exhort and
Convince the Gain-sayer. Ver. 6. He must also be blameless, the Husband of one
Wife, having faithful Children, not accused of Riot, or Unruly. Read also, Tim.
2.2. The advice Paul gave to that Bishop, ver. 1. Thou therefore my Son, be
strong in the Grace, that is in Christ Jesus, and the things thou have heard of
me, amongst many witnesses; the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be
able to teach others also; thou therefore endure hardship, as a good Soldier
of Jesus Christ. (Mark) No man that Warreth, Intangleth himself with the things
of this life, that he may please him, that chose him to be a Soldier, ver. 8.

He bids Timothy remember Christ Jesus: so say I to all you Bishops, and
Teachers, Take Christ Jesus for your pattorn, and his Light in you; and take
heed how you have any hand privately or openly, in Persecuting any for
Conscience sake; but remember Christ Jesus the chief Bishop and Shepherd of the
Everlasting Covenant, how he Persecuted none, no not his Enemies; but he that
was Just, and did no sin, suffered by the unjust and sinners, and Prayed for
his Persecuters, that knew not what they did: O let Christ be your Example,
rather than the High Priests, and those learned men that put Christ to death:
Would you purchase to your selves a good degree of Honor and Boldness in the
day of the Lord, then use the Offices ye are in well, and not against Christ,
or the Flock he takes care of; but let the same mind be in you that was in
Paul, and in Timothy, where Paul says, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25, 26. The Servant of the
Lord must not strive; but be gentle unto all men, apt to Teach, patient* in
Meekness Instructing them that do appose themselves, if God peradventure will
give them Repentance, to the acknowledging of the Truth, and that they may
Recover themselves out of the Snare of the Devil, who were taken Captiveby him
at his will. Ver. 10. Therefore, says Paul, I endure all things for the Elects
sake, that they may obtain the Salvation that is in Christ Jesus, with Eternal
Glory.

And now ye Bishops, Doctors, and Teachers, and all such that handle the Law;
Do ye all stand still awhile, weigh your selves in the true Balance, measure
your selves with the Measure of the Spirit, that God has freely given to every
one of you, that by it ye may be saved from Sin, and led into all Truth: I say,
all confider; is this the Crown ye aim at, the Salvation of the Immortal Souls?
O that there were such a heart in you that was in Christ Jesus that Bishop, or
the same mind in you, that was in Paul, Titus and Timothy, that labored, and
watched day and night that they might present every man perfect in Christ
Jesus: for whose sake, says Paul, I suffered the loss of all things, and do
count them but dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in him: yea those
things which were gain, I counted loss for the excellency of the knowledge that
is in Christ Jesus my Lord, Phil. 3.8. Says he, That I may be found in him,
(mark, in him whose Kingdom, Power and Glory is not of this world,) Not having
my own Righteousness, that is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of
Christ. Ver. 10. That I may know him, and the Power of his Resurrection, and
the fellowship of his Sufferings: (Mark, him that was a man of sorrow, and
acquainted with grief, and had not a place to lay his head in; Read Isa. 53.3.
Luke 9.58.) being made conformable to his death: but Paul with weeping
complains of some, Phil. 3. ver. 18. that were of another mind, Whose God was
their bellies, who minded earthly things, and did glory in that which might
have been looked on by them as their shame, (whose end was destruction,) but
says he, ver. 20. Our Conversation is in Heaven, from whence we look for the
Savior.

O Friends! Do nothing without consideration; and a little consider this great
matter. Is this the end ye take these Offices of Bishops upon you, that ye may
watch for the souls of the poor scattered Sheep, and save the afflicted and
despised Lambs of Christ by them that are at ease? O this is a great work, if
ye leave it not undone: Or is this the Prize ye run for, and the Mark ye aim
at? then would the Lord stablish you, and the most Highest himself will be your
Shepherd, and a Shelter, and hiding place unto you; But if the world, its
Honor and Glory be coveted after by you, as the Nation fears it is too much,
then will the Lord arise for your destruction, and as a Whirlwind from the
most highest Shall it suddenly come upon you; and as a mighty Tempest, great
and terrible against the wall, and as a sweeping Rain that leaves no food; and
his Lambs will he save, and his People and Heritage he will himself deliver:
and your portion shall be as in the book of the Psalms. It is written Acts
1.20. Psalm. 69.25. Let his habitation be desolate, and let no man dwell
therein, and his Bishopric let another take. Now this was Judas the Traitor,
that was both a Bishop, and Minister, for the work is one. For he was numbered
with the Apostles (mark, Judas numbered, and chosen by Christ, and took part of
the Ministry with the Apostles) a thing that ye never came to as yet; but he
cared not for the soul, the poor were despised by him; but like Balaam, and
many now adays, that are falsely called Ministers of Christ, he loved the
reward of Iniquity, and with that he purchased a field, which is called the
field of blood to this day. And falling down headlong, he burst asunder in the
midst, and his bowels gushed out: Let this be the reward of the wicked from
the Lord, and the Recompense of the Persecutor from the God of my Salvation;
but the Righteous, let him be saved by the Lord, with an everlasting Salvation
from my God, because he is poor and despised, and abhorred of men, and has no
deliverer in the earth.

O Watchman of Israel, O Shepherd of the Sheep, that have followed thee, and
for thy Names sake have been willing to lay down their own lives, that in thee,
and thy life, they may be found blameless, and preserved spotless. O! Do thou
arise thou great Shepherd of the everlasting Covenant, save thy-people,
preserve thy Lambs, and in thy Arms carry them that are young; preserve the
feeble, and such as be of a contrite Heart and Spirit, that none may touch thy
hidden and anointed ones, so as to harm them in their inward parts, or wound
them in their hidden life. O! Be thou abiding place unto them in the Storm, and
a Light in their Tabernacles, when darkness covers their Enemies; that so in
their Spirits, thy Sons may sing together, and the morning Stars make Mellodie
unto thee in their hearts; and the inhabitants of Sion shout for joy, that the
Lord is in the midst of them. Do this for thy heritage, and forsake them not
Eternal God; we have heard with our ears, O Lord, the triumphing of the wicked
is short, O let it not be said by them for ever, Where is now their God: But
Arise, arise as in the days of old, and work wonders for thy seeds sake as in
the ancient time, when thou did march through the Sea with thy chosen, and
did get thee a Name of praise from the foundation of Israel: So let it be
with thy Enemies O Lord as of old, when the Stars in their course fought
against Sisera.

O Friends! I am a Lover of your Souls; and the eye is open, and opening daily
in thousands, and a numerous number begin to see the sad state they have been
long in: O the Lord has done a wonder, and a mavelous work he has wrought
in this our day which is dawned, the Day Star is risen in the hearts of
thousands, and the day that is everlasting is dawned, and in England the sun is
risen that shall never set again; and the light thereof shines, and shall
shine more and more, until the perfect day; which the Clouds of the evening,
nor the shadow of the Mountains shall never cover again: the Lion is rouzed,
the Beasts of the field shall tremble; the Lord is working, and who shall
hinder, or let him?

The Light is the eye, which sees this day, which was open in Abraham, and in
his Head who is invisible and eternal, who says, Before Abraham was, I am.
This eye must be opened, and looked with, in you Bishops; and the eye that does
offend and persecute the precious Life, phickt out, and cast away, and the hand
cut off, and the Right Arm of the wicked broken before the everlasting Arm,
which is under-neath, in which the Shepherd of Israel does carry his Lambs, can
be known or wrought with by you.

I say, till this eye be opened, and a new tongue be unloosed, ye are but blind
Watchmen and Leaders of the blind into the Ditch and horrible Pit; and Dumb
Shepherds, that gather not the Sheep and outcast of Israel; but such as the
Prophet speaks of, That fed themselves with the fat and cloth with the finest
of the wool, and bewrayed him that wandereth; ye gather not the outcast; but
with force and cruelty scatter the flock, which his own blood has purchased.

The eye being blinded, that should put a difference between the Precious and
the Vile, the Sheep and the Goats, the Diseased and the Whole, the Strong, and
the Weak: This is a great work. O Friends! to watch for the soul: The world by
wisdom, nor the learned by outward learning, know not the soul of man, nor what
it is that the Anguish and pain is upon: but he that made it knows the frame
thereof, and he that breathed into it the breath of Life, his eye, which is the
Light, sees and knows it altogether: such knowledge is too wonderful for me,
that when this eye is awakened, I am satisfied therewith: O blessed is that eye
that sees and is satisfied therewith. O this is the eye that runs to and fro
thorough the whole earth, and sees the secret thoughts of all your hearts, in
your bed-chambers; and your Council against the Lords people, is not hid from
it in the darkest night that ever came; he sees our innocence, and knows how
we are wronged, by being numbered with transgressors. Is this the way to convert
us to God, as Whipping, Persecuting and Imprisoning, to the spoiling both of
our bodies and goods? Well, this is the way they took with Christ our Lord and
Master; I say, thus was it in the Green tree, and with the Master of the
Family, and general Assembly, but not to convert us (were we unconverted) but
we are on the earth, though not of it; and our bodies in prison, though our
Spirits are at liberty; and he that was dead, now lives, and is ascended out
of the reach of all Persecutors.

I say, after he was (who is) ascended, and all power in heaven and earth given
unto him, and he had received gifts for men, having led Captivity that which
did Captivate, and he having spoiled Principalities and Powers, by the power
and virtue of his Resurrection; he being ascended, which first descended into
the lowest parts of the earth; he that was in the the pit, death, hell and the
grave, being made a little lower than the Angels. I say, when he was glorified
with the same glory he had with the Father, before the world of iniquity began;
then he gave some Apostles, Bishops and Teachers: (Mark) not Lord Bishops over
the faith of Gods heritage; but for the perfecting of the Saints, and edifying
the body of Christ, until they all came into the unity of the faith and
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man in Christ: (Mark) until he be
formed, unto the measure and Stature of the fullness of Christ, that they should
be no more Children, tossed and carried about with every wind of doctrine, to
turn again into such beggarly Rudements, as the observing of days, new Moons
or Sabboths, or abstaining from meats: the forbidding of which, the Apostle
calls a Doctrine of Devils, which God has created and commanded to be eaten,
and nothing to be refused by them that are come to Christ and in him believe,
who is the Body and End of all Shadows; and the Word that Sanctifies the Meats,
who is the Everlasting day, in which the Children of the Light do walk, as it
is written, and witnessed in these latter days (of the man of sin) The
Children of the Lord, shall be taught of the Lord; in whose Light the Nations
of them that are saved shall walk; and great shall be the Peace, and Assurance
of his children in that day; it shall be unto them a good day, and a Joyful
day, a day of Feasting, and Gladness of Heart; a Good day, and a Holy day, a
day of Praise, and Thanksgiving, wherein the wicked shall cease from Troubling,
and where the weary shall be at Rest: there the Prisoners rest together, and
hear not the voice of the oppressor.

Consider ye that are Commanding to abstain from Meats, which God has
commanded to be eaten, and commanding to Swear, and Observes days, which God
has forbiden, saying, Six days shall thou labor, and do all thy work: O will
ye limit the Lords people that are in the Truth, and such who stand in the
liberty wherewith Christ has made them free?

Will ye Judge them in Meats, and condemn about Holy days of your own making?
(as ye call them) are ye wiser than God? or must the Precepts of men be
observed, rather than the Commandments of God, who says, by his Spirit (that
must not be limited) All things are lawful to be eaten by them that know the
Truth? O what is your end, that God must not be hearkened unto? is not filthy
luker your end? that can for money sell a Dispensation, to do that which your
Law condemns as unlawful; and what must the poor do that are sick, and have
scarce money to buy meat, much less to buy a license to eat it; let all these
Laws be disanul'd, and those Statutes that are contrary to the Statutes of God,
be established by you no longer, upon any pretense whatsoever.

And for these things that are Righteous and Good, and because we cannot break
Christ's Commands, (no other thing can be justly charged against us) how are we
drawn from our families, Husbands from their Wices, and Wives from their
Children, ( England never saw the like) leaving them desolate without any
helper in the earth? as Sheep for the Slaughter, so are we killed all the day
long, and counted as the off-Scowring of all things for Righteousness Sake,
because we follow him, Who is the Lord our Righteousness, and obey his
Righteous Commands, rather than the Unrighteous Precepts and Commandments of
men; therefore are we Persecuted, and Hated by them that know not our
Innocence, and judged not meet to live upon the earth: And to hide themselves,
The Cry, is, (as in all ages the Persecutors have done against the Lords People
and Heritage) They are Enemies to the King, or no Friends to the present
Government or else, as the cry is now against the despised Quakers, Deceivers,
Deceivers, and such As destroy all good Laws and Government: this was done in
the green tree; and this was done against the Apostles in Generations past; and
in this present age the cry is, These are the false Christ's, and false Prophets
that Christ said should come, Mat. 24. v. 5, 24.

Now let all people consider the Scripture in the first Epistle of John, chap.
the 2. ver. 18, 19, 26. chap. 4. ver. 1, 2, 3, 5. Read these Scriptures, and
you shall find Christ's Words were fulfilled sixteen hundred years ago, and that
the Quakers are not the false Prophets; But such as Paul complains of with
weeping, Phil. 3.18. They were such who were Enemies to the Cross of Christ,
whose God was their Belly, and minded earthly things; and such as Peter spoke
of, in the second Epistle, chap. 2. or like Demus, who forsook Christ and the
true Apostles, and embraced the present world, because the love of the Father
was not in them. And if I say like the Ministers in England, Which seek their
Gain from every quarter, I lie not.

But consider what Christ says, Ye shall know them by their fruits. Read Peter
and John before mentioned, v. 1. But there were also false Prophets among the
people, even as there shall be false Teachers among you, who shall privily
bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and many
shall follow there pernicious Ways; by Reason of which, the way of truth shall
be evil spoken of, and through covetousness, (Mark, is not this a Proverb in
England, who is more Proud and Covetous than our Ministers?) Shall they with
fained words make merchandise of you, v. 10. These are they that walk after the
flesh in the lust, which have the fained words, who were Despisers of
Government, v. 15. Which have forsaken the Right Way, whose hearts are
exercised with covetous practices, cursed Children, being gone astray in the
way of Balaam, the Son of Bozer, who loved the wages of unrighteousness: these
are Wells without water, Clouds that are carried with a tempest, to whom the
mist of darkness is reserved for ever. Read John's Epistle which saw that
fulfilled before his departure, which Christ foretold in Matthew should come,
Joh. 4.1, 2. Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, (Mark)
what must they try the Spirits with? With the Unction and Anointing which was
in them, Were they to try the Spirits whether they were of God, chap. 2.18.
Little Children, it is the last time, and as ye have heard that Antichrist
shall come, even now are there many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the
last times: they went out from us, (Mark) as I said before, from the true
Apostles who were in the light, and had fellowship with the Father and the Son,
v. 20. But ye have an Unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things, v. 24.
Let that therefore abide in you, (mark, in you) which ye have heard from the
beginning, if that shall remain in you, ye shall continue in the Son and in the
Father. v. 26. These things have I written to you, concerning them that seduce
you v. 27. But the anointing which ye have received of him abides in you,
(mark in you) and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same
anointing teaches you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie; And even as
it has taught you, ye shall abide in it. And now little Children, abide in
him; for ye know he that does Righteousness, is born of him, chapter 4.3. This is
that Spirit of Antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should come, and even
NOW already is come into the world: little children, ye have overcome them,
because, greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world; they are
of the world, therefore speak they of the world, and the world hears them, as
you may read, Rev. 13.3, 8. and all the world wondered after the beast, and
worshipped the Dragon (who was wrath with the Woman, and made war with the
Remnant of her seed, which kept the Commandment of God, and have the testimony
of Jesus Christ) they worshipped the Dragon which gave power to the Beast, and
they worshipped the Beast; saying, Who is like unto the beast? Who is able to
make war with him? Rev. 17. and 3, 8. Let him that reads understand. v. 1.
Come hither, and I will show thee the Judgment of the great Whore that sits
upon many waters: (mark) waters are Multitudes, Nations, Tongues and Peoples;
and the Woman which thou saw, the Mother of Harlots, is Mystery Babylon,
which Reigns over the Kings of the earth, with whom they commit fornication,
and drink of her Cup of fornication, ver. 3. also the ver. 2. So he carried me
away into the wilderness in the Spirit: And I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet
colored beast, full of Names of Blasphemy, and the Woman was arraied in
Purple, and Scarlet color, and decked with Gold, and precious Stones and
Pearls: (Mark, the outside was very beautiful, and desirable by the world,
whose Names are not written in the Lambs Book of Life before the foundation
thereof) but this Woman, the false Church, had in her hand a cup full of
Abomination and filthyness, of which the Nations drank, and were made drunk,
and unstable as waters.

Let him that reads, know the mystery of the Beast, [and understand who is
that false Prophet and Antichrist,] which carried the woman. Read chap. 13.6.
Is not this he that opens his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme
his Name and Tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven? This is that Antichrist
which opposed Christ. v. 7. And it was given unto him to make war with the
Saints, and to overcome them, and Power was given him, over all Kindreds,
Tongues and Nations. v. 15. And he had power to give life to the image of the
Beast that it should spoke. [mark] This is that compelling power which would
cause all to worship the Image, instead of the life: and the likeness instead
of the true God; And he causes all, both Rich and Poor, Small and Great, Bond
and Free, to receive the mark in their Right Hand, or in their Foreheads, and
that none might buy or sell, that would not worship the Image of the Beast, but
should be killed. Here is the patience of the Saints. Here are they which keep
the Commandments of God, and the Faith of Jesus.

And I saw the Woman Drunk with the Blood of Saints, [Mark, this is not the
Woman that fled from the face of the Dragon, which brought forth the
Man-Child,] And with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her, I
wondered with great admiration; but the Angel said, wherefore did thou
marvel? [Mark, John was wondering also, till the Angel spoke to him, saying,] I
will tell thee the mystery of the Woman, and of the Beast that carried her: the
Beast that thou saw was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the bottomless
pit, and go into perdition, and they that dwell on the earth shall wonder,
whose Names were not written in the book of Life from the foundation of the
world, when they behold the beast that was, and is not, and yet is: these
sayings are faithful and true, testified by his Spirit, who is the faithful
and true witness, That the everlasting Gospel shall be preached again unto
every Nation, Tongue and People; and Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots,
shall come in Rememberance with the Lord, and her flesh shall be burned with
fire and the Beast and false Prophet which have deceived the Nations, shall be
taken and east alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone; and the
Merchants of the earth shall mourn, and such as trade by Sea, and are made rich
with her Merchandise, shall weep bitterly, and shall say, Alas, alas, That
great City, that great City that was clothed in fine linen, [Mark, this fine
linen is not the Righteousness of the Saints, but the paint of the Harlot gone
from God] Purple and Scarlet, and decked with Gold, and precious Stones and
Pearls, for in one hour so great Riches is come to naught: and every
Ship-Master, [Mark, ye Watermen who are unstable] And all the Companies in
Ships, and Sailers, and as many as trade by Sea stood afar off, and oryed when
they saw the smoke of her burning, saying, What City is like to this great
City! And amighty Angel took up a Stone like a great Millstone, and cast it into
the Sea, saying, Thus with violence shall this great City Babylon be thrown,
and shall be found no more at all, and the light of the Candle shall shine no
more in her [for it shall be put out] And the voice of the Bridegroom, and of
the Bride shall be heard no more at all in thee; for thy Merchants were the
great Men of the Earth, [Mark, the great Men of the Earth traded with her, and
drank her Cup] in whom was found the blood of Prophets and of Saints. And of
all that were slain upon the Earth for by her sorceries were all Nations
Deceived; wherefore rejoice ever her, thou Heavens, and be glad of heart, you
Saints for evermore; Rejoice you holy Apostles, and Prophets, for God has
avenged your blood on her.

Now, all you great men in England, be wise; Ye Judges, and you Councellers,
receive Instructions from the Lord; Counsel is better than Stength, and Wisdom
better than Weapons of War; but your Strength, nor the Strength of your King,
is not to imprison the Seed of Abraham, and children of the Promise, and Heirs
of the Kingdom, and World that has no end; should you not rather stand up, and
make Reconciliation between the Lord and his people, as Moses did, and lift up
the prisoner out of the pit; and gather all into the Light (Christ) to whom the
gathering of the people shall be.

Now if you say, We persecute you not, you keep not the Kings Law; my answer
is, if Haman were clear of the Jews destruction, ( Esther 3) ever the more,
because of the Kings Decree, and a Law made against them; then are you clear of
our sufferings also: Why would you make us believe the Word of a King is
nothing worth, who has promised, We should live in the liberty of a good
Conscience in his Dominions, so long as we lived peaceably, which hitherto we
have, and ever shall do? for herein do we exercise our selves daily, to have a
Conscience void of offense, both toward God and man: And if you harm us for
that which is good, Christ's light in your conscience will condemn you; but was
not KING CHARLES misinformed, as King Ahashuerus was, by Haman that Courtier,
who told the King, the people of God were not fit to live in his Dominions? and
are not we as greatly wronged by some of you, as the Jews were by Haman? ver
8. There is a certain people, said Haman, Scattered and Dispersed among the
people, in all the Provinces of thy Kingdom; and their Laws (mark) [they did
Woship another God] are diverse from all people, neither keep they the Kings
laws, which was, that all should bow to Haman; much like that law, That none
should meet together in Spirit, to Worship the Lord. And this is my case, who
has been a prisoner 18 weeks, nothing laid to my charge, but the keeping on my
Hat to Richard Brown, Mayor of London, [so called] whether such thing ought to
be suffered by the King, and his Council, the Lord be Judge; Therefore,
consider ye Judges, is this the way of the Judge of all the Earth? or the way
to Establish the Kings Throne? nay, the Lord sees it, and will plead our
innocence, who has said, The Kings Throne is Established in Righteousness.

Or could the Courtiers, pertaining to King Darius, be clear of Daniells being
cast into the Lions Den, then you may be clear of so many thousands of us,
being cast into Prisons, and Dens, as it is at this day. Read Dan. 6.5. Then
these Presidents, and Princes, said, We shall not find any occasion against
this Daniel, except we find it against him, concerning the Law of his God. Then
they came and told the King, The Governors and Princes, the Councellers and
the Captains have consulted together to Establish a Royal Statute, and to make
a firm Decree, That whosoever shall as any Petition of any God or Man, save of
thee, O King, for thirty days, he shall be cast into the Den of Lions.
Wherefore King Darius Sealed the Writing, and the Decree: Now Daniel did not
forbear worshipping his God, as we do not forbear meeting together because of
the Kings Decree, therefore came his Enemies and accused Daniel, as our enemies
accuse us; that we are dis-regarders of the King, and his Law: Now, little did
Darius know what design these men did pursue, that their envy was rather
against Daniel, then to honor the King; though they did pretend it was for his
honor, that they made such a Royal Decree, as they called it.

But when the King heard these things, how was he displeased with himself, and
set his heart on Daniel to deliver him; and he labored tell the going down of
the Sun, to deliver him, but could not. Now let all Flatterers be warned, and
Proud men take heed how they incense KING CHARLES against the Lords people, or
endeavor to destroy them whom the Lord has blessed; and let them know they
are but men; and our God, whom we serve, and worship, notwithstanding the Kings
Command to the contrary, is the living and true God, and his Arm is not
shortened, but he is the same as ever he was in the days of Mordecay, Esther 3.
or in the days of Daniel, Daniel 6.22. And therefore, the Sons of Jacob shall
not be consumed, though they may suffer persecution many days, yet shall they
not be forsaken: but out of all Tribulation shall the Lord deliver them, and
save them from the hand of the violent man.

And now to your consideration, by whom we suffer, (whether as evil doers, or
well doers, the Lord is Judge, and knows rightwell) I propound these few
Questions in the fear of the Lord.

First, Whether to observe Days, and Times, were not the sin of Manasses, who
filled Jerusalem with Innocent blood? and whether to Imprison, spoil our
bodies and goods, for opening our shops, and working on the six days, be not
contrary to the Command of God? which says expressly, Six days shall thou
labor, and do all thy work: and contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, which
says, I fear I have bestowed on you labor in vain, while ye observe Days,
New Mons, and Sabbath, Which were but a Shadow of good things to come, but
the body was Christ? Collossians 2.17, 18.

Secondly, Whether it be not in your hearts, who are laying such a foundation
for Persecution, to fill London, and the Nation with Innocent blood, as
Manasses did Jerusalem, if suffered by the Lord?

Thirdly, Whether Christ be the Light, that has enlightened every man, or the
Grace that has appeared unto every man, and able to save to the uttermost,
able to Guide, Teach and Lead into all Truth, all that receive, and believe in
it? If yea, Then whether all Shepherds, Doctors, Bishops, and Teachers
whatsoever, that make it not there work to turn peoples minds to the light
within, be not false Shepherds, and such as Jeremy, Esaias, Ezekiel, and Mied,
cried against, who said, He was given for a Covenant of light, for a teacher
and leader of his people, that he might be Salvation to the ends of the earth?
Isa. 2.6, 7. Isa. 49.6, 9. Who also prophesied, That the Nations which were
saved, should walk in the light of the Lord, and the Gentiles should come to
his light, and Kings to the brightness of his Rising? Isa. 60.3. Isa. 2.5.

Fourthly, And whether all such Bishops do not deny their work, and seek
themselves, and worry the flock of Christ, That set up any worship, (though
they get a Law made by the powers of the Nation to establish it) if it be not
in Spirit and truth only, and according to Paul's Doctrine and Work, which was
to turn people from the darkness to the light, from the power of Satan unto
God, Acts 26.18. That remission of sins might be received, and an inheritance
amongst them that are sanctified in the light, in the Faith. Whether it be not
a vain worship, being neither according to the Scriptures, nor you led
thereunto by the Spirit of the Lord?

Fifthly, Whether all Worship, that is taken up from the letter of the
Scripture, [Nothing differing to the outward act,] from the Saints of old, as
singing David's Psalms, Preaching and Praying, and the like, whether all this
be not a vain worship, and to the Lord Abomination? Yea, or Nay. I say, If not
led thereto by the Eternal Spirit of the Lord? Seeing God is a Spirit, and
they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and Truth, as it is written,
Joh. 4.24. Romans 8.14.

Sixthly, Whether they are like to do the work of an Evangelist, or perfect the
Saints, or bring into the Unity of the Faith, or to any measure of Christ, who
are not in the Light, nor led by the Spirit, as it gives utterance to them
that Preach, seeing the Scripture says, the true Worship is in Spirit, and the
true Ministers spoke as it gave them utterance? Acts 2.4. But are Persecuting
and Imprisoning about days, the Children of the Light, who walk in the
substance, the Everla ting day, who says, Swear not at all, who is the Lord of
the Sabbath, and the Word of the Oath, which was since and before the Law.

Seventhly, Whether this may not be for a Lamentation in England, that so many
thousand of the Lords people, (called Quakers) who have lived peaceably, since
they were a people, should now be imprisoned, their bodies and goods spoiled in
Dungrons, Holes, and Prisons, so soon after the Word of a King to the contrary,
because we cannot forsake Christ in not meeting together, and break his
Command, who is the Shepherd of his Sheep, and Bishop of the Souls, and says,
Swear not at all? Mat. 5.33, 38. Jam. 5.12

Now let all that sear the Lord, be Judge, whether this be disobedience to
Magistrates, to be obedient to the Lord; and whether God be not rather to be
obeyed than man, or any Commands or Laws which are contra y to Scripture? And
whether the Law was added to a Righteous man, or because of the unrighteous and
lawless? whether they that a e in Christ, and walk in, and spoke the Truth, and
do righteously, and as they would be done unto; whether they do not fultil the
Righteousness of the Law? and what Law that is, will harm them in this
condition.

And now, O ye Bishops, Doctors, and Teachers, and Rulers of the people, my
love is to your immortal souls, and issues out toward you, because of the
Ruler of the people, whose love is in my heart: go not on to persecute an
Innocent people; cause them not to suffer, that never had any hand in your
Sufferings, which you, and your King, are lately come out of: since we were a
people, we did never Plot, or do Violence to any Government, (but the
government of Satan in the heart) and our Weapons were never Carnal since we
had a being, but Spiritual, to the pulling down of spiritual wickedness; but in
the Lord we have, and do honor all men, and submit to all their Righteous
Commands, Who Rule for God, and are a Terror to evil doers, and Praise to them
that do well; to them are our souls Subject, and to their Commands, for the
Lords sake; but as for these Commands, which are contrary to Scripture, and the
Spirit of the Lord in our hearts, by Suffering, shall we rather choose to bear
our Testimony against, though commanded by a King, or Parliament; and if we
suffer by them, it is for Righteousness sake; and not as Theives, Murderers, or
as evil doers; but as Christians.

And the living Lord is our Shepherd, and Bishop, and with him have we peace,
and good will toward men, such as our Persecuters cannot take from us; else we
should have sainted before this day, had not we believed in the Lord, who leads
us, and instrusts as by his holy spirit in the path we should go. And waters,
and keeps us as the apple of his own eye, in patience under our burden, that we
saint not in all our Tribulations; and this is my love, though I suffer for it:
I leave it to the Lord, and his Eternal Council, to you, do not lay a
foundation for Persecution, though it be too much laid already, yet go not on;
think not Sion will be built with blood, or Jerusalem upon the Ruin of the
people, whom the Lord has blessed, and chosen for his peculiar Treasure; for
they are the blessed of the Lord, that made Heaven and Earth; and they that
touch them will he rebuke for their sakes, as he rebuked Kings in the days of
old, saying, Touch not my anointed, and do my Prophets no harm, 1 Chronicles. 16.17,
22.

THE END.

