THE PREFACE.
BEcause the Doctrines of the Church are, as by some wittingly mis-related, so
by many others ignorantly mistaken; the Author thought it might be useful for
the informing of those, who are withheld from professing Truth, only because
they do not know it, not because they hate it, or prefer some secular interest
before it, to draw up some brief Catholic Theses, as well negative as
affirmative, extending to most of the principal Points of Controversy between
the Roman and Reformed Churches. In which Theses he Professes, 1 That there is
not any thing wittingly denied that is affirmed by any allowed Council. 2 Nor
any thing affirmed that is in any such Council denied. Nor 3 any thing affirmed
or denied here, but what, if not in Council, yet in some Catholic Writers
(uncensured by the Church) may be showed to be so; and all to be bounded within
such a Latitude of Opinion, as the Church indulgeth. For the more evidencing
whereof such Propositions, as he conjectured might be, by some less read and
experienced, any way doubted of, whether acknowledged and received by
Roman Catholics, He has confirmed, either with the Testimonies of approved
Catholic Divines, or (which might have more weight with some Readers) the
Concessions of Learned Protestants; leaving only so many of these Theses
unguarded, as he presumed their own Perspicuity would secure. But here 1 The
Author pretends not, that all is comprehended in these Theses which has been
delivered by Councils in all these Points, because this he thought both too
tedious a Task, and needless; since the main Points are here comprised; and the
intelligent Reader will discern, That many of those omitted may be readily
inferred by necessary consequence from those here expressed; and since he, who
in these concurs with the Church's Judgment, must needs so much reverence it,
as easily in the rest to resign himself to it. Nor 2 does he pretend, that no
Catholic Author of good esteem delivers the contrary to any Proposition here
set down ( i. e. such of them as have not been the Determinations of Councils):
For the Church herein allows a Latitude of Opinions; and he thought it
sufficient to his Purpose to show, that none, to be esteemed true Sons of the
Church Catholic, and right Professors of her Faith, need to be of any other
Persuasion then this here delivered; and not that all are, or must be of it.
And strange it were, for any on this account only to desert the Church, because
he can produce some persons in it that hold a thing he conceives false or
unreasonable; whilst the same Mother indulgeth him to hold only that which he
thinks rational and true. For any therefore to gather a Body of such
Testimonies (except those of Councils) against any of these Theses is labor
lost; so long as he cannot produce some obligation laid upon all to conform to
such Opinions, or follow such a Party; and so long as the Church equally
spreads her lap to all those who think, or say, otherwise. Nay further, could
he produce some Catholic Author of good repute affirming the contrary to
something here said, to be the Doctrine or Faith of the Church, or something
here said to be contrary to it; yet neither is this conceived to the purpose,
unless his saying it is so, proves it to be so. For a learned Author, possibly,
for the greater reputation of his Doctrine, may be too facile to entitle the
Church to it, either as supposing it deducible, by some necessary consequence,
from some Decree thereof; or as contracting the words of such a Decree to a
more particular sense, than the Council intended them; or indeed had light,
either from Scripture, or Tradition Apostolical, precisely to determine; and
sometimes so it has happened, that contrary opinions have both of them urged the
same Church Decree (couched only in more general Expressions) as deciding the
Controversy, their own way. But it is here reasonably desired; That such
Conciliary Decree it self be produced and well examined; and those Authors put
in the other Scale who are here showed to maintain, that to be well consistent
with, or also to be the Church's Doctrine, which some others perhaps may
pronounce contrary to it. It not being the Author's Design in this Collection
to show that Roman Catholics agree in all things here said, but that none, to
be true Roman Catholics need to hold or say, any thing otherwise. By this to
remove out of the way that great Scandal and Stumbling Block of well-inclined,
but misinformed Protestants, who apprehend, that such gross Errors in Faith
and Manners, as no sober and rational Christian can with a good Conscience
subscribe, are not only held and tolerated in the Roman Church, but also by it
imposed. The Author has also endeavored in these Theses to descend so far to
several particulars and circumstantials, as that the intelligent may easily
discern them applicable to the solution of most doubts such as are material;
and to the explanation of his meaning, where to some Readers seeming ambiguous
or obscure; and they may serve them for a Comment or Exposition on most he has
written; wherein his principal Design has ever been (Truth always preserved)
Unity, and the Peace of the Church of God: a design which can never be
completed whilst new Writings still succeed the former, till by the Divine
Mercy these present Dissensions arrive unto their just period.

CATHOLIC THESES On several Chief HEADS of CONTROVERSY.
HEAD. I. Concerning the Church, Her being a Guide.
1. More General. Concerning the Church her being a Guide.
1. Catholics do affirm, That our Savior's gracious Promises of
Indefectibility, Matt. 16.18, 19.-28.19, 20. Jo. 14.16.26.-16.13. comp. Act.
15-28.-1 Jo. 5.20.27. Matt. 18.20. comp. 17, 18. 1. Tim. 3, 15.-2. Tim. 2.19.
comp. 16, 17. Ephesians. 4.11.13. made to his Church are so to be understood, not
only, that his Church shall never fail, or fall away as to Doctrine or Manners,
if she do her duty, (as some expound them:) But also that his Church shall
never fail to do her duty, for what is necessary to Salvation, and that these
his words are not an hypothetical, but absolute Prediction that his Church
shall never fail.

2. That such Promises belong to the Church Catholic as a Guide.

3. That this indefectibility of the Church as a Guide does extend to an
inerrability, as in all Fundamentals (in which if it errs it is no more a
Church:) So in all other points, the contrary Tenants to which are dangerous to
Salvation: For there seems to be no reasonable ground of a Restraint of our
Savior's Promises (made indefinitely) narrower then this.

4. Amongst the several ways whereby the Church Catholic may deliver her
Judgment as a Guide (whether by Messengers, Communicatory Letters, or Councils)
that consent of judgment, or those Councils which are the most universal (as
the times and places are capable thereof) and which are the most dignified also
with the presence of the most eminent Church Magistrates convening therein,
must needs be also the most supreme Guide of Christians.

5. That therefore no inferior, or subordinate Person, or Synod, when they are
known to oppose this Supreme, may be taken by particular Persons for their
Guide in Spiritual matters.

6. Nor yet a minor part of the Fathers, in these supreme Councils, differing
from the rest, or out of these Councils, a minor part of Christian Churches
opposing the rest, may be followed as our Guide: For so, notwithstanding these
Guides appointed us, we are left in the same uncertainty for our way, as if we
had none, except only when all of them unanimously agree; and if, of two
parties opposite, it is left to us to choose which we will, to guide us, it is
all one for those points wherein these differ, as if we were left to guide our
selves.

HEAD II. Concerning the Church Catholic of several Ages her being equally
this Guide.
Concerning the Church Catholic of several Ages her being equally this Guide.
1. IT is affirmed: That the Church Catholic of every Age, since the Apostles,
and consequently the Church Catholic of this present Age, has the same
indefectibility in Truth, and authority in Government, as that of any other;
(Both these [Indefectibility and Authority] being as necessary for the
preserving of Christianity in one Age as in another) and that our Savior's
Promise of Indefectibility is made good to the Church Catholic of every Age
taken distinctly. Else his Promise that the Church of all Ages should not fail
would sufficiently be verified, if that of any one Age has not failed.

2. From hence it is gathered; That the present Catholic Church of any Age can
never deliver any thing contrary to the Church of former Ages, in necessary
matters of Faith or Manners.

3. Supposing that in matters not so necessary, the Catholic Church of several
Ages should differ; yet that the former having no more Promise of not erring
herein then the later, therefore a Christian has no greater security of the
not erring of the one, then of the other; and therefore ought to acquiesce in
the Judgment of the present, under whose regency and guidance God has actually
placed him.

4. If for the performance of Christian Obedience there be any necessity to
have such Points, as these first decided, viz. What former Councils have been
lawful and obliging, and what unlawful? What are fundamental and necessary
Points of Faith, and what not necessary? What is the Doctrine of the Ancient
Church in such and such Controversies? And what is the true sense of the
Fathers Writings, or of a Councils Decree? If these, I say, (or so far as
these) are necessary to be known by him; it follows that in these, a Christian
ought also to submit to the Resolutions of the present Church Catholic, so far
as it has or shall decide them unto him ( i. e. to the Resolution of the
supremest Authority thereof, that he can arrive to) and herein to acquiesce.
For thus far he is secure, that in things necessary she cannot misguide him.
And it seems unreasonable; That when she is appointed his unfailable Guide in
all Points necessary (See Number. 1. Head. 1.) He, not she should undertake to
judge what Points are necessary, and what not; for this is in effect to choose
himself, in what particular Points she shall guide him, and in what not?
Unreasonable, when he is obliged to obey her Councils, that He, not she, should
decide of those Councils which are lawful, and ought to be owned by her; for
this is in effect to choose what Councils he pleases, to command his
obedience, and exclude the rest. Unreasonable, when he is to learn of her what
is the Doctrine and true Sense of the Holy Scriptures, that He, not she should
judge what is the Doctrine of Antiquity, or the true sense of former Fathers,
or Councils, and wherein the present Church accords with, or departs from,
them; i. e. that she, that is his Judge in greater Matters, may not be so in
the less.

HEAD. III. Concerning the necessary Tradition of the former Ages of the
Church, for all the Points of Faith that are taught in the present.
Concerning the necessary Tradition of the former Ages of the Church for all
the points of Faith that are taught in the present.
1. Catholics grant, That every Article of Faith is to all later Ages, derived
either in express terms, or in its necessary Principles from the times of the
Apostles.

2. And consequently, That no Article of Faith can be justly received in any
later Age, which was not acknowledged as such in all the former; i. e. either
in express terms, or in its Principles.

3. But 3 it is not hence necessary that every Article of Faith professed in a
later Age, be professed also in express Terms in the former.

4. Nor 4 that all those Articles that are professed by a former Age must needs
be found in those Writers we have of the same Age, For all their Writings are
not now extant, nor all that they professed necessarily written; but only such
things, of which the Suppression of Sects, instruction of the times, or the
Author's particular design ministered occasion.

5. As that Rule of Vincentius Lerinensis is allowed most true; Illud tenendum
quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus creditum est. So this, Nihil
tenendum, nisi quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus creditum est,
especially as it is restrained to, and required to be showed and verified in
the Writers of former Ages, and in these not in respect of Principles of Faith,
but all the deductions too, is affirmed most erroneous; and such as if the
omnibus and semper be not confined to the Members only of the Catholic
Communion, one particular Church, or Person, in any Age, Heretical will void
the Catholic Faith.

HEAD. IV. So also concerning the Canonical Scriptures.
Concerning the Canon of Scripture.
1. Catholics do profess, That as the Church Governors, or General Councils,
can make no new Article of Faith (See H. 5. Number. 2.) So neither new Canon of
Holy Scripture; and that no Book can be part of these Holy Scriptures now,
which has not been so always since the Apostles days. But notwithstanding this,

2. It must be granted; 1 That in some former Ages, and Churches fewer Books
have been acknowledged, and received as the Canon of Scripture, than in some
other later Churches and Ages; and some Books by some, in some Ages doubted of,
which now all accept.

3. That where any such doubt arises, the Governors of the Church have Power
and Authority (and that not more in one Age, than in another) to decide and
declare, what particular Books are to be esteemed and received as Canonical,
and descending to Posterity as such from the Apostles times, and what not.

4. All those Books are received by Catholics as Canonical which the most or
more General Councils [See the Council in Trullo, Can. 2. accepting the Council
of Carthage, as well as of Laodicea. Council of Trent, Sess. 4. under Paul the
Third; ratified in full Council Sess. ult. under Pius, and accepted by all the
Western Churches, save the Reformed: Or according to St. Austine's Rule, De
Doctrina Christiana, 2. l. 8. c. In Canonicis autem Scripturis Ecclesiarum
Catholicarum quam plurimum authoritatem sequatur. Inter quas sane illae sunt,
quae Apostolicas seeds habent and Epistolas [i. e. communicatorias] ab illis
Ecclesus Apostolicis accipere meruerunt] or the more, and more dignified,
Churches Catholic have received and used for such.

5. There is no more assent or belief required upon Anathema by any Council,
concerning those Books of the Canon which the Reformed call in question than
this: Ut pro Sacris and Canonicis suscipiantur. So Council Trid. Sess. 4. Si
quis libros ipsos etc. pro Sacris and Canonicis non susceperit, Anathema sit.
But these words by some imposed upon that Council, (See Bishop Consin,. 81. p.
103.) Si quis omnes libros, pari Pietatis affectu, reverentia and veneratione
pro Canonicis non susceperit, Anathema sit, are not found there.

Next, Concerning the Sufficiency of this Canon of Scripture, as a Rule (or
that, which contains in it the matter) of the Christian Faith.

Concerning the sufficiency of the holy Scriptures for the Rule of Faith.
1. Catholics concede the holy Scriptures to contain all those Points of Faith,
that are simply necessary by all persons to be believed for attaining
Salvation: a to contain them, either in the conclusion it self, or in the
Principles, from which it is necessarily deduced. And contend that out of the
Revelations made in the Scriptures, as expounded by former Tradition, the
Church from time to time defines all such points; except it be such Practicals,
wherein the question is only, whether they be lawful; for the deciding of which
lawfulness, it is enough if it can be showed that nothing in Scripture, as
understood by Antiquity, is repugnant to them.

2. But, 2dly, The sense rather then the letter being God's word, they affirm;
that all such Points are not so clearly contained in the words of Scripture, as
that none can mistake or wrest, the true sense of those words.

3. And therefore, 3dly, They affirm the Church's Tradition, or traditive
Exposition, of these words of Scripture, necessary for several Points to be
made use of, for the discerning and retaining the true sense, which under those
words is intended by the Holy Ghost, and was in their teaching delivered by the
Apostles to their Successors: [wherein yet they make not the Tradition or
delivering of this Sense, but the Sense delivered (that is the Scripture still
for these Points) their Rule, or that which contains the matter of their Faith:
the oral expression or exposition thereof being only the same thing with its
meaning or sense; and why are the Scriptures quoted by them but because the
matter is there contained?]

4. They contend that there are many things, especially in the governing of the
Church, in the Administration of the Sacraments and other sacred Ceremonies,
which ought to be believed and practiced, or conformed to, that are not
expressly set down in the Holy Scriptures; but left in the Church by Apostolical
Tradition, and preserved in the Records of Antiquity, and constant
Church-custome: in several of which Protestants also agree with them in the
same Belief and Practice. b And amongst these Credends extra Scripturas is to
be numbered the Article concerning the Canon of Scripture. g

a S. Thom. 22.1. q. art. 9. primus, and ad primum. Art. 10. ad primum. In
Doctrina Christi and Apostolorum [he means scripta] veritas fidei est
sufficienter explicata: Sed, quia perversi homines Scripturas pervertunt, ideo
necessaria fuit temporibus procedentibus explicatio fidei contra insurgentes
errores.

Bellarm. de verbo Dei non scripto, 4. l. 11. c. Illa omnia scripta sunt ab
Apostolis, quae sunt omnibus simpliciter necessaria ad salutem. The main and
substantial points of our Faith (says F. Fisher in Bishop White, p. 12.) are
believed to be Apostolical, because they are written in Scripture.

g See Dr. Field, 4. l. 20. c. Dr. Tailor, Episcopacy asserted,. 19. Reasons of
the University of Oxford against the Covenant published 1647. p. 9. Where they
speak on this manner. Without the consentient judgment and practice of the
Universal Church (the best Interpreter of Scripture in things not clearly
expressed, for Lex currit cum Praxi:) We should be at a loss in sundry Points
both of Faith and Manners, at this day firmly believed, and securely practiced
by us; when by the Socinians, Anabaptists, and other Sectaries we should be
called upon for our Proofs. As namely sundry Orthodoxal Explications concerning
the Trinity and Co-equality of the Persons in the Godhead, against the Arians
and other Heretics; the number, use and efficacy of Sacraments; the Baptizing
of Infants, National Churches, the Observation of the Lord's Day, and even the
Canon of Scripture it self.

g Dr. Field, 4. l. 20. c. We reject not all Tradition; for first we receive
the number and names of the Authors of Books, Divine and Canonical, as
delivered by Tradition. Mr. Chillingworth, 1. l. 8. c. When Protestants affirm
against Papists that Scripture is, A Perfect Rule of Faith; their meaning is
not that by Scripture all things absolutely may be proved which are to be
believed; For it can never be proved by Scripture to a Gain-sayer, That the
Book called Scripture is the word of God.

HEAD. V. Concerning the perpetual use and necessity in all Ages of New
Determinations and Definitions in matter of Faith to be made by the Church.
Concerning the necessity of the Church in several Ages her making new
Definitions in matter Faith.
1. IT is granted by Catholics, That all Points of Faith, necessary to be known
explicitly by every one for attaining Salvation, are delivered in the
Scriptures, or other evident Tradition Apostolical: or also all those of
speculative Faith so necessary delivered in the Apostles Creed. 2. Granted
also, That the Church Governors since the time of our Savior and his Apostles
have no power to Decree, or impose any new Doctrine as of Faith, or to be
believed as a Divine Truth, which was not a Divine Truth formerly revealed
either explicitly, in the like terms, as they propose it; or implicitly at
least in its necessary principles, and premises out of which they collect it.
Nor have power to decree or impose any new thing as of necessary Faith, or
necessary to be believed to Salvation: [that is] necessary absolutely to be, by
all persons whatever (some of whom may be blamelesly ignorant of what the
Church has defined) after such Decree, known or believed explicitly with
reference to attaining salvation, which was not so necessarily formerly. 3. Yet
notwithstanding this, Catholics affirm, that there are many divine truths
which are not explicitly and in terminis delivered in the Scriptures, Apostles
Creed, or express Tradition Apostolical, but only educible de novo by most
necessary and certain consequence from those which are so delivered; which are
necessary to be determined and delivered by the Church of later Ages, when
contrary Errors happen to appear. 4. Accordingly they affirm, That, upon the
appearance of several such dangerous Errors, the Church did lawfully, in the
four first General Councils, make and deliver some new Definitions in matters
of Faith; [ new taken in the sense expressed above, Number. 2.]; did lawfully
enlarge the former Creed; and require assent or belief (in the sense explained
above, Number. 3.) unto these new Definitions under pain of Anathema. 5. They
maintain, that all such dangerous Errors have not appeared within the times of
the four first General Councils, nor those Councils defined all divine Truths
contrary to such Errors, and therefore that the Church in later Ages may use,
against these, her Authority, to do the same things in her following Councils,
as in the four first 6. And consequently that it is not reasonable to require
of the Church, that her Definitions be showed (I say not in their necessary
Principles, on which she grounds them, but) in their formal Terms; either in
the Scriptures, or her four first Councils, or in the now extant Writings of
the first Ages. 7. Nor necessary; that every explicit Tradition Apostolical,
and Principle that has descended to the Church of later Ages most certainly
through all the former, must therefore be showed to be asserted or mentioned in
the Writers of the former, especially, where these very few.

HEAD. VI. Concerning Subordination of Ecclesiastical Authorities.
Concerning Subordination of Ecclesiastical Authorities.
1. Catholics maintain a due Subordination both of Ecclesiastical Persons among
themselves; viz. Of Presbyters to Bishops: Bishops to Metropolitans;
Metropolitans to Primates, Primates to Patriarchs. And of Ecclesiastical
Synods, viz. Diocesan to Provincial; Provincial to Patriarchal, Patriarchal to
General. 2. They willingly grant, That any particular Church, or Provincial or
National Synod may lawfully make Definitions in matters of Faith, Reformations
of Errors and Manners, and other Ecclesiastical Constitutions for it self,
without the concurrence or conjuncture at the same time of any other Church or
Synod therewith. But 3ly, They deny, that any particular Church, or Provincial,
or National Synod, may make such Determinations or Constitutions contrary to
those of any present, or former Authority, or Synod, (or maintain them made
contrary to such Synod present or future reversing them) to which Authority
either Divine or Ecclesiastical Constitution has made them Subordinate. For,
without destroying Government, no Ecclesiastical Law can be dissolved but by
the same, or an equal Power to that, which made it; nor can a part, (suppose a
Church Arian or Donatist) as it thinks meet, from time to time, free it self
from the Acts of the whole: especially in such things, wherein it can show in
it self no particular difference, or disparity from the rest of the whole. And
therefore 4ly, They affirm that when Ecclesiastical Persons, or Synods, happen
to oppose one another, Christian Obedience is still due only to the Superior.

HEAD. VII. Concerning Ecclesiastical Supremacy.
Concerning Ecclesiastical Supremacy.
1. THE Catholic Church here on Earth is but one united State and Body (which
all seem to confess, in that when any separation is made, every side endeavors
to remove the cause thereof from themselves.) And it cannot reasonably be
denied, that All the Christian Churches in the world are capable of a
Monarchical Government under one Bishop, as well as several Nations under one
Emperor, or Secular Prince; and that such Government much conduces to the
Church's Peace, and to the preventing and suppression of Heresies and Schisms.
2. Catholics persuaded therein both by the Scriptures, and Tradition do
acknowledge; 1. That St. Peter was made by Christ President and Head of the
College of the Apostles, Matt. 16.19. Jo. 21.15. being compared with Gal. 2.7.
And 2dly, That the Bishop of Rome is his Successor in such Supremacy; as
likewise Successor to St. Paul the Great Apostle of the Gentiles; in that See,
wherein the two great Apostles last resided, anciently called (...) Seeds
Apostolica: And 3dly, That this Bishop has by Divine Right, or if it were only
by Ecclesiastical Constitution, and by ancient Tradition and Custom, it were
sufficient, committed to him a Supreme Authority over the Universal Church of
Christ here on Earth, in the calling of Councils and in the approving, and
confirming their Definitions, before they can be universally obligatory; and in
taking care in the Intervals of such Councils, of the due execution and
observance of their Decrees; and in receiving Appeals from all parts of the
Church in some matters of greater concernment. And 4ly, That, as no temporal
Power may lawfully change, or annul any Ecclesiastical Constitutions, or
Decrees made concerning the Government of the Church, or other matters merely
Spiritual; so neither may such temporal Power in particular abrogate this
Ecclesiastical Authority, tho it were only conferred on the Bishop of Rome by
the Church, so far as using a Jurisdiction merely Spiritual in Matters that are
so. 3dly, They willingly confess; That the Supreme Ecclesiastical Authority
cannot dispense with any Divine Law now (without such Dispensation) obliging;
but only with Ecclesiastical Laws: Nor has any Power over Princes, or their
Subjects in Temporal matters; but only in Spiritual over all those, whether
Princes or Subjects who are Members of the Church. 4ly, That there is no Decree
of the Church or Council obliging any to maintain this Supreme Magistrate of
the Church to be infallible in his Decrees; nor on the other side just cause
for any therefore to withdraw their obedience to his Decrees because they hold
him not infallible.

HEAD. VIII. Lastly, Concerning the necessary Amplitude of a lawful General
Council,
Concerning the necessary Amplitude of a lawful General Council.
IN which the Supreme Judgment of this united Body is placed.

1. It is not necessary to the composition of a lawful General Council that all
the Clergy of the Christian world be assembled therein; or all the Bishops of
this Clergy; or amongst the Bishops, some sent thither (the Delegates by the
rest) from all particular Churches professing Christianity. For 1 upon these
terms, the four first Councils cannot be allowed General. 2 Again; Thus it
would be in the power of any particular Church, in detaining its Bishops, to
hinder the Being, and the Benefit of a General Council. 3 Again, Heretical or
Schismatical Churches being no part of the Church Catholic, the absence of
their Bishops hinders not, but that the representative of the Church Catholic
in such Council may be still complete.

necessitated, from Poverty, distance of Place, Lets of temporal Magistrate; or
voluntary also, out of some unlawful respect. Which Absence of some few in
comparison of the whole, if it can hinder the necessary Generality of the
Council, it is probable, that there will never want, within the Confines also
of the Church Catholic, now spread through the Dominions of several Princes of
contrary interests, some either Bishops or Secular Governors that are averse
from the meeting of such Council in respect of some Circumstances belonging to
it; at least those of time, place, etc.

General (not to say here, that none less their such can justly be so) where
are present in person or by his Legates, the Bishop of the Prime Apostolic
See; (without whom no such Council can be held) and by their Lieutenants at
least, all or most of the other Patriarchs, such as are in Being, and have some
considerable part of the Church Catholic subjected unto them; [It is said most
of them; for the presence and concurrence of all of them was not thought
necessary neither in the third nor fourth of the allowed General Councils.] And
the Representatives of a considerably major part of the Catholic Provinces;
and more especially the Representatives of the largest and most dignified of
these Provinces.

Nice); or in any other deficiency of the representment of the greatest part of
the Church Catholic in this Assembly; yet when the Decrees, and Acts of such
smaller part being sent and made known to the Absent, are both confirmed by the
Bishop of Rome the Primate of the Patriarchs, and of the universal Church, and
accepted also by the much major part of the Catholic Provinces, tho these be
not accepted by some others of them, such Council ought either to be received
as General, or as equivalent thereto, and the Acts thereof are obligatory to
the whole Church Catholic. For seeing that if all the Provinces had convened
in one Place and Body; the disagreeing votes of some Provinces in such Councils
being fewer, and lesser could not have justly hindered, but that the contrary
votes of the other much major part would have stood in force and obliged all to
obedience, then neither can their dissent out of the Council be rationally
pretended to hinder the same. And what engagement the several Provinces of the
present Age have to such Council, the same also all future seem to have for the
same reason till an equal Authority to that which established such
Ecclesiastical laws reverse them (which in matters of necessary Faith will
never happen.) So the Arian Churches of the fifth Age are as much obliged to
the Definitions of the Nicene Council as those of the fourth: And in any Age
what means can there be of Preservation of Unity for matter of Faith in the
Church Catholic, if a few, in comparison, will neither be regulated by any one
Person or Head; Nor yet concluded by the much major part? Here by acceptance
of the much major part of Catholic Provinces is understood none other
necessary, then only a peaceful acquiescence in, and conformity to the Decrees
of such Councils; and a not declaring against them, tho such Acceptance
proceed not so far, as to the passing of an Act to this effect in Provincial
or National Synods. For, this last has not been done to those Acts of Councils
universally held General.

to decline Judgment, and for any to Appeal to a future Council, which can be
no larger than that past, to whose sentence they deny Submission, what is this
but to renounce the Authority they appeal to? To which may be added that any
Appeal to a future Council concerning such Controversies, wherein one knows
the unanimous Doctrine of the much major part of the present Christian
Churches, as well Eastern as Western, to be against him, seems bootless and
affording no relief. Because such Council can consist only of the Governors,
and so of the judgments of such particular Churches put to together; and
therefore such as the present Doctrine is of the major part of these Christian
Churches, and of the several Bishops presiding in them, especially now after
the cause, reasons, pretended demonstrations, of the dissenting Party for so
many years, divulged, pleaded, considered, such we may presume will be that of
the Council: For what can effect a Mutation of opinion in these Persons joined,
which alters nothing now, in them severed?

HEAD. IX. Concerning the Unity of the Church, and of its Government, and
Succession, in respect of Seculars.
Concerning the Unity of the Church, and of its Government and Succession, in
respect of Seculars.
subject to their distinct Superiors, and that the Church Catholic is but one
in many States.

Again; That the Civil State, entering into the Body of the Church, cannot
thereby justly take from it any of its former Rights, which are instated upon
it by our Lord; and which it did, or might justly exercise in such Civil State,
before this State submitted it self to the Christian Faith. Nor yet the Church,
entering into any State, take away any of the Civil Rights, or Authority,
thereof; which is given to the Governors of this State by God; and which it
was justly possessed of, before the Church entered into it. Takes away, I say,
none of these Rights, where Persons or Things, formerly Civil, do not, by their
Dedication to God, become Sacred. Nor the Church callenge any Temporal Right or
Authority, as to the use of the Secular Sword, which the State does not first
invest it with. a And, That, therefore, these two Bodies may always without any
jealousy, most peaceably consist together; Because the Principles of
Christianity do most entirely secure and preserve all the Secular Rights of
Princes: And, because in leaving only to Princes the use of the Temporal Sword,
the Church can never, in any difference that happens, be the invading, but only
the suffering Party.

2dly, in consequence hereof, They hold; That the Subordinations of
Ecclesiastical Government, such as are necessary for the exclusion of Heresies,
and Schisms, and conservation of the Churches Unity, Uniformity, and Peace,
throughout several Nations; And these which are instituted by Christ, or his
Apostles; or are afterward established in the Church Catholic by
Ecclesiastical Canons, made by the chief Representative thereof. (I mean, such
Canons, as can no way be justly pretended to do any wrong to the Civil
Government) They hold, That such Subordinations of Church Government cannot
justly be changed; nor the observance of such Constitutions be abrogated, or
prohibited by any Secular Supreme Christian or Heathen, within their own
Dominions.

Jerusalem to consult and give orders throughout the Churches concerning the
Abrogation of former Legal Ceremonses. So St. Paul in those times gave
Commission to Timothy for the of the Christian Church in Ephesus; to Titus for
the governing those in Creet; to ordain Clergy through the Cities there; and in
these Provinces to receive Accusations; hear Witnesses; promulgate the
Doctrines formerly received: silence False-teachers; excommunicate Offenders,
etc. 1 Timothy 1.3. -- 5.19. 2. Tim. 2.2. Tit. 1.5.11. -- 3.10. And so he gave
order also to them to hold public Assemblies, 1. Cor. 5.4. Heb. 10.25. for the
common Worship of God, and for the exercising of the forenamed Acts. And so the
Successors of these first Church Governors also used the same authority for
those three first Centuries in all dominions distributed into several
Provincial and Parochial [or Diocesan] Governments, tho the Secular Powers
frequently resisted, imprisoned, executed the Church Officers for it.] These
things therefore thus granted and allowed, hence they infer, that, as a Heathen
Prince cannot justly prohibit all Christian Clergy; so neither can a Christian
Prince, amongst this Clergy, justly prohibit all those, whom only these
Ecclesiastical Magistrates do judge Orthodox, and worthy, from professing, and
publishing the Orthodox Faith, and otherwise officiating in Divine matters
within his Dominions. Else, as where the Prince is Heathen; Christianity cannot
be propagated in his Territories against Infidelity; so where the Christian
Prince happens to be Heretical; (suppose an Arian, as the Emperor Constantius
was) the Truth of Christianity cannot be preserved in his dominions against
Heresy; or where he Schismatical, the Unity of the Churches Communion cannot be
preserved against the Sects, in his dominion. For Confirmation of these three
preceedent Theses see at large the Protestant Concessions in letter d. To which
is annexed an Answer to all their Pleas and Defenses made by them for a lawful
Reformation of Ecclesiastical Persons and Matters by the Secular Power.

temporal Jurisdictions descending on the Church, originally from the Secular
Power, so there are also other spiritual Jurisdictions, primitively belonging
to, and exercised by, the Church, and held from the donation of our Lord, such
as the forementioned, [ viz. To hold public Religious Assemblies; to
promulgate the Doctrines formerly delivered; to administer the Sacraments of
the Church; to receive Accusations; hear Witnesses; in point of Heresy and
Schism to bind, absolve; to silence False-teachers; excommunicate obstinate
Offenders; and that in all Nations, and within any Princes Dominions whatever.]
They accordingly affirm. 2dly, That the act only, of some inferior Clergy
against their Canonical Superiors, or of the minor part of Clergy against the
major can be no legitimate act of the Clergy, for conferring such spiritual
Jurisdictions; but the contrary to it is so.

5ly, They gather; That, tho Princes, for the greater security of their Civil
Government, and the many secular obligations which the Church has to them, may
nominate, and present to the Clergy and Ecclesiastical Magistrates such
persons, as they think most meet to receive from the Church these spiritual
Jurisdictions within their dominions: yet, if any Secular Power should possess
such person of these Jurisdictions in any Province either by his own sole
authority, or by the concurrence of some inferior Clergy, or minor part of such
Province, whom the major part of the Clergy of such Province, or the due
Ecclesiastical Superiors (to whom according to Church Canons the conferring of
such Jurisdiction does belong) to judge incapable or unfit; and therefore
refuse the collation of them on such a subject, They affirm such an Act of the
Prince, or Clergy assisting him, to be unlawful; and that it must needs open a
way to all Heresy and Schism, and dissolve the Faith, and Unity of the Church
Catholic. Neither, can any such Person so introduced, tho he be validly
ordained, justly exercise such spiritual Jurisdictions; neither do all such
people, as know, receive any salvifical benefit by, his unlawful administration
to them of the Church's Sacraments, or, at least, of the Sacrament of Penance,
and Absolution, by reason of a defect of a right disposition in the
Suscipients, and the great guilt they contract in applying themselves to such a
Person: unless this be done in a case of necessity, when there is no Catholic
Clergy to repair to for such Offices. So, had Novatianus, ordained and adhered
to by three, or four Bishops, been upon this settled by a Christian Emperor in
the Apostolic Chair against Cornelius, ordained and confirmed in these
Jurisdictions by all the rest of the Body of the Roman Episcopal Clergy; yet
Novatianus would, no less for this, have been still a Schismatic and an
Usurper.

de facto appoint none, because they see the possession of such place is by
violence hindered; yet will he, who, in the manner aforesaid, invades such
office, be as much an Usurper, as if he entered upon a Chair already possessed;
when it is only by reason of him, and such like, that those men are kept out,
who might rightly possess it; and it is to be reckoned the same delinquency, as
if such Chair had actually two Bishops.

yet higher, of the Patriarch himself; b it mattering little as to preserving
the Church's Unity, so long as the Metropolitans, and their actions, are
subjected to their Patriarch, whether one, or both, or the higher, without the
lower, do ratify the Election of the Bishops:) So that any Ordination made by
three or four Bishops of a Person wanting the foresaid Consent and Confirmation
from Superiors, tho it be valid, the Order is frustrate, from any Jurisdiction,
or lawful exercise thereof (in the same manner, as that of a true Bishop is
frustrate when afterward he is justly excommunicated) as being given, and
received, out of the Unity of the Church Catholic; and as exposing the Church
to all the divisions and factions, which the Lust of two or three
Ecclesiastics, assisted with a Secular Power seduced, may please to set up.

Literae Communicatoriae, or formatae of those Bishops, upon the sending to
them a Copy of their Faith (according as it was settled, and professed in the
several Articles thereof, exclusively to Heresies in those present times) and a
Testimonial of their legitimate Election. Which also may be said of the
Patriarchs themselves; who upon their sending the like Confessions and
Informations, received a Confirmation from the Primate of them, the Roman
Bishop, and the other Co-Patriarchs.

conceived to have any lawful Jurisdiction, unless possessed thereof by the
designation, and suffrage of the major part at least of the Clergy, and Bishops
of the Roman Province (in later times, for peace sake, tranferred upon the
Cardinals.) To which was usually added also the Communicatory Letters of other
Patriarchs and Primates, upon his professing to them if, need were, the
Catholic Faith of his Ancestors, and the legalness of his Election. And if, in
latter times, the manner of his Investiture with this Supreme Authority* and
Jurisdiction be not altogether the same; yet since we find in all ages a major
part of Christian Churches (such as are guilty of no ancient condemned Heresy)
adhering to the Roman, Bishop, and Faith, when as, meanwhile, several of the
other Patriarchs have been condemned for Heretics; we may presume also, that
not only the Clergy of the Roman Province, but all, or at least a major part
of, the Governors of these Churches are and have been, from age to age, ready
to afford the same Testimony to his just, and Canonical Authority. And these
seem to be the necessary Foundations and Pillars that support the Unity of the
Church Catholic.

a. a
Bellarm de Romans Pontif. 5. l. 3. c. Ex Scripturis nihil habemus nisi data
Pontifici claves regni caelorum: de clavibus regni terrarum nulla mentio fit,
Traditio Apostolica nulla. Quando Rex fit Christianus, non perdit regnum
terrarum, quod jam obtinebat. (Suitable to the Church Hymn, Crudelis Herodes
Deum Regem venire quid times? Non eripit Mortalia, etc.) And the same Cardinal
quoting a Passage out of an Epistle of Pope Nicholaus. Quicquid (says he)
Imperatores habent, dicet Nicholaus, a Christo eos habere. Peto igitur; vel
potest summus Pontifex auferre a Regibus and Imperatoribus hoc, tanquam Summus
ipse Rex, and Imperator, aut non potest? Si potest, ergo est major Christo; si
non potest ergo non habet vere potestatem regiam. Neither is any such power in
Temporals absolutely necessary to the Church in order to Spirituals, without
the exercise of which power the primitive Church, tho most grievously oppressed
by Secular States, yet enjoyed this Government in Spirituals perfect and entire.

And concerning the Obligation of the Clergy, also tho sequestered to God's
Service, to the obedience of the Civil Laws of Princes, together with their
other Fellow Subjects: Thus the same Cardinal, De Clericis, 1. l. 28. c.
Clerici, praeterquam quod Clerici sunt, sunt etiam Cives and Parts quaedam
Reipublicae politicae: igitur ut tales vivere debent civilibus legibus, non
sunt autem aliae, ut nunc ponimus, nisi quae a Politico Magistratu sunt latae;
igitur illas Clerici servare dehent, alioqui magna perturbatio and confusio in
Republica oriretur etc. quoting St. Chrysostom in 13. ad Romans Christi
Evangelio non tolli politicas leges, and ideo debere etiam Sacerdotes and
Monachos eis parere: and parere not only in a directive, but coactive way, not
only to be guided in their duty by the laws, but forced to obedience of it. But
this Coaction to proceed not from the Civil, but Ecclesiastical Magistrate to
whom the Civil in honor to the Clergy has remitted it, till in case of
heinous Crimes after degradation from the Sacerdotal Dignity, they are returned
to the Secular Justice.

b. b
See Canon Apostol. 35. Episcopos gentium singularum scire convenit, quis inter
eos primus habeatur: quem velut caput existiment, and nihil amplius praeter
ejus conscientiam gerant, quam illa sola singuli, quae parochiae propriae and
villis, quae sub ea sunt, competunt. Sed nec ille praeter omnium conscientiam
faciat aiiquid in eorum parochiis. Sic enim unanimitas erit.

Council. Nicen. Can. 4. Episcopum convenit maxim quidem ab omnibus, qui sunt
in Provincia Episcopis ordinari. Si autem hoc difficile fuerit aut propter
instantem necessitatem, aut propter itineris longitudinem, tribus tamen
omnimodis in idipsum convenientibus, and absentibus quoque pari modo
decernentibus, and per scripta consentientibus, tunc ordinatio celebretur.
Firmitas autem little quae geruntur per unamquamque Provinciam Metropolitano
tribuatur Episcopo. Can. 5. De his qui. Communione privantur seu ex clero seu
ex laico, ordine ab Episcopis per unamquamque Provinciam, sententia regularis
obtineat, ut hi qui abjiciuntur ab aliis non recipiantur.

Can. 6. Antiqua consuetudo servetur per Aegyptum, Lybiam, and Pentapolim, ita
ut Alexandrinus Episcopus horum omnium habeat potestatem; quia and urbis Romae
Episcopo parilis mos est: Similiter autem and apud Antiochiam, ceterasque
Provincias suis privilegia serventur Ecclesiis: illud autem generaliter clarum
est, quod si quis praeter sententiam Metropolitani fuerit factus Episcopus hunc
magna Synodus definivit Episcopum esse non oportere. Sin autem communi
cunctorum Decreto rationabili, and secundum Ecclesiasticam Regulam comprobato,
duo aut tres propter contentiones proprias contradicant, obtineat sententia
plurimorum.

I may spare the recital of any more, tho the same is frequently iterated in
the following Councils. See Conc. Laodic. c. 12. 2. Conc. Arelat. c. 5. 2.
Carth. c. 12. Rhegiense, c. 1. Cabilon. c. 10. Epist. Synodal, Conc. Romani sub
Siricio Papa, c. 1. and see what is said of this matter in Considerations on
the Council of Trent,. 10. etc. See likewise the Cautions used by the Council
of Trent, Sess. 24. De Reform. c. 1. And Sess. 22. De Reform. c. 2. concerning
the approbation of such persons as are nominated for Bishoprics by other
Ecclesiastical Superiors, and so the Collation of these Preferments upon them
by the Pope.

Thorndike in his Book of the Rights of the Church, 5. c. p. 248. Where he
mentions also some of the former Canons. The fourth Canon (says he) of the
Council of Nice, requires that all Bishops be ordained by a Council of the
Bishops of the Province [si fieri potest] which Council because it cannot
always be had, therefore it is Provided, [there] That two or three may do the
work the rest consenting and authorizing the Proceeding. And this is that which
the ordinance of the Apostles has provided to keep the visible Communion of
the whole Church in Unity. But when among the Bishops of any Province, part
consent to Ordination, part not; the Unity of the Church cannot be preserved
unless the consent of the whole follow the consent of the greater part. And
therefore; It seems that there can no valid Ordination be made, where the
greater number of the Bishops of the Province dissent; which is confirmed by
the Ordination of Novatianus for Bishop of Rome: which tho done by three
Bishops, yet was the foundation of that great Schism, because Cornelius was
ordained on the other side by sixteen.

After which in Application of these things to the Ordinations, made in the
Church England at the Reformation, he has this Reflection, Ibid. p. 250. Now
it is manifest (says he) that the Ordinations by which that Order (of Bishops)
is propagated in England at, and since, the Reformation, were not made by
consent of the greater part of the Bishops of each Province, but against their
mind tho they made no contrary Ordinations. And by the same means it is
manifest, that all those Ecclesiastical Laws, by which the Reformation was
established in England [ i. e. by these new Bishops were not made by a consent
capable to oblige the Church, if we set aside the Secular Power that gave force
unto that which was done [by the Bishops] contrary to that Rule wherein the
Unity of the Church consists. But in other parts the Reformation was so far
from being done by Bishops and Presbyters, or any consent which was able to
conclude the Church, by the constitution of the Church, that the very Order of
Bishops is laid aside and forgot, if not worse; i. e. detested among them. Upon
which precedent it sounds plausibly with the greatest part among us: that the
Unity of the whole being [thus] dissolved by the Reformation [ i. e. by the
Reformers either being against Bishops, or being Bishops made against the
consent of the former Bishops] the Unity of the Reformation cannot be
preserved, but by dissolving the Order of Bishops among us. The like he says
before, p. 248. If the Clergy of that time [ i. e. in the beginning of Qu.
Elizabeth's Reformation] had been supported in that Power which by the Premises
[set down and justified in his Book] is challenged on behalf of the Clergy,
this Reformation could not have been brought to pass.

Yet notwithstanding this Learned man thinks himself still secure in that
Communion; by imagining first that the Apostolical Succession of the governing
Clergy, which Canonically concludes the whole, has in several things violated
Christ's Laws [but, quo Judice will any such thing be cleared, See below,. 37.]
And 2dly, that in any such case the Secular Power may oppose their Authority,
the this established by the Apostles, viz. So often as either the Apostles
Ordinance or Christ's Laws must necessarily one of them be infringed.

g g
See Conc. Nicen. c. 6. Conc. Chalced. c. 28. And Act. 16. -- 8. Genesis Conc. c.
10.17.21. Where (in c. 17.) is mentioned the 6th Canon of the Nicene Council,
Qua pro causa and haec magna and sancta Synodus tam in seniori, and nova Roma
[Constantinopoli] quam in sede Antiochiae and Hierosolymorum, priscam
consuetudinem decernit in omnibus conservari; ita ut earum Praesules
universorum Metrapolitanorum, qui ab ipsis promoventur, and sive per manus
impositionem, sive per Pallii dationem, Episcopalis dignitatis firmitatem
accipiant, habeant potestatem; viz. ad convocandum eos, urgente necessitate, ad
Synodalem Conventum: vel etiam ad coercendunt illos and corrigendum, cum fama
eos super quibusdam delictis-forsitan accusaverit.

Of which Canon thus Dr. Field, p. 518. Patriarchs were by the Order of the 8th
General Council, Can. 17. to confirm the Metropolitans subject unto them either
by the imposition of hands or giving the Pall. And l. 5. c. 37. p. 551.
'Without the Patriarchs consent none of the Metropolitans subject unto them,
might be ordained. And what they bring (says he) proves nothing that we ever
doubted of; For we know the Bishop of Rome has the right of confirming the
Metropolitans within the Precincts of his own Patriarchship, as likewise every
other Patriarch had. And thus Bishop Bramhal, ( Vindic. c. 9. p. 259. etc.)
What power the Metropolitan had over the Bishops of his own Province, the same
had a Patriarch over the Metropolitans, and Bishops of sundry Provinces within
his own Patriarchate. And afterward, Wherein then consists Patiarchal
Authority? In ordaining their Metropolitans, or confirming them.

d. d
Bishop Carleton in his Treatise of Jurisdiction Regal and Episcopal, 4. c. p.
42. External Jurisdiction is either definitive or mulctative. Authority
definitive in matters of Faith and Religion belongs to the Church. Mulctative
power is understood either as it is with coaction [ i. e. using Secular force]
or as it is referred to Spiritual Censures. As it stands in Spiritual
Censures it is the right of the Church, and was practiced by the Church when
without Christian Magistrate, and since. But coactive Jurisdiction was always
understood to belong to the Civil Magistrate, whether Christian or Heathen.

Ibid. 1. c. p. 9. As for Spiritual Jurisdiction standing in Examination of
Controversies of Faith, judging of Heresies, deposing of Heretics,
Excommunications of notorious and stubborn offenders, Ordination of Priests and
Deacons; Institution and Collation of Benefices, and Spiritual Cures this we
reserve entire to the Church; which Princes cannot give to, nor take from, the
Church.

And by this Power (says he, 4. c. p. 39.) without Coaction, the Church was
called, Faith was planted, Devils were subdued, the Nations were taken out of
the power of darkness, the world reduced to the obedience of Christ; by this
Power, without coactive Jurisdiction, the Church was governed for 300 years
together. But if it be enquired what was done when the Emperors were Christian;
and when their coactive Power came in?] The Emperors (says he, p. 178.) never
took upon them by their Authority to define matters of Faith and Religion, that
they left to the Church: But when the Church had defined such Truths against
Heretics, and had deposed such Heretics; then the Emperors concurring with
the Church by their Imperial Constitutions, did by their coactive Power give
strength to the Canons of the Church,

Thorndike ( Rights of the Church, 4. c. p. 234.) The Power of the Church is so
absolute and depending on God alone, that if a Sovereign professing
Christianity should forbid the profession of that Faith, or the Exercise of
those Ordinances which God has required to be served with [The judgment of
which Faith and Ordinances what they are, Protestants also affirm to belong to
the Clergy] or even the Exercise of that Ecclesiastical Power which shall be
necessary to preserve the Unity of the Church, it must needs be necessary for
those, that are trusted with the Power of the Church, not only to disobey the
Commands of the Sovereign, but to use that Power, which their Quality in the
Society of the Church gives them to provide for the subsistence thereof without
the assistance of Secular Powers. A thing manifestly supposed by all the
Bishops of the ancient Church in all those actions, wherein they refused to
obey their Emperors seduced by Heretics [refused to obey them in forbearing to
teach still, and publish the Catholic Doctrine, when prohibited by them] and
to suffer their Churches to be regulated by them, to the prejudice of
Christianity. Which actions whosoever justifies not, he will lay the Church
open to ruin, whenever the Sovereign Power is seduced by Heretics. And such
a difference falling out [ i. e. between Prince and Clergy in Church matters]
as that to particular persons it cannot be clear who is in the right; It will
be requisite (says he) for Christians in a doubtful case, at their utmost
perils to adhere to the Guides of the Church against their lawful Sovereign,
tho to no other effect, than to suffer [if the Prince impose it] for the
Exercise of their Christianity, and the maintenance of the Society of the
Church in Unity. See the same Author, Epilog. 1. l. 19. c. The contents whereof
touching this subject, he has briefly expressed thus. That that Power which
was in the Churches under the Apostles can never be in any Christian Sovereign.
That the interest of Secular Power, in determining matters of Faith,
presupposes the Society of the Church, and the Act of it. And there he gives
reasons why the Church is to decide matters of Faith, rather than the State;
supposing neither to be infallible. Ibid. ( c. 20. p. 158.) he says, That he,
who disturbs the Communion of the Church, remains punishable by the Secular
power (to inflict temporal penalties) not absolutely because it is Christian;
but upon supposition that this temporal power maintains the true Church. And
afterward. That the Secular Power is not able of it self to do any of those
Acts, which the Church ( i.e. those who are qualified by, and for the Church)
are qualified by virtue of their Commission from Christ to do, without
committing the sin of Sacrilege (in seizing into its own hands. the Powers,
which by God's Act, are constituted and therefore consecrated and dedicated to
his own service) not supposing the free Act of the Church, without fraud and
violence [concurring] to the doing of it. Now among the Acts, and Powers
belonging to the Church (which he calls a Corporation) by divine right and
appointment, he names these 1. l. 16. c. p. 116. The Power of making Laws
within themselves [and then, I suppose of publishing them (made) among all the
Subjects of the Church in whatever Princes Dominions; else why make them?] of
electing Church Governors (of which see 3. l. 32. c. p. 398.) and of
Excommunicating, and (3. l. 32. c. p. 385.) The Power to determine all matters,
the determination whereof is requisite to maintain the Communion of Christians
in the service of God: and [the Power] to oblige Christians to stand to that
determination under pain of forfeiting that Communion. The Power of holding
Assemblies [which must be by meeting together in some place or other, and by
some Church Authority calling them] Of which he speaks thus, 1. l. 8. c. p. 53.
I must not omit to allege the Authority of Councils, and to maintain the Right
and Power of holding them, and the obligation, which the Decrees of them,
regularly made, is able to create, to stand by the same Authority of the
Apostles.

And afterward, I, that pretend the Church to be a Corporation founded by God
upon a Privilege of holding visible Assemblies for the common Service of God,
notwithstanding any secular force prohibiting the same, must needs maintain by
consequence that the Church has Power in it self to hold all such Assemblies,
as shall be requisite to maintain the common Service of God and the Unity in
it, and the order of all Assemblies that exercise it. Thus Mr. Thorndike.

Tailor in Episcopacy asserted (published by the Kings Authority) after that (
p. 236.) he has laid this ground for the security of Secular Princes; That
since that Christ has professed that his Kingdom is not of this world, that
Government which he has constituted de novo does no way make any Entrenchment
on the Royalty, has these Passages, p. 237. he says, That those things which
Christianity (as it prescinds from the interest of the Republic) has
introduced, all them and all the causes emergent from them, the Bishop is Judge
of. Such are causes of Faith; ministration of Sacraments and Sacramentals,
Subordination of inferior Clergy to their Superiors, Rites, Liturgies, etc.
As for the Rights of the Secular Power he lays down this Rule, p. 236.
Whatsoever the Secular Tribunal did take Cognizance of, before it was
Christian, the same it takes notice of, after it is Christened. And these are,
all Actions civil, all public Visitations of Justice, all breach of municipal
Laws. These the Church (says he) has nothing to do with, unless by the favor
of Princes these be indulged to it [these by their favor then, indulged, but
not so the former.] Accordingly, p. 239. he says, Both Prince and Bishops have
indicted Synods, in several ages, upon the exigente of several occasions, and
have several Powers for the engagements of clerical obedience and attendance
upon such Solemnities. That the Bishops Jurisdiction has a Compulsory, derived
from Christ only, viz. Inflictions of Censures by Excommunications, or other
minores plagae, which are in order to it And that the King is supreme of the
Jurisdiction, viz. that part of it, which is the external Compulsory [ i. e. as
he says before] to superadd a temporal penalty upon Contumacy, or some other
way abet the Censures of the Church. P. 243. he says, That in those cases in
which by the law of Christ Bishops may, or in which they must use,
Excommunication, no Power can forbid them. For what power Christ has given
them, no man can take away. And p. 244. That the Church may inflict her
Censures upon her Delinquent Children without asking leave; that Christ is her
(...) for that, he is her warrant and security. And p 245. That the King's
supreme Regal Power, in causes of the Church consists in all things, in which
the Priestly office is not precisely by God's law, employed for regiment and
care of Souls [I suppose those he named before, p. 237.] and in these also,
that all the external Compulsory and Jurisdiction [as he expounds (...)
before, p. 239.] is the King's. And lastly, p. 241. he says, That the
Catholic Bishops [in time of Arian Emperors] made humble and fair remonstrance
of the distinction of Powers and Jurisdiction; that as they might not entrench
upon the Royalty, so neither betray the right, which Christ had concredited to
them to the encroachment of an exterior Jurisdiction and Power [ i. e. the
Royal.]

Bramhal frequently stateth the Primacy or Supremacy of Princes in
Ecclesiastical matters thus. Schism Guarded, p. 61. he says. All that our
Kings assume to themselves is the external Regiment of the Church by coactive
Power, to be exercised by persons capable of the respective branches of it. And
p. 63. quoting the 37 Article of the Church of England, where the King's
Supremacy is expressed thus. To preserve or contain all Estates and Orders
committed to their trust, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil, in their
duties, and restrain contumacious offenders with the Civil Sword [in which
restraining offenders, and containing all in their duty with the Civil Sword,
the Prince is willingly acknowledged by Catholics the, and the only Supreme]
he comments thus upon it. You see the Power is Political, the Sword is
Political, all is Political; our Kings leave the Power of the Keys, and
Jurisdiction Spiritual, purely to those to whom Christ has left them. And in
answer to another Passage in the 37th Article, and also in the Oath of
Supremacy, wherein the Bishop of Rome is denied to have any Jurisdiction in the
Kingdom of England; he distinguishes between a Jurisdiction, (suppose to
excommunicate, absolve, degrade) purely Spiritual governing Christians in the
interior Court of Conscience, and extending no further, and an exterior
coactive Jurisdiction exercised in the exterior Ecclesiastical Courts; the
exterior Coaction of which, he says, is originally Political, and so belonging
only to, and held from, the Prince, His words are, Schism Guarded, p. 160. Our
Ancestors [in denying any Jurisdiction that is Patriarchal to the Pope] meant
the very same thing that we do: our only difference is in the use of the words,
Spiritual Authority or Jurisdiction, which we understand properly of
Jurisdiction purely Spiritual, which extends no further then the Court of
Conscience; But by Spiritual Authority or Jurisdiction they did understand
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the exterior Court, which, in truth is partly
Spiritual, partly Political. The interior habit, which enableth an
Ecclesiastical Judge to excommunicate or absolve, or degrade, is merely
Spiritual; but the exterior Coaction is originally Political. So our Ancestors
cast out external Ecclesiastical coactive Jurisdiction; the same do we; They
did not take away from the Pope the power of the Keys, or Jurisdiction purely
Spiritual: no more do we. And Ibid. p. 119. We acknowledge that Bishops were
always esteemed the proper Judges of the Canons both for composing of them, and
executing of them, but with this caution, that to make them Laws [he means such
laws, for observance of which secular coaction might be used] the confirmation
of the Prince was required; and to give the Bishop a coactive Power to execute
them, the Prince's Grant or Concession was needful [So that Bishops may both
compose and execute Canons in the Kings Dominions, and use the Ecclesiastical
Censures by their own Authority, without the Prince; only they can use no
Coaction by pecuniary, or corporal punishments etc. in the Execution of them
without his; which is granted to him.]

Again; Vindic. of the Church of England, p. 269. he says, That in Cases that
are indeed Spiritual or merely Ecclesiastical, such as concern the Doctrine of
Faith or Administration of the Sacraments, or the ordaining or degrading of
Ecclesiastical persons, Sovereign Princes have (and have only) an
Architectonical Power to see, that Clergymen do their Duties [ i. e. not what
he, but what their Superiors in Spiritual matters, judge to be so.] And Schism
Guarded, p. 136. We have nothing concerning any Jurisdiction merely Spiritual
in all the Statutes of Henry the Eighth. They do all intend coactive
Jurisdiction in the exterior Court of the Church. We give the supreme
Judicature of Controversies of Faith to a General Council, and the supreme
Power of Spiritual Censures which are coactive, only in the Court of Conscience
[and suitably, in the interval of General Councils he must allow to National
Synods the same Judicature, and Censures, abstracting from the Prince.] Ibid.
p. 92. he says, We see the Primitive Fathers did assemble Synods, and make
Canons before there were any Christian Emperors. [And then may not they do the
same still? Both assemble Synods, as the Apostles did at Jerusalem, Act. 15.
And make Canons: and then also publish them made, as the Apostles did, when an
Heretical Prince concurreth not with, or also opposes them? Provided that
there be no apparent danger to the Prince or State, of any Sedition by such
meeting.] But they had no coactive Power to compel any man against his will.
[This therefore is the Power, which Emperors when become Christian, and her
Subjects, bring in, and add to the Church, without taking away from it any of
that Power, which before, from Christ's time, it was possessed of under Heathen
Princes.] The Sum is, He challenges for the Prince only a double coactive
Power with his temporal Sword, which is either executed by himself, or
committed to the Church Governors, one for constraining, of the Laity to the
obedience of the Church, the other of the inferior Clergy to the obedience of
their Superiors in all Spiritual matters.

Fern ( Answer to Champny, 9. c. p. 284.) It is a mistake, that the Prince, by
his supreme Power in Spiritual and Ecclesiastical things, is made supreme Judge
of Faith, and Decider of all Controversies thereunto belonging, and may ordain
what he thinks fit in matters of Religion. Who also in his Discourse of
Presbytery and Episcopacy, p. 19. Grants, That no Secular Prince can justly
prohibit, within his Dominions the exercise of Ordination and of Judicature, so
far as the Keys left by Christ in his Church do extend; nor prohibiting, is to
be obeyed, and Christ's Substitutes herein being denied the assistance of the
Civil Power, are to proceed without it. And ( Exam. Champny, p. 290.) says,
That the Bishops and chief Pastors of the Church are the immediate, proper and
ordinary Judges in defining and declaring what the Laws of Christ be, for
Doctrine and Discipline. That they have a coercive Power in a spiritual
restraint of those, that obstinately gainsay. So Dr. Fern.

Mason de Ministerio Anglicano, 3. l. 3. c. asks the Question. Quis enim
nostrum unquam affirmavit Principes in causes Fidei and Religionis supremos
esse Cognitores and Judices? De hac a Cardinale Bellarmino, and aliis
Pontificiis, Ecclesiae Anglicanae illata injuria sic olim conquestus est
Doctissimus Whitakerus, etc.

Field, Of the Church, p, 667. The State of the Christian Church (the good
things it enjoys, and the felicity it promises, being Spiritual) is such,
that it may stand, tho not only forsaken, but greatly oppressed, by the great
men of the world. And therefore it is by all resolved on: That the Church has
her Guides and Rulers distinct from them that bear the Sword, and that there is
in the Church a Power of convocating these her Spiritual Pastors to consult of
things concerning her welfare, tho none of the Princes of the world do favor
her. And p. 81. Touching Errors of Faith, or Oberrations in the performance of
God's worship and service (says he); There is no question but that Bishops and
Pastors of the Church, to whom it pertains to teach the Truth, are the
ordinary and fittest Judges; and that ordinarily and regularly Princes are to
leave the judgment thereof unto them. And below, We do not attribute to our
Princes, with their Civil Estates, power newly to adjudge any thing to be
Heresy without the concurrence of the State of their Clergy; but only to judge,
in those matters of Faith that are resolved on, [ i. e. in former Councils.]
according to former resolutions. And the same much what is said by Dr. Heylin,
Reformation Justified, p. 80, 81. in affirming, That if the Reformation be in
such Points of Doctrine, as have not been before defined in such manner [ i. e.
in a General Council, or in a particular Council universally received] The King
only with a few of his Bishops and learned Clergy, tho never so well studied in
the Point disputed, can do nothing in it. That belongs only to the whole Body
of the Clergy in their Convocation, rightly called and constituted. [By these
Expressions the Reformation, allowed to Christian Princes, seems only of
Errors, first declared such, either by the Resolutions of former lawful
Councils, or of a new lawful Council of Clergy first had; which will easily be
granted them. Provided that Councils be understood in their due Subordinations,
and according to their due votes; not the Decree of some inferior Synod
preferred by such Prince to the Decree of a Superior, nor the vote of a Minor
part in a Synod (or of some Clergy out of it) before that of a Major part, But
if they mean, the Princes taking the Guidance of some Council against a
Superior, or of some part of the Clergy opposed by a Major, this is only
deluding the Reader, and in effect granting nothing.

Field of the entering of any person into, or his Deposition from the
Ecclesiastical Ministry, Ibid. p. 681. It is resolved that none may ordain [I
add or force the Clergy to ordain] any to serve in the work of Ministry, but
the Spiritual Pastors and Guides of the Church. 2dly, That none may judicially
degrade, or put any one lawfully admitted from his Degree and Order but they
alone; [else had the Secular Magistrate no other Power, yet, if he may place,
and displace Clergy at his pleasure, within his Dominions, he may hereby
advance or depress what Sect of Religion, what Doctrines, what Discipline he
pleases.] Next of the Power of the Prelates of the Church to call Councils
independently on Princes, p. 668. It is evident (says he) that there is a
Power in Bishops, Metropolitans, Primates and Patriarchs, to all Episcopal,
Provincial, National, and Patriarchal Synods, and that neither so depending on,
nor subject to, the Power of Princes, but that when they are Enemies to the
Faith, they may exercise the same without their consent and privity; and
subject them, that refuse to obey their Summons, to such punishments as the
Canons of the Church do prescribe in cases of such contempt, or wilful
negligence. To which may be added that of Bishop Bilson, Government of Christ's
Church, 16. c. When the Magistrate does not regard, but rather afflict the
Church, as in times of Infidelity and Heresy, who shall then assemble the
Pastors of any Province to determine matters of doubt or danger? [To which
Question he Answers] The Metropolitan. [ When they are Enemies to the Faith
(says Dr. Field) I understand him, either when Enemies to the Christian Faith,
as Heathen Princes; or if Christian, to the Catholic Faith, as Heretical
Princes; for the Church has as well need of using these her Privileges against
Heretical Princes, as Heathen: otherwise the later may do her as much mischief
as the former.

Next; what is said here of calling Councils without such Princes consent, I
apply to the exercise of all those particulars, which are allowed to be the
Churches Rights, and to have been exercised by her under Heathen Princes, as in
this Council assembled the making Decrees in points of Doctrine controverted,
and Canons for her Government; The publishing and requiring obedience thereto
from all her Subjects, in whatever Princes Dominions, and punishing with the
Church Censures the Refractory.]

Andrews, Tort. Tort. p. 377. also seems well content. Who (in answer to
Bellarmin, saying the Authority alleged out of the New Testament to be given
to Princes, was to the Heathen, who yet had no Primacy in Ecclesiasticals, and
therefore these places served nothing for proving such a Primacy) grants
neither Infidel Princes, nor yet Christian, if Heretical, to have an
Ecclesiastical Primacy over God's Church. Primatum ad Reges infideles pertinere
non probant [these Texts]: Non sanc magis ad hos in novo, quam ad Ahasuerum,
vel Nabuchodonosor, in veteri -- Interim sit vel Infidelis, sit vel Haereticus,
oretur pro co etc. And, Non id agitur, ut Ecclesiae Persecutores, Tiberii,
Caii, Ecclesiae Gubernatores habeantur. Tum demum vero Ecclesiae Gubernacula
capessant, cum conversi ad fidem fuerint [ fidem, i. e. Christianam; if
Heathen: Catholicam, if Heretics.] After him Mason, De Ministerio Anglicano,
3. l. 5. c. In case not only of Infidelity but of Heresy, or yet, if I mistake
him not, in any other eminent Defect of Sanctity, denies to Princes at least
the Exercise (whatever remote Power he places in them) of some branches of
their Primacy Regibus (says he) qui vel non sunt Christiani; vel si
Christiani, non tamen orthodoxi; vel si orthodoxi, non tamen Sancti; Primatus
competit quidem sed secundum quid; id est quoad authoritatem, non quoad rectum
and plenum usum authoritatis; quoad officium, non quoad illustrem executionem
officii [None such therefore may execute any Ecclesiastical Primateship, so as
by virtue of it, to do any thing against the Acts of the Clergy, in Spirituals;
unless this Author seek some refuge in the Epithetes, rectus, plenus, and
illustris.]

Andrews and Mason, See Dr. Hammond in his Answer to S. W. Schism disarmed, p.
203. who to the Drs words, ( Schism, p. 125.) that the Canons of the Councils
have mostly been set out, and received their Authority by the Emperors,
replied. That never was it heard, that an Emperor claimed a negative voice in
making the Canon of a Council valid, which concerned matters purely Spiritual.
To which Dr. Hammond returns this, For the appendage etc I need not reply,
having never pretended, nor seemed to pretend, what he charge on me,
concerning the Emperors negative Voice in the Council; what I pretended I spoke
out in plain words: That the Canons have been mostly set out, and received
their Authority by the Emperors, and this receiving their Authority is (I
suppose) in order to their powerful Reception in their Dominions: and this he
acknowledges, and so we are friends. [By Dr. Hammond's consent then, A
negative Voice the Prince has not to reverse, or contrary the Church Canons in
Spiritual matters; only thus he may be said to give Authority to them, by
causing a powerful reception of them in his Dominions. Powerful, i.e. by
assisting the Church in the Execution of them with this coactive Power.]

And elsewhere, Answer to Schism disarmed, p. 164. he grants in the Controversy
of Erecting Metropoles. That if the Prince exercises this Power so, as to
thwart known Canons and Customs of the Church; this certainly is an abuse: And
afterward says, It is invalid, as doing wrong to another in those Privileges
he enjoys by the Canon.

Grotius, Rivet. Apol. discuss. p. 70. (well seen in the Imperial Rights) not
long before his death Imperatorum and Regum aliquod esse officium etiam circa
res Ecclesiae in confesso est. At non tale, quale in Saeculi negotiis, ad
tutandos, non ad violandos Canones jus hoc comparaturs est. Nam cum Principes
filii sunt Ecclesiae, non debent vi in matrem uti, omne corpus Sociale jus
habet quaedam constituendi, quibus membra obligenter; hoc jus etiam Ecclesiae
competere apparet, Act. 15.28. Heb. 13.17. Where he quotes Facundus, saying of
Martianus, Cognovit ille quibus in causis uteretur Principis potestate, and in
quibus exhiberet obedientiam Christiani. And obedite Praepositis, says he)
etiam Regibus dictum.

James, and King Charles the First, in his Defense of the Right of Kings
against Cardinal Perron, p. 427, 428. It is granted (says he) That if a King
shall command any thing directly contrary to God's Word, and tending to the
Subversion of the Church, that Clericks in this case ought not only to dispense
with Subjects for their Obedience, but also expressly to forbid their obedience,
for it is always better to obey God, than Man. Howbeit in all other matters,
whereby the Glory and Majesty of God is not impeached, it is the duty of
Clericks to ply the people with wholesome Exhortations to constant obedience,
etc. [Therefore the Clergy are the Judges for Christ's Flock, whatever Princes
Subjects they be, when the Prince commands any such thing: which how it
consists with another judgment of the Prince concerning the Doctrines of the
Clergy, whether these command any thing against God's Word; a judgment not only
discretive for himself, but prescriptive also to his Subjects, in prohibiting,
that no such Doctrine be taught to them by the Clergy, I cannot divine; unless
there can be two ultimate Lawgivers, in the same matters, over the same
persons; both whom delivering contrary things, they may be obliged to obey.]
Again a little before. I grant (says he) That it is for Divinity Schools to
Judge, How far the Power of the Keys does stretch: I grant again, That Clericks
both may, and ought also to display the Colors and Ensigns of their Censures
against Princes; who violating their public and solemn Oath [The King speaks
of Christian Princes] Do raise and make open War against Jesus Christ [he means
in maintaining some Heresy, and opposing his Church]: I grant yet again, that
in this case they need not admit Laics [Doth he not here, also include
Princes?] to be of their Council, nor allow them any scope or liberty of
Judgment, yet all this does not hinder Prince nor People, from taking care of
the preservation of their own Rights and Estates [That the Clergy pass nothing
prejudicial to these Rights, for which there is all good reason. Again; The
Emperors (says he) in making use of their Authority in Councils took not upon
them to be infallible Judges of Doctrine, but only that they might see and
judge, whether Bishops did propound nothing in their Convocations and
Consultations, but most of all in their Determinations, to undermine the
Emperors Authority, to disturb the tranquillity of the Commonwealth [ i. e. in
their meddling in civil affairs] and to cross the Determinations of precedent
Councils. Thus King James.

Charles in his last Paper in the Isle of Wight, p. 3. Speaking of the several
Branches of Episcopal Authority practiced under Heathen Princes. Tho the
Bishops (says he) in the times of Pagan Princes had no outward coercive Power
over men's Persons or Estates [as also no more have they now, except from, and
during, the Princes pleasure] yet in as much as every Christian man, when he
became a Member of the Church, did ipso facto, and by that his own voluntary
Act, put himself under their Government [So Christian men do still, Princes and
all They [then] exercised a very large Power of Jurisdiction in Spiritualibus;
In making Ecclesiastical Canons, receiving Accusations, conventing the accused,
examining Witnesses, judging of Crimes [against the Evangelical Law] excluding
such men as they found guilty of scandalous offenses, from the Lord's Supper,
enjoining Penances upon them, casting them out of the Church, receiving them
again upon their Repentance, etc. [I subsume, the same making of Ecclesiastical
Laws and Canons, the same Examinations, Excommunications, and casting out of
the Church, etc. are, and must be, allowed still, in Christian States also
being things, which (as Bishop Carleton) Princes can neither give to, nor take
from, the Church. And therefore they must also be allowed all those means,
absolutely without which no such things can be done. As convening, keeping
intelligence one with another, Promulgation of their Acts and Decrees, etc. And
when the Christian Prince or State becomes to them such, as the Heathen were,
in his withholding or prohibiting these necessary things, then may they resume
that behavior, as was practiced formerly, in Heathenisme, i. e. do these
things without the States leave, or against its Prohibitions.]



The Ecclesiastical Supremacy, that is commonly attributed to the Civil Power,
seems to consist chiefly in all, or in some one of these three.

1. His strengthening and promoting the Acts of the Church and its Governors,
with the assistance of the Secular Sword: and his making their laws, the Laws
also of the State. One Branch of which power consequently is, The opposing and
suppressing by the hand of Civil Justice, any such Ecclsiastical Acts of
Inferior and Uncanonical, and illegal Persons or Synods, as go against the
Superior, and legal, (the Church being always the Judge in this matter, what
Acts are against, and disowned by her) which is indeed the Princes not
opposing, but defending the Church.

2dly, His opposing and abrogating some of the Churches Canons and Laws of
Government, in purely Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Affairs (for in Civil, all
Princes, Heathen also and Heretical may rescind any such Ecclesiastical Acts,
as do any prejudice to the temporal Power, which God has committed immediately
into their hands) as pretended contrary to the Law of Christ, or to Christian
liberty, etc.

3. Or 3dly, His declaring and reforming, against their Decrees in matters of
Faith and Manners as some way contrary to God's Truth, and the Doctrine of the
Scriptures.

Mason, De Ministerio Anglicano, p. 313. in Nabuchadonosor, Cyrus, Darius,
under the Old Testament Tiberius, Adrian, Antoninus Pius, etc. And afterward of
several of the Gothic Kings under the New.

For the other two, These Protestant Authors forecited grant, That so often as
any Prince falls into Heresy, or in general opposes the Christian Faith, the
exercise of such Supremacy concerning matters of Faith, and Church Government
returns to the Church alone, as it was in the Church alone, before Constantine.
Again the judgment of Heresy (and consequently when Princes are Heretical, and
so fallen from the exercise of any such Supremacy) is by several of the former
quotations, See before,. 21, 22. etc. granted to belong to the Church. But
suppose the Christian Prince to be also Catholic, yet the limitations of
several of the forecited Authors seem hardly to allow him any such Branches of
Supremacy. For touching Errors of Faith, or Aberrations in the performance of
God's worship and service, Dr. Field, before. 20. says, That ordinarily and
regularly Princes are to leave the judgment thereof to the Bishops and Pastors
of the Church, and in these things to judge according to their former
resolutions; or in any new matter, whereof no former Definition has been made,
the Prince (says Dr. Heylin, before. 20.) is to follow the new Resolutions
that shall be made not of some few, tho never so learned, but of the whole body
of his Clergy, and by consequence to follow also, not that, but the Resolution
of a higher Body of Clergy, if this oppose that of his Clergy; the one being
necessarily subordinate to, and conclusive by, the other for preservation of
the Unity and Peace of the Catholic Church. So Bishop Bramhal grants; That the
Bishops were always esteemed the proper Judges of the Canons [ i. e. such, as
related only to Ecclesiastical not Civil, matters] both for the composing and
executing of them. Only to make these Canons Laws [ i. e. accompanied with a
politic and coactive Power] the Prince's Confirmation was required. And Mr.
Thorndike says before,. 15. That should the Prince forbid it, yet the Church
still ought to use that Ecclesiastical Power therein, that shall be necessary
to preserve the Unity of the Church [of which necessity also they, not the
Prince, are by our Lord constituted the Judges.] The like says Dr. Tailor of
the Subordination of inferior Clergy to their Superiors, and Bishop Bishop
Carleton before,. 14. of the Ordinations of the Clergy, and Institution and
Collation of Benefices, and Spiritual Cures; that they are proper Laws and
Rights of the Church, not to be changed or taken away by Princes.

Henry the Eighth's days, to project a Repeal of any of those forementioned
ancient Ecclesiastical Customs and Canons, which we find made or practiced by
the Church under the Heathen Emperors, even against their frequent Edicts (yet
which could not then have been lawfully so used, if any of these had encorached
on Civil Rights; in any of which Civil Rights the Heathen Prince might claim as
much lawful Power as the Christian can.) And also, which we find still
continued by the Church under Christian Emperors, without asking their leave to
Decree such things, or substituting their Decrees to their Authority, or
depending on their consent only with humbly desiring their assistance, yet so
as without it, resolved to proceed in the Execution thereof, as under Heathen;
of which we have many Experiments under the Christian Emperors, when these
Arian; yet which things the Church could not lawfully have done, were any of
these entrenching upon the Princes Right, now at least when Christian. For
Example, the 6th Canon of Nice; and 5th Canon of Constantinopolitan Council;
and 3d, 4th. 7th. 17th. Canon of Council. Sardic. concerning the Subordinations
and Appeals of Clergy, would have been an usurpation of an unjust Authority, if
the Subordination of Episcopal Sees, and Erecting of Patriarchs had belonged to
the Prince. When also we find them excluding Princes, tho Christian and
Catholic, either from the judging in matters of Faith, and from prohibiting
here that any such Spiritual Food (to use Bishop Andrews Expression, Resp. ad
Apol. p. 332.) should be set before their Subjects, of which themselves first
did not like the taste [which surely is judging of the good or evil of such
food; or judging in merely Ecclesiastical causes, in any way of opposition, or
review of the Churches Decrees, I mean the most supreme that may be had in it.]

Ambrose, 2. l. Epist. 13. ad Valentin. with the Emperor Valentinian, presuming
to examine Church Controversies, and calling them before his Tribunal. Quando
audisti, Clementissime Imperator, in causa fidei Laicos de Episcopo judicasse?
Not, Quando audisti imberbem necdum baptizatum ex matris arbitrio pendentem, as
Bishop Andrews, Resp. ad Apol. c. 1. p. 29. and others explain it; but, Quando
auaisti Laicum, [applicable to any Secular Prince] de Episcopo judicasse? or,
if Bishop Andrews will, dedisse idoneos cognitores, i. e. if they such, as
Valentinian shall choose for idoneos; if these chosen be not Bishops, or
Bishops of Valentinian's appointment, and not his Canonical Superiors; but
then, these Canonical Superiors are given for the Bishops Judges, not by
Vulentinian, but by the Church. But else, who cannot see clearly, that, dare
idoneos cognitores, i. e. such as the Emperor thinks fit, which Bishop Andrews
pleads for, as the Emperors right; and ipse Imperator judicare which St.
Ambrose, denies, comes all to one? The same Father goes on. Quis est qui abnuat
in causa fidei, in causa in-quam fidei, Episcopos solere de Imperatoribus
Christianis, non Imperatores de Episcopis judicare? Pater tuus, vir, Deo
favente, maturioris aevi, dicebat; Non est meum judicare inter Episcopos, etc.
And thus St. Athanasius, Ep. and Solitar. vitam agent. Expostulates with
Constantius, interposing, as to the Churches Definitions about Arianisme, and
her Canons, about judging and censuring of Bishops, opposing such Bishops as he
took for Enemies of the Divine Truth, and countenancing those inferior
Ecclesiastical Synods which he fancied to be in the right, against the Superior
and against the Canons. Quando a condito aevo auditum est, quod judicium
Ecclesiae authoritatem suam ab Imperatore accepit? aut quando unquam hoc [a
small number of Bishops joined with Constantius] pro judicio agnitum est?
Plurimae ante-hac Synodi fuere, multa judicia Ecclesiae habita sunt. Sed neque
Patres ^istiusmodi res Principi persuadere conati sunt, nec Princeps se in
rebus Ecclesiasticis curicsum praehuit. And see his complaints following; That
he did, abrogare Canones, in decernendo Principem facere Episcoporum, and
praesidere judiciis Ecclesiasticis, which he calls there Abominatio
Desolationis. And the Reverend Hosius President in the Council of Nice, writes
to this Prince on the same manner, Ibid. p. 456. Reformida diem Judicit; ne te
misceas Ecclesiasticis, neque nobis in hoc genere praecipe, sed potius ea a
nobis disce. Tibi Deus imperium commisit; nobis quae sunt Ecclesiae
concredidit, neque igitur fas est nobis in terris imperium tenere, neque tu
thymiamatum and sacrorum potestatem habes, Imperator. Nefas est enim [as.
Theodosius, see Conc. Ephesin. writ to the 3d General Council when he sent
Candidianus thither for the Preservation of Peace and Order; but not, ut cum
quaestionibus and controversiis, quae circa fidei dogmata incidunt quicquam
commune haberet] qui Sanctissimorum Episcoporum Catalogo ascriptus non est,
illum Ecclesiastieis negotiis and consultationibus sese immiscere.

Andrews would have them Resp. ad Bell. Apol. p. 332) the Discussers of the
Clergy's Definitions, whether contra legem Christi etc; and the last Tasters of
the Food prepared by the Pastors for Christ's Sheep; that, as this appears to
them sweet or bitter, good or bad, so they may allow, or forbid, it to be
ministered to their Subjects. Constantius was the first of the Christian
Emperors that assumed this pregustation, and that he took for sweet and good,
proved very Poison to his Subjects, and at last ended in Mahometanisme.
Meanwhile no doubt but Princes may assist all the Churches Consults with their
secular power, may call them, preside in them, for keeping of Order,
restraining the Tumultuous and Refractory, and seeing that particulars perform
what the whole declares to be their duty, as the only Supreme's there and
elsewhere, of all coactive Power. This Right none can deny them.

Hitherto from. 14. I have collected and considered the Protestant Concessions
in Confirmation of the Church's Rights in her Ecclesiastical judgments, and
other proceedings in pure Spirituals, which are declared to be independent on,
and unrepeable by, the secular power; and I have given you greater store of
them than at first I intended.



Fern, Answer to Champny, p. 300. That the secular Sovereign Power is to be
satisfied [or as it is there. 21. to have it, by Demonstration of Truth,
evidenced to him] that what is propounded as Faith and Worship is according to
the Law of Christ, before he use or apply his Authority to the public
establishment of it. Ibid. p. 294. And this in respect of his duty to God,
whose Laws and Worship he is bound to establish by his own Laws within his
Dominions, and is accountable for it, if he do it amiss. Thus Dr. Fern. Well,
But may the Clergy at least publish that Faith and Worship which they judge to
be according to the Law of Christ in his Dominions without him? Or may not the
Prince also establish something, as the Law of Christ, when it is, as he
conceives, evidenced to him to be so by some other, without or against the
Clergy; or only with some minor or inferior part of them, when opposed by the
superior and major, i. e. by the Canonical Ecclesiastical Judge? The first of
these is denied by him, the later affirmed. For (says he) Ibid. p. 308.
General Councils being the greatest and highest means of direction which Kings
can have in matters of Religion; but still with the limitation, quatenus docent
legem Christi [of which I suppose the Prince must judge] it being possible that
the major part should be swayed by Factions or worldly Interest; Therefore
Kings and Emperors (says he) may have cause given them, upon Evidence of
things unduly carried, to use their supreme power for forbidding of their
Decrees. And Ibid. 2. c. p. 73. The Sovereign Prince is not bound in the way of
Prudence always to receive his directions from a vote in Synod; especially when
there is just cause of fear, that the most of them, that should meet, are
apparently obnoxious to factious Interests. And ( p. 72.) If the Prince by the
law of God stands bound to establish within his own Dominions whatsoever is
evidenced to him by faithful Bishops, and Learned Men of the Church, to be the
Law of Christ, shall he not perform his known duty till the Vote of a major
part of a Synod give him leave to do it? Where also, p. 295. he approves the
Concession of the Clergy under King Henry the Eighth. In binding themselves by
Promise in Convocation in verbo Sacerdotis, not to exact, or promulge, or
execute any new Canons or Constitutions without the King's assent. Here you see
the Clergy's power so tied up, that they can publish no Christian Doctrine to
the People, that is to Christ's Flock, which they do not first evidence to the
Prince, and have for such publication his consent: but on the other side
whatever is any way evidenced to the Prince he may publish without, and against
their consent; and yet they, not he, are made by these men the ordinary Judges
in Spiritual matters.

i. e. to think something evidenced to him when indeed it is not; and again to
think other things not sufficiently evidenced, when they are; so there were
less hazard in leaving Church matters thus to his disposal. But, since things
are much otherwise; and evidencing Truths to any one, by reason of different
Understandings, Education, Passions, and Interest is a thing very casual; so
that what is easily evidenceable to another, may happen not to be so to the
Sovereign Power, when not patient enough to be informed, when misled and
prepossessed by a Faction; when not so capable, as some others by defect of
nature, or learning, and facile to be persuaded by the last Speaker, etc. to
what an uncertain, and mutable Condition are Church Affairs reduced, when the
Function of the Clergy depends on such Evidences made to the Prince?

2. If in matters already determined by our Lord and his Apostles, or Laws
given to the Church, by injury of time the Practice become contrary to the Law,
the Sovereign Power (being bound to protect Christianity) is bound to employ it
self in giving strength, first to that which is ordained by our Lord and his
Apostles. By consequence, if those with whom the Power of the Church is trusted
[ i.e. that Body of the Clergy, whose Acts conclude the whole; else if only
some other Clergy miscarry, this Body serves the Prince for their correction]
shall hinder the restoring of such Laws, the Sovereign Power may and ought, by
way of penalty to such persons, to suppress their power, that so it may be
committed to such as are willing to submit to the superior Ordinance of our
Lord, and his Apostles. Thus Mr. Thorndike, Rights of the Church, p. 273.

Discourse concerning the Guide in Controversies,. 6. etc. And Second
Discourse,. 12. etc. what reasonable man is there, hearing this, that will not
presently ask, Who shall judge, whether that be indeed a Law ordained by our
Lord or his Apostles, which the Prince would introduce, or restore, and which
the Succession of the Clergy opposes? Which Clergy surely will never confess
such to be a Law of our Lord, but always will profess the contrary? Nay; will
say, That the Succession of the Clergy shall keep, teach and maintain our
Lord's Laws inviolably as to necessaries, to the end of the world. This
Question he asks not; he solveth not, as writing against the Presbyterians,
who will not ask it him. But what can he say when asked it? Shall the Clergy
judge? They deny it to be the Lord's Law, what the Prince, against their
consent would restore. Shall the Prince judge? But this is most unreasonable,
that the judgment of a Laick in such a Contest, shall be preferred before the
whole Succession of the Clergy in Spiritual matters: and what mischief will
come hereupon, if he judge amiss? And here let me set before him his own Rule.
A difference falling out [saith he, i. e. between the Secular Power and the
Bishops so that to particular persons it cannot be clear, who is in the right
[and how can that be clear, in such high mysterious matters of Divinity to any
humble person, the contrary to which is judged clear by his Spiritual Guides?]
it will be requisite for Christians, in a doubtful case at their utmost perils,
to adhere to the Guides of the Church, against their lawful Sovereigns. Thus
Mr. Thorndike.

Field says much-what the same, as He: That tho ordinarily and regularly
Princes are to leave the judgment of Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Affairs to
the Bishops and Pastors; yet because they may fail [ i. e. the chiefest of
them, else these may redress the failings of inferiors] either through negligence,
ignorance, or malice, Princes having charge over God's People, and being to see
that they serve and worship him aright, are to judge and condemn them [the
foresaid Clergy] that fall into gross Errors contrary to the common sense of
Christians; or into any other Heresies formerly condemned [I conceive he
means, condemned by former Councils.] And tho there be no general failing [in
the Clergy] yet if they see violent and partial courses taken, they may
interpose themselves to stay them, and cause a due proceeding; or remove the
matter from one sort of Judges to another [I suppose he means either from the
whole Clergy to Secular Judges, or from that part of the Clergy, which the
Prince dislikes, to some others of the Clergy, whom he approves.]

Field, who, (not to urge Bishop Andrews's Observation against him. Ad
extraordinariam Potestatem confugere non solet quis, nisi deplorata res est)
here seems to fix the Prince as one, that cannot fail, through negligence,
ignorance or malice: or at least cannot fail so soon thus, as the whole
governing Body of the Clergy may. What? not fail in ignorance sooner then they?
That is somewhat strange. Again; as one, that has a charge over God's people,
and is to see that they worship God a right. As if the Clergy had not such
charge more then he, or as if he could judge what is Right in God's Worship
better then they. Again he represents this Body, or major part of the Clergy,
as those that may fall into gross Errors, contrary to the common Sense of
Christians, and into Heresies condemned; he means by former Clergy. But why
may not this former Clergy be supposed, by the Prince, to have erred sometimes
contrary to the common Sense of Christians, as well as the present Clergy? Or
if the judgment of the Clergy of former Ages is to be followed by the Prince,
why not that of the present, that is of equal Authority? But lastly imagine the
Prince to fail, as he may through negligence, ignorance, etc. may not an
Ecclesiastical Power within his Dominions review his Acts, and reform his
Errors too? But, how this, if they may enact, promulge, or execute no new
Canons or Constitutions in spiritnal matters without his consent? Or if this be
allowed them, how may these two, both of them made supreme, and ultimate
Lawgivers, at the same time in the same place, reform one another, and the
people subjected to them, according to their different Judgments? What
Confusion!

Andrews going the same way with the former, Resp. ad Bell. Apol. p. 332. Cum
in Deuteronomio dicere jubeantur Sacerdotes, and docere juxta legem Dei, leget
exemplar suum Rex, ut sciat an ex ea respondeant. Pascua petet, nec sibi Pastor
erit, sed sibi tamen gustabit, and, si amarum pabulum and noxtum, gustabit, ut
Christus acetum: quod, cum gustasset, noluit bibere. And after him Mason, De
Ministerio Anglicano, 3. l. 3. c. p. 272. Pastorum est, dubia legis explicare,
Regum vero veritatem cognitam [sibi] promulgare; and subditis cujufcunque sint
ordinis [ i. e. whether Clergy or Laity] imperare. Ibid. p, 273. Nec tamen
splendidis hominum titulis aut suffragiorum numero, aut locorum privilegiis
tantum deferet, quantum veritati [ i. e. that which he-conceives to be Truth]:
paucis secundum Scripturas docentibus [ i. e. when he conceives to teach so]
potius credet, quam 400 pseudo prophetis pro^cultu Baalis contendentibus. And
Ibid. 4. c. p. 289. Imperator etiam in Sacro-sanctis fidei Mysteriis,
proveritate [i. e. quae sibi videtur] jubere potest, and pro doctrina
Apostolica, Concilii Decreto in contrarium non obstante. And p. 297. Neque ad
primatum Regium quicquam interest, sive praelucentes Synodorum sententias
habeat Rex, sive non habeat. Sive enim veritatem caelestem ipsi dignoscant,
sive a Praelatis suis edocti ediscant, dummodo pro veritate [i, e. quae sibi
videtur] jubeant, and leges condant, vere se exhibent Supremos Gubernatores.

judicio diseretivo, as they call it; but for others also, judicio decisivo
(which the Clergy are not); so far as to promulgate and command all his
Subjects, and amongst them the Clergy, to obey that which he, upon consulting
the Clergy, and hearing their reasons, judges to be according to God's word;
and this without the consent of the Clergy at all, or at least, of the major
part of them. But they of the Clergy may not promulgate any Canons or
Constitutions of theirs, or what they judge according to Gods word, in such
Controversy, without the King's consent. And yet; Quis enim nostrum (said he
before) unquam affirmavit Principes in causis Fidei and Religionis supremos
esse Cognitores and Judices?

a
By the Reformations in Religion, which they say were made by the Godly Kings
of Judah.

(b. b
To which some join Moses's correcting Aaron's Idolatry in making the Molten
Calf; g. g
and St. Paul's Appeal from the Jew's Ecclesiastical Court to Caesar.) 2. d. d
By the Acts of some pious Emperors cassating the Decrees of some
Ecclesiastical Synods; as particularly Theodosius the Decrees of the second
Ephesine Council. 3. e. e
By many precedents of later Christian Princes, and amongst them the Kings of
England before Henry the Eighth, vindicating such Rights of Princes against the
Pope. But indeed none of these, well examined, will bear the weight they charge
on them.

To a. The first Instance (which is the main: To a.
Habuerunt Reges, Andrews, Tort. Tort. p. 379. in vetere Testamento primatum
suum atque inde Nervi, and lacerti causae nostrae; in novo autem deteriore jure
non sunt.) It is willingly granted: 1. That Princes may reform, and that as
Supremes in the exercise of their Civil Power, in matters of Faith and
Religion. 2. May reform; as Bishop Andrews would have it, Ibid. p. 365. Citra
Declarationem Ecclesiae, without any Declaration of the Church at that time, in
Doctrines of the Church known and undisputed, and formerly declared, as those
things, the Kings of Judah reformed in, were; and justly are Princes blamed for
any their neglect in this, the duty of their Place, and wherein their Secular
Power is much more effective of a through Reformation than the Priest's. 3. May
reform the Clergy too; such, as sound in the Faith neglect their Duty: or also
are fallen from that Faith which is taught by that Church, that is the
Canonical Judge of such Controversies: and Princes in punishing such Clergy,
are to be accounted Assistants to the Church. 4. May reform this Clergy, tho
these a greater number, than those professing the Catholic Faith; because the
legislative Church Power remains not in these separated, and excluded, tho the
more; but only in the whole, or in the major part of the Catholic party,
easily discernable from the Apostates, as were those deserting Moses's Laws,
and changing the former Divine Service, and but a few at the first. Only it is
contended, that never may Princes so reform against that Body of the Clergy,
which is the Canonical Judge of Controversies in matters of Faith, nor can it
beproved, that the Godly Kings of Judah did so; either that they reformed all
the Priests; or the High Priest, who was always their Guide in matters of
Religion; or reformed the People against them, or reformed the People, at least
without them.

David, Jehosophat, Hezekiah, and Josiah. And in all these we find an Orthodox
Clergy Co-adjutors and Con-reformers, and the Prince rectifying nothing in
them, but with them: and if the King's Actions appear in the Book of Kings, or
Chronicles more set forth, than their's; it is because it is an History of the
Acts of the Kings, not of the Priests. When after the flourishing times of the
Church under David and Solomon in Jeroboam's Reign, Israel fell away, yet the
Priests and Levites revolted not with the People; but leaving their Cities and
Possessions, went over to Judah See 2. Chron. 11.13, 14. -- 13.9. -- 15.9. and
new Priests were made by Jeroboam for his new Worship. Afterward we find these
Priests and Levites assisting Jehosaphat in his Reformation, 2. Chron. 17.7, 8.
and 19.8, 9, 10. In the times of Ahaz's Apostasy these Aaronical Priests were
excluded; the Doors of the house of our Lord shut up, 2. Chron. 28.24. and new
Priests not descended from Aaron, called Chemarim, consecrated with many
Sacrifices, and ordained for the new idolatrous Worship: of whom see 2. King
23.5. Zeph. 1.4. Hos. 10.5. Ezech. 44.8. To whom I will not deny, but that some
also of Aaron's race joined themselves. But after this we find Hezekiah's
Reformation, in the very beginning of his Reign assisted with the Orthodox
Clergy. 2. Chron. 29.11, 12. etc. He opened the doors of the Lord, (says the
Text, 2. Chron. 22.3, 4 etc.) and brought in the Priests and the Levites; viz.
whom Ahaz had excluded not long before. Afterward these Priests of the Lord
being excluded again from officiating in a greater persecution of Manasses. Yet
by him at last repenting we find them also restored, and officiating in the
Temple before Josiah's time, 2. Chron. 33.16. And in the next Chapter, 2.
Chron. 34. Josiah perfected the Reformation, which his Grandfather had begun,
by their Assistance; and particularly by that of the High Priest Hilkiah; who
also found in the Temple, the Book of the Law, this in those times, (at least
entire) being very rare, and communicated it to the pious Prince, who had
neither seen it, nor heard it read before this Eighteenth Year of his Reign,
and therefore must formerly have learnt God's Service, and the true Religion,
to which he now so zealously reformed the People, not from the Scriptures, but
from the Priests. Neither were any of those Priests and Levites, that assisted
King Josiah, such, as had before Apostatized under Manasses, in that Josiah
would permit none of those Levitical Priests who had formerly offered
Sacrifices in the High Places, tho these to the God of Israel, afterward to
officiate at the Lord's Altar in Jerusalem; but only indulged them their Diet
with the rest of the Priests: See 2. King. 23.7.9. This Good King Josiah was
the last Reformer. And if the Clergy after this fell away in a much greater
number, so did the Princes too much more irrecoverably. But in those times also
when it is said, 2. Chron. 36.14. That all [ i.e. very many, as it is not
unusual in Scripture,] of the chief of the Priests, and of the People
transgressed very much after all the abominations of the Heathen, yet a remnant
still there was, that remained Catholic, whom the rest now being Extra
Ecclesiam King and People were obliged to obey, in Spiritual matters; a
remnant, I say, Catholic as appears out of Ezekiel, who began his Prophecy
some few years before the Captivity, where Chapter 44.15. The Lord having condemned
the lapsed Priests or Levites to lower service, says of these. But the Priests
the Levites the Sons of Zadoc [either of Zadoc mentioned 1. King. 2.35. etc.
And 1. Chron. 6.8. or of Sadoc mentioned 1. Chron. 6.12. Grandfather to
Hilkiah the High Priest in Josiah's time] that kept the charge of my Sanctuary,
when the Children of Israel went astray from me, they shall come near to me to
minister unto me, etc. Some Priests therefore there were through all those evil
times whom God accepted and owned; and who stood firm as to the Faith; tho many
of these guilty of great neglect of their Duty, of Covetousness, and several
other Vices; and particularly of undertaking to foretell Good things to a Wicked
people, instead of exhorting them to Repentance; and of persecuting the true
Prophets, who foretold things bad; which rendered them the frequent subject of
the Prophet's complaints, See Jer. 23. etc.

Judah that are instanced-in, were done with the Priest's consent and
assistance, none against them. And if instead of proving that these Kings did
reform against the Clergy, it be urged; that at least they might have done it,
because no way subjected in matters of Religion to the judgment of the Priest;
many Texts may be produced, evincing the contrary; as particularly that Deuteronomy.
17.8, 9. etc. where the Judge named, beside the Priest, may either respect
those extraordinarily, sent by God and sanctified in a special manner with his
Spirit, as Samuel, and some others; or also in general the supreme Civil Power
joined for the Execution with the Ecclesiastical; or as for the Decision, the
one judging for the Civil and Regal, the other for God's, Laws; but however it
be, the Judge in such a Conjunction is no way authorized to give Sentence in a
matter of God's Law without or against the judgment of the Priest. Which
appears more clearly, if this Text in Deuteronomy. be compared with those other
relating to it, 2. Chron. 19.8, 9, 10. Ezekiel. 44.24. Haggai, 2.11. Mal. 2.7, 8.
Hos. 4.4. or if these Texts will not evince such an Ecclesiastical Supremacy
belonging to the Priest in the Old Testament, at least other Texts do in the
new. From which Texts the former Protestant Concessions grant such a Power, as
to the judging of Controversies of Faith and of Heresy, and that without the
Civil Power's having herein a Negative Voice. This to the Kings of Judah.

To b. That urged concerning Aaron; To b.
I answer, That this Sin of his was before his being enstalled High Priest,
Moses was appointed by God the supreme Judge in Ecclesiastical Affairs. Yet
that the Tribe of Levi, following Moses, remained then not only constant, but
valiant and zealous Professors of the true Religion, for which God afterward
chose this Tribe for the sacred Ministry, See Exodus 32, 27. Deuteronomy. 33.8, 9.
That the High Priest should be suspected, or accused of Idolatry, the judgment
of this (as also of Heresy) and the expelling of him, found guilty, out of the
Church by Excommunication belongs to the Clergy united in their supreme
Council, and the punishing him by other temporal Censures to the Prince.

To g. St. Panl's Act; To g.
I answer that the supreme Court for deciding Ecclesiastical Controversies in
St. Paul's time, Sanedrim of the Jews. That St. Paul's Appeal to Caesar was in
no such Ecclesiastical Cause, but in an accusation of raising Sedition, of
which he was charged, as well, as of being a Sectary, Act. 24.5.12.18. wherein,
brought hefore Festus's Tribunal, he pleaded Not-guilty; and upon his
Adversaries seeking to kill him, before judgment given, appealed to Caesar's,
i.e. from one Civil Tribunal to another higher.

To. d. The Acts of the Emperors, To d.
and that especially of Thedosius; kinds; and so are allowed, and such in
particular was that Act of Theodosius, in dis-avowing the Decree of the second
Ephesine Council: which Decree, being opposed by the Bishop of Rome's Legates
in the Council, and by himself, and all the Western Churches, and diverse of the
Eastern Bishops out of it; and several of those, who voted for it in the
Council, being with threats forced thereto, as appears by their complaint made
hereof in the following Council of Chalcedon, Contil. Chalced. Act. 1. was
illegal and not obliging: and upon this ground or motive, the Emperor's
assistance requested by Leo, for the nulling of its Acts; as may be seen in the
beginning of the Epistle he writ to him, wherein upon such reasons given he
desires the Emperors favor, Epist. 43.

To e. The Practice of later Christian Princes preceding the times of Henry the
Eighth (much pressed by Bishop Brambal in Vindication of the Church of England,
To e.
5th and 7th Chapters) I answer; Rome, relating to matters, the Cognizance
whereof belongs to the King's Court, and therefore these matters to be
considered by the Prince, whether not such, before that his Subject may submit
to them. Of which may be used the Bishops forecited. 17. Observation on the
37th Article of the Church of England. You see that all here is Political. But
then granting that some other instances are such as offend against the Churches
native Rights, as some Contests here in England did; for opposing which some
holy Bishops here suffered much Persecution: yet the proving such Facts to have
been done, even before the times of Henry the Eighth, proves not their
lawfulness to be done; and next how far soever such Acts may be showed to have
passed in restraining some claims of the Church, yet the Bishop confesses that
for Henry the Eighth's abolishing the usurped Jurisdiction (as he calls it) of
the Bishop of Rome or Western Patriarch, he finds no Pattern in these former
Acts of Christian Princes. His words are, Vindication of the Church of England,
p. 184. Lastly Henry the Eighth abolished the usurped Jurisdiction of the
Bishop of Rome within his it] Dominions. The Emperors did not so. Whether
[saith he conjecturing at the reasons of that they thought it not fit [I add or
lawful] to leave an old Patriarch; or because they did not sufficiently
consider the right bounds of imperial power, especially being seconded with the
Authority of an Occidental Council [but no such Council would second them, or
did Henry the Eighth in this business]; or because they did not so clearly
distinguish between a beginning of Unity, and an universality of Jurisdiction
[for if they had, they had wronged this Patriarch]; or because they had other
remedies wherewith to help themselves, I cannot determine:

By what is said it may appear, how improper the foresaid Instances are to
prove, in Christian Princes, a Power to reform the supposed Errors of the
Clergy in their Doctrines of Faith or Manners; the second thing they have urged.

That it is not fit nor safe that the Clergy should be able by their
Constitutions, and Synodical Acts to conclude both Prince and People in
Spiritual matters, until the Stamp of Royal Authority be imprinted on them. Dr.
Heylin, Reformation Justified, p. 86. Dr. Fern, Exam of Champ. p. 295. Where,
were the Princes knowledge and assent required only on this account relating to
the State; that so nothing be passed in these Synods prejudecial to his Civil
Rights, it is willingly allowed: but if required on another account, relating
to Religion, that so he may prohibit and suppress so much of them, as is not
evidenced to him to be juxta legem Christi, or as he apprehends, is also
against it, (of which thing he is not the Judge, yet which has been the
Pretense of reforming Princes, meddling with the most speculative points in
Divinity) it seems not reasonable. And thus an Heretical Prince will strangle,
as he pleases, within his Dominions the Catholic Verities.

4.
and investing him, or whom he shall nominate and elect, with that Power which
formerly they enjoyed in their own capacity. After which, they say, the Princes
Act, or their's he nominates, have virtually the power of the Clergy, or their
Synod, and do oblige as much as if they in terminis had agreed upon it. To give
you it in Dr. Heylin's words, Reform. Justified, p. 89. The Kings of England
(says he) had a further Right as to this particular, which is a Power
conferred upon them by the Clergy (whether by way of Recognition, or
Concession, I regard not here); by which the Clergy did invest the King with a
supreme Authority, not only of confirming their Synodical Acts, not to be put
in Execution without his consent, but in effect to devolve on him all that
Power which formerly they enjoyed in their own capacity; [amongst which Powers
( p. 85.) he names this; to reform such Errors and Corruptions as are expressly
contrary to the word of God.] And to this we have a parallel Case in the Roman
Empire; in which the Supreme Majesty of the State was vested in the Senate, and
People of Rome, till by the Law, which they call Lex Regis, they transferred
all their Power on Caesar, and the following Emperors; which Law being past,
the Edicts of the Emperors were as binding as the Senatus-Consulta had been
before. The like may be affirmed of the Church of England. The Clergy had self
Authority in all matters, which concerned Religion, and by their Canons and
Determinations did bind all the Subjects, till by acknowledging King Henry the
Eighth for their supreme Head, and by the Act of Submission not long after
follwing, they transferred that Power upon the King and his Successors. After
which time whatsoever the King or his Successors did in the Reformation, as it
had virtually the Power of the Convocation, so was it as good in Law as if the
Clergy in their Convocation particularly, and in terminis, had agreed upon it.
Thus Dr. Heylin. And upon this ground and title it was that the XLII Articles,
since reduced to XXXIX, were first introduced into the Church of England, being
composed by certain Persons appointed by the Prince; and then, without any
review, or Confirmation of the Synod, published as the Act thereof: as appears
by Philpot's Plea, and arguing in the Synod 10. Mariae, when the Clergy
questioned these Articles and subscribed that they were wrongfully entitled to
the Synod, which had never passed them: See for this matter, Fox, Act, p. 1282.
And Ib. p. 1704, Archbishop Cranmer's Trial. And Fuller's Hist. Ecclesiast. 7.
l. p. 420. And Dr. Fern, Exam. Champny. p. 74.

Head 6. These. 1. etc. 2 Discourse concerning the Guide in Controversies,. 24.
etc. Consid. on Council of Trent,. 9. etc. And so such National Synods cannot
give away what they have not. Nor, were it so, have they any Power of
Alienating this Authority, for which they are personally set a part from the
rest of the world by our Lord, with a successive solemn Ordination, and of
which well or ill managed, they themselves must give account to our Lord: No
such Power of Alienation being contained in the original Grant thereof. But if,
without such express License, they can give away some Part to the Laity (where
also no necessity is pretended) then why not any part of their office; and so
depute Laics to ordain Ministers also and consecrate the holy Encharist? To
which may be added: That no part of the Clergy Duty depends more on their
personal Abilities, and long preparation by study then this we speak of; The
composing of Articles and Canons, the reforming of Errors, etc. Least of all
therefore seems this committable to the Prince, either that he himself should
perform it, whose Regal employments require a far different Education; or that
he should delegate it to others; by which the Clergy authorizeth they know not
whom, perhaps some persons heretical, (if such happen to be Favorites of the
Prince) to establish in Religion the Clergy knows not what (for this Concession
is made by the English Clergy without any Reservation of a Revisal.)

Bramhal's words, Vindic. of the Church of England, 5.
p. 257.) 'That since the Division 'of Britain from the Empire [ i. e. since
Brittain's being governed by Princes of its own, who therefore in their
Territories have the same Authority that the Roman Emperors formerly had in the
Empire, See Dr. Hammond, Schism p. 124.] No Canons are, or ever were, of force
with us further then they were received, and by their incorporation became
Brittannick Laws. Which as they cannot, or ever could, be imposed upon the King
and Kingdom by a foreign Patriarch by constraint, so when they are found by
experience prejudicial to the public Good, they may as freely by the same King
and Kingdom be rejected. And so Dr. Hammond, Of Schism, p. 125. The Canons of
Councils have mostly been set out, and received their Authority by the Emperors.

I answer; All this is true: 1. That the Church Canons are not of force, as to
any Coactive Power to he used in the Execution of them by Clergy or Laity,
before made the Emperor's or other Princes Laws. For which take the same Bishop
Bramhal's Exposition, when I believe he had better considered it: Schism
Guarded, p. 92. We see the Primitive Fathers did assemble Synods, and make
Canons before there were any Christian Emperors, but that was by Authority
merely Spiritual. They had no Coactive Power to compel any man against his
will. And p. 119. We acknowledge that Bishops were always esteemed the proper
Judges of the Canons both for composing of them, and for executing of them, but
with this caution; That to make them Laws the Confirmation of the Prince was
required; and to give the Bishop a Coactive Power to execute them, The Prince's
Grant or Concession was needful. 2. That the Church Canons are not of force at
all, when these Canons relate to any civil Right, without the secular
Magistrate's precedent admission of them, of whose proper Cognizance such
Rights are. But meanwhile all Ecclesiastical Canons, whether concerning the
Faith or Government and Discipline of the Church, so far as they do not
encroach on any such civil Rights (as I presume all those made by the Church
when under Heathen Governors will be granted to be) are in force, in whatever
Princes Dominions, so as to render all the disobedient liable to the Church's
Censures, tho the Christian Prince never so much oppose and reject them. And
this granted, more is not desired; for thus no Members of the Church at any
time can be free from the strict observance of such Canons by any secular
Authority or Patronage.

6.
and the application of the matter on which it works; viz. of the Subjects of
such a Dominion, are held from the Crown; so that a Christian Prince, by
denying this, lawfully voids the other, as he thinks fit. We draw (says Bishop
Bramhal, Vindic. p. 268.) or derive from the Crown, Liberty or Power to
exercise actually and lawfully upon the Subjects of the Crown, that habitual
Jurisdiction which we receive at our Ordination. And in his Reply to Chalced.
p. 291. he makes Ecclesiastical Persons in their excommunicating and absolving
the King's Substitutes ( i. e. as he expounds himself afterward) by the King's
Application of the matter; namely, of his Subjects to receive their Absolution
from such Ecclesiastical Persons.

I answer; This again, if meant, of the liberty of the Clergy's exercising
their Functions with a Coactive Power or of some persons among that Clergy,
which the Church owns as Catholic, being admitted to exercise their Function
absolutely in such Dominions, and not others, is very true; but little to their
Purpose that urge it. But if understood absolutely as to the liberty of any
such Clergy at all, to exercise their Function at all in any Christian Prince's
Dominions upon his Subjects without his leave, in which sense only it besteads
them, is most false. Neither may a Christian Prince be thought to have any
privilege herein, which a Heathen has not. And as such Privilege is most
pernicious to the propagation of the Christian Religion, where the Prince is
Heathen; So to the Conservation of the Catholic Religion, where the Christian
Prince happens to be Heretical or Schismatical.

7.
that Authority given by the men and abused, may be again suppressed by them.
So Rivet, Grot. Discuss. Dialys. p. 173. in Answer to Grotius, Discussio Rivet
Apol. p. 69. who alleged a Jus Ecclesiasticum for the Pope's Primacy to be
conceded by Protestants. And, 'Tho Inferiors are not competent Judges of their
Superiors; yet as to subordinate Superiors in matters already defined by the
Church, the Sentence of the Judge is not necessary, the Sentence of the Law,
and Notoriety of the Fact are sufficient. So Bishop Bramhal, Vindic. of the
Church of England, p. 253. from whence seems to be inferred the lawfulness for
a Prince within his Dominions, or for a Church National, totally to abrogate
the forementioned Canonical Sub-ordination of such Kingdom, or Church to the
Patriarchal Authority, when this abused.



2. Next for Abuses, and the Notoriety of them; that no Practices may be styled
so, where neither Church-Definitions are found against them, much less where
these found for them; nor where a major part of those subject to them
acknowledge them as Abuses, but continue their obedience therein as their Duty.
3ly, For such things as are notorious Abuses, or most generally agreed on for
such; and so Obedience withdrawn herein; yet none may therefore substract his
obedience absolutely, from such an Authority for such other matters, where
their Obedience is due; and due it is still, that was formerly so, till such
Power reverse that Authority, and its Injunctions as set it up. But whilst
Obedience in the one is denied, in the other it ought still to be yielded.
Therefore should the Patriarch make a breach upon the Civil Rights of Princes,
or their Subjects, these may not justly hence invade his Ecclesiastical. And if
the Priest (Patriarch or Bishop) would in some things act the Prince, therefore
may not the Prince justly take upon him to act the Priest; or to alter any
thing of that Spiritual Hierarchy established by Christ or by the Church, much
to the good, but nothing at all to the damage, of temporal States: If any thing
happen to be unjustly demanded, it excuses not from paying just debts. The
Office must not be violated for the fault of the Person: And herein may the
Example of other Nations be a good Pattern to ours; who having made resistance
to their Patriarch in some Injunctions conceived by them not Canonical, yet
continue still their Obedience in the rest; as appears in the late Contest of
the State of Venice, and those Opposals both of France and Spain, and England
before the times of Henry the Eighth, of which Bishop Bramhal, In Vindic. 3d.
Book, 7th Chap. has been a sufficiently diligent Collector; but at last found
them all to come short of Henry the Eighth's Proceedings: See before,. 49.
Neither indeed need any Prince to fear any Ecclesiastical Tyranny so far, as to
pluck up the Office by the roots, who holding the Temporal Sword still in his
own hands, can therewith divide, and moderate it as he pleases.

Patriarchal Authority, and the Canonical Privileges belonging to it, 8.
by his claiming an Universal Headship by Succession to St. Peter, whereby they
say that the Western Provinces do now become released from their Obedience due
to him as Patriarch; and then that they never owed any Obedience to him as the
Universal Head: to which purpose thus Bishop Bramhal, Vindic. p. 250. They [the
Popes] quitted their pretended Patriarchal Right, when they assumed and usurped
to themselves the name and thing of Universal Bishops, Spiritual Sovereigns,
and Sole Monarchs of the Church. To be a Patriarch, and to be an Universal
Bishop in that sense are inconsistent, and imply a contradiction in adjecto;
the one professes humane, the other challenges divine, Institution. The one
has a limited Jurisdiction over a certain Province, the other pretends to an
unlimited Jurisdiction over the whole world. And so Reply to S. W. p. 69. To
claim a Power paramount, a Sovereign Monarchical Regality over the Church is
implicitly, and in effect, to disclaim a Patriarchal. After the same manner
argues Dr. Hammond concerning the Pope claiming a Jurisdiction over England as
Patriarch upon the supposed Conversion thereof [I add, or claiming such
Jurisdiction upon Ecclesiastical Constitution] and claiming it from his
Universal Pastorship, that these two are incompatible. Because (says he,
Answer to Catholic Gent. p. 101. compared with Schism, p. 107.) the one
supersedes the other, and the same Right cannot be held by two Tenures. In all
which I see no true arguing.

Bramhal I say: The Pope may have an universal Head-ship by divine Institution
as to certain Superintendencies over all the Church, and a Patriarchal by
humane. Institution as to some other, extending only to a part of the Church:
and thus may have limited Jurisdiction (as to Place) for the one, unlimited for
the other, without any Contradiction. As also the same Person has the
subordinate Jurisdictions of a Bishop (and also in some poor Bishoprics of the
Rector of a Parish too) of a Metropolitan, and of a Primate, all well
consisting. So one may be by a Prince made Governor of a whole Province in
respect of some command which he has over it all; and may be made by the same
King, or by any other, to whom the King has given the bestowing of such a
Dignity, Governor also of one City in that Province, in respect of some other
Offices, diverse from the former; which Offices he may exercise over that Town
only, and not likewise over the Province. Next suppose the Popes claim of the
universal Pastor-ship unjust; he cannot cease thereby to be what he is, because
he claims something more than he is; no more to be Patriarch still, than to
be Metropolitan or Primate still: nor can the Obedience Canonically due to him
as such, be withheld, because on a wrong Title he claims somewhat more not
due, or some other way abuses his Office: No more then a Prince's Oppressions,
or other misdemeanors discharge their Subjects Allegiance.

To Dr. Hammond; The universal Pastor-ship and Patriarch-ship are not one, but
two Rights; and something held by the Patriarch-ship over the West, which is
not by the other over the whole Church. But were it otherwise, the same Right
may be held by many Tenures. A Kingdom by Inheritance; and by Conquest,
supposing Conquest a Good Title against an Heir when these two are in several
persons: A parcel of Land by Donation, and by Purchase. By many Tenures I say,
so that as long as these are inherent in the same person, when one is judged to
fail, the right may be challenged by another; and so that no other can
dispossess such person, unless he prove not one, but all his titles faulty.

9.
Next, they seek to dissolve themselves from it by transferring it, or erecting
a new Patriarch-ship instead thereof; which thing, they say, is in the Power of
any Prince at any time to do within his own Dominions, and so after this, that
a National Church is freed from their Obedience to the former. Of which thus
Bishop Bramhal, Vindic. p. 256. Tho the Roman Bishops had sometimes a just
Patriarchal Power, and had forfeited it neither by Rebellion, nor abuse; yet
the King, and the whole Body of the Kingdom by their legislative Power,
substracting their Obedience from them, and erecting a new Patriarchate within
their own Dominions, it is a sufficient warrant for all Englishmen to suspend
their Obedience to the one, and apply themselves to the other, for the welfare
and tranquillity of the whole Body Politic. And Reply to Chalced. p. 238.
Suppose (says he) that the Brittanick Churches have been subjected to the
Bishop of Rome by General Councils, yet upon the great Mutation of the State of
the Empire, and the great variation of Affairs since that time, it had been
very lawful for the King and the Church of England to substract their Obedience
from the Bishops of Rome (tho they [ i. e. the Bishops of Rome, by claiming the
Title of universal Pastor] had not quitted their Patriarchate) and to have
erected a new Primate at home among themselves. So He. But much more copiously
Dr. Hammond: Who relies very much on, and frequently recurrs to, this Relief,
for rendering the Church of England's departure, from this their former.
Patriarch free from Schism. Schism, p. 115. To put this whole matter (says he)
out of Controversy [ i. e. concerning the Pope's Supremacy, upon the title of
Conversion of England] it is, and it has always been in the Power of Christian
Emperors and Princes within their Dominions to erect Patriarchates; or to
translate them from one City to another: and therefore whatever Title is
supposable to be acquired by the Pope in this Island upon the first planting of
the Gospel here, this cannot so oblige the Kings of England ever since, but
that they may freely remove that Power from Rome to Canterbury; and subject all
the Christians of this Island to the Spiritual Power of this Archbishop or
Primate independently from any Foreign Bishop. And p. 142. Thus certainly the
King being the Fountain of all Power and Authority, [A Supposition unproved,
and denied as to Ecclesiastical Authority, and so what he builds on it unsound]
as he is free to communicate this Power to one, so he is equally free to recall
and communicate it to another. And therefore may as freely bestow the Power of
Primate and chief Metropolitan of England, or (which is all one) of a Patriarch
on the Bishop of Canterbury, having formerly thought fit to grant it to the
Bishop of Rome, as he, or any of his Ancestors, can be deemed to have granted
it to the Bishop of Rome. And this takes off all obligation of Obediencs in the
Bishops to the Pope, at the first minute, that he is by the King divested of
that Power. Which freedom from that Obedience, immediately clears the whole
business of Schism, as that is a departure from the Obedience of a lawful
Superior. Again p. 132. Upon that one ground the Power of Kings in General, and
particularly ad hunc actum, to remove Patriarchates, whatsoever can be
pretended against the lawfulness of the Reformation in these Kingdoms, will
easily be answered. By these places you see he makes this, the Regal Power to
remove Patriarchates, the main Bulwark for defending the Reformation from
Schism.

And for proof of such a Power in Kings he instanceth a. a
In the Emperor Justinian, Justiniana prima, and afterward of Carthage; b. b
And the Emperor Valentinian, before him, his erecting Ravenna into a
Patriarchship independent in Jurisdiction on that of Rome. g. g
Next he urges the 12th and 17th Canons of the Council of Chalcedon, 38th of
the Council in Trullo, mentioning the Emperors Authority to erect new Mother
Cities for places of Justice, and the Councils ordering the Churches
Metropolitan Dignity to follow it, Ibid. 6. c.. 14. d. d
And lastly he instanceth in the Kings of England anciently transferring, or
dividing Bishoprics, and erecting new, Ibid.. 15. See in the Author how he
prosecutes these. They laboring thus by such pretended Power of the Civil
Magistrate to free a National Church from any Ecclesiastical Dependency abroad.

etc. Provided that the Canonical Ecclesiastical Superiors consent to the
introduction of the Persons they present, into such places; and confer the
Spiritual Authority and Jurisdiction such persons shall exercise in them: and
that nothing herein be done contrary to the things established by former
Ecclesiastical Canons: (which Canons if lawfully made by the Church, can be
dissolved by none, save the same Authority.) The Question therefore here is,
whether there being already a Subordination of Metropolitans and Primates, and
their Synods to the higher Patriarchs, and their Synods established by the
Church Canons (concerning which, see Consid. on the Council of Trent,. 9. And
The Guide, Second Discourse,. 24. etc.) A Prince has Authority to dissolve
this, as to its obliging the Clergy, that is within his Dominions, by settling
this Patriarchal Authority on one of his own Metropolitans, or Primates, which
is settled formerly by the Church on another? For Example; whether a Sovereign
Prince of Pentapolis or Lybia, can release the Bishops of Pentapolis from their
Canonical Obedience to the Patriarch of Alexandria, and his Synods, and subject
them to another Bishop of his own nomination, within Pentapolis.

Bramhal thus frees the Church of England from Schism, Vindic. p. 257. Number. 1.
Neither the Papal Power which we have cashiered, nor any part of it, was ever
given to any Patriarch by the ancient Canons; and by consequence the Separation
is not Schismatical. And, A Power (says Dr. Hammond in Answer to S. W. Answer
to Schism disarmed, p. 164.) Princes have had to erect Metropoles, but if it be
exercised so, as to thwart known Canons and Customs of the Church, this
certainly is an Abuse. And Schism, p. 60. The uppermost of the standing Powers
in the Church are Archbishops, Primates and Patriarchs, to whom the Bishops
themselves are in many things appointed to be subject; and this Power and
Subjection is defined and asserted by the ancient Canons; and the most ancient
even im-memorial, Apostolical Tradition and Custom is avouched for it, as may
appear Conc. Nicen. 1. Can. 4.6. Council. Antioch. c. 9.20. Council. Chalced. c.
19. concluding afterward, p. 66. That there may be a Disobedience and
Irregularity, and so a Schism, even in the Bishops in respect of their
Metropolitans, and of the Authority which they have by Canon and Primitive
Custom over them. From which, All I observe here is; That he charge Schism
upon the Disobedience of an Ecclesiastical Authority when formerly established
by Church Canon.

Number. 2.
Either they must claim it, as a Civil Right; and then the Councils have been
guilty of violating it, in meeting, and establishing such Subordinations
without asking them leave. For Example; The 6th Canon of Nice, the first
General Council, and 5th of the 2d, and 9th and 16th of the 4th would have been
an usurpation of an unjust Authority, if the Subordination of Episcopal Sees,
and erecting of Patriarchs, had belonged to the Prince, or Emperor as a Civil
Right. Nor could the Bishop of Rome have justly expostulated with the Oriental
Bishops in the last of these Councils, for passing such a Canon for advancing
the Bishopric of Constantinople into a Patriarchate next to that of Rome,
without his consent; if this thing belonged to the Emperors Civil Power, who
much desired such an Exaltation of the Constantinopolitan Bishop. Nor would the
Oriental Bishops have forborne to have pleaded this Title, especially this
Council being called after the precedent, that is urged of Valentinian touching
Ravenna, and in his days, yet such Right of the Emperor the Eastern Bishops do
not pretend to at all; But in their Epistle to Leo earnestly request his
consent, using this as one argument to obtain it. Sic enim and pii Principes
[the two Emperors Valentinian and Theodosius] complacebunt, quae tanquam legem
tuae Sanctitatis Judicium firmaverunt. And the Emperors Presidents in the
Council do, Act. 16th, leave the disposal thereof wholly in the Councils hands,
and to be directed by the former Church Canons: Where Conc. Nic. 6. Mos
antiquus obtineat, is strongly pleaded by the Roman Legates and also afterward
by Leo, which voids both Justinjan's and Valentinian's, or any other Emperors
Innovations against the Roman Bishops former Jurisdictions further then his
consent is obtained therein.

Again: Since Heathen Princes have the same Title with Christian to all Civil
Rights, neither could the Church, when under them, have lawfully practiced such
a Jurisdiction.

2. Or else Princes must claim it as a thing conceded to them by the Church, to
change and alter such Subordinations. Now any such Concession from the Church
we find not: but this we find in the 8th General Council, 21. c. Definimus
neminem prorsus mundi potentium; quenquam eorum qui Patriarchalibus sedibus
praesunt, in-honorare, aut movere a proprio Throno tentare, sed omni reverentia
and honor dignos judicare. And yet further. Si vero quis aliqua seculari
potestate fruens, pellere tentaverit praefatum Apostolicae Papam, aut aliorum
Patriarcharum quenquam, Anathema sit. And 22. Canon, Definit neminem Laicorum
Principam, vel Potentum, semet inserere electioni vel Promotioni Patriarchae,
vel Metropolitae, aut cujuslibet Episcopi, ne videlicet inordinata hinc and
incongrua fiat confusio, vel contentio: praesertim, cum nullam in talibus
Potestatem quenquam potestatum vel Caeterorum Laicorum habore conveniat. Unless
here perhaps, the Concession of the particular Clergy of such a Prince be
urged; but none such can be valid against the Canons of their Superiors. Dr.
Hammond being asked this Question; How Princes come by such a Right of
Translating Patriarchs, by S. W. Answers thus. Answer to Schism Disarmed, p.
174. I, that meant not to dispute of such Mysteries of State, etc. finding the
same things assumed by Kings as their Right, and yielded by the Church to be
enjoyed by them [both which Catholics deny, nor do his Instances prove it]
thought I might hence conclude, this to be unquestionably their due; but
whether it were by God immediately conferred on them, and independently from
the Church; or whether the Church in any Nation were the Medium, that God used
now under the Gospel to confer it on them, truly I neither then was, nor now am
inclined, either to enquire, or to take upon me to determine. [Not knowing, you
see, which way safely to take. For if this Privilege were conceded by the
Church, may not the Church according to their Principles resume it, when
abused? But if this originally a Civil Right, the Church has usurped their
Power in her making Constitutions concerning it.]

that which is urged for a reason to induce the independency of National
Primates, viz. the Division of the Empire into so many absolute Principalities,
infers rather the contrary: that the universal Government of the Church (which
is but one in all these Kingdoms) should be now, if possible, closer linked
together, then formerly; and the more likely, that Sects, and Distractions are
to grow in the Church by reason of so many States, some of which may be
perverted by Heresy, or Schism, the more need of an union in some one
Ecclesiastical Head. As the Roman Commonwealth, in more dangerous Invasions of
Enemies, chose a Dictator; and Armies are thought freest from Mutinies and
Seditions, when committed to one General.



For 1st if it lie within a Prince's Power to free his National Clergy from a
Patriarch, and his Synods; why not, also from a General Council; i. e. so far
as that the Acts thereof shall not conclude such National Clergy without their
consent? And if the Church-Canons ordering the contrary, bind them not for the
one, Submission to Patriarchs, when the Prince orders otherwise, why for the
other, Submission to General Councils? But next, were a General Council a
standing Court, or often, or easily convened, there might indeed be some remedy
from thence; but these happening so seldom, and that on the terms Protestants
require them, perhaps can be never: the standing Superiority, and Jurisdiction,
not moveable at pleasure of Patriarchs over Primates, and so of Primates over
inferior Bishops, seems a means of Unity most necessary in the long intervals
of the other highest Courts. Else supposing, That a Valentinian, or a
Constantius, having the Power to translate, and erect Primates and Patriarchs,
shall transfer Ambrose his Primacy, or Siricius, or Athonasins his
Patriarchship, to the Bishop of some other City; so, as Henry the Eighth is
supposed to have translated Clement the Seventh's Patriarch-ship to the Bishop
of Canterbury: and what Heresy may not such Emperor advance, as he pleases, if
he can find at least some Clergy on his side? And what wrong did those Popes,
and Councils, to the Emperor Constantius, in their maintaining Athanasius still
in his former Authority and Jurisdiction against him?

a
the first and chiefest, the Bishop of Justiniana Prima. The Emperor
Justinian's Novel 131. runs thus. Sancimus per tempus beatissimum Primae
Justinanae Archiepiscopum habere semper sub sua jurisdictione Episcopos
Provinciarum Daciae, etc. Et in subjectis sibi Provinciis locum obtinere sedis
Apostolicae Romae, secundum ea quae definita sunt a sanctissimo Papa Vigilio.
Where it is said, That this Bishop should locum obtinere Sedis Apostolicae
Romae; not that he should have the Place or Dignity of an Apostolical Seat. (As
Dr. Hammond ( p. 103.) would have it) but the Place of the Apostolical See of
Rome. viz. as his standing Delegate for those parts subordinate to him: the
Phrase being frequently used in this, but I think never in the other, Sense;
which is acknowledged by Dr. Field who says, Of the Church, p. 563. He was
appointed the Bishop of Rome's Vicegerent in those Parts to do things in his
name, and by his Authority: Naming there many other Bishops in other places
executing the like Vicar-ship for the Pope: The Bishop of Sevil; Arles,
Thessalonica, and others: and this also the words following in the Novel,
Secundum ea, quae definita sunt a Sanctissimo Papa Vigilio, do sufficiently
declare. To which may be added the Request of this Deputation of the Bishop of
Justiniana made by the Emperor Justinian to Agapetus, Vigilius his Predecessor,
who delaying his Grant of it, returned him this Answer; Epist. 4. De Justiniana
Civitate gloriosi Natalis vestri conscia, necnon and de nostrae Sedis vicibus
injungendis, quid, servato beati Petri, quem diligitis, Principatu and vestrae
Pietatis affectu, before deliberari contigerit, per cos quos ad vos dirigimus
Legatos (Deo Propitio) celeriter intimamus. If you would have yet more
Evidence, see the Pope's continued Confirmation of this Primate, or
Archbishop, tho consecrated by his own Bishops, as usual, by sending him the
Pall, and his deputing the judgment of Causes to him in his stead, Greg. Ep. 4.
l. Indic. 13. Ep. 15. And 10. l. 5. Indic. Ep. 34. And 2. l. Ep. 6. The same
things may be said of the Primate of Carthage, pretended only to be admitted to
the like Privileges with the Bishop of Justiniana Prima.

Concerning b the (...) of Ravenna. b
As the Pallium is taken for an Archiepiscopal Ornament derived from the
Emperors own habit to add the more Honor to such Prelates, Hammond in Schism
disarmed, p. 149. So it might be solely in the Emperors Donation; but as it is
a Ceremony used at the Instalment of a Bishop in the Archiepiscopal
Jurisdictions, so it belongs only to the Spiritual Superiors, who only can
bestow such an Authority as before Constantine's time, so after.

2. Whatever Privilege that was, That John Bishop of Ravenna claimed, who (Dr.
Hammond says) was the first that publicly contested his Right with the Bishop
of Rome (perhaps a Donation of this Pall at once for that Bishop, and all his
Successors, not to be reiterated from the Pope's upon every new Election) it
appears clearly from St. Gregory, 2. l. Ep. 54. that he claimed such
Privilege, not singly from the Emperors Rescript, but also from a Grant of the
Roman Bishop; St. Gregory there denying any such Grant. And also the same
Gregory in 5. l. Ep. 8. in his sending the Pall after this to Maximinianus
Bishop of Ravenna, and confirming his Privileges. Quae suae pridem concessa
esse constat Ecclesiae mentions the Motive to be, Provocatus; not only antiquae
consuetudinis or dine; which Dr. Hammond takes notice of, Ibid. p. 151. and
applies to the Emperors Rescript: but, first, Apostolicae Sedis benevolentia,
which Dr. Hammond omits; Apostolicae Sedis benevolentia and antiquae
consuetudinis ordine, provocatus are the Popes words. But such (...) pretended
to be received from the Church (Tho St. Gregory says this Pretense was false)
no way fits Dr. Hammond's purpose of the Princes bestowing such a Privilege,
when the Patriarch opposes.

3. As for the Subjection of the Provinces of Aemilia unto it by the Emperor:
if this be supposed done by him without the Churches consent, it seems contrary
to the 12th Canon of the Council of Chalcedon; which permits not to Princes the
dividing or changing the former Jurisdictions of Prelates. Yet were this thing
wholly permitted to the Prince, so long as the Confirmation of such new-erected
Primates is still to be received from their Canonical Superiors, no Faction,
Division, or Independency can be hereby introduced into the Church; nor the
Protestant Cause any whit hereby relieved.

To g The three Canons; To g.
In the first it appears that the Prince attempting to dispose of half the
Jurisdictions of a certain Metropolitan to a new Prelate set up by himself; the
Council prohibits it; and reserves still the whole Jurisdiction to the former:
therefore, in this Councils judgment, the Prince could do no such thing justly.

In the two last; the Prince changing or erecting a new Metropole, or Mother
City for the Seat of Judicature, the Church, not the Prince (and so this proves
no Right of his to do it.) orders, with very good reason, the change of the
Seat of the Metropolitan to this Place of greatest Concourse. These Canons,
then, which the Dr. urges for his Cause, are they not to good purpose for the
contrary? I pray you view them. But meanwhile concerning the Point, so much
driven at, the Princes making new Patriarchs, I must remind you here again of
the Canon of the 8th General Council, Can. 21. Definimus, neminem prorsus Mundi
Potentium, quenquam eorum, qui Patriarchalibus sedibus praesunt, in-honorare,
aut movere a proprio Throno tentare, sed omni reverentia and honor dignos
judicare praecipue quidem Sanctissimum Papam Senioris Romae, etc.

To d. The Kings of England transplanting Metropolitanships, To d.
dividing Bishoprics, erecting new ones, exempting Ecclesiastical Persons from
Episcopal Jurisdiction etc. Such things are denied to be justly transacted by
the Prince's sole Authority, without the consent of Church Governors, general
or particular; of which see the 8th General Council, Can. 22. about Election.
Nor does the Negative Argument of the Church's consent to this not mentioned
prove such Facts to have been without it: especially as to the confirmation of
Persons so promoted by the Prince in their Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. Which
thing being once taken from the Ecclesiastical Canonical Superiors, and this
power of Erecting Patriarchies, and Primacies, and by consequence of the
bestowing and transferring the several Privileges thereof, solely cast into
the hands of a Secular Prince; and then this Prince supposed to be not Orthodox
(a supposition possible;) and what confusion and mischief must it needs produce
in such a body, as the Church strictly tied in Canonical Obedience to such
Superiors, and subbmitting to their judgment and decisions in Spiritual
matters? By which means this seduced Prince may sway the Controversies in
Religion, within his own Dominions, what way he pleases, so long as there be
some Ecclesiastics of his own persuasion, whom he may surrogate in the places
of those others that gainsay. Remember the times of Constantius.

Meanwhile if the Churches Rights of a Canonical Subordination of all the
Clergy be strictly observed, I know not what other Indulgment about Clergy
Preferments, may not with sufficient preservation of the Churches Catholic
Unity be conceded to the Prince.

This from. 59. of their Ninth Plea; the Prince's Power to erect new Patriarchs.

That a National Church has within it self the whole Subordination of
Ecclesiastical Power and Government, 10.
See Dr. Fern's Case between England and Rome, p. 26. in which a Primate is the
highest; (and thus far only ascends Dr. Hammond) and so has a supreme, and
independent Power in managing all Ecclesiastical Affairs within it self, and
delegating its Power to others. To which, I think, there needs no further
Answer; the Subjection of these Primates, or lower Patriarchs to higher,
sufficiently appearing from frequent ancient Church Canons, and being conceded
by other Learned Protestants (For which, not often to repeat the same things, I
must refer you to what is said before in g. And in Consid. on the Council of
Trent,. 9. etc.) as also their Subjection to Patriarchal, or General Councils;
in that it has been ordinary to execute their Censures upon such Primates, or
also Patriarchs, when Heretical, or otherwise faulty.

HEAD. X. Concerning the Unity of the Church Catholic in respect of Heresies
and Schisms, and other intestine Divisions.
Concerning the Unity of the Church Catholic in respect of Heresies and
Schisms and other intestine Divisions.
1. Catholics do hold; That one holy Catholic and Apostolic Church mentioned
in our Creed, is not always a Body coextended to the Christian Profession, or
involving all Christian Churches, (if I may so call them) or Congregations, or
Sects: But that some Christian Churches or Societies there are, or may be that
are no part of it, but do stand contradistinct to it.

2. They willingly grant; That not all differences or divisions in Spiritual
matters between particular Persons or Churches, where there is no Subordination
between them, do render one or both of them, guilty of such Schism as to become
thereby no Members of the Church Catholic.

But 3ly, they maintain; that all such Division wherein a particular person, or
Church departs from the whole, or wherein a Subordinate Person or Church from
all their Spiritual Superiors for such matters wherein Obedience is required
from them by all these, or by the whole; is such Schism, as renders them no
longer any part of the Church Catholic; nor Members of the Body of Christ.

1. [From whence they conclude: 1. That a particular Person or Church,
differing or dividing from the whole in any one Point of Faith, which is
defined by the whole, and their assent or belief required thereto, cannot plead
it self any more, to be one Church with, or a part of, the Church Catholic,
because that it agrees with it still in many, or in all other Points of Faith.
As the Arian Churches agreeing in all other Credends, save Consubstantiallity
of God the Son with the Father, became, by this no longer a part of the Church
Catholic. 2. And likewise from hence they conclude: that those, who in their
separation, 1. first deny not the Church; or Churches they separate from, to be
true Churches: 2. Who profess themselves not to renounce an inward Communion
with those departed from: 3. Who renounce not external Communion neither, if
they may be admitted thereto on terms they can approve: 4. Who exclude not
those, from whom they separate, from their own external Communion, that is if
others will conform to them: 5. Who do not set up any new external Communion at
all: 6. Lastly, Who do not publicly contradict the tenants or customs of
those Churches from which they separate: Those, I say, who can plead all these
things or themselves, are not thereby cleared from Schism; because their
Separation may be, tho, in none of these things, yet otherwise faulty
(mentioned above); and tho some Churches heretofore noted for Schism, have
offended in some of these, yet it hence follows not, that those who offend in
none of these are free from Schism. 3. Again they conclude from hence, that
those, who refuse to conform to something, which the Church Catholic requires
of them, that they may be Partakers of her external Communion, and for this are
by her thrust out of her Communion, are guilty of Schism, as well as those who
before any Ejection voluntarily desert it. Else Arians, and many other
Heretics would have been no Schismatics. 4. Lastly, That those who never were
in the external Communion of the Church Catholic, yet stand guilty of Schism,
so long as upon the same reason, upon which the others left it, they do not
return to it, or cannot be admitted by it.]

4. They maintain, That any particular person, or multitude joined together,
dividing from the external Communion of all other particular visible Churches
of the present Age, and even from those of their own Church, as well as from
the rest ( viz. from so many of it, as continue what they were, and what the
Separatists also were formerly) must needs in this separate from the external
Communion of the Church Catholic of the present Age [for either all, or some
of these Churches, which they separate from, is so] and do separate from their
lawful Superiors [for such is the Church Catholic in respect of any part] and
so is guilty of that sort of Schism, which cuts off from the whole.

5. They affirm, that the exercise of any sacred Function is to all Heretical
or Schismatical Clergy, tho never so truly, or validly ordaioned, utterly
unlawful; and the Sacraments and other Ordinances of the Church, to the
Receivers in such Church, unbeneficial; i. e. to so many, as are conscious of
the Schism; or, only through a culpable ignorance nescient.

HEAD. XI. Concerning the Judgment and Discovery of Heresy and Schism.
Concerning the Judgment and Discovery of Heresy and Schism.
1. Catholics affirm: That all maintaining of any Tenent contrary to the known
Determination of the supremest judgment of the Church, in matters which she
declares of necessary Faith, is guilty of obstinacy, and so is Heresy.
Likewise, that all voluntary departure from the external Communion of the
Church Catholic, upon what pretenses soever of its erring, in faith or
manners, is truly causeless; (the Catholic Church being our Guide in Spiritual
matters as to both what is true, and what is lawful, to whom we ought to assent
and submit) and so Schism.

But 2ly, taking the Protestant Description of them: viz. That Heresy is an
obstinate Defense of Error, contrary to a necessary Article of Faith: and
Schism a causless Departure, or Separation from the external Catholic
Communion, and so also (being causless) from the internal; Yet Catholics urge
this as necessary; that there must be some certain Judge upon Earth authorized
to decide whether such Error be against necessary Faith; and whether the
Defense thereof be to be interpreted obstinacy; and whether such Departure be
causless. So that all the Subjects of the Church are to receive that to be
Heresy, or Schism, which this Judge pronounces to be so. Else what none can
know, and judge of, none can punish or separate from; nor the true extent of
the Church Catholic, and its Distinction from the Heretical and Schismatical,
ever be discovered.

3. It is most reasonable, that in any differences of judgment concerning
these, amongst Ecclesiastical Magistrates, or Courts of Judicature, the most
supreme for the time being must be the Judge, to whom all ought to acquiesce.
Else if a particular Person, or Church may undertake to judge these against
Superiors, Heresy and Schism will remain equally undiscovered between these
two contrary Judges, as if there were none; And Heretical and Schismatical
Churches will still free themselves of it by their own Judgment; and that
Person or Church, which contends for such Privilege at any time, gives great
suspicion that they are in such manner faulty.

4. It seems clear, that all separation of a particular Person or Church from
the external Communion of all the rest, will always by such Judge either be
pronounced causless, or the cause thereof be rectified; and so the Division
cease, if these Churches that are departed from, be the Judges of it. For
doubtless these, if they should condemn themselves, will also correct in
themselves what they do condemn.

HEAD. XII. Concerning Submission of Private Judgments to this Church Authority
indicated in the former Heads.
Concerning Submission of Private Judgments.
1. IT is conceded by Catholics, That no man can believe any thing at all, or
do any thing lawfully, against his own judgment, or conscience; as Judgment is
taken here for the final Determination, upon reviewing the former Acts of the
Intellect; and upon considering all reasons (as well those taken from Authority
as those taken from the things themselves) of what we ought to do.

2. But notwithstanding this, 2ly, It is taken for granted, That one following
his own judgment in believing, or acting, is not thereby secure from believing
amiss, or acting unlawfully; and therefore that every one is much obliged to
take care of rectifying his Judgment, or directing aright his Conscience.

3. That the same Judgment may be swayed contrary ways by several Arguments:
viz. One way from the Argument drawn from Authority, and another way from his
private Reason: and that when this happens, he is no less truly said to follow,
and do according to, his own Judgment who judges it meet to follow Authority
against his private Reason; then he who judges it meet, and so does the
contrary; i. e. follow his own Reason, and reject Authority: or (which is the
same) follow Authority merely for the Reasons it gives evidencing to him such
a Truth. Thus we without difficulty believe the Books of Scripture, that are
proposed us for such by sufficient Authority, to be God's word; when we find in
them some seeming contradictions, which perhaps our private Reason cannot
reconcile. And every one, who believes, that God has commanded him an assent,
and submission of Judgment in Spiritual matters to his Ecclesiastical
Superiors, does, in yielding it, follow his own Judgment, even when in yielding
it, he goes contrary to his own private Reason.

4. It is freely conceded, That supposing that one has infallible certainty of
a thing from private Reason, or any other way whatever, such person cannot
possibly yield obedience of assent to any Authority whatever proposing the
contrary to be believed by him.

5. But notwithstanding, 5ly, It is affirmed by Catholics, That every one
ought to yield assent, and submit his Judgment (even when by plausible
arguments of private Reason otherways biased and swayed) in all Spiritual
matters, wherein such assent is required to the Authority of the Church, and
those Spiritual Superiors, who are by Christ appointed in these matters the
Guides of his Faith. And also, That none can ever have, from private Reason, an
infallible certainty of the contrary of that which the Church enjoins him to
believe.

6. But supposing, that such a certainty in some Points by some persons could
be had; yet 6ly, If no more may plead freedom from obedience of assent to the
Church's Authority, than only those, who pretend infallible certainty (as
nothing less than this seems sufficient to reject so great an Authority, and so
divinely assisted); then the most part of Christians (I mean all the unlearned
at least, unfit to read Fathers, compare Texts of Scripture etc. in matters
controverted) will always be obliged to follow this Authority, tho against
their private Reason. And, for the other, since one may think himself
infallibly certain, who is not so, (for men of contrary opinions not
unfrequently, both, plead it) these seem to have, as little humility, so little
security, in relying thereon; especially, when, so many others, having the same
Evidences, and, as these men ought to think, better Judgments, and having
larger promises of Divine assistance, and lastly, appointed for their Guides,
shall apprehend so much certainty of, as to decree the contrary.

7. To one who as yet doubts whether there be any Authority, or amongst many
pretending to it, which of them it is, to which God has subjected him for the
guidance of his Judgment in Spiritual matters, to such a one the use of his
private Reason, in the Quest thereof, is not denied by Catholics. But 1st,
they affirm that such Guide being found, here the use of his private Reason
against such Authority cease for those things, wherein he is enjoined
obedience to it; which indeed are but few in comparison of those vast Volumes
of Theological Controversies, wherein private Judgment still enjoys its
liberty. 2ly, That, if by reason of a faulty search, such Guide is not
discovered by him, none is, therefore, held excused from obedience to such
Guide, or licensed to use his liberty, in both which he is culpably mistaken.
3ly, That, as it is left to our reason to seek, so that it is much easier for
us by it to find out, this Guide, that is appointed to direct us; than to find
out the Truth of all those things, wherein she is ready to direct us: (more
easy to find out the Church, than to understand all the Scriptures:) and that
from the use of private Reason in some things; none may therefore rationally
claim it in all.

HEAD. XIII. Concerning the necessary Means or Motive of attaining Faith Divine
and Salvifical.
Concerning the necessary means of attaining faith Divine and Salvifical.
1. IT is certain, that all Faith Divine, or wrought in us by God's Spirit, is
infallible; or, that the Proposition which is so believed never is, or can be
false.

2. Again Catholics affirm; that the Authority, or proposal of the Church, is
a sufficiently infallible ground of the Christians belief for all necessary
Points of Faith. From which Infallibility in the Church (which is clearly
revealed in Scripture, and by Tradition Apostolical) delivering such Points
unto them, they also maintain, a firm Faith is had among Catholics of all
those necessary Points which are not, in Scripture, or Tradition, as to all
men, so clearly revealed. Whilst others, denying this Infallibility in the
Church, either miscarry in their Faith concerning some of these Points, or can
have no external firm ground of their believing them.

3. Catholics affirm also, that a right Belief of some Articles of Faith
profits not, as to Salvation, persons Heretical in some other. But 4ly, many
learned Catholics deny, That a known Infallibility of the external Proponent
or Motive of ones Faith [or a certainty, not from a firm adhesion of mind
wrought by the Spirit, whereby a man is without all doubt, but from the
Infallibility of the external means of his Faith, that he cannot err] is
necessary, that Faith may be truly Divine or Salvifical; See Card. Lugo, De
Virtute fidei. Dis. 1.. 12. n. 247.251, 252. Estius 3. Sent. 23. d. 13..
Layman, Theol. Moral. 2. l. 1. Tract. 5. c. or (consequently) That such
external motive or means, for producing Divine Faith, needs to be, to every
man, one, and the same; Or lastly, That one cannot have Divine Faith in any one
Article of Faith who culpably erreth in any other.

Next, Concerning the necessity of an explicit, or sufficiency of an
implicit, Faith.
Concerning explicit, and implicit Faith.
1. It is freely acknowledged by Catholics, that to some Articles of the
Christian Faith, an explicit or express Faith, wherein the Article in its
terms is particularly known, and professed, is necessary to all Christians,
that have the use of reason; of what condition or calling soever. But to how
many Articles such Faith is necessary, it is not easy punctually to determine.

2. Catholics teach that all Christians are obliged, by what means soever
afforded them, to acquire an explicit Faith, of all other Articles of Faith,
or Precepts of good Life, which are any way either necessary, or profitable to
their Salvation, so far as their capacities, or callings do permit, or also
require them.

3. That all Christians ought in general, or implicitly, to believe; that
whatever God has revealed, or the Church in her Definitions, or Expositions of
the Divine Revelations, delivers as matter of Faith, and to be believed, is
to be believed; and ought also to be ready explicitly to hold and profess
whatever is at any time sufficiently proposed to them to be such. And other
implicit Faith, than the forementioned, is not allowed; nor other explicit
Faith, than the forementioned required.

[Therefore that Proposition [Haec est vera Catholica fides, extra quam nemo
Salvus esse potest] as applied to the larger Creeds, that of Athanasius; or yet
further, to all the Decrees of all lawful Ecumenical Councils, as in the Bull
of Pius the Fourth, ought either to be understood not distributively; as if any
Decree of any such Council unknown, and so not believed, or assented to,
excludes from Salvation: For, how few among Christians do know, or yield
actual assent to all the Decrees of some one Council? And how can the Doctors
of that Church require such Belief to all the Decrees, suppose, of the Council
of Trent, a many of whom require it not to all the Articles of the Apostles
Creed? But collectively, thus; That all that Fides extra quam nemo Salvus, is
contained therein: and that extra eam totaliter sumptam, or si tota desit, nemo
Salvus esse potest. As elsewhere, in the same Council of Trent, the Nicene
Creed is called. Fundamentum firmum, and unicum contra quod portae inferi
nunquam praevalebunt. Conc. Trid. Sess. 3. or to be understood distributively;
but hypothetically, thus, That when any one knows any such Article to have been
defined by the Church (wherein a non-culpable ignorance of the Church's
Definitions always excuses) he after this, in non-believing, or in dissenting
from such Article, does by this his Pertinacy, and Disobedience to the Church,
as by other greater sins, persisted in, and unrepented of, incur the loss of
Salvation.]

HEAD. XIV. Concerning Obedience to Humane Laws, made by the Ecclesiastical or
Civil Magistrate.
Concerning Obedience required to Humane Laws.
1. Catholics do not affirm, from God's commanding Obedience to the
Ecclesiastical and Civil Magistrate, and to their Laws, That, therefore all
Dis-obedience to them, or their Laws, is a mortal Sin. For, so, all
Dis-obedience to any of their Laws whatever, tho never so light for their
matter, would be mortal Sin.

2. It is manifest; that many times the matter which these Magistrates command
is antecedently our duty in obedience to some Divine Law under Penalty of
Mortal Sin, tho they had not commanded it. As in matters of much consequence to
the public, or our private, good, the Charity to our Neighbor, or also to our
selves, that is commanded by God's Law, requires that, which the Magistrate
also exacts of us. In such cases, therefore, there may be a great, and mortal
Sin, committed in dis-obeying the Ecclesiastical or Civil Laws, but this by
virtue of the Divine concurring with, and corroborating, them in these
particular Injunctions.

3. Catholics affirm, That the Breach of a humane Law (made in a thing that is
left indifferent by the Divine) out of contempt may be a greater Sin, than
breaking one of the Divine Precepts out of Infirmity; but this is also by
virtue of our offending against another particular Divine Law, prohibiting such
contempt of the Magistrate. But (such contempt, neglect, etc. set aside) that a
much greater guilt is ordinarily contracted from the breach of a Divine, than
only an humane command, both from the greater necessity and benefit in general
of the matter of the Laws Divine, and from the supreme Dignity and Majesty of
the immediate Legislator.

4. Catholics affirm, That no humane Laws made in matters of what consequence
soever, do bind beyond the Law-Giver's intention; so that such Laws, tho given
in matters of greatest moment, bind not under pain of mortal Sin, (I mean, as
they are his Laws) if he does not intend them to do so. In whose Power since it
is to lay no obligation, so not to lay the greatest.

5. That whatever obligation to Sin such Laws may have from the Lawgivers
intention, yet that, in some Circumstances they may not bind at all (as the
Divine do); as, in Periculo mortis; cum pergravi damno, aut infamia, etc; for
quod valde difficile moraliter impossible; and to Impossibles Laws bind not. I
say, if the thing commanded appear not of a greater consequence, than such
private damage, nor has been expressed by the Magistrate to be esteemed so.
Otherwise it is presumed that the Lawgiver, in that Charity which he owes to
his Subjects, does, or ought to, pass his Laws without any intention that they
should bind under Sin in such cases.

6. Most of the Church's Laws are passed without any express Declaration of her
Subjects incurring mortal Sin in the Breach of them (yet this rationally
collected by her Doctors from the great consequence of the matter commanded,
the heavy punishment annexed, etc.) And sometimes her Laws are so indulgent, as
to oblige to a Penalty only, without any Guilt laid upon the Transgressor of
them.

HEAD. XV. Of Justification.
Of Justification.
COncerning Justification, whereby man has Right, by virtue of the Evangelical
Covenant, to freedom from eternal Death, and possession of eternal Life.

1. Catholics declare: That by Justification they mean both God's pronouncing,
or reputing Man just, or not unjust: (i. e.) freed from his wrath, and from
punishment due to the unjust; by God's free remission of all his former Sins.
And 2ly, God's making, and so reputing, him just, or holy, by habitual Grace
infused; or by inherent righteousness. Thus making God's Remission of the
former Acts of Sin; and our Sanctification, (and so, by it, the removal of
former habits of Sin,) the two parts of our Justification; or the two effects
of God's mercy in justifying us. a.

a Conc. Trid. Sess. 6.7. c. Hanc dispositionem Justificatio ipsa consequitur;
quae non est Sola peccatorum remissio, sed and Sanctificatio, and Renovatio
interioris hominis etc. Again: In ipsa Justificatione, cum Remissione
peccatorum, haec omnia simul infusa accipit homo per Jesum Christum, cui
inseritur; fidem, Spem, and Charitatem. 6. Sess. 11. Can. Si quis dixerit,
homines justificari Sola peccatorum remissione, exclusa gratia, and charitate,
quae in cordibus eorum per Spiritum Sanctum infunditur, Anathema sit. Bellarm.
de Justificationes, l. 2. 6. c. Cum tam mors Christi, quam resurrectio ad
justificationem necessaria esset, potuisset Beatus Paulus utramque partem
justificationis, (i. e.) Remissionem peccati, and donum renovationis tribuere
morti Christi; sed maluit resurrectioni tribuere renovationem, Romans 4.15. And.
Deinde. Justificatio non ideo Solum nobis confertur a Deo, ut Gehennae paenas
evadamus [ i. e per remissionem peccatorum] sed etiam, ut praemia vitae
caelestis acquiramus [ i. e. per gratiae infusionem, and bona opera.] And see
Ibid. c. 2.. Quod si: Where he makes, remissionem peccatorum, and infusionem
gratiae duos effectus Dei hominem justificantis. Where therefore renovatio
interioris hominis per susceptionem gratiae is affirmed to be the formal cause
of Justification; and deletion of Sin, to be the effect of it. It is spoken of
the only formal cause of Justification, that is within us, and from which we
are denominated really just (whereas the remission of Sin is an act of God
without us); and of the deletion of the habit of Sin inherent, not of the
pardon of the acts of Sin formerly committed.

After that, this is agreed on also by Protestants; that these two go always
together, and that none is reconciled or received into God's favor by
remission of Sin, who is not also, at the same time, renewed in his mind, and
made righteous by infusion of the Holy Spirit. b.

b. Calvin, Institut. Lib. 3. chapter 14.. 9. Fatemur dum nos, intercedente Christi
justitia, sibi reconciliat Deus ac gratuita peccatorum remissione donatos pro
justis habet, cum ejusmodi misericordia conjunctum hoc esse beneficium, quod
per Spiritum suum in nobis habitat, Lib. 3. cap. 16.. 1. Jam utrumque nobis
confert Christus, and utrumque fide consequimur, vitae scilicet novitatem, and
gratuitam reconciliationem. De vera Christianae pacificationis ratione. 2. Cap.
Si quis ex adverso objiciat non aliter nos fieri participes Christi justitiae,
quia dum ejus Spiritu in obedientiam legis renovamur, hoc quidem fatendum est,
etc. Again: Neque vero cum homines dicimus gratis justificari Christi
beneficio, tacenda est regeneationis gratia. Quin potias cavendum, ne a nobis
separentur, quae perpetuo Dominus conjungit. Quid ergo? Doceantur homines fieri
non posse, ut justi censeantur Christi Merito, quin renoventur ejus Spiritu in
sanctissimam vitam; frustraque gratuita Dei adoptione gloriari omnes, in quibus
Spiritus regenerationis non habitat; denique nullos a Deo recipi in gratiam,
qui non justi quoque vere fiant.

Mountague, Appeal p. 170. Whom Christ does not quicken he does not justify.
This is directly the Doctrine of the Scripture. Gal. 3.22. 1. Cor. 6.11. Heb.
9.14. Rev. 1.5, 6. 1. Pet. 2.9. Fathers also are cited, etc. Bishop Forbes de
Justific. Lib. 2. c. 4. Protestants unanimi consensu fatentur inhaerentis
justitiae seu sanctitatis infusionem cum gratuita nostri justificatione
necessario ac perpetuo conjunctam esse.

Now first that our Justification consists not only in the former, but also in
the later, Catholics evidently collect from many Texts of Scripture; which do
apply our freedom from God's wrath, and punishment, and inheriting eternal
life to this later; as other Texts do to the former. Such are these. Romans 3.24.
Where we are said to be justified freely [ i. e. without any thing in us
deserving it] by his Grace [ i. e. infused, as all grant it is, at that time
when God justifies us.] Titus 3.5. ver. Where speaking of Baptism, the Apostle
says, That according to his mercy he saved us by the laver of regeneration,
and renovation [ i. e. internal] of the Holy Ghost; that being justified by his
Grace [ i. e. in this internal renovation etc.] we should be made Heirs of
eternal life. 1. Cor. 6.11. compared with the former; where speaking of the
same Baptism he says, But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified in the name of the Lord Jesus [into which they are baptized] and by
the Spirit of God [ i. e. infused in our Baptism; by which infused we are said
here expressly, as to be sanctified, so justified; and this put the last, as
also Romans 8.30. it is put alone, but there necessarily including also our
Sanctification.] Romans 4.25. Where Christ is said to be delivered for our
offenses [ i. e. the remission of them], and to be raised again for our
justification [ i. e. for our regeneration or renovation by the Spirit given
unto us upon his Resurrection] comp. Romans 8.10. Ephesians. 4.23, 24. [where the new
man is said to be created in justice] Gal. 5, 6. comp. 6.15. Romans 6.7. He that
is dead [ i. e. to Sin by a new life given by Grace] is justified from Sin,
comp. Gal. 3.21. Romans 5.17.21. Where it is said, That those who receive
abundance of Grace, and donation of Justice, shall reign in life, etc. And that
Grace reigns [ i. e. in us] by [or thr] Justice to life eternal. It were
needless to add more. To the same matter belong all those Texts, wherein we are
said, By being born again, and by inherent righteousness, to be made Friends,
Domestics, Children, Heirs of God. All those Texts which atribute Salvation,
or also remission of Sin, or punishment, either to the several particular
habits and branches of this inherent Righteousness (as to that of Faith, of
Hope, or Charity, of the Love, or Fear, or Service of God; or Love, Mercy, and
Alms to our Neighbor); or to the several Act: of these Habits, and Graces; [
i. e. to our good works, following Regeneration.]

Lastly, All those Texts, wherein God is said, To accept persons for their
inherent holiness, or righteousness. And as this is evident in Scripture, so it
is concluded by many Protestants; that the Term Justification, both, sometimes
in Scripture, and most frequently by the Fathers, is used to signify not only
remission of Sin, but internal Sanctification: and in this Latitude have
several Protestants themselves explained it. g.

g. Bishop Forbes de Justificatione, Lib. 2. Cap. 4. cioncerning the
Scriptures. Verbum, justificari, quandoque etiam in Scriptura significare,
justitia imbui, vel donari, non diffitentur permulti docti Protestants; contra
aliorum rigidorum id pertinaciter negantium sententiam; quoting there the words
of Beza, Zanchy, Peter Martyr, Chamier, and others. Again concerning the
Fathers, Ibid. c. 5. Hanc fuisse communem Patrum omnium tum Graecorum, tum
Latinorum Sententiam, ex quamplurimis illorum dictis, Augustini imprimis
acerimi gratiae Christi propugnatoris, nemini, in veterum lectione versato,
obscurum esse potest. Res adeo certa, and manifesta est, ut dissentientes
ipsimet [Protestantes] id ultro concedunt; quoting the Confessions of Calvin,
Chemnitius Beza, Bucer, Chamier, etc. to this purpose. Imo (says the same
Forbes) multi etiam doctissimi Protestants* hanc ipsam sententiam secuti sunt,
aut saltem eam non omnino improbarunt; quoting after many others, Spalatensis,
Bishop Mountague, and Dr. Field: Whose words are, Append. 3. l. 11. c. The
first Justification implies in it three things, remission of Sins past,
acceptance and receiving into that favor, that righteous men are wont to find
with God; and the grant of the gift of the Holy Spirit, and of that sanctifying
and renewing Grace, whereby we may be framed to the declining of Sin, and doing
of the works of righteousness.

2. Again Catholics contend, that in comparing these two concurrents to our
Justification, the later [ i. e. to be made internally and habitually just ut
peccatis mortui justitiae vivamus, 1. Pet. 2.24.] is the chiefer, and more
principal, then the first; [ i. e. to be reputed only, not unjust, or not a
Sinner.] To which may be added, that there being two things very considerable
in Sin; the transient act, and the remaining habit; of which the later is far
the worse; and of which it is necessary, that the one be deleted, as well as
the other pardoned, for any one to be accounted positively just, or not
impious; this later (the habit) is not removed or abolished, but by Grace first
infused; and also, whether before, or rather after the same Grace infused, our
former actual Sins are pardoned, is thought by Protestants a thing doubtful,
and not necessary to be decided.d.

d. See the words of Calvin, in Antidoto Conc. Trident. Of Beza contra
Illyricum, and others in Forbes de Justific. 2. l. 4. c. p. 70, 71. Simul nos,
and justificari, and renovari, (says Calvin) dico in Christo per fidem nobis
unito and applicato: neque haec an illa ordine antegrediatur, tantillum
laborandum censeo, cum unam sine altera nunquam recipiamus.

This infusion of Grace therefore, by several titles, claims the chief place in
our Justification, and is that thing only in us that justifies or makes us to
be really just; and so is usually styled the formal cause of our Justification.

3. Meanwhile, both the one and the other being the effects only of God's
mercy, Catholics affirm: That since God justifies us, not for those, but for
the righteousness and sufferings of Christ, as the sole meritorious cause
thereof, it is not necessary, as to our Justification, in respect of inherent
righteousness, that this be every way consummate and perfect.

4. Nay further; they freely concede, that it is such, as, that it does produce
some particular acts perfect and without contagion of Sin, learned Protestants
assenting. e.

e. Forbes, Ibid. c. 5. Ecquid magis injuriose and contumeliose dici potest in
Christi Gratiam; quam asserere, nos nihilominus nihil prorsus vel cogitare, vel
dicere, vel agere posse quod purum sit a peccati Sorde? And. 13. Sententia haec
rigida multis etiam doctissimis Protestantibus, aliisque viris moderatissimis,
semper unprobata fuit; quoting them at large, Ibid.

Yet, ordinarily, it does many, or the most, mixed with several imperfections;
and that Venial Sins do both adhere to, and intervene between, many of the good
actions of the justified. z.

z. Estius, 2. Sent. 41. d. 4.. Et justi in iis operibus, quae indubitate bona
sunt, saepe-numero peccant, dum its se aliquonsque vel concupiscentiae, vel
negligentiae, vel alicujus levioris circumstantiae ad integritatem boni operis
requisitae defectus admiscent. Forbes de Justificatione, 4. l. 3. c. 8..
Communiter sentiunt Romani, nullum Sanctorum vitare posse omnia venialia
peccata per longum vitae tempus. Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. Can. 23.

Which Sins after are remitted only by God's Mercy through Christ's Merits, as
those are before Justification. g.

g. Bellarm. de Justificat. 4. l. 14. c. In Answer to the Objection [Post
primam reconciliationem Christus ociosus esset] says, no; Quoniam peccata
nostra, quamvis levia and quotidiana, ipse purgat, and sanguis ejus emundat nos
ab omni peccato. Estius, 2. Sent. 42. d. 6.. Nemo quantumcunque justus, nisi
sanguine Christi Redemptoris etiam a Veniali peccato emundatus fuit, in regnum
Dei admitti potest. See the same in Bellarm. de Justificat. 4. l. 21. c.. Resp.
non dicit.

5. Lastly, Several learned Catholics do not hold this inherent righteousness
or internal renovation so absolutely necessary to man's Justification; i. e. to
remission of Sin, or capacity of future Glory, as that none possibly could, had
it so pleased God, received from him pardon of his offenses; or also, through
virtue of Christ's merits, an eternal glory, without having such inherent
righteousness, and whilst he only reduced to his pure Naturals; or that none
could possibly, or justly, be deprived of Glory, that has such inherent
righteousness; Vid. Bellarmin de Justificat. 2. l. 16. c. Reatus paenae.
quartus effectus. Scotus, 1. Sent. 17. d. F. a Sanct. Clara Deus, Natura, Prob.
23.) But only maintaining, that it is God's Pact or Covenant, and declared
Will, that Christ's Merits should, this and no other way, merit for us freedom
from Hell, and life eternal: Namely, First by satisfying for our former Sins;
and procuring for us this donation of the sanctifying Spirit within us. 2ly,
What Catholics do include in, and understand by Justification, being thus
explained: Next they affirm, that there is nothing in man, that can
antecedently merit this our Justification; but that the sole meritorious cause
of it, both in respect of remission of Sin, or any punishment due unto it, and
of the donation of Grace destroying in us the habits and pollutions of Sin, and
producing good works, is the obedience active and passive; the works, labors,
sufferings, and satisfactions of Jesus Christ only, exclusive to the works,
sufferings, or satisfactions of any other. Where also they maintain, that
neither any works of our's, done by the mere strength of nature, have the least
worth in them to procure God's assistant Grace, for the producing of any
previous disposition to this Justification (as of Faith, Repentance, a love of
God etc.) Nor again these dispositions, tho wrought by assistant Grace, and
having some supernatural dignity in them, have any such worth, as, by it to
procure from God (setting aside his mere bounty and free promise) the
Justification it self. z.

z. Conc. Trid. Sess. 6.8. c. Nihil eorum quae justificationem praecedunt, sive
fides, sive opera, ipsam justificationis gratiam promeretur. It Is true that
these dispositions to, or conditions of, man's Justification, as effected by
Grace, having some true worth in them (tho this no way comparable to the Acts
produced by Grace inherent after Justification), and, besides having a gracious
promise made to, or acceptance of, them (which two things none can deny) some
Catholic Authors think, that this word Meritum, qualifying it with the
addition de congruo, may be justly applied to them (especially since St.
Austine, and other Fathers, have so applied it formerly (St. Austine, and other
Fathers, have so applied it formerly (St. Aust. Ep. 105, 106.) others think
not; the matter agreed on, the difference is about words, and the Church's
Subjects left to their liberty: See Bellarm. de Justific. 1. l. 21. c. And see
Head XVI. Merits.

3. Yet they next affirm: That there are some conditions or dispositions
required of us, and also by God's free, first exciting, and then assisting,
Grace (man's Will assenting and cooperating) wrought in us: Which, tho by any
worth of theirs they cannot merit, yet by virtue of God's free Promise, and the
new Covenant, do certainly impetrate the applying (or if Protestants Will,
imputing) to us both the active and passive Obedience of Christ, viz. all his
Merits, which are accepted by God instead of, and as if they had been, our own:
but this not as to our being esteemed by God our selves to have done them; (for
none can truly be said, or thought, to have performed such righteousness, or
satisfactions, that has not done them himself, but another for him); but as to
the benefit, or effect of them. chapter

chapter Bellarm. de Justificat. 2. l. 10. c. Dominus Jesus Christus justitia
nostra, 1. Cor. 1. Quoniam satisfecit Patri pro nobis, and eam Satisfactionem
ita nobis donat, and communicate, cum nos justificat, ut nostra satisfactio, and
justitia dici potest: And a little after. Non esset absurdum, si quis diceret
nobis imputari Christi justitiam, and merita, cum nobis donentur, and
applicentur, ac si nos ipsi Deo satisfecissemus; modo non negetur, esse in
nobis praeterca justitiam inhaerentem etc. Again, Ibid. 7. c. Si solum vellent,
nobis imputari Christi merita [or justitiam] quia nobis donata sunt, and
possumus ea Deo Patri offerre pro peccatis nostris etc. Recta esset eorum
sententia. Cap. 11. Potest sano modo accommodari exemplum Patriarchae Jacob
justitiae imputativae, si quis dicat; oportere, ut induamus merita Christi [I
add, or Justitiam, sive obedientiam activam, Christi, for this also is part of
his Merits,] (See Bellarm. de Christo, 5. l. 9. c initio) and illis quodammodo
tecti, petamus a Deo indulgentiam peccatorum: nam solus Christus, pro peccatis
nostris satisfacere potuit. I add, tam obedientia activa (See Romans 5.18, 19.
Gal. 4.4, 5. Phil. 2.5. etc. Matt. 3.15) quam passiva: and illa satisfactio
nobis donatur, and applicatur, and nostra reputatur, cum Deo reconciliamur, and
justificamur. Thorndike, Epilog. 2. l. 29. c. p. 248. The Supposition, that one
man's doings or sufferings, may be personally, and immediately imputed to
another man's account is utterly unreasonable. And I therefore must, and do,
say; that as it is sufficient, so it it is true, that the sufferings of Christ
are imputed unto us in the nature of a meritorious cause, moving God to grant
mankind those terms of Reconcilement, which the Gospel imports.

Not all the benefit and effect in such a manner, as that whatever is any way
due to the active or passive righteousness of Christ, is thus due to us: (for
so we should all receive a future reward equal to one another; and also equal
to that of Christ our Lord's); but all that benefit and effect of them, which
our sinful condition stands in need of; and which God has further thought fit
to dispense, for the purchasing, (by an equal compensation and satisfaction) of
our present pardon and future Glory. The benefit and reward of which merits, as
to our glorification, he applies variously, according to the different degrees
of our own present sanctity and good works, that dispose us for such a
participation of these Merits. Such dispositions, produced by prevenient and
assistant Grace (in adultis) are a certain degree of Faith, or believing the
truth of all the Divine Revelations and Promises; and particularly that of
God's justifying the ungodly by his Grace, through the redemption which is in
Christ Jesus; the fear of God's judgments for Sin; hope and trust in his mercy
through Christ; love of his goodness; hate, and repentance, for former Sins;
serious purpose of a better life, and observance of God's Commandments; and the
desire, and susception (where opportunity) of Baptism, the Sacrament
instrumental hereunto. (See Conc. Trid. Sess. 6.6. c.) 4ly, They grant, that
among these previous dispositions or conditions of Justification, Faith is the
beginning of the rest; and so the Foundation and root of all our Justification,
and that without which it is impossible, in any other act, to please God. So,
we neither fear God's Judgments; nor hope for his Pardon; nor love his
Goodness; nor put confidence in his only Son's Merits, unless we first believe
these. And therefore St. Paul opposing the condition of the new Covenant
[Faith, and all other acts, or works following it, as by God's promise to them,
and not their own worth, applying Christ's Merits to us for our Justification]
to the merits of the works of the Law, in the Jew; and of Nature in the
Gentile: (but never opposing Faith to any of those acts of Grace consequential,
so long as these maintained, in no other manner, to concur to our
Justification, than Faith it self does; therefore most perfectly agreeeth with
St. James. l.

l. Mr. Thorndike, Just Weights, 9. c. p. 60. To be justified by Faith alone
is, with St. Paul, to be justified by Christianity alone. St. James in arguing
that a Christian is justified by Works and not by Faith alone; intended to
teach, that the profession of Christianity justifies not, when it is not
performed. Bishop Forbes de Justify. 4. l. 6. c. p. 173. Sanctus Paulus
intellexit semper ex fide viva, and quatenus viva, [i. e. operante vel externe
vel interne per charitatem] nos justificari. Atque hoc ipsum est, quod Beatus
Jocobus hic, sed Paulo clarius, and distinctius, affirmat; hominem ex operibus
justificari, and non ex fide tantum. The same thing appears from St. Paul's
Arguments made against Justification by Works, many of which are faulty, if
made against Works following Faith, and wrought by Grace. As his arguing, Romans
4.4. Romans 4.13. compared with 2.6. 1. Cor. 3.13, 14. Jo. 15.10. Gal. 2.21. --
5.4. -- 3.13. Ephesians. 2.8, 9, 10. Tit. 3, 4, 5. Phil. 3.9. compared with the
precedent verses, 3, 4, 5, 6. and with Romans 10.3. -- 9.31. In all, or most of
which, if instead of works of the Law, you read works of the formerly justified
and pardoned their Sins by God's mere mercy produced by Grace, that is procured
by Christ's merits, you will find the arguing and consequence invalid and
faulty. This Apostle, I say, mentions this Faith more frequently than the rest;
as being the very beginning, and first fruits of Divine Grace, and that without
which none of the rest, that are added to it, either can be at all, or if
being, can be any thing worth. m.

m. Conc. Trid. Sess. 6.8. c. Cum vero Apostolus dicit, justificari hominem per
fidem; per fidem ideo justificari dicimur, quia fides est humanae salutis
initium, fundamentum, and radix omnis justificationis; sine qua impossible est
placere Deo, and ad filiorum ejus consortium pervenire. Stapleton de
Justificat. 8. l. c. ult. Fide nos necessario vel ante omnia, and maxim
justificamur, dum impius quidem justificatur; quia a fide ordiendum est; Dum
justus autem justificatur magis; quia omnia justitiae opera in fide recta
fieri, and a fide procedere debent. Bellarm. de Justificat. 5 l. 7. c. In
homine nondum conciliato primus motus ad salutem est fidei; inde sequitur amor,
and desiderium beatitudinis per fidem jam cognitae, post amorem sive
cupiditatem Beatitudinis sequitur in homine spes [Mediante reconciliatione]
consequendae ejusdem beatitudinis etc.

5. This Faith therefore Catholics maintain, That it may be said in this
respect primarily to justify us (I mean by way of disposition, and condition
required, and accepted, from us in order thereto.) But 5ly, not it solely;
either when it is not accompanied with the rest (for so it may be, but in such
case is injustificant): or yet as if, when so accompanied, it alone, and not
they, as well as it, and in the same manner as it, concurred to our
Justification. For first, in the Scriptures frequently our Justification ( i.
e. pardon of Sin, and donation of Grace) is attributed as to it, so to them.
See for Repentance (which also includes fear) justifying, or procuring both
remission of Sin, and renovation by the Spirit, the Apostles Sermons in the
Acts, chapter 2. v. 38. Repent (says St. Peter) and be Baptized in the Name of
Jesus Christ for the remission of Sins; and you shall receive the gift of the
Holy Ghost. And Chap. 3. ver. 19. Repent ye that your sins may be blotted out.
Chap. 5. ver. 31. This Prince has God exalted to give Repentance to Israel,
and remission of Sins. And Chap. 11. ver. 18. Then has God (say the
Christians) also given to the Gentiles repentance unto life. And Luke 24.47.
Our Lord commands, That Repentance and remission of Sin be preached in his
Name unto all Nations; And Luke 13.3.5. tells the People, That without
Repentance, they must perish (See the same, 2. Pet. 3.9. 1. Jo. 1.9. But if we
confess our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive them; in so much that it
is agitated in the Schools, whether Faith, or Repentance, in our Justification,
have, I say, not the first (for Repentance presupposes Faith) but the
principal, place. The same may be showed of Love: Luke 7.47. Much is forgiven
her (says our Lord) because she loved much. And 1. Jo. 3.14. We know that we
are translated from death to life, because we love the brethren; he that loves
not, abides in death. And very frequently it is the reward of eternal Life
particularly promised. See 1. Cor. 2.9. Luke 6.35. Jam. 1.12.2.5. Romans 8.28. 1.
Cor. 16.22. The same promise of Remission of Sin, and eternal life made, yet
more frequently, to Obedience, Reformation of Life, works of Charity and Mercy.
Matt. 6.15. If ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will the Father
forgive your trespasses. Matt. 5.7. Blessed are the merciful for they shall
obtain mercy. Acts, 10.35. In every Nation, He that fears God and works
righteousness, is acceptable to him. Heb. 6.10. God is not unrighteous to
forget your work and labor of Love. And 2. Tim. 4.7, 8. The Lord, the just
Judge, lays up a Crown of Righteousness for those who fight a good Fight. And
Gal. 6.7. Be not deceived [saith the Apostle St. Paul, speaking of good works]
God is not mocked; what a man sowes that shall he reap. And let no man deceive
you (says St. John, 1. Epist. c. 3. v. 7.) He that does righteousness is
righteous, even as he [our Lord Christ] is righteous. It Is needless to name
more. See St. Jam. c. 2. v. 21. etc. Matt. 5.1. Jo. 15.14. Nay not only by
their deeds, but words also, men are justified, or condemned. Matt. 12.37. The
same promise made also to the receiving of the Sacraments. Acts, c. 2.28. --
22.16. Ephesians. 5.26. Tit. 3.5, 6, 7. This concerning the Expressions of Scripture.

2. As Faith may be conceived to justify us only by its relation to, and
apprehension of, Christ's Merits; and not as it is a work of our's any way
meriting of, it self our Justification, so also may all the rest of the
forenamed dispositions. For by Love and Hope, built on Faith, we do yet more
closely apprehend and apply these Merits, than we do by Faith alone; and as God
is pleased to justify us by Christ's Merits, but not by these unknown to us,
but that he first requires an eye of Faith that we see them; or if you will, a
hand of Faith that we take, or lay hold of them: So he requires further the
arms of Love to embrace them, and of Hope to hold them fast; and this, after
that Repentance also with much importunity, and tears has first procured our
nearer access to them; otherwise whatever we think, our Faith without these,
sees, or catches at them, but possesses them not; and what greater opposition
is there showed to our meriting, by saying we are justified by Faith alone, and
that relatively too, than that by Faith and other works of Grace; so long as we
say; all, in their proper acts, only point at, and terminate in, the same
Merits of Christ, not their own; as well as Faith does? r.

Of this matter well the Cardinal de Justificatione, Lib. 1. 16. Cap. Esto,
apprehendatur aliquo modo justificatio per fidem, certe non ita apprehenditur,
ut reipsa jam habeatur, and inhaereat; sed solum, ut sit in mente per modum
objecti, action intellectus, aut voluntatis, apprehensi: at hoc modo
apprehendunt etiam amor and gaudium, ut scribit St. Augustinus in Lib. 8. Cons.
cap. 2. Ubi de Victorino loquens: volebant eum, inquit, omnes rapere in corsuum
and rapiebant amando, and gaudendo. Hae rapientium manus erant. Dr. Fern,
Answer to Scripture Mistaken, 4. c. p. 92. Albeit good Works do not justify,
but follow Justification, yet are there many works, or workings of the Soul
required in, and to Justification. Again, These works, or workings of the Soul
[naming there desire fear, love, sorrow, purposes,] are preparatory, and
dispositive to Justification. And Page 94. There are other acts, and works
also, besides Faith, which according to their measure are required in
Justification, as conditions of receiving remission of Sins; so, Repentance,
and the act of Charity in forgiving others. Bishop Forbes de Justificat. 1. l.
4. c. Sacrae literae nusquam nec diserte, nec per necessariam consequentiam,
fidoi Soli omnem omnino vim justificandi tribuunt; five quod idem est, asserunt
fidem esse unicum instrumentum, and medium accipiendae, and apprehendendae
gratiae justificationis. Ibid. Patres plurimi nos Sola fide justificari
affirmant. Sed si pura mente etc. legeris, clare videbis per vocem (Sola,
Patres omnia simpliciter fidei and gratiae opera a causis justificationis, and
salutis aeternae nunquam excludere voluisse. Sed primo legem naturae, and
Mosaicam. Secundo opera omnia propriis viribus, sine fide in Christum, and
gratia Dei praeveniente facta. Tertio falsam fidem, vel haeresin, cui tunc
fidem, non autem operibus opponunt. Quarto: Operum externorum etiam ex gratia
factorum, ut charitatis, paenitent^e Sacramentorum perceptionis etc;
necessitatem absolutam; quando scilicet aut potestas, aut occasio deest
ejusmodi opera faciendi; tum enim sufficit Sola fides sine operibus externis:
Sed non, sine omni bono affectu paenitentiae and dilectionis in Deum, quae
opera sunt interna. Denique quinto; omnem inanem fiduciam operum nostrorum:
Sive interne, sive externe factorum. Cap. 5.. 14. Proinde censemus omnem
rigidorum Protestantium sententiam, and a veritate, and a charitate Christiana,
alienam esse; qui assertionem de sola fide non justificante communiter a
Romanensibus defensam, citra omnem vel fidei ipsius vel meriti opinionem, etiam
improprie dicti, vel aliorum operum, seu actuum cum fide ad justificationem
concurrentium, non solum cum sancta Scriptura and piis Patribus e diametro
pugnare contendunt; sed etiam, praeter alia innumera, justam Protestantibus a
Romana Ecclesia secedendi causam praebuisse, and praebere. Dr. Hammond Pract.
Catech. 1. l.. 4. p. 75. The necessary qualifications, conditions, or moral
instruments of our Justification, are Faith, Repentance, firm purpose of a new
life, and the rest of those Graces, upon which in the Gospel, pardon is
promised the Christian. And afterward. This kind of Sanctification [so he
calls the dispositions to Justification, wrought in us by God's Grace] is
precedent in order of nature to Justification, i.e. I must first believe,
repent, and return, before God will pardon.

6. They affirm also, that one may have a true faith or belief of all the
Articles of our Creed, and particularly of this, man's Redemption through
Christ's Merits, or (if we take Faith for fiducia) may have also a fiducial
confidence, that he in particular shall obtain, or (if you will) has already
obtained, remission of his Sins, through the same redemption and merits; and
yet not by this Faith, or fiducia attain Justification, if these be not
accompanied with Repentance, and the other necessary preparations thereto. For
there are many wicked and irregenerate men; who yet do truly believe all the
Articles of the Creed, and are thereby fully convinced of their duty (yet led
away with lusts do contrary to what they know they ought) and some of them, who
are also fully (tho groundlesly, for want of Repentance, and the other
requisites) persuaded, that themselves are of the number of the justified. x

x. Thorndike, Epilog. 2. l. p. 28. It is manifest to all Christians, that
there are too many in the world, whom we cannot imagine to have any due title
to those promises, and yet do really and verily believe the Faith of Christ to
be true; and him, and his Apostles, sent from God to preach it: And [from their
belief] stand convict, that they ought to proceed accordingly. [yet] We see men
not always to do that, which reasonably [from their belief] they ought to do
etc. Again on the other side; q]Trust and confidence in God through Christ
obtains the promises of the Gospel, who denies it? But is this trust always
well grounded and true? Is it not possible for a man to imagine his title to
the promises of the Gospel to be good when it is not? I would we had no cause
to believe, how often it comes to pass.

All which argues, these other Acts are necessary concurrents to Justification,
as well as such Faith; For it seems very unreasonable, that such Faith, when
without the other (as many times it is) is effectless as to attaining
Justification; and yet, when it is with them, they effectless, and it doing the
whole; especially if the former Scriptures be reviewed using the same
expressions of their concurrence to this effect, as they do of Faith.

7. Our Justification [ i. e. remission of Sin, and infusion of habitual Grace
(which Infants also when baptized receive as well as others) whereby we are
made new creatures, and by the infusion of his Holy Spirit born of God, and his
Seed remaining in us, and so made his Sons, and Heirs] being thus attained upon
our Faith, and the other forementioned dispositions required in us. Next
Catholics grant: That the thus justified, not only have a right to, but may
also attain the possession of eternal life, before, and without external good
works issuing from such habitual or inherent Grace: or before any justification
or merit by them. And that their works are not necessary to justification (the
producing or continuing of it;) or to the obtaining the reward of it, eternal
life, when either power, as in those who as yet have not the use of reason, or
who are prevented by sudden death) or an occasion of such good works is
wanting; or also, when occasion being offered, yet the omission of such good
works amount not to a mortal Sin; by which Sins only man falls from his former
Justification. x.

But 8ly, They affirm, which is also allowed by Learned Protestants. p.

pgr;. Dr. Field, Append. to 3. l. 11. c. In Answer to Dr. Stapleton's Words.
That Actions of Virtue, and careful endeavor to walk in the Commandments of
God, are not necessary to our second Justification, or the augmentation,
progress, and daily perfecting of the same more and more, is a Calumniation;
for they [the Protestants] make the second Justification to consist in two
parts. 1st, The daily well doing, whereby the righteousness inherent is more
and more perfected: And 2ly, the daily remission of such sinful defects, as are
found in their actions. Dr. Fern, Answer to Scripture Mistaken, p. 92. If they
intend no more by second Justification than is here expressed in the Trent
Decree: viz. Renovation day by day, and yielding up our Members as Weapons of
Righteousness to Sanctification, and increase in Righteousness; we have no
cause to quarrel at the thing; but only that they will call that Justification,
which indeed is Sanctification. Bishop Forbes de Justificat. 4. l. 6. c.
Perperam a Protestantibus rigidioribus rejicitur distinctio usitatissima
justificationis in primam and secundam. Nam [praeter Justificationem primam]
necessario etiam agnoscenda, and admittenda est justificatio secunda, quae
consistit in progressu, augmento, and complemento (pro statis vitae) justitiae
primum donatae, and in remissione illorum delictorum, in quae quotidie justi
incidunt. Confirming it there with several Protestant Authorities.

That this first Justification, thus attained before these good Works, is, in
case of longer-life, both necessarily continued by good Works, or acts of
inherent Grace either external or only internal, where is some impediment of
the external, (so that he who commits a mortal Sin in omission of such works
falls from his former Justification); and also is increased; or further degrees
of Justification, or inhabitant Grace, or (as the Protestants had rather call
it) Sanctification, received, or added, by the same good works; (for such acts
external or internal do still increase the habit, or render the person more
holy); whereby the already just is still made more just, (so Abraham, tho just
before, yet was more highly justified by that Heroic act of the Oblation of
his only Son, Jam. 2.): And the future reward also becomes greater to these
good Works, according to our greater Justification by them. For if some more
imperfect acts of Faith, of Repentance, Hope, Love, etc. done only by God's
assistant Grace, did through God's promise, and Christ's merits, procure our first
Justification, and the consequents thereof; much more the same acts, and others
the like, now more perfect, and proceeding from Grace inhabitant, do, through the
same promise and merits, confer on, or procure for, us a greater or (as some
style it) a second Justification, viz. An improvement of our former justice,
the remission of such Venial Sins as are still committed by the justified, and
a richer eternal reward.

9. They affirm; That a man may fall away again from this state of
Justification by incurring those greater Sins, either of Omission or
Commission, which are for this cause, called commonly, Mortal; from which fall
he is capable of restorement to a second Justification, or justified condition
by the same means, as he attained the first; only if, instead of Baptism not
iterable, he make use of the Sacrament of. Penance for his entrance into it,
where-in concerning the just value and virtue of Penal Works, see below, Head
XIX.

10. These are the Catholics Positions concerning Justification, much tending
to the promotion of pious endeavors, and an holy life; with whom also the more
moderate Protestants, do in most, if not all, the former Points, concur. But
meanwhile there are other Tenants of the more rigid Protestants on this subject
(and several also of them broached, by the first Author of the Reformation,
which brings a very great prejudice to it) that tend much to the relaxation of
good manners, the breeding of false securities, and weakening men's endeavors in
the prosecution of a good life: such as these z.

z. See the most rigid Protestants, maintaining the most of these Opinions,
cited and censured by Bishop Forbes in his Considerationes aequae and placidae
de Justificatione. And by Dr. Hammond in his Treatise of Fundamentals, from the
11th to the 19th Chapter. And by Mr. Thorndike, Epilog. 2. l. from the 4th to
the 10th Chapter.

1st. Their placing Justification only in the remission of Sin, and imputation
to us of the righteousness of Christ; not in infusion of Grace, or renovation
of life, making men fancy, here, that all their work is done for, and without
them; none to be done in or by them. 2ly, In such remission of Sin, their
making Justification, as it were one momentaneous act, and God at one and the
same time remitting to us all our Sins past, present, and to come; which must
needs produce afterward a very careless behavior, both to committing and
repenting of Sin. 3ly, In such imputation of Christ's Righteousness, their
maintaining it in such a manner, not as if we were meritoriously justified, by
the application of the effects of it to us, as if it had been our own; but
formally justified by a translation of it, and investiture with it, in such a
manner, as if it were inherent in us, and esteemed to be done by our selves.
4ly, From whence arises also a conceit; that all men by this righteousness
(apprehended by their Faith) are equally justified: or all esteemed equally
righteous in their Justification. 5ly, And so also, that all become equal in
the future celestial reward, whether working much or working little. 6ly, Their
making the only instrument, or necessary condition required in us for
Justification, or remission of Sin, Faith alone (an easy act of the brain (as
Dr. Hammond, Of Fundamentals, p. 116. observes) having nothing in it repugnant
to our passions, and not any other good disposition wrought in us by God's
especial Grace; Repentance, purpose of a better Life, etc; and this Faith too
required of us for this purpose, not as any work, or duty, but only as an
instrument or hand to apprehend, and apply Christ's merits to us, and to make
his righteousness ours, etc. 7ly, Their making this Faith that justifies us, a
strong fiducia or full assurance that we are justified (or if you will that we
shall be justified) only on those terms, if we firmly believe we shall be so.
Which obliging men of what life soever, to believe they are, or shall be,
justified, without looking after any requisite thereto, save only this full
belief, renders those who continue still unreformed in their Manners, yet (by
such strong fancy) secure of their Salvation; whilst none more than they extol
the all sufficiency of Christ's Righteousness; nor none so much as they do, or
have reason to, diffide in, and dis-esteem their own. From which Tenent also it
follows; that all those that are truly justified, are assured, or certainly
know that they are justified; The ordinary effect of which Doctrine is, despair
in some, who find in themselves no such assurance certain; presumption in
others, who are fully assured without just cause. 8ly, Their holding that a
justifying is only a true Faith; which breeds a great presumption in those for
their being also justified persons, who do, and have no reason but to, take
themselves for true believers; and who would even give their bodies to be burnt
for any Article of the Christian Faith (1. Cor. 13.3.) and yet do, or may want
Charity; and so, Justification. 9ly, Their holding good works and the other
dispositions, that always accompany a justified Faith to be necessary to our
Justification, or Salvation, only as effects, and fruits, or also signs and
assurances, to our selves, or others of this Faith; necessary for their
presence indeed; but not for their efficiency; as causa sine qua non, ad
salutem non impediendum etc; but not as instruments, or conditions required
thereto as our Faith is: thus destroying obedience it self, by taking away the
chief motives that men have to it; and making them neglect any further
pains-taking, for the production of those things, which they are taught do
necessarily grow from Faith: or which serve only to justify them, not before
God, but Men. 10ly; Their expounding St. Paul, not only to exclude Works
performed by strength of Nature, but done by Grace, from any way disposing us,
or concurring thereto: And St. James, only to speak of good Works, as declaring
our Justification before men, not obtaining it with God. 11ly, Their affirming
the Promises of the Gospel to be merely gratuital (excepting for Faith), and
not conditional upon Obedience, as those of the Law were, denying our Lord to
be any Legislator; or denying Christian liberty to be so far obliged to the
Obedience of the Law, as that any account is had of our observing of it in any
degree, as to obtaining, or improving, our Justification: And that Christians
ought now, not as tied to it by God's Law, but spontaneously and freely, to do
that Will of his, which was formerly made known to them by the Law. Which
Obedience of our's, how little soever, (and upon such terms we may guess it
will not be much) yet is accepted by God through the more perfect Obedience of
his Son, made ours by Faith. (See Calvin, Institutiones, 3. l. 19. c. 2.4..)
And then we may guess what a poor harvest there will be of good Works where
they are, thus only Free-will-offerings. 12ly, Their depressing the
righteousness, and true worth, of good Works, flowing from Grace infused; and
by this undervaluing the true Power of God's Grace given unto us; and so by
this again inconsiderately, lessening the effects of Christ's merits also, as
purchasing this infusion of Grace whereby to forbear sinning; as much as they
seem to extol them, in the pardoning of us, whilst doing nothing but sinning;
lessening also the same merits in the removing of Sin; whilst they make it in
their Justification rather covered, than the strength and habit deleted, and
eradicated: misapplying Romans chapter 7. 13ly, Their affirming, that the pretended
restoring of the once justified and afterward fallen from Grace, to the State of
Grace again, taught and used in the Church, is a thing merely imaginary. (See
Dr. Field, Append. 3. l. p. 312.) for that he who is once justified, can never
be unjustified; and who are once assured of their Justification, are also
assured of perseverance in it, happen afterward what sin will happen. Which
sins also (consequently) tho of the same kind must not be, in these persons, of
the same guilt, as in others: i. e. losing the Kingdom of Heaven; (1. Cor. 6.)
and so these persons being indeed (though they persuade themselves otherwise)
by such sins, fallen from Grace. Now are the Keys of the Church, and those
Sacraments, and such a measure of repentance, neglected, whereby they might
have been restored; and so the last state of these men worse than the first
[that before their justification]: and their end miserable, because too much
conceited, and secure. These are the Tenants of some more rigid Protestants in
the Point of Justification in opposition to the Roman Doctrines. In some of
which, if perhaps, their meaning may, by a charitable construction, be
reconciled to truth; yet do their expressions seem very pernicious to a good
life; and easily misunderstood by the vulgar, or those who take them in the
most obvious sense.

HEAD. XVI. Of Merit.
Of Merit.
COncerning the Merits of Grace inhabitant, or of the good Works that proceed
from it. 1. Catholics do generally disclaim any merit of them, in such a
sense, as the word Merit is explained by Protestants (See Field, Append. 3. l.
p. 324. Forbes de Justifica. 5. l. 3. c. p. 197.) viz. First, Ut opus sit
nostrum non ejus, a quo mercedem expectamus. 2ly, Ut sit indebitum. 3ly, Ut
nihil unquam faciendum omittatur, nec omittendum committatur, sive quoad
parts, sive gradus. 4ly, Ut sit aequalitas inter opus and mercedem. Or yet as
Merit is taken in the former Covenant of Works involving the first and third of
these Conditions. They willingly granting; That as there are no works of our's
done by Grace assistant, tho having some worth in them, that can merit our
Justification; so neither any Works of the already justified, proceeding from
Grace infused, and inhabitant, tho having yet a greater worth in them, that can
merit the future divine reward promised to them, as condign; i. e. as any way,
in strict justice, equalling it. a.

a. Bellarm. de Justific. 5. l. 14. c. Opera, bona si considerentur ex natura
sua, remota promissione and dignitate principii operantis, nullam habent
proportionem ad beatitudinem illam supernaturalem: proinde non eis debetur ex
justitia merces aeternae vitae; quoting Romans 8.18. Luke 19.17. Matt. 19.29.
centuplum 2. Cor. 4.17. and in his using the Phrase ex condigno (for this
reason, because their Works have not only a promise made to them of a reward,
but also a dignity, by reason of the divine principle of them, God's Grace in
us, that has some correspondency, or similitude to the reward; as the Seed to
the fruit; a lesser degree of Grace here, to a higher measure thereof here,
and hereafter in the next world), yet he disclaims any equality in a sense
strictly taken; as most clearly appears in his answer to the Objection made
against condignity; viz. the great inequality of our present Works (tho
proceeding from Grace), and life eternal; especially, taken for the Object
thereof: Deus merces nostra magna nimis; as also the inequality of the
imperfect knowledge, and charity we have here, to that perfect, we shall
receive for it hereafter. To which he answers, Ibid. c. 18. Negari non potest,
quin beatitudo long excellat actioni meritoriae, cum in illa sit coguitio, and
charitas perfecta, in ista vero sit cognitio, and charitas imperfecta. And,
That, Non requiritur absoluta aequalitas inter meritum and praemium secundum
justitiam distributivam; ut dici possit praemium ex condigno, etiam ex part
operis; sed sufficit, ut sit proportio quaedam, secundum quam is, qui meretur,
dici possit dignus eo praemio. And, That, -- Ideo dicimus ex condigno deberi
fidei formatae per charitatem visionem cum ardentissima charitate; quia dignum
est, ut res a Deo inchoata and disposita, tandem aliquando perficiatur and
absolvatur. Granting also there, that God does always, remunerare justorum
opera supra condignum. This account, gives this Cardinal, of the Word
Condignum. See the like in Scotus, 1. l. 17. d. 1. q. Praemium [speaking of
aeterna beatitudo] est majus bonum merito; and justitia stricta non reddit
melius pro minus bono; ideo been dicitur quod Deus semper praemiat ultra
meritum condignum. See more Testimonies tending to this purpose below [e.] and
Head (...) Letters, chapter r. t. u. ph.

Or; Secondly. As nostra, or ex nobis; or 3ly, As indebita g. 1. or 4ly, All of
them, quoad parts, and gradus, perfect and free from faults (See Head XV. of
Justification.) Further also conceding; that these good Works in order to that
meriting, which is by Catholics ascribed to them, do stand in need of the
supply, or support, of the Merits of our Lord; and that in many several
respects. 1st, Both for procuring the gift of that Grace to us, which in us
procures or produces these good Works, b. 2ly, And for procuring the Pact and
Promise, which God has made to them; without which whatsoever their worth had
been, they could have claimed from God no such reward. 3ly, And for the
remission of the imperfections and Venial Sins accompanying many of them;
pardoned to us for Christ's, not their, Merit (see Head XV.) 4ly, And lastly,
For the exhibiting to God an Obedience which in its true worth equalizeth, or
(if you will) exceeds the reward; for Catholics affirm a meritorious cause, as
of our Justification, so of our Glorification perfectly equalling life eternal,
and the highest degrees thereof which any one receives; but this not in us, or
our Works a; but in Christ; the effect of whose merits is dispensed to us for
this end according to the measure of these our Works; which (as the Council of
Trent, Sess. 14.8. c.) Ex illo vim habent; ab illo offeruntur Patri; and per
illum acceptantur a Patre. And Ibid. Can. 26. Justus pro bonis operibus
expectat retributionem aeternam, per Christi merita. (See Vasq. 1.2. P. 214. c.
1, 2.) Catholics therefore affirm: 1. That, whatsoever worth there may be in
the works of the Justified, yet since we are not sufficient of our selves to
do, or think, any good thing as of our selves; but our sufficiency is of God;
(See 2. Cor. 3.5. Jo. 15.5. -- 3.27. 1. Cor. 4.17. -- 12.16. Jam. 1.17. -- 2.
Cor. 12.11. Gal. 6.3. Luke 17.10.) His Grace in every thing first preventing
us, and exciting us to them, and also necessarily helping us in every part of
them, and mau's Will only assenting, and, as it it guided, cooperating with
it; therefore this their worth is justly to be ascribed to God's Grace the
first and principal agent herein, not to us ( nostra vu^ esse merita, quae
ipsius sunt dona. ( Conc. Trid. Sess. 6.16. c.) When therefore Catholics any
way advance the Dignity of such Works, they only extol God's Grace and Spirit
within us, whilst others his Grace, and favor only without us; whilst others,
the Works of Christ for us; they the Works of Christ also in us. b.

b. Conc. Trid. Sess. 6.16. c. Tanta est Domini erga omnes homines bonitas ut
eorum velit esse merita, quae sunt ipsius dona. Bellarm. de Justifica. 1. l.
19. c. Operibus, quae fiunt ex gratia, id quod redditur non est simpliciter
merces, sed etiam gratia, imo magis gratia, quam merces. To which purpose also
St. Austin, Epist. 105. Etiam ipsa [vita aeterna] gratia nuncupatur non ob
aliud, nisi quia gratis datur; nec ideo quia meritis non datur, sed quia data
sunt and ipsa merita, quibus datur.

From whom, as his members and branches, we receive all our Virtue, as from our
Root and Head: Nor we any more live, but Christ in us. b. Secondly, They grant,
that whatever degree or worth, or condignity to a reward these good works
should have, yet that they cannot merit or claim the least reward from God
without the intervening, first of a pact, and his free promise of such reward:
they cannot merit from him; because all things whatever by the right of
Creation, and again of our Redemption, are already his own and due to him. g. 1.

g. 1. F. Fisher in Bishop White, p. 517. God might wholly require the good
Works we do as his own [ i. e. without paying the least reward to them] by many
titles of Justice, being Works of his Servants: Of Religion, being Works of his
Creatures: Of Gratitude, being Works of persons infinitely obliged to him [ viz.
in our Preservation, Redemption, Sanctification, etc. Bellarm. de Justific. 5.
l. 14. c. Cum simus omnes condition servi and mancipia Dei, non potest esse
justitia inter nos and Deum, nisi ipse libera conventione operibus nostris
alioqui debitis, etiamsi nulla merces illis reddenda esset, praemium
constituere voluisset. Quoting there Luke 17. Cum feceritis haec omnia, dicite,
servi inutiles sumus. And St. Bernard: Totum ergo quod es, illi debes, ^^quo
totum habes. Applying this debitum to our good Works universally, not only
those acts of Christian Virtues that are sub praecepto, in omitting which in
just time and place we sin, and are made liable to punishment; but also those
higher and intense acts of the same Virtues that are sub consilio recommended
to us by our Lord, not commanded: or commanded for the attaining of perfection,
but not for our not incurring sin, or punishment in disobeying them. Quae
observata majus habent praemium, non observata nullam habent paenam. (De
Monach. 2. l. 7. c.) for which see De Monach. 2. l. 13. c. Potuit Deus a nobis
exigere quicquid possumus, non tamen voluit. Nunquam potest homo facere plus
quam debet, immo etiam nec quantum debet, si consideremus beneficia Dei nobis
collata; and tamen possumus facere plus quam debemus, si consideremus Legem
nobis impositam [ i. e. such Law, in not observing which we are held guilty of
Sin] and perinde possumus facere plus, quam revera facere teneamur.

And particularly, the whole worth of these good Works from his special Grace.
Nor 2ly, can they claim, were they none of his already, any such reward from
him; because nothing from its mere worth can oblige another to purchase or
reward it, or give to the owner thereof its just price, unless some bargain or
obligation has preceded. g. 2.

g. 2. Bellarm. de Justific. 5. l. 14. c. Neque enim opus aequale mercedi
potest vel ex justitia commutativa, vel distributitiva, praesertim, ubi quis
propria bona distribuit, alterum obligare, nisi conventio and pactum ante
praecesserit.

3ly, Catholics affirm; That man, in his Justification being now regenerated,
and made a new Creature, and a partaker of the Divine Nature, born of God, and
his Seed abiding in him; receiving as a true Member of Christ, a continual,
celestial Virtue, and influence from this Head; and as a branch the juice of
this Vine; receiving the Signature, the earnest and first fruits of that Holy
Spirit now presently, of which he shall have the more plentiful harvest
hereafter; which Spirit in him already a fountain of living water springing
unto life eternal; (See 2. Cor. 5.17. -- 2. Pet. 1.4. Jo. 1.13. -- 15.5. -- 2.
Cor. 1.22. -- 5.5. Ephesians. 1.14. Romans 8.23. Ephesians. 4.3. Jo. 4.14.) Catholics, I
say, affirm, that this Seed of God in him, and its fruits, good Works, which
God works in him ( Phil. 2.13. Heb. 13.21.) must needs have a certain divine
and supernatural goodness, worth, and dignity in them, well pleasing, and of a
sweet smelling savor to God; and the persons doing them children of light,
truly beloved of, and most acceptable and dear to, him, as now his Sons, and
bearing his own image; ( Phil. 4.18. Ephesians. 5.8. Col. 3.10.) and these their
actions just, pure, lovely, praiseworthy ( Phil. 4.8.) done to God's glory (1.
Cor. 10.3.) resembling and like unto his. Sanctificantes se, sicut and ille
Sanctus est, (1. Jo. 3.) and imitatores Dei ut filii Charissimi, ( Ephesians. 5.1.) d.

d. Acknowledged also by sober Protestants. Bishop White against Fisher, p.
170. The Works of the Regenerate are truly good, because they proceed from the
Holy Ghost; good in regard of their object, form, efficient, and end, Psalm.
118.167. Gal. 5.22. Phil. 2.13. -- 1. Cor. 10.31. They are good Fruits opposed
to evil Fruits, Matt. 7.17. Works of Light opposed to Works of Darkness, Ephesians.
5.9. a spiritual Sacrifice, acceptable to God, Phil. 4.18. And the same are
truly good comparatione Scelerum; not comparatively only, but Regula Virtutum,
according to the Rule of Virtue. August. c. 2. Ep. Pelag. Lib. 4. c. 10. and p.
174. There is in all good Works a dignity of Grace, Divine similitude,
goodness, and honor, Phil. 4.8.

4ly, Affirm also, this worth of the actions of the Regenerate, after
Justification, much different from, and transcendent to, that worth, which is
in the former dispositions precedent to Justification; done indeed by the
external help of God's Grace, but before the transfusion into us of his Spirit.
But this always to be remembered; that no worth of the one, or the other, is
from our selves, as of our selves; but the worth of them is from God. They
affirm, accordingly, that there is in these Works of the justified, proceeding
in us from this Divine Principle, a worth and similitude some way
proportionable, and corresponding to the reward promised to them; in respect of
which worth, Life eternal, and the beatifical Vision of God, and all the
consequences thereof, are called the Wages, and Stipend, Reward, Prize, and
Crown, of these Works; Matt. 5.12. Apoc. 22.12. Matt. 20.8. -- 2. Tim. 4.8.
Apoc. 2.10. -- 1. Cor. 9.24, 25. And they said truly to merit such reward,
according to the sense of the word Merit used by the Fathers, and the word
Dignity used in the Scriptures. (a chief portion of which reward, as a greater
measure of God's Spirit; and Charity, and Sanctification in the most intense
degree, received in the next world; and the augmentations of Grace daily
received in this, are only higher degrees of the same kind, and nature, with
that, of which they are the reward.) And God also is said to give such rewards
to these, ex justitia; and quia digni sunt, ( Apoc. 3, 4. -- 2 Thessalonians. 1.5.
Heb. 6.10. -- 2. Tim. 4.8.) not only in this respect that God is just and
faithful in keeping his promise, once made, tho to a Service of little or no
worth at all; but in respect of some valuable goodness, and worth (tho this
from God) also in the condition it self, to which he makes the promise of such
reward. They rationally affirm also, that whatever benefit any ones Sanctity or
good Works may be said; by way of impetration, to procure from God for others,
they may be said also to have the same power with God for themselves, when by
relapse into sin, or falling into any necessity or misery themselves are in the
same condition as such others; and when their ingratitude, and affront and
contempt of former Grace etc. does not aggravate their offense and fall beyond
that of others. See 2. Chron. 9.3. Nehem. 13, 14.22.31.

5ly, Yet this worth of the Righteousness, or works of the justified, whatever
it it be, as it has its original not from us, but from God, and is also,
without any purchase thereof, wholly due to him, from us his Creatures and
Vassals; so is it not affirmed to ascend so high, as any way to equal those
rewards promised to it, but to be far inferior, and God ever to reward beyond
any such Merit. ( Matt. 25.22. -- 2. Cor. 4.17.) For whereas our good Works
momentary are not only said to merit Life eternal, but also to merit those
higher measures of the Holy Spirit, and degrees of Sanctification, that shall
be conferred on us there, as also the the increase of Grace, in this life; here
it is manifest, that the lesser degree (the Merit); and the greater, (the
reward) cannot be equalled in their worth. Some proportion, some similitude
there is between this Seed the justified sow here, and the Fruits thereof they
reap hereafter, sufficient to support the Phrase (especially after the
intervening of a Pact) of the one meriting, or being worthy of the other; but
not to maintain in commutative justice, one of equal value, or worth, to the
other a. This we have title to by Christ's Merits only, not our Works; to the
which Merits also we owe, that we have these Works; therefore the Council of
Trent, that admits meritum bonorum operum ex pacto, and so ex justitia etc, yet
waves the expression ex condigno, as liable to Mistakes. e.

e. Bellarm. de Justificat. 5. l. 16. c. Catholici omnes agnoscunt opera bona
justorum esse meritoria vitae aeternae, sed tamen aliqui censent non esse
utendum his vocibus, de condigno, and de congruo; sed absolute dicendum, opera
bona justorum esse meritoria vitae aeternae, ex gratia Dei.

Bishop White, Answer to Fisher, p. 172. (and the same p. 512.) The Opinion of
Modern Papists (says he) concerning the Merit of Condignity was always opposed
by Pontificians themselves, Scotus, Durand, Marsilius, Dionysius,
Cisterciensis, Gregory Ariminen, Thomas Walden, Paulus Burgensis, Joh. Ferus,
Eckius, Pighius, etc. [and see many more later added by Bishop Forbes de
Justificat, 5. l. 4. c. which I mention here to show a liberty of Opinion
herein left to her Subjects by the Roman Church:] and many, who propugne 'the
Doctrine of Merit of Condignity, speak improperly. Thus Bishop White. Mr.
Thorndike, Epilog. 2. l. 33. c. p. 308. As it cannot be denied that the Church
of Rome allows this Doctrine of Merit [he means of Condignity] to be taught;
yet can it not be said to enjoin it: Because there have not wanted to this day
Doctors of esteem that have always held otherwise. Again, They who only
acknowledge Meritum congrui in Works done in the state of Grace ( i. e. that it
is fit for God to reward them with his Kingdom) say no more, than that it was
fit for God to promise such a reward; which who so denies must say, that God
has promised that which was unfit for him to promise. And if the Dignity of
our Works in respect of the reward, may have this tolerable sense, because God
daigns and vouchsafes it [such reward] the Council of Trent, which has enacted
no reason why they are to be counted Merits, can neither bear out these high
Opinions, [he means maintained by some of the Roman Authors] nor be said to
prejudice the Faith in this point. Again, That which necessarily comes in
consideration with God, in the bestowing the reward (which the condition he
contracted for, must necessarily do) tho it cannot have the nature of Merit [
i. e. taken in a Protestant sense] (because the Covenant it self is granted
merely of Grace in consideration of Christ's death), yet it is of necessity to
be reduced to the nature and kind of the Meritorious Cause. Nor can the Glory
of God, or the Merit of Christ, be obscured by any consideration of our Works,
that is grounded upon the Merit of our Lord Christ, and expresses the tincture
of his Blood; [as all the Roman Merit professedly does.]

And so do many Roman Authors, both before, and since the Council. And also
most of those other that use this Phrase, to signify some true worth in these
Works, as before explained. These. 3, 4. yet so qualify it, as that it can
offend no rational Protestant.

6ly, That therefore, first, he who conceits, any good works of the justified
are, or may be such, as may challenge from God's justice life eternal, save
only upon his free and gracious promise, made to them; or at least in
commutative justice, do deserve it, from any worth in them, that equals it;
and, for both these does not always depend only on the Merits of Christ, is
held by Catholics to err from Truth; and to be guilty of a most false
presumption. 2ly, For the true concurrence, that good Works have by Christ's
Merits through God's free promise, for obtaining or meriting life eternal; here
also, as every one ought in general to believe most certainly, and infallibly,
that all who perform such Evangelical Obedience, shall obtain life Eternal: So
they affirm; 1st, That none is obliged to believe specially, that his own
Works, or Obedience is such, as cannot miss of it; or that if he have not a
full persuasion of the merit of his own Works, or of his own Justification, or
Salvation, or of the particular application of Christ's Merits to himself, he
cannot be justified, or saved, or partake of his Merits. 2ly, That by reason of
the liableness of the once justified by, or in, their Baptism to fall away
again, by committing Mortal Sin, from their Justification: and then the
difficulty of discerning exactly among their Sins committed, what are Mortal
and losing the Divine Grace, what are not: then again, by reason of the
difficulty of knowing in our regaining a second Justification, when we have a
sufficient repentance, or sorrow, and contrition for our former Sins (without
which the Churches Sacraments do not profit us, and a different measure of
which is required according to the greatness of our fault) and when we have
not: And 3ly, by reason, If we were ascertained of our regained estate; of the
great allay, and impairment which our actions, in this estate, may receive from
the mixture of many Venial sins; so that our faults do many times equal,
sometimes exceed, our good deeds; nay sometimes that which we think a good act,
is no better than a true, tho Venial, Sin; and is augmented also in our
presumption that it is none: By reason also of the difficulty to distinguish
between Evangelical Counsels, and Precepts; in respect of which, a different
observance is required, under penalty of falling into some Mortal Sin, or only
failing of Perfection: And lastly, by reason of the uncertainty of our
perseverance, and that our present Merits or Piety may not be all evacuated by
some future miscarriages: I say by reason of all these, Catholics affirm it
the safest course, especially for those who have not attained to any great
perfection, not to put any, or much, least it should happen to be a mistaken,
confidence in any merit, or sufficiency of their own present works to those
ends, for which God requires them of us. But rather wholly to trust in, and
rely on, God's mercy, both for our present condition; that, if it be not safe,
he will, through Christ's Merits, by improving our Faith, and Repentance,
change and amend it; and for our present actions; when we are in a safe
condition; that if they be full of defects and miscarriages, he will for
Christ's Merits, remit these, and for the future more sanctify them, and give
us also perseverance in them. We ever remembering that of the Apostle, 1. Cor.
4.4. Nihil mihi conscius sum, sed non in hoc justificatus sum, qui autem
judicat me, Dominus est. Of which matter thus the Council of Trent, Sess. 6. c.
9. Sicut nemo pius de Dei misericordia, Christi Meritis, Sacramentorum virtute,
and efficacia, dubitare potest: Sic quilibet, dum seipsum suamque propriam
infirmitatem and indispositionem respicit, de sua gratia [ i. e. of his
Regeneration] formidare, and timere potest. 7ly, Yet lastly, they grant; That
such justified, as are eminent in Sanctity, both may have by special revelation
(which God sometimes condescending to a great familiarity communicates unto
them) an infallible certainty of their present justification, and (if
persevering) Salvation; and may also without such revelation, tho not attain
any infallible certainty or persuasion, cui non potest sub-esse falsum, by
reason of the possible defect of their judgment about some of the aforenamed
particulars (upon which therefore can never be built any Divine Faith; the
object of which is only Divine Revelation, and therefore that only which is
absolutely infallible), yet have a strong and moral-certain persuasion, or
faith, cui non sub-est dubium, or dubitatio; may have a fearless and calm
security, that they are actually justified, and consequently (if persevering)
shall be glorified. Which is called the Testimony of a good Conscience,
grounded on their present Obedience, as the condition and service required of
them, for rendering them capable, of such a reward, and of Christ's most perfect
obedience the adequate meritorious cause thereof. (See 2. Cor. 1.12. -- 1. Jo.
3.18, 19, 20. etc. 24.4.17. -- 2. Pet. 1.10. -- 2. Tim. 4.7, 8.) To which
Testimony of a good Conscience is added also the witness within them of the
Holy Spirit, Romans 8.15. tho this witness (as also its other ordinary operations
in us) most-what is not certainly known by us to be its witness or operation;
for, if it were so, this would amount to special revelation. Catholics
therefore affirm not, a particular application of Christ's Merits to
themselves, or a confidence of their own Salvation, in any justified, to be
unlawful; but only an infallible certainty of these to be (except by
revelation) unattainable: and whilst they say; that one, tho in the state of
Justification, de sua gratia formidare and timere potest; yet they say not,
that every one timere debet. x.

x. See the Roman Writers quoted to this purpose by Dr. Field, Append. 3. l. p.
318. etc. And by Bishop Forbes de Justificat. 3. l. 1. c. p. 95. etc. Where, --
Communior Romanensium sententia (says he) libenter admittit ex vivae fidei
sensu, seu charitatis and bonorum operum experimento, certitudinem aliquam
minoris and inferioris gradus oriri, quae conjecturalis and probabilis nominari
potest; and quae, licet non omnem formidinem pellat, tamen tollit omnem
anxietatem and haesitationem. Progrediuntur alii quidam Romani ulterius, and
certitudinem aliquam aliam, minorem quidem certitudine fidei divinae,
Conjecturali tamen majorem, quam certitudinem moralem appellandam censent,
admittunt. Ita ut nullam habeant de sua justificatione formidinem deceptionis.

The Pharisee very confident Luke 18.11. went home unjustified; the Publican
very fearful, justified; and so the Leper believing Christ's Power, but
doubting his good Pleasure, (si vis, potes) yet was cleansed, Matt. 8.2.

HEAD. XVII. Concerning Sin Venial and Mortal.
Concerning Sin Venial and Mortal.
THE Catholic Doctrine is. 1. That all the Baptized are truly Regenerate. 2.
That a Man falls not from this state of Regeneration, or from God's Grace, and
favor by committing any Sin, how small soever; nor yet continues still in this
State whilst committing any Sin how great soever. But 3ly, that there are some
greater crimes, and offenses against God, which are inconsistent with, and
destructive of, the State of Grace; which do so break God's Commandments, as
that (if not worthily repented of) they make us actually liable to eternal
Damnation; after the committing of which (expelling us from the Grace and
Privileges of our Baptism) we cannot be reconciled to God, nor restored to
our former condition, without the help of the Keys of the Church (wherever
this may be had.) Lastly, from which Sins by the Grace of God the Regenerate
Person may totally abstain and totally reform his life, and in respect of them
may, through his whole life, perfectly observe all God's Commandments. 4ly,
That there are other lesser Sins, which are well consistent with the State of
Regeneration. From committing of which (one or other of them) no man, tho
Regenerate (abstracting from God's special Privilege) can for any long time
live free; nor in respect of these can be said perfectly to observe God's
Commandments. Bellarm. de amiss Gratiae upon Matt. 5.22. Si quis leviter
irascitur [which he calls a Venial Sin] is jam recedit a perfecta observatione
legis. Si quis autem manifestum convitium in proximum jactat, is demum non a
perfecta observatione, sed simpliciter ab observatione legis recedit. Which
Sins, however they do, or do not, offend against God's Laws; or also, in their
nature, do, or do not merit eternal punishments, yet all agree on this, that no
Regenerate person at all by committing them, does actually fall from God's
favor, or his former righteousness; nor actually incur external punishments;
and that the Regenerate, committing them, have always at least an habitual
repentance of them.

Next, Concerning a Possibility to the Regenerate of fulfilling God's Laws, and
freedom from, either Mortally or Venially offending him.
Next, Concerning a Possibility to the Regenerate of fulfilling God's Laws.
1. Catholics do believe, that some good thought, word, or work, may be
performed by the Regenerate, and God's Commandments be observed therein,
perfectly and without any contagion, or adherence of any Sin. But 2ly, that
none can certainly know of himself 1. Cor. 4.4. when any work is so purely
done. 3ly, They also willingly concede; that the most, or very many, of the
good works of the Regenerate are not done without some Sin, or defect in some
smaller Circumstances thereof, by reason of concupiscence, negligence, etc; and
that no Regenerate person (abstracting from the Divine special Privilege) can
for any long time keep all God's Commandments; as these Commandments are
understood by any to involve the Prohibition of lesser (and those commonly
called Venial) Sins. But 4ly, they maintain, that many have kept and may keep,
them all (through the Grace given us by Christ, at our Regeneration) in the
abstaining from greater, or those commonly called Mortal, Sins.

HEAD. XVIII. Of Works commonly called of Supererogation.
Counsels Evangelical, or Works of Supererogation.
COncerning Evangelical Counsels, or Precepts of Perfection, and the Observance
of them, called Works of Supererogation. 1. Catholics disclaim any such Works,
taken in such a sense, as Protestants explain, and impose on them. viz. That
all things be performed, and fulfilled, that the Divine Law commands [ i. e.
in living free as well from all those called Venial, as from Mortal, Sins. a

a. Bishop White, Answer to Fisher, p. 522. To the Definition, and being, of
Works of Supererogation Two things are required. First, That all be performed
and fulfilled, which the Divine Law commands [he means without any Sin at
all incurred Venial or Mortal. See p. 525. but if, without Mortal Sin, and such
as excludes from Grace, were only meant by this Bishop; so, he must grant; That
all persons, whilst in the State of Grace, do thus fulfill God's commands. He
goes on.] But if just men have any Sin, they perform not all which the Divine
Law requires. Again, p. 527. Supererogation implies these things. 1st, A
perfect and exact performance of all commanded Duties, without omission of any,
etc. But (says he) supposing the perfection of the Divine Law, and
presupposing all men to be Sinners in part [ i. e. as to Sins Venial] the
former is impossible. So Perkins, Demonstrat. Problem. p. 117. Of the Fathers.
Volunt Supererogationem fieri, non quod officium aliquod praestari possit ultra
legem moralem integram, [as now the Papists hold] sed quod fit, 1{suo} Ultra
negativam partem: ut non furari, etc. 2{suo} Ultra actus externos. 3{suo} Unum
aliquod mandatum. 4{suo} Ultra mandatum caeteris hominibus commune. Bishop
Andrews, Resp. ad Apol. 8. c. p. 196. Quis nescit fieri a nobis multa libere?
and quae a Deo non sunt imperata, voveri, and reddi? In hoc tamen Supererogandi
vis tota non est. Erogare prius oportet summam integram, quae imperata est
nobis; Erogare quicquid debitum a nobis; Id, ubi jam factum, tum, and ultra
illud, amplius quid, Supererogare. Peccavit in praecepta quis; quae debuit
facere, non fecit; sed votivum nescio quid vel voluntarium praestitit: Hoc
jampraeter erogare est forte; non super. Where his Answerer ( Discovery of Dr.
Andrews Absurdities, p. 363.) long ago observed; That he would have Works of
Supererogation to be such good works only, as are done after the Precepts are
fulfilled, or fully observed; and so quite changed the question, as it is
stated by Catholics.

And 2ly, beyond this; That something more be performed by us, than is any way
due to God from us. b.

b. See the Reason given in the Fourteenth Article of the Church of England,
why the Doctrine of Works of Supererogation is arrogant and impious: For (says
the Article) by them men do declare, that they do not only render unto God as
much as they are bound to do; [ i. e. absolutely in respect of all the Divine
Precepts] but that they do more 'for his sake, than of bounden duty is
required: Whereas Christ says plainly: When ye have done all that are
commanded you, say, We are unprofitable Servants. Vossius These. de bonis
Operibus, Quest. 3. These. 1, 2. Cum nemo, in hac infirmitate vitae, praestet ea
quae debet, impia est eorum sententia, qui plus aiunt proestare, quam debet.
Refellit hoc etiam Christus apud Lucam 17.9, 10. Bishop White's Answer to
Fisher, p. 526. out of St. Bernard. By the obligation of Gratitude we owe to
the Almighty omne quod sumus and possumus etc.

And 3ly, (As some Protestants add.) g.

g. Dr. Hammond (Of Will Worship,. 52.) vindicating himself, in the holding
Evangelical Counsels, yet from maintaining works of Supererogation. The
Romanists (says he) mean by Supererogating; that, after having sinned, and so
become debtors to God, they have paid that debt by satisfaction; i. e. done
something else, which may satisfy God for their former sins. Which
satisfaction, they say, they may perform so far, as not only to satisfy for
their own Sins; but also to do more than so; help, toward the raising of a
bank or treasure, for others also. Reiterated also in his Answer to Cawdry, p.
225.

That they be such works as are satisfactory, for our own, or also other men's,
Sins, and Disobedience; and that are also laid up in the Church's Treasure for
this purpose. Catholics freely granting. 1st. That none can perfectly fulfill
the Law, not only without the mixture of some imperfection, but also without
the intervening of several venial or lesser sins frequently happening (See
Head, Justifica. (x.) (g.) But yet these sins or deficiencies not such, as cast
us out of God's friendship, or the state of Grace; or as can hinder us from the
greater reward in our observing of Counsels, any more, than they do from that
lesser reward in our observing Precepts; From which Venial Sins also David,
when yet he is said to have loved God toto cord, was not free. 2ly, Granting
also, That none can perform any work at all, that is not by many titles a due
debt to the Divine Majesty (of which see before Head XVI. g. 1.): yet not a
debt exacted by him under pain of sin, or loss of heaven to those who do not
pay it. 3ly, Granting that these works are no way satisfactory for any ones
Sin, or the eternal punishment thereof; nor yet of the temporal, but by
application of Christ's Satisfactions; nor again these Works of Supererogation,
and observance of the Counsels satisfactory in any other manner, than other
works, that are observances of the Precepts, are also affirmed to be; nor is
this [that there is any Treasure of the Church, partly at least made up of
these] maintained to be any part of the Roman Faith: Concerning all which
peruse the ensuing Head concerning Satisfaction.

But notwithstanding these Concessions, 1st, Catholics (wherein Learned
Protestants join with them) d.

d. Mountague in his Appeal, Licensed by Bishop White, p. 214. I know no
Doctrine of our English Church against Evangelical Counsels. I do believe there
are, and ever were, Evangelical Counsels; such as St. Paul mentions in his
Consilium autem do; such, as our Savior pointed at, and directed unto, in his,
Qui potest capere, capiat; such, as a man may do, or not do, without guilt of
sin, or breach of Law [therefore are these no particular Precepts, obligatory
to some, which have received from God such a particular gift; for then all that
are so gifted would sin in omitting them; all not so gifted in doing them; and
they would be Counsels to none at all. Nor would there be any place in them for
St. Paul's doing well in the one, but better in the other.] Again, p. 216. (out
of St. Nazianzen.) We have Laws that do bind of necessity; others that be left
to our free choice to keep them, or not; so as, if we keep them, we shall be
rewarded; if we keep them not, no fear of punishment. And, out of St.
Chrysostom. A man may do more than is commanded [ i. e. not as to fulfilling
the whole Law, with freedom from all Venial Sin; but as to some particular
Precept thereof, with freedom from transgressing it either by Mortal Sin at
all, or Venial Sin for some time.] Again, p. 215. and p. 218. The Doctrine of
Antiquity, with universal consent, held Evangelical Counsels. -- Name but one
Writer in all Antiquity of a contrary mind to this; There are Evangelical
Counsels. Bishop White, Answer to Fisher, p. 522. 'God Almighty does not
rigorously, (or as simply necessary to Salvation) [therefore not under pain of
sinning, or such sinning at least; as excludes any from Salvation] exact of his
Saints and Servants, that in every particular work in his service, they do the
uttermost of their force, etc. Again, p. 527. He grants men may do more than
God has commanded by his Law as simply necessary to Salvation; to wit, 'They
who give all their Goods to the Poor, etc. Again, p. 527. He allows Counsels;
i. e. free will offerings, or spontaneous actions, exceeding that which the
ordinary bond of necessary duty obliges men unto; and which are acceptable
unto God in respect of their end. Dr. Hammond in his Treatise of Will Worship,.
41. Every man is not bound, under pain of Sin, to be prudent, or pious, or
merciful, in such a degree; I may give so much as will denominate me merciful;
and pray so often as to denominate me pious; and yet be capable of growing in
each of these Graces. And. 47. That ordinary saying; 'That every one is bound
to do that which is best, it is most discernably false (and that which a world
of falsities are builton) which to prove I shall need no further testimony,
than that of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 7.38. He that gives in Marriage does well,
and he that gives not does better. If all were bound to do that which is best,
that which were only good, were evil, for so is that, whatever it is, which
comes short of what we are bound to do. Ibid. in his Answer to Cawdry, p. 192.
The Macedonians (says he) are an instance of doing more in this kind, than
either all men, at all times, or they at this time were obliged to have done:
And see before, p. 184. His instancing in St. Paul's taking no hire from the
Corinthians for his preaching. Ibid. p. 195. He that observes the duty in any
degree of the Latitude does well, and he that goes yet further, but not beyond
the Latitude, does better. [Why better, but because he does more than the
other; and more than the command requires under sin?] Again, p. 224. If every
regular act of Obedience, which comes short of the highest degree of
perfection, is a sin, than every act of Virtue in this life, is a sin; for the
fullest perfection, which cannot be increased, is not to be found in any man in
this life. And p. 229. he says. That such persons may expect from our great
(...) more and greater acceptance [I shall add, reward also] than the same
person could in reason expect for doing only what is commanded. And of two men,
which have been equal in obedience, one exceeding the other, in acts of
uncommanded perfection, the more perfect shall have the richest reward. In all
which he says plainly enough, that a man may do more than is commanded, as to
some particular commands; praying; giving Alms; etc; and that without sinning
in such act; or simning either Mortally, or Venially, against such Precept, at
another time; tho he denies this not sinning. 51. in respect of all commands
whatsoever; i. e. our never sinning against any of them; where if he mean
venially, so says the Roman Church with him.

Mr. Thorndike in Epilog. 2. l. 32. c. p. 296. etc. Justifies the Counsels of
Continency, of abandoning riches to which one has just title: and St. Austin's
Comment upon St. Paul's forbearing his dues for Preaching. Potuit S. Paulus ex
evengelio victum sibi quaerere: quod muluit operuri, amplius erogabut. Ibid. p.
208. Nay further justifies Vows made in these Kinds, and a Monastic Life in
the observance of them, See l. 3. c. 31. p. 368.371. And of these Counsels he
says, p. 298, That the observance of them obliges God in point of goodness,
tho not in point of promise [he means promise annexed to a command.] And, That,
tho the love of God, for which they do these things, is commanded, yet that
they are not commanded to exercise that love in doing these things.

Maintain; that there are several such Counsels, or Precepts of perfection, in
Scripture, which are not Precepts of necessary Obedience; and which, being
observed, are graciously accepted, and highlier rewarded; but not observed,
bring on us no guilt of sin, or liability to punishment; lastly, in doing which
we do more than is commanded; viz. in that particular matter, concerning which
the Counsel is; and which are free-will-offerings and indebita, i. e. upon any
Law exacting them so of us, as that, in the omission of them, we are held
transgressors of it; i. e. Sinners. For tho God, whose are we and all ours,
might justly require these works also under such penalties: yet such is his
indulgence, that he calls not for all his dues from us on such terms, nor ties
us in every thing, under the pain of sinning, or incurring his displeasure, to
do our best: for, then, he, that did not his best, could not possibly do well,
nor any one better than well: contrary to the Apostle, 1. Cor. 7.38. and
whoever can be any whit better, should be yet bad. Such works in Consilio are
the highest degrees in the acts of Christian Virtues, or Duties; which Virtues
consist not in an indivisible point, but have a certain Latitude, as there must
be some lowest degree, as to time how often, or quantity how much, farther than
which he, that descends, sins against the Precept, so are there certain
higher degrees, as to time, place, or quantity, etc. which for encouraging our
best endeavors, are by the Divine Wisdom, allowed, commended, or (if you
will) required, upon the title of perfection. Lastly, which are highly
rewarded; but out of his mercy to our weakness, not strictly commanded upon the
forfeiture of our being any longer good, or virtuous; nor the omission of them
punished. 2ly, That hence clearly appears a degree of perfection in the
observance of the Counsel always transcending that of observing the Precept, to
which such Counsel relates: because these (such as are called Supererogatory)
are always the more intensive and heroical acts of the same Virtues, or Duties.
e.

e. Bellarm. De Monach. 2. l. 7. c. Consilium includit praeceptum, and aliquid
supra praeceptum addit.

So there is a higher degree of perfection (caeteris paribus) i. e. as to good
intentions, and the improvements made by the external acts on the inward
habits, and our keeping still within the latitude of the Virtue supposed a like
in both; in distributing the fifth, than only the tenth part of our increase or
goods, in alms to the poor; or giving daily what another does weekly; in
praying seven times, than twice, a day, or with greater fervor than is that
least degree thereof, which may be performed without sinning; In an entire
fasting, than temperate eating; and in a total abstinence from, than a moderate
use of, delicate meats; or fasting four times, than only twice a week; in a
virginal than a conjugal Chastity; preaching for nothing (whereby the more to
advance the Gospel) than for wages; preaching once a day, (i. e. caeteris
paribus) than once a week. And it were not reasonable, nor yet sense to say:
That these Counsels, or higher, and more excellent, degrees of Christian
Virtues, that are in Consilio, are the means only whereby we may more easily
attain to the observance of that inferior practice of the same Virtue, that is
sub Praecepto, and under penalty of sinning, if not obeyed; or to say that our
perfection lies in performing such precept, and not the Counsel; or that the
Precept of the two is more highly rewardable; for that is to say; the less
doing the more perfect, and the more rewardable, or rewarded. 3ly, Catholics
affirm; That there is no Precept at at all ( i. e. taken in the former sense,
as requiring obedience under penalty of sinning) but that there is some Counsel
that transcends it; or, But that the superior degrees of the practice of it are
in Consilio; and this, as maintained by Catholics, so also is conceded by
Learned Protestants. z

Bellarm. 2. l. 13. c. Ex toto cord, non significant omnes actus cordis, vel
omnem intentionem possibilem; ita ut imperetur, ut nihil cord agamus, nisi
Daum diligere, idque summa vehementia amoris, sed solum ut amemus Deum
praecipuo amore, nihilque illi amore anteponamus, velaequemus.

St. Thomas 2.2. q. 184. art. 3. ad 2nm. Transgressionem praecepti evadit, qui
quocunque modo perfectionem divinae delectionis attingit. Est autem infimus
[perfectae] divinae delectionis gradus ut nihil supra eum, aut contra eum, aut
aequaliter ei, diligatur, a quo gradu perfectionis qui deficit, nullo modo
implet praeceptum. Bishop White, p. 523. We maintain not, that this Precept
obliges man at all times to an actual employment of all his powers, and forces
thereof on God, without conversion to other lawful Objects. Dr. Hammond of
Will Worship,. 49. With all thy heart denotes two things only; 1st, Sincerity
of this love of God, as opposed to partial divided love, or service; 2ly, The
loving him above all other things, and not admitting any thing into competition
with him; not loving any thing else in such a degree; and in neither of these
respects excluding all other things from a subordinate place in our love: which
being supposed, it will be easy to discern, that this sincere love of God above
all is capable of degrees; and that it is very possible for two men to love God
with all their hearts, i. e. sincerely and above all other things, and so both
to obey that Precept; and yet one to love him in a more intense degree, than
the other does. Which may be observed among the Angels themselves, etc. And he
in his Answer to Cawdry, p. 214. returns this answer to St. Austin's Saying,
Ep. 29. Quamdiu augeri potest [virtus aut charitas] profecto illud, quod minus
est quam debet, ex vitio est; Urged by Cawdry, by Bishop White, and usually by
other Protestants. That the Father means not that every regular act of
Obedience, which comes short of the highest degree of perfection is a sin; for
so (says he) every act of Virtue in this life will be a Sin, since any may be
increased. And St. Austine sufficiently clears himself from such a sense
elsewhere ( De Spiritu and Lit. cap. ult.) in saying, -- Neque enim, si nondum
esse potest tanta dilectio Dei quanta illi cognitioni plenae, perfectaeque
debetur, jam culpae deputandum est;] but that in some particulars, or others,
still there is in some part, in this life, a failing of our duty; not only some
defect in our Virtue, but also from it.]

St. Thomas 2, 2. q. 184. art. 3. speaks thus in answer to the Argument. Ad
observationem praeceptorum omnes tenentur, cum sit de necessitate salutis; and
igitur perfectio Christianae vitae non consistit in praeceptis, quia omnes ad
perfectionem non tenentur. That, -- Non est transgressor praecepti [perfectae
dilectionis] qui non attingit ad medios perfectionis gradus, dummodo attingit
ad infimum. [Which lower degree every justified person must be possessed of
before performing Counsels.] Est autem (says he) alia perfectio charitatis [
i. e. the higher degrees of it, that transcend the Precept] ad quam aliquis per
aliquid spirituale augmentum pervenit [ i. e. by practicing and using the
advantage of Counsels] ut puta, cum homo etiam a rebus licitis abstineat, ut
liberius divinis Obsequiis Vacet.

So the very highest Degree, that of perfect Dilection [Diliges Dominum Deum
tuum ex toto cord and totis viribus] does not command, under pain of sinning,
and punishment, an entire employment of all our powers, thoughts and affections
on God, wholly, perpetually; nor that we never love, desire or think on any
thing besides him (Protestants assenting); but only such a sincerity of our
love, ut nihil supra eum, aequaliter ei diligatur; Beyond which there may be
yet a more intense dilection of him in Consilio, and most acceptable to God, to
which we stand upon no such penalty obliged. z. ( p. 125.) Neither can Zachary
and Elizabeth, who walked in all the Commandments of the Law blameless, and so
observed this Precept amongst others, be imagined to have always exercised the
same intensive act of love, or the one an act always exactly equal in degree to
that of the other.

4ly, In comparing Counsels and Precepts; or some Counsels with others, it is
granted that the practice of some, may be the means or instruments of the
acquiring of the other; or of any higher perfection therein; or also of the
preservation of them acquired; in respect of which (as the means compared with
the end) there Counsel may be esteemed inferior to the Precept. So by
exercising some higher degrees of temperance, that are in Consilio, we arrive
easilier to the preservation of virginal, or also a conjugal, and necessary
Chastity, and such as is sub Praecepto. And granted; That all Counsels
whatsoever, are subordinate, and instrumental to the attaining of that one
Counsel of perfect Dilection. In which, and not in any other of them (tho every
one of them also contains a greater perfection, than the particular Precept
to which it relates; as has been said These. 2.) ultimately consists the
greatest perfection attainable in this life; and of which is that much noted
proposition of St. Thomas 2.2. q. 184. a. 3. to be understood; That perfectio
Christian vitae, per se, and essentialiter, consistit in Praeceptis [ viz. in
these two charitatis, or dilectionis Dei, and proximi] secundario autem and
instrumentaliter in Consiliis; viz. those higher acts of other Virtues that do
all tend to the perfecting of this love; but it is meant by him of this Precept
of Love in respect of the superior degrees thereof, which are in Consilio; and
not, of the inferior to which we are obliged under Sin; nor of the necessary
degree of Charity which every one must already have to be in the state of
Grace, or Justification; which state only produces the acceptable performance
of these Counsels we speak of, that tend all to a greater Dilection; and yet
which state always presupposes this Dilection already had in some degree. g (
p. 119.)

5ly, In comparing the several States of men according to their practice of
necessary Duties, or also of Counsels, as it seems clear that in respect of any
Precept of necessary Obedience, and the Counsel relating to it, caeteris
paribus, he must needs possess a higher degree of Christian perfection, that,
besides the Precept, observes also the Counsel; that is, that performs the
higher degrees of any Virtue, than he who only the less; so it is granted; that
one in the observance of some particular Counsels, as Virginity, or Evangelical
Poverty, etc. may be much inferior to another that observes them not, where
some other disparities appear. As where the other observes some other Counsels
of an higher perfection in which the former person is deficient; and especially
if the later have attained to that, which is the end of all the other, a more
intensively-perfect love of God; or also if he has been constant in the
performance of all the necessary duties with more purity and freedom from
Venial Sins.

6ly, Affirmed also; That in one, who in respect of some duties aspires to
Counsels, and does more, at least as to the external act, than is commanded;
yet if he be disobedient (so far as to sin mortally) in respect of any other
duty, there cease now all Supererogation, or any acceptable, or rewardable
performance, of any such Counsels: because no work Meritorious or of
Supererogation can be done, save by those, who are in the state of Grace, and
possessed of the habit of Charity. (See Head XVI.) And therefore far are
Catholics from imagining any acquitting, or recompensing of disobedience in
one thing by Supererogation in another; neither is the laudable, tho imperfect,
performance of some Evangelical Counsels before Justification (whereby more
easily to attain it, and the practice of necessary duties) reckoned by
Catholics any work of Supererogation, or to be any way preferrable to, or so
perfect as, the observance of those Precepts of necessary Obedience after our
Justification, to which such Counsels facilitate the way. Much less yet is any
thing to be accounted an act of greater perfection, or work of Supererogation,
which is necessary to be done, in order to performing any Precept; for every
Precept involves the injunction of all such means, without which it cannot be
observed, upon the same penalty.

7ly, This for the thing. As for the expression of Supererogations it is a word
used, but not invented, by later times; but derived from Antiquity, who also
took it up from the Scripture ( Luke 10.35.) Quodcunque Supererogaveris, ego
cum rediero, reddam tibi. Where St. Austine, De Sanctis Virgin. cap. 30. Nec
enim sicut non Maechaberis, non occides, ita dici potest, non Nubes; illa
exiguntur, ista offeruntur; si fiunt ista laudantur; imperat vobis, in hoc
autem si quid Amplius Supererogaveritis, in redeundo reddit vobis. And, De
Opere Monach. c. 5. Amplius erogabat Apostolus Paulus, qui suis, ut ipse
testatur, Stipendiis militabat. Again, Confess. l. 1. c. 4. Supererogatur tibi
ut debeas, and quis habet quicquam non tuum?

HEAD. XIX. Of Penances and Satisfactions.
Of Penances and Satissactions.
THE Catholic Assertions concerning Penances and Satisfactions may be easily
collected out of these Theses concerning Justification and Merit.

1. By Penances Catholics understand any Acts either produced by adjuvant
Grace, before Justification; or by inhabitant Grace after it; that are some way
painful, laborious, or afflictive to us, by depriving us of some Good, either
utile, or jucundum. Whereby all sorts of good Works may be reckoned Penal, and
Satisfactory; as they do cross and mortify our contrary, carnal, secular, and
terrene appetites and inclinations. a.

a. Estius, 4. sent. 15. d. 24.. Paena non aliud est quam privatio boni vel
utilis, vel delectabilis: (Nam privatio boni honesti ad culpam pertinet),
igitur satisfactionem, quae cum tali quadam privatione, seu substractione,
fieri debet, paenalem esse oportet. Lugo de Paenitent. Disp. 24.. 3. De facto,
omnis nostra operatio meritoria est simul satisfactoria; quia omnis de facto
paenalis est; and sicut omnis satisfactio est simul meritoria, quia debet
procedere ex action laudabili, and honesta, ut diximus; sic etiam e contra,
omnis actio meritoria est Satisfactoria, quia affert secum aliquam
paenalitatem. Ratio autem a priori est, quia nullum est opus honestum, quod non
adversetur alicui bono, vel delectabili, vel utili, etc. See d.

Or would have crossed them, if these had not been by Grace formerly mortified;
for, in such a case, a less pain in doing it, when it arises only from such a
cause, diminishes not, but increases the satisfactoriness and merit of the
Work, as proceeding from a person more eminently sanctified, and one who has
formerly suffered the pains he has now conquered. Such then, are both these
acts of Christian Virtues, which are sub Praecepto, and cannot be omitted in
due time and place without sinning and breach of God's commands: which, in what
sense they are said to merit and obtain life eternal, (See before, Head XVI.)
may be much more in the same sense to merit and obtain the remission of some
temporal punishment; (the divine acceptance being always supposed): As,
likewise, the same acts done more imperfectly before our Justification, are
conditions or dispositions instrumental for obtaining remission of our Sins, as
well as of the infusion of Grace, in our Justification. b.

b. Lugo de Paenit. 24.. 3. Art. 1. Per opera praecepta posse hominem
satisfacere etc; communis sententia and verissima affirmat. Et quidem, stante
doctrina Concilii Tridentini, contraria sententia non videtur posse ulla
ratione sustineri; Number Council. Tridentinum, Sess. 6. cap. 10. and 16. definit,
iis operibus, quibus divina lex observatur, mereri hominem justum augmentum
gratiae: Unde non apparet, cur non habeant ea opera vim purgandi debitum
paenae, sicut habent vim novum jus comparandi ad novum praemium. And, see
Bellarm. de Paenit. 4. l. 13. c.. Add quod. And Ibid. c. 8. He argues thus. Si
opera justorum [ i. e. praecepta] eam vim habeant, ut vitam aeternam vere and
proprie mereantur, nullo modo negari potest, quin etiam efficacia esse possunt
ad satisfaciendum pro reatu paenae temporalis; siquidem long majus est gloria
aeterna, quam paenae temporalis remissio. In the same manner Lugo, Ibid.. 1.
Quia opera hominis justi habent aequalitatem and condignitatem [in what sense
this see Head XVI.] in ratione meriti, in ordine ad beatitudinem aeternam; ergo
possunt habere condignitatem ad redimendum paulatim debitum paenae temporalis,
quod est multo minus.

But such are more principally those higher acts of Christian Virtues that are
in Consilio: [See Head XVIII.) which as they are still in a higher degree
painful, and opposite to our secular contents than the other, and as in some
sense in debita, (See Numb.) freely undertaken, so are they more acceptable to
God and satisfactory (in the manner which shall be explained hereafter) for any
debt of punishment and suffering, that we still owe unto him, and that his
vindicative justice, for our sins, is ready to inflict upon us. Thus the acts
of any Christian Virtues may be reckoned amongst Works Satisfactory in respect
of cancelling punishment (as also satisfactions, as they also are good works,
cannot be denied to be meritorious in respect of acquiring Glory, but more
especially, d.

d. See life eternal the promised reward of our temporal sufferings, 2. Cor.
7.14. and 2. Tim. 1.12. Romans 8.17.13. and particularly of those Works wherein a
satisfactory Virtue is said principally to consist; I mean Alms-deeds, Fasting,
and Prayer. Matt. 25.34, 35. -- 6.6.16.18. [Where the open reward is the
kingdom of heaven.] Bellarm. de Indulgent. 1. l. 2. c. In bonis actionibus
hominum justorum duplex valor, sive praemium assignari potest, meriti videlicet
and Satisfactionis. Again, Ibid. In uno atque eodem opere bono, and eleemosyna
vel jejunio, and meritum and Satisfactio reperitur. Nam eleemosyna delet
peccatum, quod est Satisfactorium esse; and tamen eadem eleemosyna, quia est
opus bonum, and Deo gratum, meritoria est vitae aeternae. Esse Satisfactoriam
convenit eleemosynae, quia opus est laboriosum and paenale; esse meritoriam
convenit eidem, quia est opus bonum ex charitate factum. Eadem oration simul est
impetratoria and meritoria [meritoria, quia orans, orando, been operatur, and
Deo placet], quid impedit, quo minus possit esse simul Satisfactoria and
Meritoria?

those of Prayer, Fasting, and Alms-deeds: The first respecting the Soul; and
involving all the mental Exercises, and spiritual Mortifications thereof, in
the acts of Contrition (For Contrition is not denied, as it is penal, so also
to be satisfactory) Confession, Deprecation, examinations of Conscience,
intensive recollections of Spirit to celestial matters etc. acceptable to God.
The second respecting the Body; and including the several macerations, and
subduings thereof, by suffering cold, thirst, hunger, hard fare, clothing,
lodging, disciplines, watchings, solitude, silence, etc. The third respecting
the goods of fortune; but also those of the Soul, and Body, in order to the
showing all manner of Works of mercy to, or any way benefiting, our Neighbor.
Always provided that our penal Works in any of these three kinds be such, first
as are for the matter of them, lawful, which all those are* (Learned
Protestants consenting.) g. 1.

g. 1. See Dr. Hammond, in his Answer (maintaining good Free Will; or
spontaneous Worships) against Cawdry, much in this matter. p. 154. The Law and
Will of God being the Rule, in agreement with, or opposition to, which, lawful
and unlawful consists; it is as impossible, that any thing should be unlawful
in respect of God's Law, which is not forbidden by it, as that any should be
lawful, that is forbidden. Again, p. 171. The Pharisees doing some things which
were not commanded, was no part of their Hypocrisy [I add, or fault] but on the
contrary either their saying but not doing; or their preferring their own
Traditions before commanded Duties. But still this is no prejudice to those
real performances of more strictness than the Law exacts. Fasting twice in the
Week, and the like; supposing they offend in no other respect, but, that they
are uncommanded performances. Again, p. 128. To Cawdry, urging concerning these
very matters we are here speaking of, Penances, Pilgrimages, Laniations of the
Body, etc. That, since the Romanists do not hold them forth as Commands of God,
that which makes them impious mistaken Mortifications, is their being voluntary
Worships, He answers. It is not their making them the Worship of God, that
renders them culpable, but the unfitness or inordinateness of them to that end,
to which they are designed. Such Laniations of our own Bodies [and might not he
here have added St. Paul's, 1. Cor. 9.27?] being on that account deprived of
all appearance of being acceptable to God [Acceptable to God, useful to that
end or such end, the pricklings of an hair cloth, ( Matt. 11.21.) But not the
lashes of a Discipline: Why so? Yet allows he there St. Paul's Sufferings 2.
Cor. 11.27. which, why it may not include beating or scourging, as well as
pining or prickling the Body, who can give a good reason?] Bishop White, Answer
to Fisher, p. 302. In a thing adiaphorous [ i. e. no way commanded by the
Scripture] it is sufficient to make the practice lawful, if it be not repugnant
to the Scripture.

That are no way prohibited: 2ly, As are some way expedient and conducible to
that good end to which they are designed, and, therefore also, acceptable to
God; which many Penal Works ordinarily used in the Catholic Church need no
such refuge; being either such as are commanded, and no where prohibited; and
such as are known to be acceptable to his Divine Majesty, commanded us in the
Scriptures, at least as to some inferior degree; or recommended to us there
either in particular, or in general; and such as have been frequently practiced
by former Saints, and experienced powerful for correcting vicious habits,
preventing temptations etc; and such as in Scripture have frequent promises
made to them, of remission both of Sin to the not yet justified; and of God's
temporal scourges for Sin, to those already received into his favor. g. 2.

g. 2. Bellarm. de Paenitent. 4. l. 6. c. Opera Satisfactoria in genere non
sunt caeremoniae, sed res utilissimae, quarum in divinis literis extant
exempla, promissiones, and pr^cepta [i. e. quoad certum modum, the superior
degrees being in Consilio, and therefore, when done, much more acceptable to
God.] Again, Cap. 4. Paenitentiam Scripturae passim describunt per fletum,
planctum, jejunium, saccum, etc. Itaque cum dicuntur aliqui Paenas sponte sua
assumere, illud sponte sua non excludit mandatum Dei de paenitentia agenda, and
operibus laboriosis assumendis, sed excludit certum genus, aut majorem mensuram
operum laboriosorum, quam Scriptura, aut Ecclesia in particulari praescripserit.

Lastly Catholics affirm, that any such Acts may be reckoned penal and
satisfactory, either when voluntarily undertaken and imposed by our selves; or
when enjoined us by our spiritual Physician the Priest, (God's appointed
Officer for reconciling Penitents, and prescribing the ways of making their
peace with God); or also, when some of these, or other, Sufferings first
imposed on us by God, yet are by our patience and cheerful acceptance of them,
made, and so offered back unto him, as it were Sufferings of our own choice, in
conformity to his holy Will. This said concerning the matter of Penances, next
to proceed to their effect.

2ly, Catholics then declare, That in the freeing us from Sin, and its bad
effects, there are contained these particulars. 1st, The remitting of the fault
or sin it self; as to the offense given to God by it, and our being resumed
into his favor. 2dly, The remitting of the eternal punishment due thereto,
which always accompanies the former; the retention of such punishment not
consisting with a restored amity. 3ly, The remitting of the temporal
punishment, or of some part of it. 4ly, The removing, out of our Soul, of the
vicious habit, or inclination to Sin, left in it by the former frequented acts
thereof. That three of these, the 1st, 2d, and 4th are removed in our
Justification, without any thing in us meriting this, or satisfying for them. e.

e. Council. Trident. Sess. 6.14. c. In paenitentia continentur etc.
Satisfactiones per jejunia etc, non quidem pro paena aeterna, quae vel
Sacramento, vel Sacramenti voto, una cum culpa remittitur etc. See Melancthon
Apol. Confess. Aug. Art. de Confess. Fatentur Adversarii, quod Satisfactiones
non prosint ad remissionem Culpae. And Rivet (in Dialys. Discuss. Grot. Art.
4.) opposing Grotius thought by him to speak somewhat Socinian-like concerning
our Savior's Satisfaction. Hic etiam novam ipsis Pontificiis doctrinam aperit
[Baptismo and precibus satisfieri Deo pro peccatis.] Applicari Satisfactionem
Christi per Sacramentum and per fidem hactenus apud Christianos creditum est:
Sacramentum and preces adhibitas esse Satisfactionem pro peccatis, nemo
hactenus dixit vel, credidit.

Only some pre-dispositions in us being required, without which the Application
of Christ's Merits and Satisfactions, and our Justification is not attained.
That of these conditions or predispositions required in us one is Repentance:
and in it a due Contrition, in a greater or lesser degree, according to the
quality of our former offenses, especially in any greater relapses from our
first Justification. And again; That, for the producing such due contrition, as
likewise for the bringing the purpose of Reformation (another and chief part
thereof) to good effect, there is ordinarily requisite the practice of the
forementioned works of Penance, some or other, more or less according to the
more stubborn, or flexible inclinations of the Soul to a penitent sorrow, and
remorse, and softness, or hardness of the hearts of wretched sinners: less
Penance being necessary; as the person better disposed. (ch.) Yet that neither
are these Penal Works so far made necessary by Catholics: as if all or most of
them, were to precede every ones Justification; or any of them so absolutely
necessary thereto; as that true Contrition may not possibly be without it: or
such true Contrition, as is without it, not obtain a perfect Justification: z.

z. Bellarm. de Indulgent. 2. l. 17. c. Satis novinus posse hominem per
internam conversionem ad Deum ita vehementer accendi in amorem Dei, and de
peccatis suis dolere, cum proposito Confessionis, ut continuo recipiat
remissionem omnium culparum and paenarum. [I add further; which intense and
worthy Sorrow, or Contrition, did the Church know, she might absolve such
Penitents (where no intervening of public scandal) without imposing or
reservation of any further Penance; or did the Penitent himself know, he also
might omit all those other voluntary Penances, which he, without the Churches
prescription, inflicts upon himself.] Daille de Paenis and Satisfactione, 1. l.
2. c. 5. p. Vel ipsi adversarii fatentur, insignem peccatoris contritionem
omnem saepe paenam expungere.

But only; That the Sinner, being uncertain of his possessing such a sufficient
Contrition as is answerable to his offenses, is exceedingly concerned not to
neglect these means so much conducing thereto, which also are frequently in
Scripture joined with Repentance, and have a like promise annexed of remission
of Sin. e.

e. Conc. Trident. Sess. 6. c. 9. Sicut nemo pius de Dei misericordia, de
Christi merito, deque Sacramentorum virtute, and efficacia, dubitare debet; sic
quilibet, dum seipsum, suamque propriam infirmitatem, and indispositionem
respicit, de sua gratia formidare and timere potest; cum nullus scire valeat,
certitudine fidei, cui non potest sub-esse falsum, se gratiam Dei esse
consecutum. Thus the Council. Of which uncertainty Cardinal Lugo, De Paenit. 2.
Disp.. 7. give these Reasons. Quia nescimus, an actus doloris fuerit undiquaque
bonus, absque admixtione alicujus circumstantiae malae tenentis se ex part
actus, qui reddat actum malum, saltem venialiter. 2. Quia saepe putamus nos
diligere Deum super omnia, and fallimur; habemus enim occultum in cord
affectum ad aliquid Deo repugnans. Sicut Saul, 1. King. 15. And Ibid: In Answer
to the Fathers. Non negamus (says he) expedire, ut peccator conetur summa
intention dolere, ut certior sit paenitentia etc. In quo sensu debent accipi
Patres, qui summum dolorem exigunt. And to the Scriptures. Ibi Movemur (says
he) ad id quod melius est; ne forte, dum minus volumus, non habeamus etiam quod
sufficit. Conc. Trid. Sess. 14.8. Cap. Debent Sacerdotes Domini, pro qualitate
criminum, and poenitentium facultate, salutares and convenientes Satisfactiones
injungere; ne si forte peccatis conniveant, and indulgentius cum paenitentibus
agant, levissima quaedam opera pro gravissimis delictis injungendo, alienorum
peccatorum participes efficiantur [Which relates as well to the non-remission
of the Sin, ne alienorum peccatorum participes, etc. if there be not yet true
Contrition, as of the punishment.] Ibid. Sane and divinae justitiae ratio
exigere videtur, ut aliter a Domino in gratiam recipiantur, qui ante Baptismum
per ignorantiam deliquerint; aliter vero, qui semel a peccati and Daemonis
servitute liberati, and accepto spiritus sancti dono scientes templum Dei
violare and spiritum sanctum contristare non formidaverint. [Which Reason holds
as well for a sufficient Contrition in order to Remission of Sin; as sufficient
Satisfaction, in order to Punishment:] Bellarm. de Paenit. 2. l. 11. c. Dolor
de peccatis esse debet summus appreciative; i. e. ut voluntas pluris aestimet
detestationem peccati, quam cujuscunque boni consecutionem, aut alterius mali
evitationem. To which he adds afterward. Ibid. Periculum est, ne homo se ipse
fallat, and dum in se ad acrem and intensam contritionem excitare non satagit,
revera ne appreciative, quidem toto cord crimina detestetur. And elsewhere, De
Paenit. l. 2. c. 14. Quia nemo certo scire potest, se veram contritionem
habuisse, Itaque ut quis de adepta indulgentia securior sit, debet omnia illa
remedia adhibere, quae Deus ad peccata purganda instituit. Again concerning a
different Contrition of different Sins, Ibid. On St Cyprian's Saying, In Sermo.
de Lapsis. Quam magna deliquimus, tam granditer defleamus, he Comments thus.
Non significat dolorem absolute offensioni aequandum esse, quod fieri non
potest; sed proportionem illam inter peccata and dolorem de peccatis, esse
debere, ut de majore peccato magis, de minore minus doleamus. And on that of
St. Ambrose, Lib. ad Virg. corruptam 8. c. Quanta putas, and qualis necessaria
Paenitentia, quae aut aequet crimina, aut certe excedat? Non ita accipiendum
est (says he) quasi Paenitentia aequare, aut excedere debet peccatum, aut
offensam Dei, sed ut dolor Paenitentiae aequet, aut excedat voluptatem quam
peccando accepimus; quod aliis verbis ita scripsit Hugo de S. Victore, De
Sacram. 2. l. p. 14 2. c. Si in correctione minor est afflictio quam in culpa
fuit delectatio, non est dignus Paenitentiae tuae fructus. Estius, 4. sent. 16.
d.. 7. Sicut peccata alia aliis graviora sunt, ita magis de uno, quam de alio
pro ratione gravitatis eorum dolere debet peccator, magis, inquam appreciative.
And, tho there he maintains, that, ad remissionem culpae non necessario
requiritur ex part contritionis ad certum aliquem gradum intensio, neque ad
certum tempus extensio; yet he speaks of intentio, post Deum sum dilectum,
and aliis rebus omnibus praelatum, which he requires even in the least
Attrition profitable, so that a Contrition falling in any degree short of this
is invalid; and this is no small matter.

For true Contrition containing in it both cessationem a peccato, or vitae
novae propositum and inchoationem: and veteris odium; ( Conc. Trid. Sess. 14.4,
cap.) Neither will hate be without taking revenge, nor a Reformation effected
without many painful acts in the crossing of our former secular, or carnal,
Concupiscences. And Mortifications of the Body do usually accompany a saving
Contrition (that is, where is time, and ability to perform them) in the same
manner as good Works do a saving Faith. And great reason have we to suspect,
that these solitary internal Acts of Contrition accompanied with no external
Humiliations (where strength or time fails not) are none of those vehement and
intensive ones, as, alone, operate the forenamed effect.

3ly, That the Sacerdotal Absolution, and Sacrament of Penance, appointed for
the restoring of sinners relapsed after their first justification, yet has not
this real effect of restoring them when received, without any such due
pre-dispositions in the persons absolved; and, particularly, without any such
Repentance, Contrition, or Godly sorrow, as is required in the person
proportionably to his sin, has no effect, they say, till such Conditions be,
first, performed. th.

th. Cardinal Cajetan, Opuscul. Tract. 5. q. 5. De horum numero utinam non
maxima pars Christianorum paenitentium sit, quos non sicut primos, puta virtute
clavium de attritis regulariter fieri contritos, sed in sua attritione absolvi
and communicare. Cujus signum est etc. De istorum Confessione intelligo
doctrinam Thomae [in 4. sent. 17. disp.] quod confessio informis per defectum
contritionis est valida, ita ut non sit iteranda; and erit eis fructuosa,
quando ascendent adcor altum, ut habeant peccatum pro summo odibili and summo
vitabili etc. See more in the Author. Card. Lugo, De Sacramentis, Disp. 9.. 6.
Sicut Baptismus, ablato obice, remittit priora peccata, sic Sacramentum
Paenitentiae remittit sua, ablato obice: Nulla certe ratio excogitari potest ad
negandum hoc de Sacramento Panitentiae, si concedatur de Baptismo, and
supponatur Sacramentum Paenitentiae validum, and inform. Again, -- Licet
Sacramentum Paenitentiae sit reiterabile, non est tamen obligatio reiterandi
illud circa eadem peccata semel valide subjecta clavibus. Unde, si non daret
postea effectum, ablato obice, illa peccata non dimitterentur direct per
claves Ecclesiae, neque esset obligatio ea confitendi ad hunc finem; quod ex
vipraesentis Institutionis videtur absurdum.

4ly. That therefore where no such worthy Repentance and due Contrition, or
godly sorrow precedes such Absolution, these Penances (tho done after
Absolution) have the self same operation and concurrence to produce such
Contrition, and to procure our Justification, and the forementioned remission
of Sin, and eternal Punishment; and are as necessary for this effect as if done
before; and, till this effected, are for this very thing prescribed by the
Church, or are to be voluntarily undertaken, by Sinners, as the principal end
to which they tend, and for which they are imposed, or recommended to Christian
Practice. Therefore the Baptist calls for these digni fructus paenitentiae in
order to escaping ira ventura; i. e. Hell fire, and the eternal punishment of
Sin. See Matt. 3.7, 8. comp. 10, 11; And as Protestants much urge, so
Catholics willingly grant, that the Fathers do make frequent mention of the
necessity, and prevalency with God, of our Penances and Satisfactions, in
relation to these effects. chapter

chapter Council. Trident. Sess. 14.8. cap. Debent Sacerdotes Domini etc. See (e.)
Ne, si forte peccatis conniveant, and indulgentius cum paenitentibus agant,
levissima quaedam opera pro gravissimis delictis injungendo, alienorum
peccatorum participes efficiantur. Now how can the Priest be so, if due Penance
not required (I mean as necessary predispositions, and as concurring to effect
a due Contrition) to Absolution from the Sin? Estius, 4. Sent. Disp. 15.. 10.
Quod Satisfactio, etiam subsequens absolutionem, aliquo modo respicere debeat
paenam aeternam, ex eo patet, quia and ipsa est pars Sacramenti paenitentiae
instituti ad solvenda vincula mortis aeternae; and absolutio datur, non tantum
intuitu contritionis and confessionis, verum etiam Satisfactionis factae, vel
faciendae. Cum igitur paenitentem absolvat Sacerdos a paena aeterna, consequens
est, etiam Satisfactionem in suo genere atque ordine ad eum effectum valere,
sicut Contritionem and Confessionem, licet non omnino aequaliter. And so
Bellarm. de Paenit. 1. l. 5. c. At quae contumelia Christo esse potest, si
dicamus meritum passionis ejus esse veram atque unicam peccatorum medicinam,
eamque applicari per verbum absolutionis iis, qui per Contritionem and
Confessionem, ac Satisfactionem propositam, ad eam medicinam recipiendam rite
praeparantur. [ here is praeparatio per Satisfactionem, ad applicandum meritum
passionis, medicinam peccatorum.] Estius, Ibid. Satisfactio Christi per se
sufficientissima ad tollendam omnem paenam; sed divinitus sic ordinatum, ut
ista nobis non applicetur, ne quidem ad solutionem paenae aeternae, nisi and
ipsiper opera quaedam paenalia Christo compatiamur. Again, Sunt conditiones
quaedam paenales ex part nostra requisitae ad hoc, ut passio and mors Christi
tanquam plenissima Satisfactio nobis ad tollendum reatum paenae aeternae
applicetur. Ibid.. 14. Quarta utilitas Satisfactionis propriae est placatio
irae divinae super peccatis commissis, sive relaxatio paenarum temporalium
adhuc debitarum, vel etiam paenae aeternae, juxta sensum in Superioribus
explicatum [ i. e. per modum conditionis, etc. applying to this the Apostles
words, 2. Cor. 7. Quae secundum Deum tristitia est, paenitentiam in salutem
stabilem operatur.] Bellarm. de Paenit. 4. l. 12. c. Concurrunt and prosunt
nostra opera paenalia ad culpae remissionem, and mortis aeternoe liberationem,
ut dispositiones, etc. Sicut actus fidei. See Ibid. c. 14.. Ad hanc. 2. l. 12.
c. De bonis operibus, 3. l. 3. c. Vere enim ejusmodi eleemosynae [now its the
same of other Penal Works, Fasting, etc] partim ut dispositiones ad
Justificationem, peccatum etiam quoad culpam suo modo delent, dum gratiam
impetrant justificationis; partim, post acceptam remissionem culpae,
Satisfaciunt pro poena temporali. And, Cap. 4. Eleemosyna dispositio est ad
gratiam justificationis, si fiat ab eo, qui paenitentiam agere incipit, and ex
Dei motione and auxilio speciali. De hoc fructu loquitur Solomon, Prove. 16.6.
Luke 11.41. -- 19.8. comp. 9. Act. 10 4.

Neither, since the regained amity of God, and remission of eternal torments is
infinitely more valuable than the remission of the temporal, can it be
imagined; but that God requires these our Humiliations, and Mortifications, as
well for obtaining of the first, as of the second. Or, that the ancient
discipline in requiring the performance of these Penances from lapsed sinners,
in order to procuring God's favor, pardon of their sin, and freedom from
Hell, before the absolving them from such sins; and restoring them to the
Churches Communion, herein mis-applied them. [Though that must be always
remembered, which the Council of Trent has declared, Sess. 6. c. 14. That, in
respect of these, they are not Satisfactions, since they have no proportionable
worth at all to them; nor yet are the acts of a person by Grace inhabitant
rendered acceptable to God; but are only conditions and predispositions in us
for obtaining the application of Christ's all-sufficient Satisfactions.]

5ly, That therefore, though now in later times (wherein all the faithful,
those also persisting in the state of Justification, yet do frequently, and
beneficially, repair to Confession) not without good causes moving thereto, the
performance of such Penances from greater sinners is not usually exacted, as
anciently, before Sacerdotal Absolution, and admission to Communion; yet,
still, where there is greater doubt of some defect in the Penitents Contrition,
for the perfecting thereof Absolution, and approach to the Eucharist, is by
prudent Confessors for some time suspended, and the performance of such
Penances discreetly premised. l.

l. Layman, 5. l. 6. Tract. 4. c. Si Paenitens, post duas aut tres
Confessiones, eandem peccati speciem eodem vel majori numero adferat, and
nullus emendationis conatus ante cessisse videatur; hoc casu differenda erit
absolutio, nominato aliquo temporis spacio, intra quod Paenitens conatum
adhibeat ad criminis emendationem; postea absolutionem accepturus. Bonacina de
Paenit. Disp. 5.. 3. p. 2. Prop. 4. Confessarius potest obligare paenitentem ad
paenitentiam ante absolutionem adimplendam, quatenus judicaverit expedire ad
curationem, and medicinam paenitentis. See Suarez de Paenit. Disp. 38.. 7. n.
7. See the Rules of Carlo Borrhomeo, Acta Eccl. Med. Part 4 in Instruct.
Confess. enjoining Confessors to defer Absolution to persons offending mortally
in such sins, as are grown to much excess: to those who have not quitted the
near occasions of their former sins; or who, they probably gather, will quickly
return to them: [for the Contrition of such seems not sufficient till some
experience be had of their Reformation. And see Xaverius his Instruction to
Gaspar, Rector of the College at Goa (Tursel. Vita Xaver. 6. l. 17. c.)
Confessionem non continua sequetur Absolutio; sed biduum, triduumve dabitur
eorum peccatoribus certarum rerum meditatione praeparandis, ut interim animorum
maculas, lachrymis and voluntariis eluant paenis. Si quid cui debent,
restituant; simultatibus, si quas habent, depositis redeant cum inimicis in
gratiam, a libidinis consuetudine, caeterisque, quibus impliciti sunt,
flagitiis expediantur. Haec omnia absolutionem rectius praecurrunt, quam
sequuntur. [Where the space of time mentioned, doubtless, ought to be
prolonged, as a longer Mortification seems necessary.] Lastly, In the Pope's
Briefs to those who are authorized to absolve in reserved Cases, they are
enjoined not to absolve any for such great Sins, till some part at least of a
rigorous Satisfaction first performed. See the large Collection of Authorities
to this purpose in Arnauld de la Frequen. Communion. Part. 2. c. 44, 45.

6ly, That God, no Acceptour of Persons or Ages, does in no times require
lesser Penances or Humiliations from us for procuring his pardon of our sins,
or averting either his eternal, or his temporal, punishment of them, than in
others. So that, though such Penances happen not, for some good reasons, to be
so severely now, as anciently, imposed on Penitents by their Ghostly Fathers
according to the true demerit of their sins; or, being imposed equal to the sin
in his judgment, yet really are not so; yet are they still in the same measure
due, nevertheless, to be performed to God for such sin as well now as in any
former times; and therefore the Council of Trent, endeavoring to correct some
modern neglects, requires -- Ut Sacerdotes, quantum spiritus and prudentia
suggesserit, pro qualitate criminum, and paenitentium facultate, salutares and
convenientes Satisfactiones injungant; And that -- Non tantum ad novae vitae
custodiam and infirmitatis medicamentum, sed etiam ad praeteritorum peccatorum
vindictam, and castigationem, [an Office committed to them by our Lord, Jo.
20.23.] Ne si forte peccatis conniveant, and indulgentius cum paenitentibus
agant, levissima quaedam opera pro gravissimis delictis injungendo alienorum
peccatorum participes efficiantur. m.

m. Bellarm. de Indulgent. 2. l. 18. c. Et veteres, and recentiores, Episcopi
non aliis quam paenitentibus Indulgentias tribuunt, nec alias paenas [Penances]
quam in foro paenitentiario debitas, relaxant. Quod autem [ex paenis in ^oro
paenitentiario debitis] tunc relaxarentur paenae injunctae, nunc autem tum
injunctae, tum injungendae, ratio est, quoniam tunc injungebantur severiores
paenitentiae, quae saepe delictis aequases erant, nunc autem injunguntur
mitiores, quae delictis impares sunt; sed, sive pares sive impares injunguntur,
omnino pares in hac vita vel in alia perferendae sunt [for our defect of
performance of due Penance for our Sin] nisi misericorditer relaxentur. Again,
8. Cap. Hoc tempore non injungitur quidem paenitentia tam severa [ i. e.
pluribus annis] tamen vere debitores sunt, qui peccata gravia commiserunt
paenitentiae agendae multis, vel annis, vel diebus etc. And, -- Ut plurimum,
long plus est quod expiandum restat per non-injunctas paenitentias, quam quod
expiatur per injunctas. And 7. Cap.. Ex his -- Imo Sacerdotes cum Paenitentias
imponunt, hortantur paenitentes, ut ipsi etiam sponte assumant alias, cum
credibile sit impositas non esse aequales criminibus; and Cyprianus dicat. --
Paenitentia crimine minor non sit. quod idem alii Patres docent. Again, 2. l.
9. c.. tertio. Tunc majores paenas Deus exiget, quando Paenitentia Canonica
injuncta est minor, quam par esset, sed si injungatur aequalis [ i. e. as
explained below, These. 9. n. 4.] ut plane injungi potest, and ea plene
exolvatur, nihil in Purgatorio solvendum superesse omnes Catholici docent.
Estius, 4. Sent. did. 15.. 21 Si Sacerdos officio suo desuerit [in jungens,
dans, opera levia pro delictis gravibus] vel etiam, justa quaquam ratione
addictus, minorem quam pro exigentia delicti Satisfactionem injunxerit; omnino
videtur paenitens, qui eum defectum vel scit velscire debot, teneri ad
satisfactionem aliquam ultra assumendam, ^aque donec tota satisfactio perveniat
ad quandam aequalitatem cum paena remporali pro peccatis debita; cujus ratio
est, quia quamdiu nondum fecit fructus dignos paenitentiae, nondum satisfecit
divino praecepto. Matt. 3.8. Card. Tolet. Instruct. Sacerd. 3. l. 11. c.
Advertendum est, quod paenitentia imposita a Confessore, quamvis, ut diximus,
magis prosit quam voluntary assumpta, non tamen semper adhuc delet totam
paenam, sed partem aliquam, nisi tam grandis sit ut totam auferat. Sed humana
fragilitas non patitur tales panitentias: Ob id, merito indulgentiis and
omnibus bonis operibus vitae juvamur, and adhuc in purgatorio solvenda post
obitum ferimus. Lastly thus Lugo de Paenitent. Disp. 25.. 2. Non sufficere
prudentem existimationem Ministri Prebatur (says he): Quia ad causandos alios
effectus Sacramentales non sufficit prudens existimatio ministri; v. g. in
absolutione non sufficit, quod sacerdos prudenter judicet, paenitentem esse
dispositum, nec ad effectum Eucharistiae sufficit, quod prudenter aliquis
existimet, se esse in gratia, and sic de aliis; ergo nec ad hunc effectum
remissionis paenae sufficient, quod Sacerdos prudenter existimet, esse
satisfactionem aequalem, si revera non sit: Dico autem aequalem non mathematice
(non enim requiritur talis) sed juxta regulam and dispositionem divinam, qua
Christus instituit in hoc Sacramento tantam satisfactionem paenitentis cum tali
dispositione valere ad tollendum tantum reatum paenae temporalis.

And, That therefore it is more beneficial to the Penitent, that these be, in
case of great and mortal sins, in some larger proportion prescribed (and such
Penitents have good cause both gratefully to accept, and to desire it of their
Confessors); Both for that such Penances are as necessary now, as heretofore,
to be paid in the same proportion, at least by our own supplying such a defect;
and a less measure of them prescribed is more effectual to such purposes, than
a greater voluntarily undertaken; both for the Sacramental efficacy, and the
power of the Keys exercised in the one, that is not in the other: and also, for
the merit of Obedience, when they may happen to be imposed by these our
spiritual Superiors in a way less grateful to us. n.

n. Layman, 5. l. 6. Tract. 15. c. Multo plus valet modica paenitentia a
Sacerdote imposita, quam magna, quae sponte assumitur; quia non haec, sicut
illa, vim Sacramentalem habet [ Estius adds; nor meritum obedientiae; all
Obedience being a kind of Mortification]: Quamobrem ^ptandum est paenitenti, ut
non levis ipsi paenitentia imperetur.

7. Thus much of Penances and Satisfactions, as they relate also to Contrition
and the Remission of Sin, and eternal torments due thereto, in our
Justification. 7ly, Catholics affirm, That after Sin, and its eternal
punishment thus remitted; and after the person restored into God's favor in
his Justification, yet both after our first Justification by Baptism, as to
some temporal sufferings in this life, (tho not in the next); but chiefly,
after a second by the Sacrament of Penance, to those, who have relapsed after
Baptism into greater sins, and who (to use the expression of the Council of
Trent, Sess. 6. cap. 14) Gratiae Dei, quam acceperunt, ingrati spiritum Sanctum
contristaverant, and Templum Dei violare non sunt veriti, there, many times,
remains still reserved (and so not the Sin, always, as to all its punishment,
remitted in our Justification, See Conc. Trid. Sess. 14. Cap. 4.) some temporal
punishments, besides that common one of a corporal Death, to be undergone by
them; God's justice not admitting so far the application to us, gratis, or for
our former repentance, of the all meritorious satisfactions of our Lord, as
that great sins especially should escape impune and unchastised with some
temporal scourges at least; in this manner, to show his hate to sin even when
he has taken into favor the sinner. Examples of which punishments of the sin,
after God reconciled to the person, and so his offense in this sense removed,
are found frequent in Scripture; See Numb. 20.12. -- 27.12, 13, 14. Numb.
14.34. -- 2. Sam. 12.10.13, 14. -- 2. Sam. 24.10.13. -- 2. King. 20.6.18. comp.
2. Chron. 32.31. -- 2. Chron. 20.37. -- 35.22, 23. -- 1. King. 13.22. -- 1.
Cor. 3.15. Exodus 32.34. [Where the punishment threatened ver. 10. being
remitted; yet are others [less than that) reserved, whenever their new sins
should provoke the Lord also to remember these.] Josh. 22.17. Psalm. 89.31. etc.
Prove. 11.31. -- 1. Pet. 4.18. Ecclesiasticus, 5.4. Psalm. 98.8. -- 1. Cor.
11.31, 32. Which temporal Sufferings of the already justified, Protestants
also, though some of them had rather call them Chastisements and Corrections,
than Punishments, acknowledge inflicted on them for former Sin; and amongst
other ends, for this: to show God's hate to Sin. x.

x. Chemnitius Exam. Conc. Trid. Part. 2. De Satisfact. Fide, propter Christum,
accipimus simul remissionem culpae and paenae aeternae. Sed, quod ad paenas
temporales in hac vita attinet, post acceptam remissionem peccatorum,
subjiciuntur [justificati] in hac vita vel communibus calamitatibus, vel
peculiaribus paenis propter certa, seu privata, quaedam peccata. Ut Adam,
David, populus Israel, Miriam. Testantur idem calamitates Baptizatorum post
baptismam. Ostendunt etiam Scripturae exampla, Deum aliquando and post
reconciliationem seu remissionem, quibusdam singulares paenas ob peccata in hac
vita imponere, quanquam hoc non sit universale. Scripture etiam dicit de
reconciliatis; Corpus mortuum est propter peccatum, Roman. 8. and 2. Reg. 12.
Quia fecisti hoc etc. Non quasi Deus illis nondum satis sit reconciliatus, seu
aliquid offensae retinuerit, etiam post datam remissionem peccatorum; sed illis
imponuntur ad castigationem sui, and ad exemplum aliorum. Ne, accepta
reconciliatione, obliviscantur, quanta sit abominatio peccati and quae
magnitudo irae Dei adversus peccatum. Ut crescat in ipsis odium and detestatio
peccati, timor Dei, fides solicit curans, ut gratiam retineat. Ut his
Exercitiis conservetur and confirmetur paenitentia, quae perpetua esse debet,
fides, obedientia in Cruse, spes, petitio, and expectatio auxilii, liberationis
seu mitigationis. Denique Deus vult in illis tanquam in publico spectaculo,
conspici Exempla, admonentia, and nos and alios de judicio suo adversus peccata
etc. Daille, De Paenis and Satisfact. 1. l. 3. c. Neque absolute negaverat
Calvinus piorum castigationes ad praeteritum referri, qui sciret eas. piis
imponi ob admissa delicta. Libenter concedimus, ob admissum a Davide peccatum
mortuum esse ejus filium. Mortem parvuli paenam [i. e. impositum in ultionem
peccati] [tho ultio he calls it, when man punishes such Sin (See De Christ.
Pacif. (s.) and so does the Scripture (2. Cor. 7.11.) why not when God?] fuisse
admissi a Davide peccati proprie dictam negamus. Again, Sapientissimus Pater,
ut grassaturae pesti occurreret, tempestiveque tanto malo mederetur, sui in ea
peccata, qualia a Davide admissa erant, odii [and why not as well suae
ultionis, which he denies, See page 5.) specimen edendum putavit, sublato,
parentis ante oculos, filio. So he says chap. 6. of the punishment of Moses's
Sin. Ea insigne documentum fuit, tum nostrae miseriae, tum sanctitatis ac
puritatis divinae; quae ne minimos quidem, vel carissimorum ministrorum naevos
sine animadversione transmittit.

But next, Concerning these temporal Punishments, Catholics do not affirm, 1.
That there always remains a debt of them reserved after remission of the Sin
obtained in Justification. But that, in this, one act of Contrition may
possibly be so intense and prevalent with his Divine Majesty, as to remove at
once, through Satisfactions of Christ, whatever punishment due thereto; z. and
that after our Regeneration in Baptism, no temporal Punishment, at least in
the next world, (of which see Council of Trent, Sess. 6. c. 14. Conc. Florent.
de Baptism) where the person being now incapable of meliorating his condition,
several former ends of such sufferings cease, remains payable for any sins
preceding it. 2. Again of Punishments that remain, they do not affirm, the sole
end of God's inflicting them to be the Satisfaction of his vindicative Justice
upon Sin, but many other merciful purposes: As for the cure of the remaining
stains, and bad impressions of such Sin, and of the vicious inclinations left
in the offenders, or also for increasing the merit of the sufferer, by the
exercise and improvement of many Christian Virtues in his patient and cheerful
undergoing of them. Again, for the deterring them, or at least others, by the
Example of these their punishments seen, or heard of, from committing the like
offenses. This last being one end of all temporal punishments whatever, whether
in this life, or after it, so long as any live to take notice of them: for
Death itself is a perpetual Memorial to men of God's hate to Sin; and the
circumstances of many men's death a warning to others not to provoke God's
judgments in the like manner. 3. Again, Of these temporal punishments reserved,
they affirm not, That all of them are certainly removable by any ordinary means
used to avert, or prevent them; As the retaining of which may, some other way
above mentioned, tend more to God's glory; as for Example: that of David, was
not released; nor that of Moses; nor is the General one of a corporal Death, at
some time or other, executed on all. p.

p. Bellarm. de Faenit. 4. l. 3. c. Paenae temporales hujus vitae interdum non
possunt redimi, sed necessario perpetiendae sunt; id, quod extra omnem
controversiam esse videtur. Deus enim aliquando ita paenam aliquam constituit,
ut nullam pro ea redemptionem accipere velit. Talis imprimis paena mors est,
quam nullus, quantumvis justus, nllo pio opere avertere potuit. Talis fuit illa
paena Davidis (2. King. 12.) and Moysis. See Antidagm. Coloniense de
Satisfactione. Interim tamen and hoc praedicatum and doctum fuit [a Patribus]
neminem vel posse, vel debere Deo terminum aut modum remissionis paenae
statuere; ac si oporteret Deum, ad completam Canonicam satisfactionem, illico a
flagellis suis cessare: Christo vero reconciliatori nostro, cui Pater omne
judicium dedit, prorsus relinquenda est paenae remissio, a quo petere oportet
ut obedientiam nostram velit per meritum suum patri caelesti facere acceptam,
and paenam pro-meritam misericorditer avertere.

And again, of those removable, they grant; That some may be so, only upon an
intense act of Contrition, or upon Prayer and Deprecation without any further
Penances, especially where opportunity does not admit them; which Prayers, (and
those considered not as Penal, but merely as petitioning), as they are held
effectual, by impetration of the application of Christ's Merits, which God, for
averting temporal punishments from others, living or dead; so, much more, may
they be, from our selves. r.

r. Lugo de Paenitent. Disp. 24.. 1. Facilius potest aliquis impetrare sibi,
quam alteri. Neque illa peccata manent tunc impunita, sed satisfit plene
divinae justitiae, applicando Satisfactiones Christi pro paena, quam nos
debebamus solvere; quae applicatio obtineri potest aliquando per orationes.
Sicut nec manent impunita peccata, quando paena pro iis debita remittitur per
Indulgentias, aut Sacramenta vel Sacrificia; quia tunc etiam Satisfactiones
Christi applicantur, quibus solvitur plenissime totum debitum.

But meanwhile the faithful, not knowing the just measure, value or effect, of
his own Contrition, or Prayers, where time serves, cannot upon this prudently
omit any other means, which God has left as helpful for attaining the same
effect; and those things are at all times to be held necessary and useful,
which at no time he knows to be superfluous.

8ly, Catholics affirm: That, as the aforesaid Penances, and Satisfactions,
when done only by Grace assistant, are prevalent with God for obtaining the
Remission of Sin, and its eternal punishment in our Justification; so, after
it, that these, when done by Grace inhabitant, may much more prevail with God,
for obtaining the remission of some temporal punishment, Chastisement, or
Correction, still reserved by God as the scourge of the Sin, though after his
having readmitted into favor the Sinner. A thing conceded also by
Protestants. s.

s. Chemnitins, Exam. Conc. Trid. 2. Part de Satisfactionibus. Illas etiam
temporales paenas, Scriptura tradit, reconciliatis, propter filium mediatorem,
saepe vel mitigari, velprorsus tolli, quando vera humilitate peccata agnoscunt,
fide Deum invocant, veterem hominem mortificant, and serio novam vitam
meditantur, hoc est, non in debitis humanarum traditionum operibus, sed tota
paenitentia, quae habet mandatum Dei, paenae illae propter Christum mitigantur.
[quoting 2. Paralip. 6.26. Joel, 2.13. -- 1. Cor. 11.] Observandum vero est
(says he) paenas temporarias mitigari tota paenitentia, non quod opera ejus
sint vel compensationes, vel merita remissionis peccatorum, sed quia
castigationibus illis Deus in reconciliatis nihil aliud quaerit, quam ut
conservetur, magis accendatur, crescat and augeatur vera humilitas, agnitio,
odium and detestatio peccati; exercitium fidei, mortificatio veteris hominis,
patientia, spes etc. Daille, De Paenis and Satisfact. 7. l. 6. c. answering to
the Fathers. Significant (says he) temporalibus illis paenis, quaecunque
tandem sint, eos, quos peccati vere paenituit, [i. e. paenitentia ejusque
fructibus, lachrymis, jejuniis, orationibus, eleemosynis, as he expresses it
before] non aliter eximi ac liberari, quam si nullas unquam essent promeriti.
Hunc vero paenitentiae certum and immutabilem eventum esse (quod ex Patrum
dictis sequitur) ultro, ac libentes, fatemur; eventum istum ex jure and
justitia, sive ex paenitentiae ipsius dignitate esse, non autem ex mera Dei
optimi misericordia, ac veritate, constantissime quidem negamus. Bishop White
against Fisher, Q. 21. P. 540. grants, That, after great and enormous offenses
committed by his people, God does chastise them with the rod of Correction, Ps.
89.33. -- 1. Cor. 11.31, 32. Which Correction is a pain of Castigation, but not
a punishment of Malediction. Grants also, That this affliction or pain of
chastisement inflicted upon penitent Sinners, may by Prayer of Faith, exercise
of Virtue, Humiliation and Mortification, be either removed, or else mitigated.
But denies, that such persons can by Prayer, Mortification or any good Works,
merit release of any temporal Mulct. And contends, That the Fathers under the
word, Satisfaction, understand not the word Satisfaction strictly and in rigor,
for satisfaction of condignity, as Romists do, but improperly and largely, to
wit, For satisfaction of deprecation, congruity or impetration. Calvin, De
Christiana Pacificat. 5. c. Qui paenas divinas avertere cupit, non est, quod
studeat satisfactione aliqua, quod deliquit expungere; [because Christ's
Satisfactions have, and only can, do this]: Sed, se quibuscunque potest modis
cum ad humilitatem, tum ad veram resipiscentiam erudiens, suipsius peccati
ultor sit homo; ne Deum experiatur ultorem [by not having Christ's
Satisfactions applied to, or accepted for him] Qui Deum sibi vult parcere, ipse
sibi nec parcat nec indulgeat etc. Sed hoc totum nihil est ad mutuam
compensationem: Nam, qui in hunc modum de se paenas sumunt, quo praeveniant Dei
judicium; constituunt sibi nihilominus in Christi Sacrificio non modo culpae
expiationem, sed paenarum etiam, quaecunque meriti sunt, veniam. Spalat. 5. l.
8. c. 4.. Deus, quoniam peccatum nullum relinquit absolute impunitum (quia
misericors quidem est, sed etiam justus) cum dilectis suis i^a agit; ut, si
ipsi in se peccata propria puniant, ille nolit ea ordinary punne, and
contentus est ex sua misericordia, ut loco flagellorum, quibus ipse solet
peccata hominum in hac vita purgare, paenae a peccatore voluntary assumptae
succedant: eas Patres ponant in interna potissimum contritione, qua Peccator
seipsum, adjutus divina Gratia, macerat propter peccatum. In reliquis supplet
Christi Satisfactio; sed quae nemini applicetur, qui paenitens non sit, and
consequenter, qui de seipso prius aliquas paenas saltem interni doloris non
sumit. Satisfacit ergo Deo, qui hoc facit, quia facit id, quod Deus ab eo
requirit: and quo facto ipse plenam donat remissionem, non propter hanc
minimam, nulliusque precii aut meriti satisfactionem; sed propter plenam
satisfactionem Christi. Dr. Fern ( Answer to Spencer, p. 146.) We cannot allow
the Purposes (or at least Practices) of the Romish Church, in commending those
Penals, as meritorious and satisfactory to God's Justice; that I may say
nothing of the no small gain, that is made thereby. But we allow and commend
the doing of the things, these self-afflictives, 1st, In order to the obtaining
of Remission of Sin, and Punishment: So the sackcloth, ashes, lying on the
ground, as in the Ninevites, Jonah 3. c. 2ly, After forgiveness, they are
profitable, when done, either in respect to Sin past, by way of wholesome
Discipline, to make us more wary of such Sins, etc. Or, when done in order to
averting some temporal Judgment etc. And these afflictives, or exercises of
self-denial, may be either voluntary, undertaken of our selves; or, by advice
of the Priest, that has the Ministry of Reconciliation, and the power of
loosing committed unto him. And the less that God does inflict on us etc, the
more we are concerned to impose on our selves such Acts, etc. [In all those you
may observe the Catholic Doctrine so misunderstood, or at least
misrepresented, by them, as if it maintained these Penal Works to be
Satisfactions in rigid Justice, equalling, and compensating such punishments;
and that, without any relating to, application of, or dependence on, Christ's
Satisfactions. Filii hominum, duro cord, ut quid quaeritis mendacium?]

Are prevalent with God they say; though not, always, and for all such
punishments (at least in such a degree, as these Penances are usually
performed) but many times, or for the most; either for averting all, or at
least part thereof; But 2dly, When they are not this way effective, for the
Reasons given before; yet do not such persons lose their reward, viz. The
recompense of a future greater portion of Glory according to the measure of
such Penances: all Works that are in this way satisfactory, being also (as
commonly the higher and uncommanded Acts of Christian Virtues, and of Grace
infused) in the other way meritorious.

9ly, Whether these Penances obtain such Remission of Temporal Punishment by
way of Impetration only, or of Satisfaction, or (which is the same) by way of
meriting such Remission; and, if they Satisfactory, in what manner they be so,
much-what the same things recur in the stating of these, as before of Merit. 1.
Catholics disclaim Satisfaction in such a rigid sense, as Protestants impose
on it. viz. That it be a suffering, or satisfaction, that equals, in rigor of
justice, the punishment reserved. 2. That it be an act of our own ability, not
merely of his Grace, to whom we offer it in Satisfaction. 3. That it be not a
work due to him already upon many other accounts (though we were to have made
him no such Satisfaction therewith) from our being his Creatures; and again his
redeemed servants, and slaves; and, so all that we are, or can do, wholly his,
See g. 1. Though it is true, that out of God's great Indulgence to us in the
new Covenant, all his dues are not called for by him, in any strict command, or
precept of his, made under the penalty of our Sinning, and being punishable,
for an omission thereof; and so true, that, some Works of ours, that are very
acceptable to him (and, amongst these, the chief of them which are accounted
Satisfactory) yet are, in the former sense, indebita; and we are enabled by his
Grace to give him a great deal more, than, upon any prescribed Penalty, he
asks us. Catholics therefore 1st affirm of Satisfactory Works as before of
Meritorious; That whatever saisfactory worth there may be in them, it is to be
ascribed not to our strength, but God'd Grace, purchased by our Lord's
Satisfactions, and inhabitant in us, which is the Fountain of them. t.

t. Lugo, Disp. 24.. 1. Licet opera nostra habeant de se illum velorem and
dignitatem; non tamen expiarent formaliter, and auferrent debitum paenae
temporalis, si non accedecet acceptatio Dei libere acceptantis; atque ideo haec
acceptatio de facto suit propter Christum. And afterward. Qui potuit (says he)
non acceptare; sicut de facto pro alique debito paenae temporalis non acceptat.

2ly, Whatever value they have, they cannot challenge, from God, the remission,
or quittance of any such Punishment, but according to his own gracious
Acceptance of them through Christ's Merits to this purpose; they being all due
to him upon another account, as has been said; and, if they were not so, he
not being obliged, without a promise passed; to any equal exchange. u.

u. S. Thom. Supplem. Q. 13. A. 1. Non potest homo Deo satisfacere, si [satis]
aequalitatem quantitatis importet; contingit autem, si importet aequalitatem
proportionis; and hoc, sicut sufficit ad rationem justitiae, ita sufficit ad
rationem satisfactionis. Quia amicitia non exigit aequivalens, sed quod
possibile est. Again, Quamvis totum suum posse homo Deo debet, non tamen ab eo
exigitur de necessitate salutis, ut totum quod possit faciat. Bellarm. De
Paenit. 4. l. 7. c. Nos de satisfactione illa verba facimus, quae (ut nostri
loquuntur) ex condigno quidem paenam temporalem expiet, non tamen ex rigore
justitiae. Satisfactio enim ex rigore justitiae duo requirit, ut satisfiat ex
proporiis; and ad aequalitatem, nulla videlicet praeveniente aut intercedente
gratia ejus, cui debetur satisfactio. Nos autem neque aliquid habemus quod Dei
non sit, neque possumus ullo genere honoris adequare injuriam, quam Deo
fecimus. Nihilominus tamen accedente gratia Dei, eaque multiplici, vere
possumus, aliquo modo ex propriis. and ad aequalitatem, ac per he just, and
ex condigno satisfacere. [A^iquo, modo, i. e. dum opera nostra, ut a Spiritu
Christi in nobis habitante procedunt, quandam habent infinitatem.] And, -- Dum
Deus, qui omnia nostra sibi jure vendicare posset, non omnia quae facere
possumus imperat. Lugo, De Paenit. Disp. 24. 1. Comparing Merit and
Satisfaction. Sicut mereri [in the sense that Catholics use it] non est emere
pro aequali pretio, aequalitate rei; sed est seminare apud aequitatem, and
gratitudinem Principis; quare aequalitas, meriti, non est sicut precii; sed
sicut seminis, in cord Principis faecundissimo. Sic etiam facere non est satis
pati; sed imitatur meritum, eo quod debtor tendat ad placandum Principem and
alliciendam ejus mansuetudinem ac clementiam, ut acceptet voluntariam
punitionem anticipatam, and placetur, ne exigat debitam paenam. Unde multo
minor paenalitas sufficient ad expiandum debitum majoris paenalitatis. And Disp.
25.. 2. Dico Satisfactionem aequalem non Mathematice (non enim requiritur
talis) sed juxta regulam and dispositionem divinam, qua Christus instituit in
hoc Sacramento tantam Satisfactionem Paenitentis, cum tali dispositione
[interna] valere ad tollendum tantum reatum paenae temporalis. See the stating
of Merit in Merits. a.]

3ly, Yet that these Penances, being the fruits of the Spirit in the
Regenerate, and adopted Sons of God, have a supernatural dignity in them, most
acceptable to him, See Merit, These. 3, 4. especially those done freely by them
beyond the obligation of his Precepts: and so; the same which has been said,
of the worth of their other good works, See before, in order to their meriting,
in some fence, eternal life, may, much more, be said of these, in order to
their meriting, in the same fence, the remission of, or (which is the same)
satisfying God for, some temporal Punishment. (That is;) In such a fence, as
these good Works may have a worth acceptable to God, for obtaining from him
that which is more, they may, for procuring, or giving satisfaction to him, for
that which is less. b. A like worth to which no Penal Works have, that precede
our Justification as to any remission of the eternal punishment; a pardon
always received, before the production of these later Penances that follow
Justification; which therefore are affirmed Satisfactions for the temporal
Punishment, not for the eternal. Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. c. 14.

4ly, But, in this satisfaction, or remission of the one, (Sufferings that are
to be inflicted) for the other, (Penalties voluntarily undergone) there is
affirmed no equality, in strict justice, of the later to the former; of the
sufferings performed by us, to those remitted by God: but these, far greater,
affirmed to be averted by the other, far lesser; therefore they are called
Satisfactions in reference to God's acceptance; not Satispassions (a just
recompense of) in comparison to such punishments. u. But, since God's Justice
suffers no Sin to pass unpunished, nor Punishment to pass unsatisfied-for, to
the uttermost, by some person or other, therefore, for whatever they are
deficient herein, it is affirmed to be abundantly supplied in, and by, the
Satisfactions of our Lord; applied for the remitting of these temporal
Punishments less or more, according to the various measure of those
self-revenges, and fruits of Penance, which Christians bring forth and offer to
God for their release. As also, the same Satisfactions of our Lord are affirmed
to be applied to the faithful, for remission of these Punishments, by the
Sacraments of the Church, by oblation of the Sacrifice of Christ's Body and
Blood for them, by the Churches Indulgences; Lastly, by their own Prayers,
though without any other Penal Works, as God pleases: God's Justice finding
these plenary Satisfactions in his Son, for any Punishment, eternal, or
temporal, the pardon of which his Mercy is pleased to indulge us without our
own. ph.

ph. Council. Trid.. 14. c. 1. Sacramento Paenitentiae [one part of which are
Satisfactions, lapsis post Baptismum] beneficium mortis Christi applicatur.
Ibid. c. 13. Si quis dixerit pro peccatis quoad paenam temporalem minime Deo,
per Christi merita, satisfieri paenis, ab eo inflictis etc. Anathema sit.
Again, Can. 14. Si quis dixerit Satisfactiones, quibus Paenitentes, per
Christum Jesum, peccata redimunt, non esse cultus Dei etc. Again, Cap. 8. Dum,
satisfaciendo, patimur pro peccatis, Christo Jesu, qui pro peccatis nostris
satisfecit, ex quo omnis nostra sufficientia est, conformes efficimur. Omnis
Gloriatio nostra in Christo est, in quo meremur, in quo satisfacimus, facientes
fructus dignos paenitentiae, qui ex illo vim habent, ab illo offeruntur Patri,
and per illum [per illius merita] acceptantur a Patre etc. Ubi vides (says
Cardinal Lugo, De Paenit. Disp. 24.. 1.) intervenire merita Christi non solum,
ut fiant nostrae satisfactiones; sod etiam, ut acceptentur a Deo. Again, Cap.
9. Corporalibus flagellis a Deo inflictis and a nobis patienter toleratis apud
Deum Patrem, per Christum Jesum, satisfacere valemus. [Upon which thus Lugo,
Ibid. Congruum est, quod hoc etiam beneficium non aliter concederetur nisi
propter Christum, propter quem Deus remittit and indulget omnia, quae quolibet
modo nobis remittuntur, and indulgentur. For, since God's Justice must be fully
satisfied, by some person or other, for all Sin, and all its due punishments
(Else why suffered Christ?) and the Satisfactions of our Penal Works are
affirmed, not in rigid justice to equal the temporal punishment remitted; here
also our Satisfactions are completed by Christ's in the same manner, as our
Merits. And what Cardinal Lugo says, in Defense of that Thesis; Liberari nos
posse a debito paenae temporalis per impetrationem; vel merito congruo, may as
well be said of our freedom from it by our imperfect, and diminutive,
Satisfactions. Nostra peccata non manner tunc impunita [as to what they fully
deserve:] Sed satisfieri plene divinae justitiae, applicando satisfactiones
Christi propaena, quam nos debebamus solvere; quae applicatio obtineri potest
aliquando per orationes. Sicut, nec manent impunita peccata, quando paena pro
iis debita remittitur, per Indulgentias aut Sacramenta, vel Sacrificia: quia
tunc etiam Satisfactiones Christi applicantur, quibus solvitur plenissime totum
debitum. Suarez, De Paenit. Disp. 36.. 1. Nostra Satisfactio Christi
Satisfactioni innititur, non solum quia per illum habemus virtutem
satisfaciendi, sed etiam quia nostra satisfactio propter ipsum acceptatur, and
ut rationem justitiae participet, in ejus satisfactione fundatur, Antidiagma
Coloniense de Sac. Paenitent. De hac satisfactione Canonica and Disciplinari
semper docuerunt Patres, quod virtute sanguinis, and merito passionis Christi,
auferat, aut saltem minuat, paenam temporalem peccatis nostris debitam Christo
Reconciliatori nostro, cui Pater omne judicium dedit, prorsus relinquenda est
paenae remissio; a quo petere oportet, at obedientiam nostram [in our Penal
Works] velit per meritum suum, patri celesti facere acceptam, and paenam
promeritam misericorditer avertere. Dr Holden in Resolut. Fidei, where he
endeavors to separate matters of Faith from disputable Question, 2. l. 5. c.
Nulla prorsus est satisfactio ab homine quovis etiam justissimo peracta, quae
Deo sit grata, vel quae sit alicujus omnino valoris, nisi per meritum Domini
nostri Jesu Christi. Patimur quidem satisfariendo pro peccatis, sed nunquam
satis patimur. Christus est, qui solum vere, and plene pro peccatis nostris
satisfecit ex quo est omnis nostra sufficientia. Nostra namque Satisfactio,
qualis qualis, est and quo modo nostra est potius est quaedam meritorum Christi
nobis applicatio, quam propria aliqua Satisfactio. And see Mr. Hooker in his
Discourse of Justification, p. 62. quoting Panigarola, Let. 11. And the
Rhemish Annotations to this purpose. We put (says the one) all Satisfaction in
the Blood of Jesus Christ. But we hold, that the means which Christ has
appointed for us, in this case, to apply it, are our Penal Works. And thus the
other on 1 John 1.7. The Blood of Jesus cleanses us from all Sin. Whether Sins
be remitted by Prayers, by Fasting, by Alms, by Faith, by Charity, by
Sacrifice, by Sacraments, and by the Priests (for the Holy Scriptures do
plainly attribute Remission to every of these) yet none of all these do
otherwise remit, but in the force by the merit and virtue of Christ's Blood;
these being only the means and instruments by which Christ will have his Holy
Blood to work effectually in us. Which Point let the Protestants mark, and
cease to beguile their Followers, persuading them, that the Catholics derogate
from Christ's Blood, or seek Remission [either of Sin or its Punishments]
otherwise then by it, because they use humbly the means appointed by Christ to
apply the Benefit of his Holy Blood unto them. [And from Generation to
Generation let this be repeated unto them, In Testimonium, Illis.]

10. Lastly they affirm such Penances, beside the former ends, very effectual
also for the full cure and eradication of the stains of Sin left in the Soul,
and for the subduing of vicious habits, and preventing the like sinful Acts for
the future by removing the occasions of them; practicing acts of Virtue
contrary to them; inflicting Pains equalling the Pleasures of them, etc.

HEAD. XX. Concerning one Person, his Meriting, or Satisfying for another.
Concerning one Person's Meriting, or Satisfying, for another.
COncerning one Person's Meriting, or Satisfying, for another, as to remission
of Sin or Punishment. 1st, It is granted by all, that one Man's Prayers may
impetrate, ( i. e. from God's Mercy by application of Christ's Merits to this
purpose) Grace; Repentance; Contrition; and so Remission of Sin, of any
(eternal or temporal) Punishment; Salvation; for another. a.

a. Daille, De Paenis and Satisfact. 7. l. 17. c. Caeteros [ i. e. Martyres]
vult [Origenes] peccata dimittere, non ulla pro peccata satisfactione, sed
precibus, quas Domino pro hominibus morientes obtulerunt; quibus scilicet
effectum est, ut clementissimus Dominus multos ad se conversos peccatis
liberaret. Jam vero aliud est prece aliquod beneficium hominibus a Deo
impetrare; (quod Sanctis and vere fidelibus convenire satemur:) aliud ultrici
Dei justitiae pro aliorum peccatis ex condigno satisfacere; quod sanctis
adversarii tribuunt, nos negamus. Spalatensis, De. Rep. Eccl. 5. l. 8. c.. 18.
Dispositio unjus non est, neque esse potest alterius dispositio; meritoria
fortasse improprie potest esse, and impetratoria, ut justi suis orationibus,
and humiliationibus impetrent peccatori paenitentiam and dispositionem, ut
tamen ipsorum satisfactiones and humiliationes suppleant pro alterius
satisfactionibus and humiliationibus; and sic ille alter dispositus ad
remissionem dicatur per alienam dispositionem, and humiliatus per alienam
humiliationem, est impossible.

2ly, That one Man's Penances, Humiliations, Mortifications, may have the same
(or a stronger) effect, for impetration of these things for others, as his
Prayers have, Psalm. 34. (or 35.) 12, 13, 14. -- 2. Sam. 12.16. 3ly, It cannot
rationally be denied; but that, whetever worth, or value, such Penal Works have
as to removing any ones own temporal Punishment, the smae they have as to
removing another's, If his Divine Majesty please to accept of them to this
purpose; and, that one man's Satisfactions are applicable also to another, is
clear in Christ's, so applied. b.

b. Lugo, De Penitent. Disp. 26.. 1. Hic modus solvendi patiendo pro aliis non
repugnat ex se; cum Christus Dominus utroque modo nobis profuerit, nempe
merendo and rursus satisfaciendo etiam pro nobis, ut constat ex satisfactione
ipsius, quae pro debito paenae nobis applicatur per Sacramenta aliqua and
Indulgentias; poterit ergo satisfactio unius justi alteri applicari.

But whether such Works are prevalent with God for others by this way of
Satisfaction, or only of Impetration; and whether the Satisfaction (excepting
only that of Jesus Christ) for Sin, or its Punishments is not made by God
personal, and cannot be vicarious, or supplied by another, is disputed in the
Schools; nor, on any side, a matter of Faith. g.


