THE CATHOLICS DEFENSE, FOR THEIR ADORATION OF THE Body and Blood OF OUR LORD,
As believed Really and Substantially present IN THE Holy SACRAMENT OF THE
EUCHARIST.

At OXFORD Printed, Anno 1687.

THESES of Adoration of the EVCHARIST.
CONTENTS.
1. PRotestant-Concessions.. 1. 2. Catholick-Assertions.. 1. Presuppositions..
1.
1. Of a Precept of giving Divine Worship to our Lord.. 1. 2. Of our Lord's
whole Person its being where his Body is.. 2. 3. Of this Divine Person being
supremely adorable wherever his Body is: Granted by Protestants.. 3. Not only
in Virtue, but Substance.. 5.
4. That this Presence of our Lord's Body and Blood is by Protestants affirmed
in the Eucharist; and that this Body is then to be worshipped with supreme
Adoration.. 5. 5. Further affirmed; That Christ's Body and Blood are present
not only to the worthy Communicant, but to the Symbols; and whilst present are
to be adored.. 7. 6. Granted by Daille, That though he and his believe not
Christ's Body present in the signs, yet they, for this, break not Communion
with those that hold it.. 8.
Catholic Assertions.
1. A Sign or Symbol to remain after Consecration distinct from the thing
signified.. 9. This external Sign to be all, that which is perceptible by the
senses, of the Bread and Wine; though not their Substance.. 10.
2. The word Sacrament to be taken not always in the same sense, but sometimes
for the Sign or Symbol; sometimes for the thing signified.. 11. 3. Catholics
ground Adoration, not on Transubstantiation, (which, as also Consubstantiation,
involves it) but on Real Presence with the Symbols: maintaining Adoration due,
though Christ's Body were present, neither under the Accidents of Bread (as
Catholics say); nor under the Substance of Bread (as Lutherans say); but after
some other unknown manner distinct from both.. 17. 4. Supposing (not granting)
Transubstantiation an error, yet if Corporal or Real Presence held by the
Lutherans be true, Catholics plead their Adoration warrantable.. 18. 5.
Supposing Real Presence an Error, and the Lutheran and Roman Church both
mistaken; yet these latter, in such Adoration, as excusable from Idolatry, as
the other.. 19. 6. Supposing both the former Opinions Errors, and (indeed) no
Presence of Christ's Body with the Symbols at all; yet such Adoration by the
one, or the other of Christ (who is a true object of supreme Adoration, and
only mistaken by them to be where he is not) cannot be termed such Idolatry, as
is the professed worshipping of an Object not all adorable.. 21. 7. Whatever
Idolatry it is called in a Manichean worshipping Christ in the Sun, or in an
Israelite worshipping God in the Calves at Dan and Bethel, because adoring a
fancy of their own, (and a good intention grounded on a culpable ignorance
excuses none from Idolatry;) yet since Daille, and perhaps others, allows a
reasonable (though mistaken) ground of Adoration sufficient for avoiding the just
imputation of Idolatry; hence if Catholics can produce a rational ground of
their apprehending Christ present in the Eucharist, though possibly mistaken in
it, they are to be excused from Idolatry, on the same terms.. 22. Catholics
Grounds for their Belief.
1. Divine Revelation.. 24. 2. The Declaration thereof by the supremest
Church Authority in Councils.. 25. 3. The Testimony of Primitive Times.. 26. 4.
The Universal Doctrine and Practice of the later, both Eastern and Western
Churches.. 27. 5. Protestant Concessions.. 28.
8. For these Grounds given by Catholics, Idolatry by many Protestants of late
but faintly charged upon the Church of Rome.. 30. 9. Catholics grant, That to
adore what is believed to be Bread, or perform the external signs of Adoration
to our Lord as present there, where the Worshipper believes he is not, is
unlawful to be done by any whilst so persuaded.. 33.

CATHOLIC Theses, Concerning the ADORATION of Christ's Body and Blood IN THE
EUCHARIST.
What in reason is or must be conceded by Protestants. 2. Examine what
Catholics maintain.

1. I suppose a general precept of giving supreme and divine adoration to our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: And, Suppositions.
that as Affirmative precepts (such as this is) do not oblige to every time,
and place; so, if they are unlimited and general, they warrant the lawfulness
of our practice of them in any time or place; nor is there any need of any
particular divine command in respect of these (i. e. places and times,) without
which command we may not obey them. [For, what absurdities would follow hence?
For, Was our Savior, when on Earth, never lawfully worshipped, but in place,
or time, first commanded? Nor then, when he showed and presented himself to
them for some other purpose, than for adoration? as to teach them, to suffer
for them, etc. Might not the Magi worship him lying in the Cratch, divested of
all appearance of Majesty, without a special command from God?] But it is
sufficient to warrant our practice of them; if, in respect of such time, and
place, there be no express prohibition.

wherever the Body of our Lord is, there is his whole person; it being no
more since this Resurrection to be a dead body, (for Christ dies no more, Romans
6.9.); but having the Soul joined with it: as likewise, ever since the
Incarnation, having also its hypostasis or subsistence from the Divinity joined
with it; even when it was in the Grave, and the Soul severed from it.

where ever this Body of our Lord is present, there this Divine Person is
supremely adorable: As the Divinity every where present is every where
adorable, and may be so adored in the presence or before any of his Creatures;
if such adoration be directed to him, not it, (as, when I see the Sun rising, I
may lawfully fall down on my knees, and bless the Omnipotent Creator of it; and
see 1 Cor. 14.24, 25.) may be, I say, but not, must: for where there is only
such a general presence of the Divinity; as is in every time, place, and thing;
here our Adoration may and must be dispensed with, as to some times; and places.

None likewise can deny, That the Humanity of our Lord also, in a notion
abstractive from the Divinity personally united to it, is truly adorable; though
this with a worship not exceeding that due to a Creature.

Andrews, Resp. ad Apol. p. 195. Christus ipse Sacramenti res [sive] in and cum
Sacramento, sive extra and sine Sacramento, ubi-ubi est, adorandus est.

Apol. des Eglis. Reform. c. 10.
Thus also Daille, Apol. des Eglis. Reform. c. 10. who, in pitching especially
on this point, Adoration of the Eucharist, as hindering the Protestants longer
stay in the Roman Communion, has in this Discourse, and in two Replies to
Chaumont made afterward in defense of it, discussed it more particularly than
many others) in answer to S. Ambrose and S. Austin their adoring the flesh of
Christ in the Mysteries. -- The Humanity of Jesus Christ (says he) personally
united to the Divinity, is by consequence truly and properly adorable. And
again: They only adored Jesus Christ in the Sacrament; which is the thing we
agree to. And ibid. p. 29. We do willingly adore Jesus Christ, who is present
in the Sacrament, namely by Faith in the heart of the Communicants, etc. And
see Dr. Stillingfleet in his Roman. Idol. c. 2. p. 114. -- The Question (says
he) between us, is not whether the person of Christ is to be worshipped with
Divine worship, for that we freely acknowledge. And although the humane nature of
Christ, of it self, can yield us no sufficient reason for adoration [he must
mean, Divine]: yet being considered as united to the Divine Nature, that cannot
hinder, the same Divine worship being given to his Person, which belongs to his
Divine Nature; any more than the Robes of a Prince can take off from the honor
due unto him. Though how well that which he says before, ibid.. 2. (as it seems
against worshipping Christ supposed present in the Eucharist, without a special
command to do it) consists with what he says here, and with what follows, let
him look to it.]

4. It is affirmed by many Protestants,. 5. n. 1.
especially those of the Church of England, that this Body and Blood of our
Lord is really present, not only in virtue, but in substance in the Eucharist,
either with the Symbols immediately upon the Consecration; or at least so, as
to be received in the Eucharist, together with the Symbols, by every worthy
Communicant: and that this Body and Blood of our Lord, which is not severed
from his Person, is then to be worshipped with supreme Adoration.

[See 1. for a substantial presence of Christ's body in the Eucharist, (I mean
at least to the worthy Receiver, contradistinct to a Presence by effect only,
Influence, Virtue, Grace, or the Holy Spirit, uniting us to Christ's Body in
Heaven) Dr. Tailor of Real Presence, p. 12. When the word Real (says he) is
denied [ i. e. by Protestants, as it was in King Edward's time] the word Real
is taken for Natural, [ i. e. as he explains it p. 5. including not only the
nature of the Body, for that is the substance; but the corporal and natural
manner of its existence: he goes on,] But the word substantialiter is also used
by Protestants in this question, which I suppose may be the same with that
which is in the Article of Trent; Sacramentaliter praesens Salvator substantia
sua nobis adest; in substance, but after a Sacramental manner. See the
Confession of Beza, and the French Protestants (related by Hosp. Hist. Sacram.
part. ult. p. 251..) Fatemur in coena Domini non modo omnia Christi beneficia,
sed ipsam etiam Filii hominis substantiam, ipsam, inquam, veram ^arnem and
verum illum sanguinem, quem fudit pro nobis, non significari duntaxat, aut
symbolice, typice, vel figurate proponi tanquam absentis memoriam; sed vere ac
certo repraesentari, exhiberi, and applicanda osserri, adjunctis symbolis
minime nudis, sed quae (quod ad Deum ipsum promittentem and offerentem attinet)
semper rem ipsam vere ac certo conjunctam habeant; sive fidelibus, sive
infidelibus proponantur.

Again, Beza Epist 68. speaking against Alemannus, and some others, who opposed
a substantial presence; Volunt (says he) ex-Gallica Confessione [Art. 36.] and
Liturgia [Catech. Din. 53.] expungi substantiae vocem, idcirco de industria
passim a Calvino and a me usurpatam, ut eorum calumniae occurreremus, qui nos
clamitant prore Sacramenti non ipsum Christum, sed ejus duntaxat dona and
energiam, ponere. And Epist. 5. he argues thus against the same Alemannus. --
Velim igitur te imprimis intueri Christi verba; Hoc est corpus meum, quod pro
vobis traditur, and Hic est sanguis meus qui pro vobis funditur. -- Age pro his
vocibus Corpus and Sanguis, dicamus, Hoc est efficacia mortis meae, quae pro
vobis traditur; Hic est Spiritus meus qui pro vobis effunditur: Quid ineptius
est hac oratione? Nam certe verba illa, Quod pro vobis traditur; and Qui pro
vobis funditur, necessario huc te adigunt, ut de ipsamet Corporis and Sanguinis
substantia hoc intelligere cogaris.

See Hooker, Eccles. Pol. 5. l. 67.. p. 357. Wherefore should the world
continue still distracted and rent with so manifold contentions; when there
remains now no Controversy, saving only about the subject where Christ is? --
Nor does any thing rest doubtful in this, but whether, when the Sacrament is
administered, Christ be whole within Man only; or else his Body and Blood be
also externally seated in the very consecrated Elements themselves? [But a
great Controversy surely there would be beside this, if the one party held
Christ's Body substantially, and the other virtually present.] Again, p. 360.
-- All three opinions do thus far accord in one, etc. That these holy
mysteries, received in due manner, do instrumentally both make us partakers of
that body, and blood, which were given for the life of the World; and besides
also impart unto us, even in true and real, though mystical, manner, the very
Person of our Lord himself, whole, perfect, and entire.

Thus also Bishop Andrews, Resp. ad Apol. Bell. 1. cap. p. 11. Nobis vobiscum
de Objecto convenit, de modo lis omnis est. [But there would be a lis
concerning the Object, if one affirmed the substance of the body there, the
other only the virtue, or efficacy.]

See Bishop Cosins his late Historia Transubstantiationis, tit. cap. 2.
Protestantium omnium consensus de reali,. 5. n. 2.
id est, vera, ( sed non carnali) Praesentia Christi in Eucharistia manifest
constat. And in proof of this p. 10. he quotes Poinet Bishop of Winchester, his
Dialacticon de veritate, natura, atque substantia Corporis and Sanguinis
Christi in Eucharistia; Quod (says he) non alio consilio edidit, quam ut fidem
and doctrinam Ecclesiae Anglicanae illustraret. Et primo ostendit Eucharistiam
non solum figuram esse Corporis Domini; sed etiam ipsam veritatem, naturam,
atque substantiam in se comprehendere; idcirco nec has voces Naturae and
Substantiae fugiendas esse; Veteres enimde hoc Sacramento disserentes ita
locutos fuisse. Secundo quaerit, an voces illae, Veritas, Natura, and
Substantia, communi more in hoc mysterio a veteribus intelligebantur; an
peculiari and Sacramentis magis accommodata ratione? Neque enim observandum
esse solum, quibus verbis olim Patres usi sunt, sed quid istis significare ac
docere voluerint. Et licet discrimen ipse cum Patribus agnoscat, inter Corpus
Christi formam humani corporis naturalem habens, and quod in Sacramento est
Corpus mysticum; maluit tamen discrimen illud ad modum praesentiae and
exhibitionis, quam ad ipsam rem, hoc est, Corpus Christi verum accommodari; cum
certissimum sit, non aliud Corpus in Sacramento fidelibus dari, nisi quod a
Christo pro fidelium salute in mortem traditum fuit. Thus he, justifying
Poinet's expressions speaking in the language of the Fathers. p. 43. -- Non
dicimus (says he) in hac sacra Coena nos tantum esse participes fructus
mortis, and passionis Christi; sed fundum ipsum cum fructibus, qui ab ipso ad
nos redeant, conjungimus; asserentes cum Apostolo, 1 Cor. 10.16. Panem quam
frangimus esse (...) Corporis Christi, and Poculum Sanguinis ejus
communicationem; imo in eadem illa substantia, quam accepit in utero Virginis,
and quam sursum in coelos invexit; in hoc tantum a Pontisiciis dissidentes,
quod illi manducationem hanc and conjunctionem, corporaliter fieri credunt; nos
non naturali aliqua ratione, aut modo corporali; sed tamen tam vere, quam si
naturaliter aut corporaliter Christo conjungeremur. [Here I understand his non
modo corporali not to exclude Corpus Domini, or non ratione naturali to exclude
natura rei, or the thing it self; but only to signify, that the Body is
present, not after a corporal manner, or with the dimensions and other common
qualities of a Body; which thing indeed Catholics also affirm.]

He seems also to grant,. 5. n. 3.
this substantial Presence to be with the Symbols, after Consecration, on the
Table, and before communicating. For p. 65. for this he quotes the Conc.
Nicaen. Sublata in altum mente per fidem consideremus, proponi in sacra illa
mensa Agnum Dei tollentem peccata mundi. And p. 43. -- Quoniam (says he) res
significata nobis offertur and exhibetur tam vere quam signa ipsa: ea ratione
signorum cum Corpore and Sanguine Domini conjunctionem agnoscimus; and mutata
esse elementa dicimus in usum alium ab eo quem prius habuerunt. [ i. e. to be
now conjoined with, and to exhibit to us this Body of our Lord: which
conjunction, he says p. 45. is made per omnipotentiam Dei.] So he says ibid.
-- Non quaeritur, An Corpus Christi a Sacramento suo, juxta mandatum ejus
instituto ac usurpato, absit; quod nos Protestants and Reformati nequaquam
dicimus aut credimus. Nam cum ibi detur and sumatur, omnino oportet ut adsit;
licet Sacramento suo quasi contectum sit, and ibi, ut in se est, conspici
nequeat. And p. 125. -- Fieri enim (says he) de Elemento Sacramentum [which
surely is done in the Consecration] nec consistere Sacramentum sine Re
Sacramenti, firmiter tenent. And this conjunctio Corporis Christi, p. 35. he
affirms to be made in receiving the Sacrament, not only cum anima, sed etiam
cum corpore nostro.

Lastly,. 5. n. 4.
the modus of this true Presence of the Body of our Lord with the Signs or
Symbols in the Sacrament, when as it remains in Heaven till our Lord's second
coming, he makes, as others, to be ineffabilis, imperscrutabilis, non ratione
inquirendus aut indagandus. p. 36. -- Nos vero hunc modum [praesentiae Christi
in Eucharistia] fatemur cum Patribus esse ineffabilem, atque imperscrutabilem,
hoc est, non ratione inquirendum, aut indagandum; sed sola fide credendum. Etsi
enim videtur incredibile in tanta locorum distantia penetrare ad nos Christi
carnem, ut nobis sit in cibum; meminisse tamen oportet, quantum supra sensus
nostros emineat Spiritus Sancti virtus, and quam stultum sit ejus immensitatem
modo nostro metiri velle. Quod ergo men's nostra non comprehendit, concipiat
fides. [The like to which esse ineffabilem, and supra sensus, Catholics say of
the same presence of our Lord in the Eucharist in tanta locorum distantia,
whilst also at the very same time it is in Heaven.] And thus Lanfrank long ago
in his answer to Berengarius, (who contended that Christi Corpus coelo devocari
non poterit,) quoting the words of St. Andrew a little before his Passion: --
Cum vero in terris carnes ejus sunt comestae, and vere sanguis ejus sit
bibitus; ipse tamen usque in tempora restitutionis omnium in coelestibus ad
dextram Patris integer semper perseverat and vivat. Si quaeris (says he) modum
quo id fieri possit; breviter ad praesens respondeo, Mysterium est fidei: credi
salubriter potest, vestigari utiliter non potest. See also the Gallican
Confession, produced by this Bishop, p. 23. where they say, Christus in coelis
mansurus donec veniat; and yet nutriens and vivificans nos Corporis and
Sanguinis sui substantia, [ i. e. in the Sacrament:] that Hoc mysterium nostrae
cum Christo coalitionis tam sublime est, ut omnes nostros sensus, totumque adeo
ordinem naturae superat. In all these then does not the incomprehensibility and
supernaturality of this Mystery lie in this, that the one Body of our Lord
should be at once in two places, viz. present at the same time in Heaven, and
to us here in the Sacrament? And yet this Bishop seems to find some trouble in
it, to make any other unexplicable or unintelligible mystery in the Catholics
Transubstantiation, save only this. See p. 122. For the ceasing of the
substance of the Elements by God's Omnipotency he allows very feisible; and
then the Adduction of Christ's Body (pre-existent) in the place of their
substance, labors under no other difficulty, save this, this Body its being at
once in two places, here and in Heaven: nor, having twice p. 122. and p. 125
mentioned such a Sacramental Presence of our Lord, has he replied any thing
against it, but that thus the term of Transubstantiation is not rightly applied
to such an Adduction; which is a Logomachy. But this seems the difficulty and
incomprehensibility that Protestants also confess in their Sacramental Presence
of our Lord in tanta locorum distantia pascentis nos in Eucharistia vera
Corporis sui praesentia and substantia.

Lastly, after this Bishop, with others,. 5. n. 5.
has so far conformed to the Expressions and Language of the Fathers, as to
allow an Essential or Substantial presence of Christ's Body, it seems he finds
some of these Expressions also so far to advance toward a Substantial
transmutation of the Elements, as that he says, p. 113. -- Non abnuimus,
nonnulla apud Chrysostomum aliosque Patres inveniri, quae emphatice, immo vero
Hyperbolice de Eucharistia prolata sunt: Et quae, nisi dextre capiantur,
incautos homines facile in errores abducent. And below: Sanctissimi Patres quo
haec auditorum animis vehementius and efficacius imprimerent, de Typis, tanquam
si essent ipsa Antitypa, Oratorum more multa enunciant. And again, p. 117. Si
verba [i. e. of some of the Fathers] nimis rigide urgeantur absque intellectu
Sacramentali; nihil aliud ex iis colligi potest, quam Panem and Vinum proprie
and realiter ipsum Christi Corpus and Sanguinem esse; quod ne ipsi quidem
Transubstantiatores admittunt. Where he granting the expressions of some of the
Fathers so high as to transcend the Assertions of Catholics, or
Transubstantiators; whose Assertions again transcend those of Protestants in
this Mystery: it seems not reasonable, that he should after this depress and
extenuate their meanings, to countenance and comply rather with that Opinion
that is farther distant from their expressions. Neither will the same Fathers
calling, in other places, the Elements Symbols and Signs of Christ's Body, (as
he pleads p. 116.) afford him that relief he seeks for from it. For since the
Catholics, as well as Protestants, do firmly maintain and profess an external
Symbol, as well as the thing signified in the Eucharist, viz. all that is
perceived by our senses, and that is visible, gustable, or tangible, of the
Elements; as the Protestants contend this Symbol to be not only these, but the
very Substance and nature of the Elements also: here it will be found that
these sentences of the Fathers do suffer much less force and torture, if
understood according to the Symbol supposed by Catholics, than that by
Protestants. For example, the Bishop p. 12^.
has mentioned that passage of the ancient Author de Coena Domini in S.
Cyprian's Works: the words are these; -- Panis iste quem Dominus discipulis
porrigebat, non effigy sed natura mutatus, Omnipotentia Verbi factus est caro:
and sicut in persona Christi Humanitas apparebat, and latebat Divinitas; ita
Sacramento visibili ineffabiliter divina se effudit essentia. Here, I say, if
the Sacramentum visibile, and the external Symbol be taken in this Bishops way,
for substantia or natura panis, all is extremely forced, and confounded; and so
he is driven to expound it, that by mutatio naturae panis is meant only mutatio
usus p. 120.
; the change of which use of the Bread also seems no object of God's
Omnipotence. But the Symbol or Sacrament being taken for such as the Catholics
make it, viz. for the external Effigies or Sensibles of the Bread, all is good
sense and coherent, and nothing strained: and the Omnipotentia Verbi rightly
applied to the mutatio naturae panis: as God's Omnipotency may be observed in
the Fathers to be frequently urged, not only in relation to the presence of our
Lord's Body and Blood there, but also to the transmutation of the Elements
there, whilst the exteriors of them still remain. But now in the last place,
supposing the natura panis to remain, which the Father says is changed, yet so
long as these Divines maintain according to the Doctrine of the Fathers a
substantial presence of our Lord's Body in the Eucharist, and that with the
Symbols (as he says p. 45. Sacramento suo quasi contectum); though they will not
admit such a Symbol as the Catholics, and a Transubstantiation of the
Elements; yet they must (if complying with the Fathers) at least confess some
kind of Consubstantiation or conjunction of the substances of Christ's Body and
of the Elements in the Eucharist; to which opinion the sayings of the 0139 0979
V Fathers constrained Luther, as he often professes. Mean while if it be
asked, why such a Consubstantiation is declined by Catholics? their answer is
ready: viz. because the greatest Councils that have been held successively in
the Church-Catholick, upon and since the agitation of this controversy, have
frequently and constantly stated and delivered, That the Scriptures, as
understood and expounded by the Fathers and Church-Tradition, declare a
Transubstantiation; in the Judgments of which Councils Catholics hold it their
Duty to acquiesce. This of a Substantial Presence asserted by Protestants.

2. Next,. 6. n. 1.
for Adoration too of this Body, as there present either with the Symbols upon
their Consecration, or at least to all worthy receivers, see the same Bishop
Andrews, ib. c. 8. p. 195; where to what Bellarmin has said, Inter novitia and
nupera dogmata ponit Adorationem Sacramenti Eucharistae, i. e. adorationem
Christi Domini in Sacramento, miro, sed vero modo praesentis, he answers thus:
Sacramenti ait, id est, Christi Domini in Sacramento. Rex autem Christum in
Eucharistia vere praesentem, vere and adorandum statuit, rem scil. Sacramenti;
at non Sacramentum. And -- Nos vero and in mysteriis carnem Christi adoramus,
cum Ambrosio; and non id [ i. e. Sacramentum] sed eum, qui super altar
colitur, [ i. e. Christum rem Sacramenti.] And is not this res Sacramenti
worshipped as upon the Altar too with the Symbols there?

Since him, Bishop Bramhal to the Bishop of Chalcedon, Rep. to Chalced. 2. c.
p. 57.
asking, how the Protestants could profess to agree in all essentials of
Religion with the Roman Church, which they held to be an idolatrous Church, i.
e. in worshipping the Sacrament as their God? thus replies: The Sacrament is to
be adored, said the Council of Trent: The Sacrament, i. e. formally the Body
and Blood of Christ, say some of your Authors, [where he quotes Bellarmin de
Sacramento, 4. l. 29. c.] we say the same. [So Cardinal Bellarmin and Bishop
Bramhal are agreed about this Adoration of our Lord in the Eucharist.] The
Sacrament, i. e. the species of Bread and Wine, say others: that we deny, and
esteem it to be idolatrous. Should we charge the whole Church with Idolatry for
the Error of a party?

The same concession with the same distinction makes the French-Protestant
Divine Daille,. 6. n. 0139 0979 V 3 2.
in his second Reply to Chaumont, p. 29. There is a vast difference between to
adore the Sacrament, and 013 to adore Jesus Christ in the Sacrament, or in the
Mysteries. -- The later of these we freely do, since we believe him God blessed
for ever together with the Father. And afterward, in answer to the Fathers:
They speak (says he) of the Flesh of Jesus Christ in the Mysteries, (of which
we do not contest the Adoration) and not of the Eucharist. And again: They only
adored Jesus Christ in the Sacrament, which is the thing we agree to. And in
his Apology, Ch -- p -- he says concerning the Body of Christ if in the
Sacrament, That it is evident, that one may, and that one ought to worship it:
seeing that the Body of Christ is a subject adoreable. And Chap. 10. he grants
upon Adorate scabellum, -- Thatthe faithful cast down themselves before the Ark
to adore the Lord there, where the Divine Service was particularly joined to
the place where the Ark was. Dr. Tailor says Real presence,. 13. n. 5.
, -- Concerning the action of Adoration, it is a fit address in the day of
Solemnity with a sursum corda, with our hearts lift up to Heaven, where Christ
sits (we are sure) at the right hand of the Father. For, nemo digne manducat,
nisi prius adoraverit, etc. [which, rightly understood, means illud quod
manducat.] Here the Doctor allows adoring in the the Sacrament Christ as in
Heaven. But if Christ's Body (and so himself in a special manner) be
substantially present in the Eucharist, here on Earth; why not adore him, not
only as in Heaven, but as present here? See elsewhere, Real Pres. p. 144. where
he says, We worship the flesh of Christ in the Mysteries exhibiting it to our
Souls.

See Spalatensis de rep. Eccles. l. 7. c. 11.. 7. etc.. 6. n. 3.
-- Si secundum veritatem qui digne sumit sacramenta corporis and sanguinis
Christi, ille vere and realiter corpus and sanguinem Christi, in se
corporaliter, modo tamen quodam spirituali, miraculoso, and imperceptibili,
sumit; omnis digne communicans adorare potest and debet corpus Christi quod
recipit. [Is then the worthy Communicant to worship, but not the unworthy;
because Christ's Body is there present to the one, but not to the other?] Non
quod lateat corporaliter in pane, aut sub pane, aut sub speciebus and
accidentibus panis; sed quod quando digne sumitur panis sacramentalis, tunc
etiam sumitur cum pane Christi corpus reale, illi communioni realiter praes^ns.
Thus Spalatensis.

And so Bishop Forbes, de Euchar. 2. l. 2. c. 9.. -- An Christus in ustia sit
adorandus, Protestants saniores non dubitant. In sumptione enim Eucharistiae
(ut utar verbis Archiepiscopi Spalatensis) adorandus est Christus vera latria,
siquidem corpus ejus vivum, ac gloriosum, miraculo quodam ineffabili digne
sumenti praesens adest; and haec adoratio non pani, non vino, non sumptioni,
non comestioni, sed ipsi Corpori immediate, per sumptionem Eucharistiae
exhibito, debetur, and perficitur. [Thus then Protestants allow Adoration to
Christ's Body and Blood, as substantially present in the Eucharist, if not to
the Symbols, yet to the worthy receiver.]

Lutherans, more expressly, that Christ's body and blood are present, not only
to the worthy Communicant, but to the consecrated Symbols; and whilst so
present, which is during the action of the Lord's Supper, ( i. e. as I conceive
them, from the Consecration till the end of the Communion) are to be adored.

[Of which thus Chemnitius, Exam. Conc. Trid. part. 2. sess. 13. c. 5. Deum and
Hominem in Divina and humana natura, in action Coenae Dominicae vere and
substantialiter praesentem, in spiritu and veritate adorandum, nemo negat; nisi
qui cum Sacramentariis vel negat, vel dubitat de praesentia Christi in coena.
Ibid. -- Et quidem humanam etiam ejus naturam, propter unionem cum Divinitate,
esse adorandam, nemo nisi Nestorianus in dubium vocat. -- Ita Jacob Genesis 28.
Moses Exodus 34. Elias 3 Reg. 19. non habebant sane peculiare mandatum, ut in
illis locis Deum adorarent: sed quia habebant generale mandatum ut Deum ubique
adorarent, and certi erant Deum sub externis and visibilibus illis symbolis
vere adesse, and peculiari modo gratiae se ibi patefacere; certe Deum ipsum,
quem ibi presentem esse credebant, adorabant. Nec vero Deum illi procul in
coelo Empyraeo a se remotum and absentem, sed vere praesentem, and quidem
peculiari modo gratiae praesentem, adorarunt. -- Thus he. Nor do I know, that
the Calvinists have at any time accused their brethren the Lutherans of
Idolatry in such a practice. I find also Mr. Thorndike in the like manner
clearly maintaining, 1. A presence of Christ's Body with the symbols,
immediately upon Consecration: and, 2. An Adoration due to it. See the former,
in Epilog. l. 3. c. 2. and, 3. where p. 17. I have said enough (says he) to
evidence the mystical and spiritual presence of the flesh and blood of Christ
in the Elements, as the Sacrament of the same, before any Man can suppose that
spiritual presence of them to the soul, which the eating and drinking Christ's
flesh and blood spiritually by living Faith imports. And see the latter, ib.
c. 30. p. 350. -- I suppose (says he) that the Body and Blood of Christ may be
adored wherever they are; and must be adored by a good Christian, where the
custom of the Church, which a Christian* is obliged to communicate with,
requires it. -- This honor [ i. e. of worshipping the Body and Blood of
Christ] being the duty of an affirmative precept, (which, according to the
received rule, ties always; though it cannot tie a Man to do the duty always,
because he then should do nothing else:) what remains but a just occasion to
make it requisite, and presently to take hold and oblige? And is not the
presence thereof in the Sacrament of the Eucharist a just occasion presently to
express by the bodily act of Adoration, that inward honor, which we always
carry toward our Lord Christ as God? -- Again p. 351. Not to balk that freedom
(says he) which has carried me to publish all this: I do believe that it was
so practiced and done [ i. e. our Lord Christ really worshipped in the
Eucharist] in the ancient Church, and in the symbols before receiving; which I
maintain from the beginning to have been the true Church of Christ, obliging
all to conform to it in all things within the power of it. I know the
consequence to be this, That there is no just cause why it should not be done
at present, but that cause which justifies the reforming of some part of the
Church without the whole: which, were it taken away, that it [this adoration]
might be done again, and ought not to be, of it self alone, any cause of
Distance [ i. e. between the Churches of Christ.]

6. It is granted by Daille in his Apology, c. 11. and in his defense of it
against Chaumont, 1. That although the Reformed of his party, do not believe the
presence of Christ's body in the Signs, yet they esteem not the belief of it so
criminal, that it obliges them to break off communion with all those that hold
it. So that, had the Roman Church no other error, save this, they freely
confess, it had given them no sufficient cause of separating from it: as (says
he) appears in this, that we tolerate and bear with it in the Lutherans. And
again, Reply to Chaumont, p. 63.
for the adoration of this Body as so present with the signs, (when indeed it
is not so,) he says, -- That it is only vain and unprofitable, and that, as
one may say, falls to nothing; being deceived not in this, that it makes its
addresses to an object not adorable; but in this only, that mistaking it, it
seeks it, and thinks to embrace it there where it is not. And c. 12. he also
freely confesses, That had the Church of Rome only obliged them to worship
Jesus Christ in the Sacrament, and not used this expression, that the service
of Latria ought to be rendered to the Holy Sacrament: Conc. Trid. sess. 13.5.
she had not obliged them by this to adore any Creature. Thus he, as it were
constrained thereto by the Lutherans Protestants Opinion and Practice, for his
retaining their Communion, and freeing them from Idolatry. 2. It is granted
also, Apol. c. 11. -- That when our Lord was on Earth, a Disciple's giving
divine honors, upon mistake, to another person much resembling him, would be
no Idolatry. So, supposing the Consecrated Host were truly adorable, granted,
that should any one see one on the Altar, that happened not to be Consecrated,
and Worship it, neither would such a person be guilty of Idolatry. So he
pronounces him blameless, that should give the Honor and Service due to his
true Prince to a Subject, whom, very like, he took for his Prince. Yet that a
Manichean worshipping the Sun, mistaken to be the very substance of Christ,
(see S. Austin contra Faustum l. 12. c. 22. l. 20. c. 9.) for Christ; or (to
represent the opinion more refined) worshipping with divine honors not the
Sun, but only Christ in the Sun, he could not in this be excused from Idolatry.
And, that that which distinguishes these cases, and renders them so different,
is, not a good intention to worship only him that is truly God, or Christ; nor
the opinion and belief Men have, that the Object they worship is truly such;
for this good intention (as he in that Chapter, and other Reformed Writers, and
among others Dr. Stillingfleet, copiously press) is common to the worst of
Idolaters, as to the rest: but the error or ignorance of the Judgment, from
which flows this mistaking practice; as that is perversely affected and
culpable, or innocent and excusable. Of which thus he, Ibid. -- I maintain,
that ignorance excuses here when it is involuntary; when the subject [I add,
or the presence of it] we mistake in, is so concealed, that whatever desire we
have, or pains we take, to find out the truth, it is not possible for us to
discover it. -- But there, where the ignorance of the Object [or of its
presence] proceeds not from the obscurity or difficulty of the thing, but from
the malice or negligence of the person; this is so far from excusing, that it
aggravates our fault. Thus he excuses one that should have adored a person much
resembling our Lord, or an unconsecrated Host, -- because no passion or
negligence of his caused such a mistake: -- but not those who worshipped the
Sun for Christ, [ or Christ in the Sun;] -- because (says he) the ignorance of
such people is visibly affected and voluntary, arising from their fault only,
and not from the obscurity of the things they are ignorant in. Nor so Roman
Catholics in their worshipping the Sacrament for Christ; because (says he)
the error proceeds entirely from their passion, and not any thing from abroad.
[Thus he, clearing such actions from Idolatry, where the error of the judgment
is no way perverse, voluntary, and culpable.]

Having hitherto showed you several Concessions of Protestants, and having
urged none here from any of them, but such as I think all will, or in reason
ought, to admit; next I proceed to examine, what it is that in this matter
Catholics do maintain.

Catholics affirm in the Eucharist, after the Consecration, a sign or symbol
to remain still distinct; Assertione.
and having a diverse existence from that of the thing signified, or from
Christ's Body contained in, or under it. [See Conc. Trident. sess. 13. c. 3.
Hoc esse commune Eucharistiae cum aliis Sacramentis, ut sit symbolum rei
sacrae, and visibilis forma invisibilis gratiae. By which forma visibilis (as
Bellarmin expounds it, de Eucharist. 4. l. 6. c.) is meant the species of the
Elements, not the Body of Christ. -- So Bellarmin, Euchar. 2. l. 15. c. Etiam
post consecrationem species panis and vini sunt signa corporis and sanguinis
Christi ibi revera existentium. -- And 3. l. 22. c. Accidentia remanent; quia
si etiam accidentia abessent, nullum esset in Eucharistia signum sensibile;
proinde nullum esset Sacramentum. So Estius in 4. sent. 1. did. 3..
Eucharistia constat ex pane, tanquam materia quadam partim transeunte, partim
remanente; transeunte quidem secundum substantiam; remanente vero secundum
accidentia, in quibus tota substantiae vis and operatio nihilominus perseverat.
Hence they allow of that expression of Irenaeus, 4. l. 34. c. where he says,
-- Eucharistiam ex duabus rebus, terrena and coelesti, compositam esse. And of
S. Gregory, dial. 4. l. 58. c. In hoc mysterio summa imis sociari: terrena
coelestibus jungi: unum ex visibilibus ac invisibilibus fieri.] So that though
these symbols and Christ's Body may be said to make unum aggregatum; yet, if
this be only the species or accidents of the Bread and Wine that remains, these
cannot be said to have any inherence in this Body of Christ, (though it is true
on the other side that, being accidents only, they cannot be said to make a
distinct suppositum from it;) or, if a substance remain, this cannot be said to
have any hypostatical union (or to make one suppositum) with our Lord's
Divinity or Humanity, as our Lord's Humanity has such an union with his
Divinity. From which it is observed by Dr. Tailor ( Real Presence, p. 336.)
That therefore still there is the less reason for Romanists to give any Divine
worship (as he says they do) to the symbols. Far therefore are Catholics from
granting (what a late Author Stilligfl. Romans Idol. p. 128.
pretends they do, but that which he alleges no way shows it) as great an
hypostatical union between Christ and the Sacrament, as between the Divine and
Humane Nature.

all that of the Bread and Wine that is perceived by any sense. And though after
such Consecration the substance of the Bread and Wine is denied to remain yet
is substance here taken in such a sense, as that neither the hardness nor
softness, nor the frangibility, nor the savor, nor the odor, nor the
nutritive virtue of the Bread, nor nothing visible, nor tangible, or otherwise
perceptible by any sense, are involved in it. Of which signs also they
predicate many things, which they will by no means allow to be properly said
of, or at least to be received in, or effected by, or upon Christ's Body, now
immortal and utterly impassible. So sapere, digeri, nutrire, confortare,
corporaliter; and again, frangi dentibus, comburi, rodi a brutis animalibus,
and whatever other things may be named (excepting only those attributes, which
in general are necessary to indicate the presence of Christ's Body to us with
the species whilst integrae; as the local positions, elevari, recondi, ore
recipi, etc.) they apply to these symbols that remain; not to Christ's Body
which is indivisibly there. -- Christus vere in sacramento existens nullo modo
laedi potest; non cadit in terram, [id enim proprie cadit (says he) quod
corporaliter movetur; so also, anima non cadit,] non teritur, non roditur, non
putrescit, non crematur: illa enim (says Bellarmin De Eucharist. 3. l. 10. c.
) in speciebus istis recipiuntur, sed Christum non afficiunt.

Sacrament, not to be taken always in the same sense; but sometimes to be used
to signify only the external signs or symbols; sometimes only the res
Sacramenti, or the thing contained under them, which is the much more principal
part thereof. And, as Protestants much press, so Catholics willingly
acknowledge, a great difference between these two, the worshipping of the
Sacrament, as this word is taken for the symbols, and the worshipping of
Christ's Body in the Sacrament. Now as the word Sacrament is taken for the
Symbols, they acknowledge a certain inferior cult and veneration due thereto,
as to other holy things, the holy Chalices, the holy Gospels, the holy Cross,
etc. of which Veneration much has been spoken in the Discourse of Images,. 42.
etc. but they acknowledge no supreme or divine Adoration due to the Sacrament,
as taken in this sense for the Symbols; but only to our Lord's Body and Blood,
and so to our Lord himself as present in this Sacrament, or with these Symbols.
[So that be these Symbols of what latitude you will, either larger, as the
Lutheran believes; or straiter, as the Catholics say they are; or be they not
only these, but the substance of bread also under them, as Catholics believe
it is not: yet neither those species, nor this substance, have any divine
Adoration given or acknowledged due to them at all; no more than this substance
of bread, believed there by the Lutherans, yet has from them any such
Adoration given to it.]

Latria only understand that of the res Sacramenti, the Adoration of Christ's
Body and Blood in the Sacrament, see Conc. Trid. sess. 13. c. 5. Omnes Christi
fideles, pro more in Catholica Ecclesia semper recepto, latriae cultum, qui
vero Deo debetur, huic sanctissimo Sacramento in veneratione exhibeant. Neque
enim ideo minus est adorandum, quod fuerit a Christo Domino, ut sumatur,
institutum; nam illum eundem Deum praesentem in eo adesse credimus, quem Pater
aeternus introducens in orbem terrarum dicit, Et adorent eum omnes Angeli Dei:
quem Magi procidentes adoraverunt. Where, though the Council uses the expression
of exhibiting latriae cultum Sacramento; yet that this cultus latriae is not
applied to the Sacrament, as it implies the Sign or Symbol, but only the thing
signified, both the words joined to it, qui vero Deo debetur, (which signifies
the Council maintains that to be God they gave this cultus latriae to) and the
explication annexed, Nam illum eundem Deum, etc. may sufficiently convince to
any not obstinately opposite. Neither do those words interposed, -- Neque enim
ideo [Sacramentum] minus est adorandum, quod fuerit a Christo Domino, ut
sumatur, institutum, any way cross such a sense, as a late Author
Stillingfleet, Romans Idol. c. 2.. 2. p. 117.
too confidently presses, saying, -- That by Sacrament here the Council must
understand the Elements or Accidents as the immediate term of that divine
worship, or else the latter words [ i. e. quod fuerit a Domino institutum ut
sumatur] signify nothing at all. For what (says he) was that, which was
instituted by the Lord as a Sacrament? was it not the external and visible
Signs, or Elements? why do they urge, That the Sacrament ought not the less to
be adored, because it was to be taken, but to take of the common objection,
That we ought not to give divine worship to that which we eat? And what can
this have respect to, but the Elements? Thus argues he. When as he might know,
that the Fathers of Trent, who said this, do hold, the chief thing instituted
and exhibited in the Sacrament to be, not the Elements, but Christ's Body; and
ipsum corpus Domini to be also orally both taken and eaten, (though not modo
naturali carnis or corporis) as well as the Elements, according to our Lord's
express words, Accipite, Manducate, Hoc est Corpus meum, [i. e. quod
manducatis:] and when as he might know also, that the occasion of adding this
clause was in opposition to a party of Luther's followers, who, granting
Christ's Body present with the Symbols, and yet denying Adoration, said for it,
that our Lord's Body [not the Symbol] was present there, non ut adoretur, sed
ut sumatur. And Calvin also says some such thing, Institut. l. 4. c. 17.. 35.
urging, there was no such mandate for Adoration, i. e. of Christ's Body, of
which he was formerly speaking; but that our Lord commanded only, accipite,
manducate, bibite, -- quo (says he) accipi [or sumi, if you will] Sacramentum,
non adorari jubet: meaning Sacramentum in relation to Corpus Domini; else he
said nothing to the purpose of his former Discourse. And it may be considered
here also, that not only the Council of Trent, but no Schoolman at all (some of
which are thought uncautious in their expressions about Adoration of Images,
and consequently of the holy Symbols in the Eucharist; nor is any Catholic
accountable for them) takes the boldness to give cultus latriae (qui vero Deo
debetur, as the Council says here) to the Elements, without annexing some
qualification of a coadoratio, per accidens, improprie, sicut vestes Regis
adorantur cum Rege, or ut Rex vestitus adoratur, yet without our mental notion
at such a time stripping him of his Garments. Therefore neither can the Council
here be rationally presumed to speak of the Symbols, when it uses no such
qualifications.

Canon (more than which is not required to be professed by any Son of the Roman
Church) is this: -- Si quis dixerit in sancto Eucharistae Sacramento Christum
unigenitum Dei Filium non esse cultu latriae etiam externo adorandum, -- and
ejus Adoratores esse Idololatras, Anathema sit. Concerning which, and some
other passages in this Council, in comparing the Chapters with the Canons,
Franciscus a sancta Clara, Enchiridion of Faith Dial. 3.. 18. judiciously
observes, -- That although Catholic faith, as to the substance, is declared in
the Chapters, (as indeed it is,) yet according to this we are obliged only sub
anathemate to that form of expression which is defined in the Canons. 1.
Because the Chapters are not framed in the style of Conciliary Definitions,
with Anathema 's, and the like. 2. Because the Canons (where the very form is
exceeding exact) sometimes differ from the manner of expression in the
Chapters, in order to the same matter: As sess. 6. of Justification; Canon 11.
and Chapter 7. also sess. 13. of the Sacrament of the Eucharist; Canon 6.
Chapter 5. and elsewhere: yet sub anathemate all must stand to the Canons; and
therefore must expound the Chapters by them. See more in the Author.

Soave also, l. 4. p. 343. in his censure of this 13th. Session, though he says
magisterially enough in opposition to a Council, -- That the manner of speech
used in the 5th. point of Doctrine, saying, That divine worship was due to the
Sacrament, was noted also for improper; since it is certain, that the thing
signified or contained is not meant by the Sacrament, but the thing signifying
or containing. [But what Catholic will grant him this, that Sacrament includes
not both; or, of the two, not more principally the thing contained in, or
joined with the Symbols?] Yet he observes, -- That it was well corrected in the
6th. Canon, which said, That the Son of God ought to be worshipped in the
Sacrament. See the same observed also by Grotius in Apolog. Rivet Discuss. p.
79. where also he notes Bellarmin's forequoted passage: That the Controversy
between Catholics and Lutherans in their saying, The Sacrament, or Christ in
the Sacrament, was to be worshipped, was only in modo loquendi: To which
nothing is replied by Rivet in Dialysi Discassionis, but the matter there, as
also in his Apologetic, passed over in silence. Add to Grotius what Mr.
Thorndike discourses in defense of the expression of worshipping the
Sacrament, Epilog. 3. l. 30. c. p. 352. I confess it is not (necessarily) the
same thing to worship Christ in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, as to worship
the Sacrament of the Eucharist. Yet in that sense, which reason of it self
justifies, it is. For the Sacrament of the Eucharist, by reason of the nature
thereof, is neither the visible species, nor the invisible Grace of Christ's
body and blood; but the union of both by virtue of the promise; in regard
whereof -- both concur to that which we call the Sacrament of the Eucharist, --
by the promise which the Institution thereof contains. If this be rightly
understood, then to worship the Sacrament of the Eucharist, is to worship
Christ in the Sacrament of the Eucharist. Thus he.

Bellarmine explains himself in the same manner as the Council, in his Apology
to King James, Inter nupera dogmata ponit [Rex] adorationem Sacramenti
Eucharistiae, i. e. [as Catholics understand and explain it] adorationem
Christi Domini miro, sed vero, modo praesentis. To which Bishop Andrews
replies: -- Quis ei hoc dederit? Sacramento i. e. Christi in Sacramento. Imo
Christus ipse Sacramenti res in Sacramento adorandus est. Rex autem Christum in
Eucharistia vere praesentem, vere and adorandum statuit. [Thus far then the
King, Bishop, and Cardinal are agreed] Again, de Eucharistia l. 4. c. 29. --
Quicquid sit de modo loquendi, status Quaestionis non est, nisi, An Christus in
Eucharistia sit adorandus cultu latriae? And, as it were to avoid offense, when
he comes to treat on this subject, de Euchar. 4. l. c. 29. he prefixeth the
Title to it, not De adoratione, but De veneratione hujus Sacramenti: And in it
says that -- Nullus Catholicus est qui doceat, Ipsa symbola externa per se and
proprie esse adoranda cultu latriae, sed solum veneranda cultu quodam minore.

Of this Doctrine of Catholics Bishop Forbes gives this testimony, l. 2. c.
2.9.. In Eucharistia mente discernendum esse Christum a visibili signo docent
Romanenses; and Christum quidem adorandum esse non tamen Sacramentum: quia
species illae sunt res creatae, etc. neque satis est [i. e. to give them divine
worship] quod Christus sub illis sit: quia etiam Deus est in Anima tanquam in
Templo suo; and tamen adoratur Deus, non Anima; ut ait Suares 3. Tom. 79.
quaest. 8. art. disp. 65.. 1. And so Spalatensis l. 7. c. 11. n. 7. Nam neque
nostri [i. e. Catholicks] dicunt species panis and vini, hoc est, accidentia
illa esse adoranda: sed dicunt corpus Christi verum and reale, quod sub illis
speciebus latet, debere adorari. When then the Roman Church; speaking of
supreme Adoration, explains her language of adoring the Sacrament, to mean only
adoring Christ's Body, and so Christ as present there; and not adoring any
other thing whatever (substance, or accident) that is present there, or that is
also included in the word Sacrament: that accusation, which her using such
language of adoring the Sacrament can seemingly expose her to, is at the most,
not of an error, but an improper expression. But the propriety of language
dutiful Sons ought to learn from, not teach, their Mother; who also speaks that
which has descended to her from former times. Neither will it follow from
Catholics using the word Sacrament precisely in this sense, exclusively to any
other matter save Christ's Body, that therefore one may use the word Sacrament
promiscuously for Christ's Body, in what respect soever we speak of it; and, as
well or as properly say, that the Sacrament, meaning Christ's Body, is in the
Heavens at God's right hand, or was on the Cross, or the like. For though
[Sacrament] thus applied involves no other subject or thing at all but Christ's
Body; yet it connotes, besides it, the place or manner of its presence;
signifying this Body only as present in the Mysteries; not as a term adequate
to, and convertible with it, being in whatever time and place.

Trent, and other Catholic Authors, and also out of Protestants confessing so
much of them, do show sufficiently the great extravagancy of those Protestant
Authors who tell their Readers, that the state of this controversy is not,
Whether Christ's Body, and so Christ in the Sacrament be adorable with supreme
Honors? but whether the Sacrament, and then by Sacrament are pleased to
understand the Symbols? and then, to confute the Doctrine of Rome, argue, that
no Creature, as the Symbols are, is capable of Divine Honor. The state of the
Controversy (says a late Writer of theirs Stillingfleet Romans Idol p. 117.
.) is, Whether proper Divine Worship in the time of receiving the Eucharist may
be given to the Elements on the account of a Corporal Presence of Christ under
them? And against it he affirms, -- That supposing the divine Nature present in
any thing gives no ground upon that account to give the same worship to the
thing wherein he is present, as I do to Christ himself. So Bishop Andrews, Rex
Christum in Eucharistia vere adorandum statuit, -- at non Sacramentum, terrenam
scilicet partem. And -- Nos in mysteriis carnem Christi adoramus, Sacramentum
[i. e. the Symbols] nulli adoramus. So Dr. Tailor, (Real Presence p. 335.) The
Commandment to Worship God alone is so express; the distance between God and
Bread dedicated to the service is so vast, -- that, if it had been intended
that we should have Worshipped the H. Sacrament, the H. Scriptures would have
called it God, or Jesus Christ. And Disswasive. 5. p. 76. he affirms the Church
of Rome to give Divine Honor to the Symbols or Elements, and so to a Creature
the due and incommunicable propriety of God. So they vainly also undertake to
show, that the Primitive Church did not terminate their Adoration upon the
Elements; that the Fathers, when they speak of worship, speak of worshipping
the Flesh of Christ in the Mysteries, or Symbols; not of worshipping the
Mysteries or Symbols. These, I say, are great extravagances: whilst the Roman
Church owns or imposes no such Doctrine of Divine Adoration due to the
Elements, and the true Controversy on their side is only this; 1. Whether the
Body and Blood of Christ, prescinding from whatever Symbol is or may be there,
is adoreable, as being present in the Sacrament with these symbols? (This is
affirmed by Catholics: more than this needs not be so;) And, 2. Whether the
Adoration of Christ's Body, and so of Christ as present, if it should not be
so, will amount to Idolatry?

Jesus, and other Holy things. Omnes (says Vasquez, in 3. Thom. tom. 1. disp.
108. c. 12.) eodem modo de speciebus Sacramenti, quo de Imaginibus,
philosophari debent. And then of Images we know the Definition of the Second
Council of Nice referred to by Trent -- non latria. And for what they say of
Images I refer you to the preceding Discourse on them,. 42, etc. It is true,
that some of the later Schoolmen (to defend the expressions of some of the
former) have endeavored to show how a latrical, qualified, secondary
co-adoration may improprie or per accidens be said to be given to the symbols
also, as sacramentally joined with our Lord's Body, and as this body is as it
were vested with them; such as, say they, when Christ was adored here on Earth,
was given also to his Garments, i. e. without making in the act of worship a
mental separation of his Person from his Cloths; as Bellarmin explains it, de
Euchar. l. 4. c. 29. -- Neque enim (says he) jubebant Christum vestibus nudari
antequam adorarent; aut animo and cogitatione separabant a vestibus cum
adorarent; sed simpliciter Christum, ut tunc se habebat, adorabant: tametsi
ratio adorandi non erant vestes, imo nec ipsa Humanitas, sed sola Divi^itas. Or
do allow the giving of the external sign of Latria to them: as Bowing to,
Kissing, Embracing them; but this without any the least internal act of latria,
or any other honor or submission directed to them, which such inanimate things
are incapable of; as Vasquez explains it; who is so prodigal of this external
sign of honor, after he has stripped it of any internal latria, or other
worship whatever that may accompany it; that he allows this external sign not
only to all Holy things, but to any Creature whatever, (in our inward adoration
meanwhile only of God,) upon the general relation they have to him. But indeed
such an abstraction of the external sign, from an internal honor or respect
(as other Catholics censure his opinion) makes these outward gestures, without
any mental intention attending them as to such object, like those of a Puppet
or Engine, utterly insignificant: and so Vasquez, instead of communicating the
latria to Images, to the Symbols, to other Holy things, seems, in the judgment
of others, to allow them no honor or veneration at all; and so, in seeming to
say too much, to say too little; which has been more largely discoursed
before, Of Images. 42. etc. And a late Author Stillingfleet Romans Idol. p. 129.
might have done well, in mentioning this Author's Opinion, to have given also
a true relation of it, affirming only an external sign of honor given to the
creature void of any internal the least respect to them; Ita ut tota mentis
intentio in Exemplar, non in Imaginem [or, Deum, non Creaturam.] feratur: which
would easily have taken away all that malignity he fastens upon it. This for
Vasquez. And as for Bellarmin's adoration improprie and per accidens, Bishop
Forbes tells us l. 2. c. 2.. 11. Sententia ista Bellarmini plurimis Doctoribus
Romanensibus displicet. And Bellarmin himself, as appears by the former
citations, waving these School disputes, tells us, -- Status Quaestionis non
est nisi, An Christus in Eucharistia sit adorandus? i. e. no more is defined,
decided, imposed on Christians faith by the Church, than this: nor more needs
be desputed with, or maintained against, Protestants, than this. [This in the 2
d. place from. 11. Of Catholics professing their Adoration with divine worship
of Christ, only present in the Sacrament with the Symbols, not of the Symbols;
or, not, of the Sacrament, if taken for the Symbols.]

ly. Therefore also Catholics ground their Adoration (a thing Cardinal Perron
much insists upon in his Reply to King James) not on Transubstantiation, (though
both Transubstantiation and Consubstantiation involve it; so that, either of
these maintained, Adoration necessarily follows) as if, Transubstantiation
defeated, Adoration is so too; but on a Real Presence with the Symbols; which
in general is agreed on by the Lutheran together with them. Which Adoration
they affirm due, with all the same circumstances wherewith it is now performed,
though Christ's Body were present with the Symbols, neither as under the
accidents of Bread, as they say; nor under the substance of Bread, as the
Lutheran says; but, though after some other unknown manner, distinct from both:
and if they were convinced of the error of Transubstantiation, and of the truth
of the presence of the substance of the Bread unchanged; yet as long as not
confuted in the point of Real Presence, they would never the less for this
continue to adore the self same Object, as now; in the self same place, namely,
the Body of Christ still present there with the Symbols, and therefore there
adorable; though present after another manner than they imagined. See the
argument of Barnesius a Roman Writer apud Forbes. l. 2. c. 2.. 12. Corpus.
Christi est cum pane vel permanente, vel transeunte, uno vel alio modo, and per
consequens non est idololatria adorare Christum ibi in Eucharistia realiter
praesentem. See in Conc. Trid. 13.. c. 5. the reason immediately following the
requiring of Adoration, -- Nam illum eundem Deum praesentem in eo [i.e.
Sacramento] adesse credimus, quem Pater introducens in orbem terrarum dicit, Et
adorent eum, etc.

If therefore the Roman Church enjoins these three: 1. To believe Christ's
Corporal presence in the Sacrament. 2. To believe such presence by way of
Transubstantiation. 3. To adore Christ as being there present: It follows not
that she enjoins the third in order to the second: but may only, in order to
the first; as the first being (without the second) a sufficient ground thereof.
Neither can I, disbelieving the second, yet believing the first, refuse
obedience to the third, that is, to worship the same object in the same place,
as those do who also believe the second; and in my believing both the first and
the second, yet may I nevertheless ground the third only on that, which is by
Christians more generally agreed on; and still worship out of no other
intention, after Transubstantiation believed, than I did before I believed it
(when only I held in general a corporal presence) or than others do; who,
believing a Real presence, do not yet believe Transubstantiation.

Lutherans, or others) be true, Catholics plead, their Adoration is no way
frustrated, but still warrantable, and to be continued.

ly. Suppose not only Transubstantiation, but Real presence an error, and the
Lutheran and the Roman Catholic both mistaken; yet there can be no pretense
why these later, in such Adoration, (grounded by both on Real presence with the
Symbols) will not be as excusable from Idolatry as the other. For, thus far
these two Parties agree: 1. That Christ is corporally present: 2. That he may
be worshipped: 3. That no other there but He may be worshipped; not Bread, nor
any other mere creature: 4. That nothing visible in the Sacrament is He, or his
Body; which is present only invisibly, without any thing visible, inhering, or
appertaining to it, as the subject thereof. They differ only about the manner
of the presence of this invisible Substance. The one says, it is there
together with the Bread; the other says there, instead of the Bread, and the
Bread away; a thing also to God possible, for any thing we know. The one says,
he is there both under the substance and accidents of Bread; the other, there
under the accidents only of the bread. Now, whilst both worship the same Object
in the same place, and veiled with the same sensible accidents, if the one
adoring him as being under the substance of bread, (he not being there) are
freed from any Idolatry in such worship; the other adoring him as being under
the accidents of bread, (he not being there) cannot be made hereby Idolaters:
since they say, and freely profess, that, if his body be not there, under those
appearances, but the same substance still under them which was formerly; then
they confess it a creature, and renounce all adoration of it.

Whereas therefore it is objected, That the substance of bread only being in
that place, where they suppose Christ's Body, and not any Bread, to be,
therefore in worshipping the thing in that place, they worship bread; this were
a right charge, if they affirmed, that they worshipped the substance that is in
that place under such accidents whatever it be: but this none say; but, that
they worship it only upon supposition that it is Christ's Body, and not bread,
and that for this supposition they have a rational ground, (of which by and
by.) Now, saying they worship it, because it is so, is saying, if it be not so,
they intend no worship to it. He that says, I give divine Adoration to that
which is under the species of Bread, because believed by me, or, if you will,
certainly known by me (but he, indeed, mistaking) to be Christ's Body, and so
Christ present, is yet far from saying, I worship whatever is under the species
of Bread, whether it be Christ's Body or no. And he that says the later of
these, if bread happen to be there, is willingly granted an (...); but not so
the former.

Daille, as it much concerns him, excuses a Lutheran adoring upon a falsely
supposed real or corporal presence of our Lord, from any Idolatry, for this
reason: Because, says he, 1. Reply to Chaumont, p. 63.
such adoration is mistaken not in this, -- that it addresseth it self to an
Object not adorable, but only that by error it seeks and thinks to enjoy it in
a place where it is not, and so he says it becomes only vain and unprofitable,
etc. as is said before. 8. The same therefore must he allow to Catholics, if
meaning nothing more by their Language of Adoratio Sacramenti than Christi in
Sacramento; as has been showed before. 12. etc. that they do not: and that the
contention about this is a mere Logomachy; and that they also, as the others,
ground their Adoration not on Transubstantiation, but Corporal Presence.

Costerus, or perhaps some other Roman Writers, that say, if Transubstantiation
[ where also they must mean, or a Corporal Presence, some other way] were not
true, the Idolatry of Heathens is much more excusable, than of Christians, that
worship a bit of bread: they do not, or at least are not necessitated to grant
the consequence necessary, that, if Transubstantiation or Corporal Presence
fail, then they must adore the bread; which bread mean while they deny also to
be there: no more than Protestants do or think themselves necessitated to grant
this consequence, That if Consubstantiation or Corporal Presence fail, then the
Lutherans do adore the Bread; which bread also though the Lutherans affirm to be
there, yet do other Protestants deny that the Lutherans worship. But Costerus,
and others, only maintain this: That, supposing that which is imposed upon
them, viz. that Catholics, if there be no Transubstantiation, do worship a bit
of bread; the Heathen Idolatry, in their worshipping a golden or silver Image,
or some living creature, etc. would be far more tolerable, and more noble.
Showing by this (as Dr. Tailor expresses it, Liberty of Prophesying, p. 258.)
That they are so far from worshipping the bread in such case, that themselves
profess it to be Idolatry to do so; and intending, by advancing this fault the
higher, the more, to make appear the impossibility of such an error, its for so
many hundred years possessing the Universal Church of Christ, assisted by our
Savior to the end of the World, and the Pillar of Truth: and thinking the
greatness of this crime a good argument of the Churches innocence therein;
whilst perhaps, in some smaller matters, she might be liable to a mistake. I do
believe (says Mr. Thorndike, Epilog. 3. l. 30. c. p. 353.) that it has been
said by great Doctors of the Church of Rome, that they must needs think
themselves flat Idolaters, if they could think that the Elements are not
abolished: That shows with what confidence they would have the World apprehend,
that they hold their opinion; but not, that the consequence is true; unless
that which I have said be reprovable. And again, in Just weights c. 19. -- When
they say they must be flat Idolaters, if the Elements be there, zeal to their
opinion makes them say more than they should say. -- Lastly, If Costerus says,
that Transubstantiation failing, Catholics do worship the bread, Bellarmin de
Eucha. l. 4. c. 30. and others, say just the contrary, arguing thus concerning
a Catholick's worshipping an unconsecrated Host, which is nothing but bread, --
Adoratio ex intention [i. e. such as is rationally grounded] potissimum
pendet. Quare qui [talem] panem adorat, quod certo credat non esse panem sed
Christum, is proprie and formaliter Christum adorat, non panem. Which may as
well be said of an Host consecrated, that is not Transubstantiated (when the
adorer upon probable grounds believes it to be so,) but remains still bread, --
Qui hunt panem adorat, quod certo credat non esse panem, sed Christum, is
proprie and formaliter Christum adorat, non panem. And the same, much-what, as
by Bellarmin, is said by Dr. Hammond, Disc. of Idolatry,. 64. That, supposing
their error be grounded on an honest and blameless misunderstanding of
Scripture, it is, though material, yet perhaps in them not formal Idolatry;
because, if they were not verily persuaded that it were God, they profess they
would never think of worshipping it. Thus he.

This in the 5th. place of not only Transubstantiation, but Real Presence being
supposed an error, yet that the Roman practice, or error, compared with the
Lutheran, the first is no more peccant than the later; and therefore that the
Lutheran by Protestants being excused from Idolatry, so ought the Roman
Catholic too.

such Adoration, by the one or the other, of Christ, who is a true object of
supreme Adoration, and only by them mistaken to be in some place where he is
not, cannot be termed any such Idolatry, as is the worshipping of an object not
at all adorable. So, for example, If we suppose a Heathen worshipping a
Heathen-God, as having some particular residence in an Image; or an Israelite
worshipping the true God of Israel, as having a special residence in the Calf
at Sinai; or in Jeroboam's Calves, called also by him Cherubims; or lastly, a
Manichean, mistaking nothing in the Nature or Attributes of our Lord Christ,
save that he thinks him to have some particular residence in the Sun, and so
worshipping him as present there: None of these would be any such Idolatry, or
parallel to it, as that of another Heathen worshipping the very Molten Image;
or Israelite worshipping the very Calf for his God; or Manichean worshipping
the Sun it self for Christ. Again; neither can any of these that adore only God
or Christ as specially present where indeed he is not, ( e. g. as fancied God
so present in the Calf, or Christ in the Sun,) if we suppose something else
invisibly and undiscerned by him to be there present, as if we imagine an Angel
in the Sun, or a Serpent within the Calf, therefore be said to adore such
Angel, or Serpent: and whatever fault may be in such worship, yet it would be
great injustice to accuse such Israelite or Manichean, of adoring such Angel or
Serpent upon this indefinite Proposition, that he professes to worship that
which he believes to be present there; especially if such person do also
declare against the adoration of any such particular things, if, contrary to
his belief, there present. Neither then can it be justly deduced from a
Lutheran's or Catholick's adoring Christ as under the substance or species of
Bread, that therefore these adore the thing it self that is present under them.

Manichean that worships Christ in the Sun, or in an Israelite that worships
God as specially present or resident in the Calves of Dan and Bethel or that at
Sinai, because it is adoring a fancy of their own, without any rational ground
or pretense thereof; and however merely a good intention grounded upon a
culpable ignorance can excuse none from Idolatry, or any other fault, (which as
it is often pressed by Protestants, is freely granted by Catholics.) Yet since
Daille (and, I suppose, other Protestants with him) does allow, not an
absolutely certain, but a reasonable, though mistaken ground or motive of
Adoration, sufficient for avoiding the just imputation of Idolatry, [upon which
account a Disciple adoring with divine worship a person very much resembling
our Savior, when he was upon Earth; or, supposing a consecrated Host truly
adorable, one, who adores an Host placed on the Altar, and by some deficiency
in the Priest, not truly consecrated, is freely absolved by them herein from
committing any Idolatry. See before. 8.] Hence therefore if Catholics can
produce a rational ground of their apprehending Christ present in the
Eucharist, though possibly mistaken in it, they are to be excused from Idolatry,
upon the same terms.

Lutherans being allowed to have such a plausible ground or motive for their
Adoration, whereby they become by other Protestants absolved from Idolatry in
adoring our Lord as present there, (only their Adoration inutile (says Daille)
and tombent en neant,) I see not why the ground of Roman Catholics should be
any whit less valued than theirs. For, if we compare the one's Con -- with the
other's Trans -- substantiation, the later seems more agreeable to our Lord's
words, Hoc est Corpus meum; and to the most plain literal obvious sense
thereof, Hoc est Corpus meum, by a change of the Bread, rather than, Hoc est
Corpus meum, by a conjunction with the Bread; and therefore is the Roman
equalled with, or else preferred before, the Lutheran sense by many
Protestants, that are neutral and dissent from both. [ Longius
Consubstantiatorum (says Bishop Forbes, de Euchar. l. 1. c. 4. 5.) quam
Transubstantiatorum sententiam a Christi verbis recedere, sive litera
spectetur, sive sensus, affirmat R. Hospinianus and caeteri Calviniani
communiter. And Hospinian. Histor. Sacram. 2. part. fol. 6. says of Luther, --
Errorem errore commutavit, nec videns suam opinionem non habere plus, imo etiam
minus coloris, quam Scholasticorum and Papae. And see the same judgment of the
Helvetian Ministers, and Calvin, apud Hospinian. f. 212.] But next; Catholics
founding their Adoration not on Transubstantiation, but on Corporal Presence,
the same common ground of this they have with Lutherans, viz. our Lord's words
implying; and so it must excuse both, or neither.

rational ground Catholics exhibit of this their belief of a Corporal Presence
in the Eucharist, and so of Adoration.

I. This their Ground then of such a Corporal Presence in the Eucharist (after
a possibility thereof, granted also by sober Protestants See Guide in
Controversy, Disc. 1.. 62.
) is pretended to be Divine Revelation, and if it be so as pretended, then no
argument from our senses, and against it, valid:) and that (as was said but
now) taken in its most plain, literal, natural, and grammatical sense, in the
words, Hoc est Corpus meum; so often iterated in the Gospel, and again by S.
Paul, without any variation or change, or explication of that which yet is
pretended by Calvinists to be a metaphorical expression; and such, if we will
believe them, as this, that the Church is his Body, Ephesians. 1.23. or, He the true
Vine, Joh. 15.1. A great argument this, (the Apostles punctual retaining still,
in their expressing the Institution thereof, the same language and words) that
our Lord intended it literally, as he spoke it. Pretended also to be Divine
Revelation from many other Scriptures, (the citing and pressing of which takes
up all Bellarmin's first Book de Eucharistia, to which I refer the inquisitive
Reader:) but especially from the Discourse Jo. 6. Which Apostle writing his
Gospel so late, when the Communion of our Lord's Body and Blood was so much
frequented and celebrated in the Church, seems therefore to have omitted the
mention of it at all in his story of the Passion, and the time of its first
Institution: because he had dilated so much upon it before in relating a Sermon
of our Lord's made in Gallilee about the time of the yearly Feast of eating the
Paschal Lamb, Jo. 6.4, etc. -- The literal and grammatical sense of which
Divine Revelation (says Dr. Tailor, Liberty of Prophesying,. 20. p. 258.) if
that sense were intended, would warrant Catholics to do violence to all the
Sciences in the circle. And that Transubstantiation is openly and violently
against natural Reason, would be no argument to make them disbelieve; who
believe the mystery of the Trinity in all those niceties of explication which
are in the Schools, (and which now adays pass for the Doctrine of the Church,)
[or he might have said, which are in the Athanasian Creed,] with as much
violence to the principles of natural and supernatural Philosophy, as can be
imagined to be in the point of Transubstantiation. And elsewhere ( Real
Presence, p. 240.) says, as who will not say? -- That if it appear, that God
has affirmed Transubstantiation, he for his part will burn all his Arguments
against it, and make public Amends.

Catholics have for their Rational ground of following this sense, in
opposition to any other given by Sectaries, the Declaration of it by the most
Supreme and Universal Church Authority that has been assembled in former times
for the decision of this controversy long before the birth of Protestantism; a
brief account of which Councils, to the number of seven or eight (if the 2d.
Nicene [ Act. 6. tom. 3.] be reckoned with the rest) before that of Trent, all
agreeing in the same sentence, see concerning the Guide in Controversy, Disc.
1.. 57, etc. [Out of the number of which Councils said to establish such a
Doctrine, as Bishop Cosins, Hist. Transub. c. 7. p. 149. after many others,
has much labored to subduct the great Lateran Council under Innocent 3. upon
pretense of the reputed Canons thereof their being proposed therein only by the
Pope, Mr. Dodwel Considerations of present concernment.. 31. p. 165.
but not passed or confirmed by the Council; so another late Protestant Writer
upon another Protestant interest, viz. out of the 3d. Canon of the same
Council, charging not only the Pope but the Councils themselves, and the
Catholic Religion, as invading the Rights of Princes, has with much diligence
very well vindicated these Canons against the others, as the true Acts of this
Great Assembly, and not only the designs of the Pope; and copiously showed them
(as in truth they were) owned as such, both in the same, and the following
times. And thus the Doctrine of Transubstantiation in this Council is firmly
established, whilst Catholics contend, in the other Canon concerning Secular
Powers, the Sense of the Council is by Protestants mistaken.

Now upon this, I ask what more reasonable or secure course in matters of
Religion, (whether as to Faith or Practice) can a private and truly humble
Christian take, than, where the sense of a Divine Revelation is disputed, to
submit to that interpretation thereof, which the Supremest Authority in the
Church, that has been heretofore convened about such matters, has so often
and always in the same manner decided to him; and so to act according to its
Injunctions?

i. e. not held before some controversy happened in the Church touching the point
they decided, Catholics still have another very Rational ground of such a
sense of the Divine Writ, viz. the evident testimony of the more Primitive
times. Which that they have conveyed the Tradition of such a sense to the
present Church, and to these former Councils, (to repeat what has been said
already in Considerations on the Council of Trent,. 321. n. 1. because perhaps
by scarcity of copies that Book may come to few hands) I think will be clear to
any one, not much interessed, that shall at his leisure spend a few hours in a
public Library to read, entire, and not by quoted parcels, the discourses on
this Subject; Of St. Ambros. de Myster, init. cap. 9. -- the Author de
Sacramentis, ascribed to the same Father, 4. l. 4, and 5. Chapters. -- Cyril.
Hierosol. Cateches. Mystagog. 4, and 5. -- Chrysostom in Matt. Hom. 83. -- In
Act. Hom. 21. -- In 1 Cor. Hom. 24. -- Greg. Nissen. Orat. Catechet. chapter 36,
37. -- Eusebius. Emissen. or Caesarius Arelatensis de Paschate, Sermon. 5. --
Hilarious Pictav. de Trinitate, the former part of the 8th. Book. -- Cyril.
Alexand. in Evangel. Joan. l. 10. c. 13. Concerning the authenticalness of
which pieces enough also has been said elsewhere.

Rational ground of his Faith, and practice, the universal doctrine and
practice of the later both Eastern and Western Churches till Luther's time, and
at the present also, excepting his followers. For the Eastern Churches
(disputed by some Protestants) both their belief of a corporal presence with
the Symbols, and practice of Adoration, see what has been said at large in the
Guide in Controversy, disc. 3. c. 8. (where also are exhibited the testimonies
of many learned Protestants freely conceding it) and again, in Considerations
on the Council of Trent,. 321. n. 22. p. 313. and n. 9. p. 294. See also the
late eminent evidences of the Faith and Practice of these Eastern Churches at
this day, collected by Monsieur Arnaud, in his two replies to Claude; a brief
account whereof also is given in the Guide, Disc. 3.. 81. n. 2, etc. In which
matter (whereas one of the chiefest and commonest Pleas of Protestants is the
Greek and Eastern Churches their according with them, whereby they seem to
out-number the Roman) if any will but take the courage, notwithstanding his
secular Interest, heartily to examine it, I doubt not he will receive a full
Satisfaction.

Lastly, see D. Blondel (one much esteemed by Protestants, for his knowledge in
ancient Church History) granting an alteration in the Doctrine concerning our
Lord's Presence in the Eucharist (an Alteration he means from that which is now
maintained by Protestants, and was by the former Antiquity) begun in the Greek
Church after A. D. 754. Esclaireissements sur L' Eucharistie c. 15.
i. e. begun so soon as any dispute happened in the Eastern Church concerning
this Presence; which dispute was first occasioned there upon an Argument which
was taken from the Eucharist, and urged against Images by the Council of
Constantinople, under Constantius Copronymus, and was contradicted by Damascen,
and shortly by the 2d. Nicene Council. In which opinion of the 2d. Nicene
Council and Damascen, Blondel freely acknowledges the Greek Churches to have
continued to this day. See c. 16. p. 399. Again, granting an Alteration in the
same Doctrine (as is said before) begun in the Western Church A. D. 818. See.
Ibid. c. 18.
i. e. as soon as the like dispute happened about this Point in the Western
Parts: which dispute there was occasioned by the Council held at Frankfort
under Charles the Great, opposing the expressions of the foresaid
Constantinopolitan Council in like manner as the 2d. Nicene Council had done
before. Lastly, if we ask him, what this Alteration in the East first, and
afterward in the West, was; 1. He makes it much-what the same in both. And
then he explains it to be a kind of Impanation, or Consubstantiation, or
Assumption of the Bread by our Lord Christ. His words, c. 19. are these Des l'
An. 818. etc. -- Some among the Latins did ( as it were in imitation of the
Greek) conceive a kind of Consubstantiation, partly like, partly unlike, to
what many Germains [he means Lutherans] now maintain; which, to speak properly,
ought to be called Impanation, or Assumption of the Bread by the Word of God.
And c. 20. he goes on, -- The opinion of Paschasius, [whom he makes Leader in
the Western, as Damascen in the Greek Church] had advanced before A. D. 900. an
Impanation of the Word, fortified and getting credit by degrees; the
establishment of which (says he p. 440.) both Damascen and Paschasius
designed. Wherein (he says p. 441.) they supposed a kind of Identity between
the Sacrament and the Natural Body of Christ, founded upon the inhabitation of
the Deity in them; which at last produced, he says, the establishment of
Transubstantiation, under Pope Innocent the Third.

Here then 1. We see granted, both of the Greek and Latin Church, the same
Tenent. 2. We may observed, that this Tenent of Impanation he imposes on them,
when well examined, is found much more gross and absurd than that of
Transubstantiation: For which see what is said in Bellarmin, de Euchar. l. 3.
c. 13. and 15. Or in Suarez, de Sacrament. Disp. 49. But 3. see in
Considerations on the Council of Trent. 321. n. 13. and n. 16. etc. that this
Doctrine of Damascen and the Greek Church, and afterward of Paschasius and the
Latin, before Innocent the Third's time, was plain Transubstantiation; and is
misrepresented by Blondel for Impanation; and therefore never has the Greek
Church hitherto had any contest or clashing with the Roman concerning this
point. And see the concessions also of other Protestants very frequent and more
candid, of Transubstantiation held by the Greek Churches of later times, as
well as by the Roman, produced in the Rational Account concerning the Guide in
Controversies, Disc. 3. c. 8. 4 ly. Lastly, these Churches, in which, he says,
such an Alteration was made from the former Doctrine of Antiquity, deny it at
all so to be; and affirm, that, when some new opinions appeared, they
maintained and vindicated it as the Doctrine of the Fathers; their Proofs of it
being also extracted out of the Fathers Testimonies. Now then to stand against
such a strong stream of both East and West running constantly in this course,
seems to Catholics, with S. Austin very unreasonable. -- Similiter etiam
(says he, Epist. 118. Januario) siquid horum tota per orbem frequentat
Ecclesia: nam and hinc, quin ita faciendum sit, disputare, insolentissimae
insaniae est. And, -- Graeci omnes (says Bishop Forbes, de Euchar. l. 2. c.
2.) [as well as the Roman Church] adorant Christum in Eucharistia: Et quis
ausit omnes hos Christianos Idololatriae arcessere and damnare?

Luther's time, in the Reformation, no small number of Protestants, I mean such
as are the genuine Sons of the Church of England, proceeding thus far, as to
confess both a Real Presence of our Lord's Body and Blood in the Eucharist, and
Adoration of it as present there; a real presence of it to each worthy
Receiver, though not to the Elements. And Hooker, if he mistook not the Doctrine
of the Church of England in his time, says, Eccles. Pol. l. 5.. 67. --
Wherefore should the world continue still distracted, and rent with so many
manifold Contentions, when there remains now no Controversy, saving only
about the subject where Christ is? -- Nor does any thing rest doubtful in this,
but whether, when the Sacrament is administered, Christ be whole within Man
only, or else his Body and Blood be also externally seated in the very
consecrated Elements themselves. So that, if Hooker and his party are int he
right, Catholics do not mistake Christ's Body as present in a place where it
is not; but only in thinking it in that present to one thing, the Elements,
when it is so only to another, the Receiver of them. But then the same
Catholics have another half of the Reformation, viz. all the Lutheran
Protestants, that affirm, with the Roman Church, Christ's Body present also to
the Elements, or Symbols. And see Mr. Thorndike also, Epilog. l. 3. c. 3. much
for this presence of Christ's Body to be in, with, or under the Elements,
immediately upon, and by the consecration of them, (which consecration also he
places ( l. 3.4. c. p. 24.) in the blessing of the Elements before the
breaking, etc. mentioned before. 7.). Look back now upon all these Pleas of
Catholics, and see if they will not make up at least a reasonable ground or
motive of their Adoration. A reasonable ground; I say not here (what I might)
sufficient to secure their faith from all suspicion of error, but (which serves
my purpose) to secure them from Idolatry in their Adoration, though they should
be mistaken; when as other persons, because proceeding on like reasonable
motives, are by Protestants, in their Adoration of a mistaken Presence, or
Object, excused from it; (See before. 8.) As, for example, the Lutheran; the
Adorer of one much resembling our Lord here on Earth; the Adorer of an
unconsecrated Host, or Wafer placed on the Altar, etc. especially when
Catholics in crediting such divine Revelation of Christ's Presence, and so for
their Adoration, receive no contradiction (as it is pretended they do) from
their senses: because they adore, I mean with divine Adoration, nothing
visible, or sensible at all, nor any substance invisible wherein any thing that
occurs to their senses inheres; but only understand Christ's Body present thee,
where their senses can no way certainly, and against any pretended divine
Revelation, inform them, either when it is present, or not; since salvis
omnibus phaenomenis, all appearances granted most true, such a Presence is
possible.

Catholics for Adoration, which we expected should have been most strictly
examined by those who conclude the Roman practice herein Idolatry, are slightly
passed over by Daille, in pronouncing that this error of Catholics vient toute
entiere de leur passion, Apolog. des Eglis Reform. c. 11. p. 90. And after in
reducing all their ground thereof to a -- la seule authorite du Pape and de son
Concile: and by Dr. Tailor, Real Pres.. 13. p. 346. in calling them -- some
trifling pretenses made out of some sayings of the Fathers. Elsewhere indeed,
when he was in a more charitable temper ( Liberty of Prophes. p. 258.) he
says, That for a motive to such an opinion, Roman Catholics have a divine
Revelation, whose literal and grammatical Sense, if that Sense was intended,
would warrant them to do violence to all the Sciences in the Circle: but
prudently there omits their Plea of Catholic Tradition, securing to them such
a literal sense of the Text. Dr. Stillingfleet ( Romans Idol. c. 2.. 7.) says
first, -- That, if a mistake in this case will excuse the Romanist, it would
excuse the grossest Idolatry in the World. And in comparing two persons, one
worshipping Christ as really present in the Sun, another, Christ as really
present in the Sacrament, he says, as inconsiderately as magisterially, --
That supposing a mistake in both, we are not to enquire into the reasons of the
mistake, [i. e. as he says before, concerning the probability of the one
mistake, more than of the other] but the influence it has upon our actions. So
he. But, what is more manifest, than that the influence which a mistake has
upon our actions, as to making them culpable or innocent, is not always the
same; but very various, and often contrary; rendering them sometimes blameless,
sometimes faulty, according as the mistake is ex-or in -- exusable? Next, he
grants Ibid.. 5. a Catholic Tradition of Transubstantiation to be a sufficient
ground for Adoration: But the Catholic Tradition that is pleaded here
necessary for Adoration, is only that of a corporal Presence. Now, for a
sufficient evidence of such a Tradition, I refer the conscientious Reader to
what has been said before, waving that of Transubstantiation as to this
Controversy, though the same Catholic Tradition authorizeth both; namely, a
corporal Presence by a mutation of the Elements into our Lord's Body. This
from. 24. Of the Rational grounds Catholics have for their Adoration.

ly. For such Rational grounds thereofre of their worship as are here given
(and not from any excess of Charity, or from the singular Fancies of some few,
though learned men, as Dr. Stillingfleet, in his Preface to Roman Idolatry would
insinuate) Idolatry is by many Protestants of late, either not at all, or but
faintly charged on the Church of Rome. For first, see Mr. Thorndike in his
Epilogue, 3. l. 30. c. p. 350. -- I say first (says he) that the Adoration of
the Eucharist, which the Church of Rome prescribes, is not necessarily
Idolatry. I say not, what it may be accidentally by that intention which some
men may conceal, and may make it Idolatry as to God: but I speak upon
supposition of that intention, which the profession of the Church forms. And
in his Just Weights, c. 19. p. 125. -- They who give the honor proper to God
to his Creature, are Idolaters; they that worship the Host give the honor due
to God to his Creature: this is taken for a Demonstration, that the worship of
the Host is Idolatry. But will any Papist acknowledge, that he honors the
Elements of the Eucharist, or, as he thinks, the Accidents of them for God?
Will common Reason charge him to honor that, which he believes not to be
there? If they were there, they would not take them for God; and therefore they
would not honor them for God: And that is it ( not saying that they should be
Idolaters if the Elements did remain) that must make them Idolaters. And
Epilogue p. 357. in general he says; -- Whosoever admits Idolatry, [i. e. in any
point whatever] to be taught by the Roman Church, can by no means grant it to
be a Church; the very being whereof supposes the worship of one God, exclusive
to any thing else. The Roman Church, then, must either be freed from the
imputation of commanding any thing that is Idolatry, ( i. e. adoration of a
creature for God): or we must affirm, there to be, and to have been, no true
Church of Christ, never since such command of that which they say is Idolatry
went forth, (which no judicious Protestant, I think, has or dare say of the
Roman Church, since the beginning of the Adoration of the Eucharist:) For what
Church or Sect of Religion can be Apostate at all, if not a Church committing,
and commanding Idolatry; even the worshipping of a piece of Bread, which
themselves made, for that God which made them and Heaven and Earth.

And thus Bishop Forbes, de Euchar. l. 2. c. 2. Perperam (...) Romanensibus a
plerisque Protestantibus objicitur, and illi Idololatriae crassissimae and
gravissimae ab his insimulantur and damnantur; cum plerique Romanenses, ut and
alii fideles, credant panem consecratum non esse amplius panem, sed corpus
Christi; unde illi non panem adorant: sed tantum ex suppositione, licet falsa,
non tamen haeretica, aut impia, vel cum fide direct pugnante, ut superiore
libro ostensum est, Christi corpus, quod vere adorandum est, adorant. In
Eucharistia enim mente discernendum esse Christum a visibili signo docent ipsi;
and Christum quidem adorandum esse, non tamen Sacramentum, quia species illae
sunt res creatae and inanimes, and consequenter incapaces adorationis. And
Ibid. showing the Greek and Eastern Church, as well as the Roman, to use it, he
concludes, Quis ausit omnes hos Christianos Idololatriae arcessere and damnare?
After the same manner the Archbishop of Spalato, de Repub. Eccles. 7. l. 11. c.
n. 6. -- Respondeo (says he) me nullum idololatricum crimen in adoratione
Eucharistiae, si recte dirigatur intentio, agnoscere. Qui enim docent, panem
non esse amplius panem, sed corpus Christi, illi profecto panem non adorant:
sed solum ex suppositione, licet falsa, Christi corpus vere adorabile adorant.
Non enim nostri dicunt species panis and vini, hoc est, accidentia illa esse
adoranda.

Bishop Bramhal, cited before,. 6. -- The Sacrament is to be adored, said the
Council of Trent. The Sacrament, i. e. formally the Body and Blood of Christ
say some of your Authors: we say the same. -- The Sacrament, i. e. the species
of Bread and Wine say others: that we deny. Thus he.

D. Tailor, in his Liberty of Prophesying, p. 258. confesses the Subjects of
the Church of Rome no Idolaters in this kind; at least so as to worship Bread
or any creature with Divine Worship, and as God: For, -- It is evident, says
he, that the Object of their Adoration (that which is represented to them in
their minds, their thoughts, and purposes, and by which God principally, if not
solely, takes estimate of humane actions) in the Blessed Sacrament, is the only
true and eternal God, hypostatically joined with his holy Humanity; which
Humanity they believe actually under the veil of the Sacramental signs. And if
they thought Him not present, they are so far from worshipping the Bread in
this case, that themselves profess it to be Idolatry to do so; which is a
demonstration that their soul has nothing in it that is idololatrical, [ i. e.
as to the directing this their divine worship to an undue object.]

Tailor is faulty in his charge in Real Presence, p. 334. Faulty I say, in
charging on the Church of Rome, not their worship of a right Object in a
some-way unlawful and prohibited manner, this we are not here examining; but
their worship of an undue Object of Adoration, of a creature instead of God:
for so he charge them there. If (says he there) they be deceived in their
own strict Article, [he means of Transubstantiation,] then it is certain, they
commit an act of Idolatry in giving divine honor to a mere creature, the
image, the Sacrament and representment of the Body of Christ. Thus he. When it
is evident that the Object, etc. is the only true and eternal God, etc. as he
said before in the place cited, and must say if he will say truth. So, faulty
is also Daille, ( Reply to Chaumont, p. 63.) in his charging the Church of Rome
to worship Bread, upon this arguing: Catholics adore that substance that is
veiled with the accidents of Bread and Wine; but this substance is Bread: Ergo
they adore Bread. By which arguing he may as well prove the Lutherans in the
Eucharist to adore a Worm or a Mire, thus: The Lutherans adore that substance
which is joined with the Bread; but that substance is a Worm or Mite: (for such
thing may be there with the Bread at such time of Adoration) Ergo, they adore a
Worm. Whereas both the Catholic and Lutheran explain the indefinite term [that
which,] used in the major Proposition, restrictively to the Body of Christ, and
exclusively to any other substance whatever, that is, or may be, there, either
with the Bread, or under its accidents. Faulty also is Dr. Stillingfleet, Romans
Idol. c. 2. in saying the Protestants controversy with Catholics is; Whether
proper Divine Worship, in the time of receiving the Eucharist, may be given to
the Elements on the account of a corporal Presence under them, p. 117. And, as
for the passage in the Council of Trent, sess. 13. c. 5. urged by him there for
it, his mistake is showed before,. 12. And so, faulty, in his concluding, p.
118. -- That the immediate term of that Divine Worship given by Catholics, is
the external and visible signs or elements. And again, p. 124. That, upon the
principles of the Roman Church, no Man can be satisfied that he worships not a
mere creature with divine honor, when he gives Adoration to the Host: [whenas
Catholics expound themselves to mean by Host in their Adoration, not the
Symbols, or Sacramentum, but rem Sacramenti.] Again, p. 125, 127, 129. -- That,
supposing the Divine Nature present in any thing, gives no ground upon that
account to give the same worship to the thing wherein it is present.]
[Catholicks grant this as much as he: and does not himself say several times,
That Catholics condemn the worshipping of a mere creature for Idolatry?] See.
4. p. 120. -- If (says he) it should be but a mere creature [that I adore,]
all the World cannot excuse me from Idolatry, and my own Church [he means the
Roman] condemns me; all agreeing that this is gross Idolatry. Again; p. 119. It
is (says he) a principle indisputable among them, [ i. e. Catholics,] that to
give proper divine honor to a creature is Idolatry. Again; p. 126. he says,
-- he finds it generally agreed by the Doctors of the Roman Church, that the
Humane Nature of Christ considered alone, [ i. e. without an Hypostatical union
to the Divinity,] ought not to have divine honor given to it: [and therefore
neither any other creature whatever, that is not Hypostatically united, as none
besides It is.] All these, I say, faulty and mistaken in charging the Church of
Rome with this species of Idolatry, of worshipping a creature [ the Bread]
instead of Christ; from which the other Protestants clear it.

Hammond, in his Treatise of Idolatry,. 64. upon supposition that the ignorance
or error of Catholics is grounded on misunderstanding of Scripture, [I add, so
expounded to them by the supreme Church Authority,] seems to charge them rather
with a material than a formal Idolatry; which material Idolatry in many cases
is or may be committed without sin; as also material Adultery, and the like.
His words are; -- That if it be demanded, Whether in this case, that their
ignorance or error be grounded on misunderstanding of Scripture, this so simple
and not gross ignornace may serve for a sufficient antidote to ally the poison
of such a sin of material, though perhaps in them not formal, Idolatry, etc.
because if they were not verily persuaded that it were God, they profess they
would never think of worshipping it? -- he had no necessity to define and
satisfy it, being only to consider what Idolatry is; and not how excusable
ignorance or mistake can make it. And indeed Protestant Writers, that will have
it to be Idolatry, are concerned to make it such a gentle one, as that the
practice thereof, died in, and it neither particularly confessed, nor repented
of, yet excludes not from Salvation; or else they must damn all those who lived
in the visible communion of the Church Catholic for five or six hundred years,
by their own confession.

Daille's Apology of the Reformed Churches, c. 2. p. 98. much contendeth in
their behalf: That to Adore that which the Adorer believes not to be our Lord,
but Bread; or to perform the external signs of Adoration to our Lord as present
there, where the worshipper believes he is not, is unlawful to be done by any,
so long as the person continues so persuaded: For, Conscientia erronea obligat.
But then, if we suppose the Church justly requiring such Adoration upon such a
true Presence of our Lord; neither will the same person be free from sinning
greatly in his following such his conscience, and in his not adoring:
disobedience to the Churches just commands being no light offense. Neither for
the yielding such obedience in general is it necessary that the Churches
Subjects be absolutely certain of the rightness or lawfulness of the Churches
Decrees or Commands: For, thus, the more ignorant in spiritual matters and the
things commanded that any person is, the more free and released should he be
from all obedience; the contrary of which is true. But sufficient it is even in
the stating of judicious Protestant Divines, when writing against Puritans,
(see Considerations on the Council of Trent,. 295. n. 3, 4.) that such persons
be not absolutely certain that the Churches commands are unjust, and that they
do in something demonstratively contradict God's Law: which plain
contradiction, if a private person can see it, it is strange the Church should
not. And as to this particular matter, after the Churches motives of Adoration,
that are delivered before,. 24, etc. well considered, I leave the Reader to
judge, whether such a pretended certainty can have any solid ground. It is
better indeed to forbear an action, when we are not certain of the lawfulness
thereof, provided that we are certain, that in such forbearance we do not sin.
But thus certain of our not sinning in such forbearance we cannot be,
concerning any thing that is enjoined us by our lawful and Canonical Superiors;
whom we are obliged to obey: unless (as has been said) we are first certain
that such their command is unlawful.

Roman Catholick's grounds of believing Christ's Corporal Presence in the
Eucharist, with the Symbols, are solid and true. 2. And next; Whether this
Church, for any ones enjoying her Communion, exacts more of him, than the
confessing that Christ as present there is also there to be adored: whilst
meanwhile such person renounceth and declares against any adoration, or, if
you will, co-adoration of the species, or any other thing whatever there
present, with any Latria or supreme worship, proper or improper, or with any
other honor or reverence, save only such an inferior veneration as is
exhibited by us to other Holy Things.

FINIS.

