CONCERNING IMAGES AND IDOLATRY.

printer's device of a mask with rings. It lacks the initials "A H" but is
otherwise similar to McKerrow 379. A ms note in the Bodleian copy identifies
Obadiah Walker as the printer.

OXFORD, Printed in the Year, 1689.

THE CONTENTS.
I. WHAT Image Worship granted by Catholics Idolatrous. II. That all former
Idolatries about Images are contained therein. III. The Roman Doctrine and
Practice free therefrom. IV. What Image Worship allowed by the Roman Church. V.
The Roman Church not chargeable with the Abuses in her Worship.
Conceded, That it is Idolatrous;
I.
1. To Worship an Image made to represent a false God, tho such God imagined to
be spiritual; immaterial; not to resemble, animate, inhabit, or give virtue to
such Image. 2. 2. To make an Image of the true God, and to worship him in, by,
or before it, as it truly representing his form of shape.. 3. 3. To give Divine
Worship, wholly or in part, to any Image, made to represent either the
likeness, or any apparition of God (or to an Image of our Lord Christ), as to
the mediate or immediate object of Divine Worship. 4. 4. To give any note of
Honor, appropriated to God, to an Image, tho intending no Divine Honor
thereto, where no invincible ignorance.. 5. 5. To make an Image, not of God,
but of an Angel or Cherub, or other Figure; and to worship God before it as a
Symbol of his presence; or as believing God particularly present to, with, or
in, it; or God to give virtue to it, or to others by it (this grounded on no
Divine Promise) is a sort of Idolatry more or less excusable, as the error of
the judgment more or less voluntary., 6.
II.
1. The Heathen, by their Images, worshipped not the one true, but many, and
false Gods or Demons; grossly erring in the Divine Attributes, and communicating
Divine Honors to their inferior false Gods.. 7. 2. The Jews, both at Sinai and
Bethel, worshipped not the God of Israel, but the Calves and molten Images.. 8,
9.
III.
1. The making any Figure of God is matter of opinion only, and by some denied
to be lawfully done. Universally denied that any such Image may be made (in the
same manner as those of a Creature, or our Lord) to infer any form or shape
proper to God: Tho accounted lawful to represent any visible apparition of any
Person of the Trinity.. 12. 2. In neither the Metaphorical Representations of
the Trinity, nor those of our Lord, or his Saints, any particular presence of
the Trinity, our Lord, or his Saints, affirmed by Catholics. No Virtue in such
Image for which to worship, honor, or confide therein: Or to Honor or Worship
our Lord thereby: Or our Bequests rendered more prevalent with its Exemplar or
Prototype through, or by, It. Or the Exemplar by, or through it rendered more exorable
to his Suppliants.. 13. (The Benediction of them not deriving virtue to them,
but imploring God's blessing on the users of them.. 14.) 3. No Prayer tho made
before, directed to, an Image; believed neither to be endued with life, or
inhabited by the Deity: Neither sacrificed to, nor honored with any signs of a
Sovereign Adoration.. 15. 4. No Cult proper to the Exemplar (in the relative
veneration, for the Persons sake represented thereby) given to Images; either
Latria to those of our Lord, and the Blessed Trinity; Or Dulia to those of the
Saints.. 16. Shown by the Councils, of Nice 2. and Trent, and other preceding
Councils; St. Gregory.. 20, 21, 22. Concerning the Council of Franckfort, the
Caroline Books, and the Reasons exhibited therein against Images.. 25, 26, etc.
No Honors from Lights, Odours etc. applied to Images, Relics, Saints, amount
to Latria.. 30.31, 32. To which Council, the Nicene, or Franckfort, Obedience
due.. 35. etc. Concerning the Schoolmens Opinion herein.. 37. etc.
5. No external, signs of Honor, appropriated to God, exhibited to Images: No
Sacrifice as in the Heathen and Jewish Idolatry.. 30. 6. Protestants granting
the Roman Church a true Church, consequently free her Worship of Images from
Idolatry.. 41.
IV
1. Catholics maintain the use of Images many ways beneficial; to fix, or
heighten, Devotion; excite Affections; revive the Memory; invite our Addresses
and application to their Exemplars.. 42. 2. Maintain also a Veneration properly
due to Images in themselves as the proper Object of such Honor.. 43. 3. But
this only Relative, not propter se: but for the Exemplar's sake.. 43. 4.
Maintain the making, using, or worshipping, so as is here asserted, of Images
not to be prohibited in the Decalogue. 1. Because otherwise the prohibition of
making or having an Image, in any sense whatever, would thus be inferred from
the Text. 2 Because else such Worship must be extended to all Creatures: But it
seems unreasonable to hold, either all Worship whatever to a Creature forbidden
by the Decalogue: Or, that, tho forbidding only Latria, yet it forbids any
Worship at all to Images. Supposing all Worship of Images prohibited by the
Decalogue, yet if Images be worshipped by an inferior Worship lawfully given to
other things, it may be a Sin, but no Idolatry.. 45. Some Divines denying any
Worship whatever to Images; deny also the making and using thereof; and
restrain this Precept as Temporal to the Jews; Grant also the Jews not
prohibited hereby the Adoration of other Sacred things, hence inferring the
prohibition of Image Worship, having in it nothing of Morality; so that this
Opinion is utterly unserviceable to Protestants who are pressed by many
difficulties: The Cherubim; Brazen Serpent; Solomon's framing several Figures
as without, so without breaking, any Command.. 46.
5. But this Worship or Respect of an Image not the same as to the Prototype,
or implying our submission to it; or its excellency above us; but relative,
inferior, and such as is given to other appartinents of holy persons, and the
instruments of Religion: all these being by the Councils and the Schoolmen
compared and equaled as defending Image Worship.. 47. 6. Veneration due to
Holy things granted by Protestants.. 48. 7. The Honors externally imparted to
Images are, baring the head, bowing, kissing, embracing, lights, perfumes etc:
internally, an esteem of them for their relation to some nobler Object than our
selves; and an intention by our outward gestures to declare to persons of
understanding, the Exemplar or others, the value we set on any thing so nearly
relating to such holy Person. 49. 8. Not necessary that this esteem or reverent
treatment of inanimate things (for the sake of some sacred person they
appertain to) should therefore be the same of all things relating to such
Person.. 50. 9. The lawfulness of an inferior Veneration of Images being
cleared, no need to inquire whether the present practice herein be ancient, and
the modern use precisely the same as of former ages. For what at any time is
lawfully practiced may at any time lawfully begin to be so. And Antiquity in
not condemning, justifies the present Practice. Scripture-example without a
Precept is sufficient. The non-practice argues not the Tradition not
Apostolical.. 53. Protestants grant Images began to be used in the Fourth Age.
V.
The Church not chargeable with the Abuses about Images; She regulating by her
Bishops both the making and use of them. Nor bound in favor to Protestants to
quit all her Images; as neither do Protestants theirs in favor to Puritans..
58. The Church not chargeable with Idolatry for some particular Practices
therein; because the internal act of Worship not knowable by others.. 59. The
external such as is practiced among Catholics (abstracting from a bad
intention) may be lawfully used in the honor given to a Creature.. 60. The
great guilt and the many inconveniences pressing those that charge the Church
with Idolatry in the matter of Images.. 61.

CONCERNING IMAGES AND IDOLATRY.


I.. 2.
I. First, then, Concerning Idolatrous Worships of Images these things are
willingly granted.

1. That to Worship, or Bow to, an Image made to represent a false God; tho
such God imagined to be Spiritual, or Immaterial; and tho imagined not to
resemble, not to animate, or inhabit, or have any presence in, or to give any
virtue to, such Image, (although such a refined, and abstractive Heathen-worship
can hardly be produced), is Idolatry: Be cause indeed the thing represented,
and which they worshi^ by, in, or before, this Image is not God, but an Idol, a
Figment; either Quod non est, Nothing; or, Quale non est, no such Thing as they
imagine it.

Spirituality, and Infinity of his Essence, Act. 17.29, 30. (as in the last of
these do at this day the Socinians), and so were prone to make several
Similitudes and Figures,] is also Idolatry; that is, a worshipping him as so
something He is not, or as having some shape, figure, or members, he has not.
And is expressly forbidden by God in the Second Commandment (according to the
Protestant-account) Exodus 20.4. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven thing,
or any likeness that is in Heaven etc, thou shall not how down unto them, nor
serve them. Where, by serve them is understood, 1 either giving Divine Honor to
any of them, and serving them as God, strange God's being prohibited just
before, verse. 3. and, I am a jealous God, following presently after, ver. 5.; 2
Or giving Honor to God by any such Image, as a Similitude of God; or giving to
such Image any inferior honor whatever, as to the Similitude of God; or as
having any virtue in it, whereby to render our Devotions more acceptable to
God. Of which Moses speaks, Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16, 17. Take good heed to your selves
etc. for ye saw no manner of Similitude in Horeb. See also Isa. 40.18.46.5.
Act. 17.29. Thus, therefore, we are so forbidden, to give God any honor by any
kind of Image or Figure so designed: and, as not to make the Image of any other
God, so neither of the true with conceiting it to have any likeness of him, or
him to have any presence in it, or to communicate any Divine Virtue thereto,
whereby our service may be rendered more acceptable to him through, or by, it.
Nor was such law obligatory only to the Jews, but is so to all men for ever.

Elius, Sent. 3. Did. 37. Contra istamprohibitionem (Decalogi) peccaur tribus
modis. 1. Si ipsum Simulachrum habetur pro Deo. 2 Si Creatura per Simulachrum
repraesentata colitur ut Deus. 3 Si it a habetur Simulachrum [tho in an
intention of worshipping the true God] quasi per illud Deitas ipsa effigiaretur.
Bell, de Imag. 2. l. 13. c. Qui imagnatur Deum esse ipsi Idolo similem, dum
putant se colere Deum verum, revera non cosunt nisi figmentum suum. Conc.
Trident. Sess ult. Si aliquando historias and narrationes sacrae Scripturae,
cum id indoctae plebi expediat, exprimi and figurari contigerit, doceatur
populus, non propterea Divinitatem figurari, quasi corporeis oculis conspici,
vel coloribus, aut siguris exprimi possit.



Of which thus Bellarm. De Imag. 2. l. 24. c. Non licet Imagines colere Divinis
honoribus, i. e. cultu Latriae etiamsi quis dicat, id se facere propter Deum
vel Christum, non propter imagines; nam hoc ipso quod eas colit divinis
honoribus convincitur eas colere propter ipsas, non propter Deum quicquid ipse
verbis dicat [for none can give an interior supreme Honor to what really he
holds not Supreme.] And, -- Quis diceret, se exhibere Latriam Imaginibus, quae
est divina Servitus in affectu solo consistens, concederet eo ipso, se
Imaginibus tanquam Diis servire, says Vasquez, In 3. Thom. Disp. 109. c. 3. As
for the Expressions of some Schoolmen how they are to be understood see below,.
37. And hence also is conceded, That to profess the giving any Adoration, or
Religious Worship, as Adoration, and Religion are taken strictly and properly
to signify Divine Worship, to any image of God, of our Lord, or his Saints, is
Idolatry.

the honor and reverence due to it, to any Creature.

Sinai, and afterward of those at Bethel; viz. That all things were framed like
to those in the Sanctum Sanctorum of the Tabernacle, and afterward of the
Temple; and then, the God of Israel only worshipped as present here between the
Cherubs; worshipped in the same manner here, as in the Sanctuary, or Temple (tho
there seems to be no truth in this supposition, that the Jews Worship was such,
see. 8, 9.) yet, as the one was a true and acceptable worship of God, so would
the other have been Idolatry, and the worship of their own groundless and
irrational Figment, instead of the service required from them by God; and where
the error of their Judgment, being void of any Divine Promise, or Revelation
concerning such peculiar Presence, was unexcusable, as also was that of Gideon,
Jud. 8.27. who made an Ephod, and probably all other furniture belonging to the
Divine Service, and set it up in his own City, tho without intention of
introducing any strange God, or Worship, See ver. 23, and 33. the people
returning to strange Gods (as before in Jud. 2.11.3.7.) after his death, yet it
is said here, that all Israel fornicated, that is, committed Idolatry with his
Ephod;) and, that it was the ruin of his house.

Of which thus St. Austine, Q. Vet. Testam. 7. l 41. q. moves this Question.
Non frustra quaeritur, cum Idolum non fuerit, id est, cujusquam Dei falsi and
alieni simulachrum, sed Ephud, id est, unum de Sacramentis Tabernaculi quod ad
vestem Sacerdotalem pertineret, quomodo fornicationem Scriptura dicat populi
ista sectantis, atque venerantis. To which he answers, Ideo scilicet quod
praeter Tabernaculum Dei, ubi erant ista quae ibi fieri jusserat Deus Israel,
extra simile aliquid fieri fas non erat. And afterward, Ut hoc sit peccatum
Gedeon, quodextra Dei Tabernaculum fecerit aliquid simile ubi coleretur Deus.

Not much different seems also that of Micah, Jud. 17.6. 13. and the Manicheans
worshipping the Sun for Christ; or Christ in the Sun. This of several sorts and
ways of Idolatry in Images freely granted.

II. Next, II.. 7.
All the Idolatrous use of Images either by the Heathens, or Jews, or any
others, seems to have fallen under some of these.

1. For that of the Heathen, I think the matter out of dispute; who whatever
respect they gave to, or conceit they had of, the Images, it is certain, that
the Gods or Demons invisible, that these worshipped by, or in, them, were not
the one, true, but many, and false, Gods; whilst they also grossly and stupidly
(even the wisest of them) erred both in several of the Divine Attributes, and
communicated also to the inferior false Gods those Attributes and Honors (as
Sacrifice, for one) which do belong only to the Supreme. Neither can there be
shown (tho some Protestants take great pains for paralelling Heathens and
Catholics in Idolatry, to make the one in their Worship very acute and
subtle, the other extremely stupid and simple, as if Christianity much blinded
the one, and Heathenisme much elevated the other) I say, neither can there be
shown out of the Apologies of the Wisest of the Heathen, (after Christianity
had subtilized them,) either in their own Works, or those of the Fathers, any
Heathen Image Worship so refined and purified, as not to have been peccant in
some of the circumstances fore mentioned; viz. either imagining some things
false concerning the Image, or concerning the Deity they worshipped, or both.
Or, if there can, it shall be granted, that such Person was no Idolater; but
then, maintained also, that he was no Heathen.

Sinai, or at Bethel (both which some also labor much to extenuate, so to
raise the Christian's practice in their Veneration of Images etc. to equal it)
yet we find the Scriptures most express in charging them with worshipping not
the God of Israel, whom they are said meanwhile to have forgotten and cast
behind them, but the Calves, the molten Images with Divine Honors, and
Sacrifices. See, for the first, that of Sinai, the Declaration, of God, Exodus
32.8. They have made a molten Calf, and have worshipped it, and sacrificed to
it, and have said these [or this Nehem. 9.18.] is thy God, etc. And of Moses,
ver. 31. They have made them a God of Gold. And of the Psalmist, Psalm. 105.19,
20, 21. They worshipped the Golden Image, and changed their Glory [their God,
Jer. 2.11.] into the similitude af an Ox, that eats grass: and, they forgot
God their Savior, which had done great things in Egypt. And of St. Stephen,
Act. 7.41. They made a Calf and offered Sacrifice to the Idol. See for the
second, that of Jeroboam, 1. King. 12.28.32. where, after the like
Proclamation, he is said to have sacrificed to the Calves that he had made, and
also to Devils, 2. Chron. 11.15. and is accused by the Prophet Ahijah, 1. King.
14.9. to have gone and made him other Gods, and molten Images, and to have cast
the Lord behind his back [that is, forgot him, which seems not done in his
worshipping none, but him, between the Cherubim, and only mistaking the right
place.] But yet further, since we live in a world now not so addicted to
Idolatry, as the old was, and so less crediting it; that we may the easilier
imagine this Idolatry of the Jews so gross, as here described, Consider, how
formerly in Egypt many of the Israelites themselves went after, and served, the
Idols thereof. Of which God complains also, Ezekiel. 20.7, 8. And also how in the
Wilderness after this, at Sinai, and after the Tabernacle already erected, and
God's Worship better settled, they still entertained, and served, there also,
strange Gods, Moloch and Remphan, and the Moabites Idol, Baal-Peor; and the
Host of Heaven; had their Images, Figures, and Tabernacles; and, in effect,
worshipped the Devils, see Levit. 17.7. that inspirited them; see Amos 5.25, 26.
Act. 7.43. Ye took up the Tabernacle, etc. And it is said, Ezekiel. 20.16. That,
here, their hearts went after their Idols, they and their Children, ver. 24.
And Deuteronomy. 32, 16, 17, 18. That they sacrificed to Devils, not to God; to new
Gods, whom their Fathers feared not; and that they forgot God that formed them.
See Lev. 17.7. Number. 25.3. And, if you will look yet higher, see the infectious
Idolatry of their Forefathers in Ur of the Chaldees, perhaps the cause of God's
removing Abraham and his Family thence: Jos. 24.2. compared with Genesis 31.53.
Isa. 43.27. and Genesis 35.2. Again; for Jeroboam's Idolatry at Dan and Bethel,
consider his new coming out of Egypt, and what Idol-worships Solomon in his old
age had done, or tolerated before him.

Hammond, Of Idolat.. 34, 35, 36. (having rejected Moncaeus his Opinion)
concludes, -- The Question which is ordinarily made (whether the Israelites
worshipped this Calf, or only God in this Calf) may well enough be superseded;
and the Resolution be sufficiently clear, that they worshipped not God only, but
the Idol-Calf also. And, -- It is not improbable by the Text (says he,. 34.)
that the Calf was by them thus counted of as an Image, which, upon Aaron 's
Consecration, was thus animated by God [as the Heathen also conceited of their
Idols] and so fit to go before them, and to be their Conducter in Moses 's
absence. And of the same Opinion is Mr. Thorndike, persuaded by the many Texts
of Scripture clearly declaring it. See Epilog. 3. l. 25. c. where he says, p.
297, of the Calf at Sinai: 'That he can by no means distinguish that act of the
Israelites from the Idolatries of Egypt, which it was but late that they had
forsaken. And, of the other at Bethel, 'That the appearance of the Idolatry of
the Gentiles in the service tendered to Jeroboam's Calves is evident in
Scripture, quoting 1. King. 14.9.15, 16. And, -- 'That the Israelites
attributed the incommunicable Name of God to those imaginary Deities, which
they advanced to the rank of the only true God. Thus Mr. Thorndike. All this I
have produced to show, that some Protestants have no just Grounds to plead such
discretion, and subtilty in the Israelites Idolatry.

Sinai, and those afterward set up in Dan and Bethel, were framed in
resemblance of the Cherubims set up in the Tabernacle first, and then in the
Temple. The proper Face of a Cherub (as figured by Moses, and afterward by
Solomon, from which Ezekiel's, as also St John's somewhat differ) being that of
a Calf; as appears from Ezech. 1.10. compared with 10.14. In which later the
face of an Ox is called (contradistinct to the other three faces) the face of a
Cherub: and see Ezekiel. 1.7. for their feet. Now, tho the Tabernacle-Cherubims
were set up after Aaron's Calf, yet a pattern of these things was seen in the
Mount before (See Heb. 8.5. Act. 7.44. Exodus 25.9.); of which Aaron might have
had some intimation, or also Vision, together with the Seventy Elders in the
Mount, Exodus 24.9.10.

Exodus 25.18. where they are made at the two ends of the Propitiatory, and
covering it not with their Bodies, but Wings stretched out from them: (unless
any will have the Calf made erect and with hands): See Ezekiel. 1.5. -- 41.28, 29.
compared with Ezekiel. 1.10. And Genesis 3.24. the Cherubin set with a flaming
two-edged Sword. And it seems their form appeared not always exactly the same,
but, according to the service and use of them was diversified, as they made his
seat over the Propitiatory in the Tabernacle and Temple; where the face being
said to look toward the Propitiatory implies it was but one: Or as they drew or
carried his Chariot in Ezekiel; where, to move always immediately fore right
without turning or wheeling about, they had four Faces: Or, as they attended on
his Throne, praising, and worshipping, in St. John's Rev. 4. and the Prophet
Esay's Vision, Isa. 6. where they had, because of the Glory of the Divine
Majesty, two wings to cover their face. Now, either Aaron's and Jeroboam's
Molten-image was made exactly like these Cherubims, and the Scripture, in
vilifying of them, calls them Calves; or else, by reason of the Israelites and
also Jeroboam's lately before coming out of Egypt, and being corrupted with its
Idolatry, their Images varied in part from the true figures of the Cherubims,
to bear the more resemblance to the God of Egypt, a Calf. This, for the
occasion of making them. And lastly, If the worship of them made be only
supposed of such a degree, to which some Protestants, much contrary to the
Scripture-complaints, would abate it, yet thus also it is confessed before,. 8.
unexcusable: nor will such Concession prejudice any present Roman Practice in
their behavior toward Images. This, of the Heathen, and Jewish, Idolatries.

III. In the next place then I shall show, III.. 12.
That, from all these forementioned Miscarriages the Christian's Practice, in
the Veneration of Images, is easily acquitted.

1. First, then, For any Figure of God, or of the Divinity; 1st, It is no
matter of Faith, but only of Opinion (some Catholics denying it) that any such
may be rightly made at all.

Bellarm. de Imag. 2. l. 8. c. Non est tam certum in Ecclesia, an sint
faciendae Imagines Dei, sive Trinitatis, quam Christi, and Sanctorum. Hoc enim
confitentur omnes Catholici, and pertinet ad fidem; illud est in opinione.

2. Next, universally denied, That any Image, or Figure thereof may be made (in
the same manner as those of Creatures, or those of our Lord Christ himself are)
to signify any form or shape proper to it: and who shall worship God as having
any such likeness is censured before. But as for the visible Apparitions of any
Person of the Trinity which have bin made in Scripture, It is by many
Catholics conceived lawful to represent in a Picture to one man's eye, what
has bin seen by another's. As the sitting of the Ancient of Days in Daniel,
Dan. 7.9. or Descent of the Dove in St. Matthew, Chapter 3.16. that is, to
represent not the true figure of God, but the true figure of his Apparition,
and an Emblematical or Metaphorical Presence of God. The lawfulness of which is
thus vindicated by Dr. Hammond, Of Idolatry,. 58. 'Notwithstanding that the
making any Image of God is prohibited: yet if in the representation of a sacred
story there be set down any form, particularly an eye, a ray, a glory, and. [I
add, or such form, as the First or Third Person of the Trinity has appeared
in, a Man, Ezekiel. 1.26. a Dove, Jo. 1.32.] not to signify any supposed likeness
of him (which is impossible) but only to present him to the mind of the
beholder in the doing some action of his (which is in effect to do the very
same thing in a table, which the word Jehovah or God would do in a Book) I
conceive not what charge could be laid on it, at least what degree or spice of
Idolatry, unless I must be thought to worship the Name of God, because I write
or read it. Thus He. And to Mr. Spencer's urging the lawfulness of representing
God, as he has pleased in the former Visions to represent himself, Dr. Fern,
Answ. to Spencer, p. 57. answers, 'That the representations of these Visions
are tolerable: And if of these Visions tolerable, why not also of some part of
them? As the Ancient of Days sitting on a Throne, to represent his coming to
Judgment; Or the figure of a Dove, to signify a peculiar presence and
assistance of the Holy Ghost; where nothing untrue or unwarranted by Scripture
is designed: the care and oversight of which is committed to the Church
Governors. And, these thus represented, why may not the same reverence be given
to such figures recommended to us by such sacred Scripture-Apparitions, as is
to other representations of sacred Persons, our Lord, or his Saints limned, or
drawn in the like stories; and why may not those Persons of the Trinity be
worshipped before such Symbolical Figures, or Representations of them, if our
Lord Christ may before his? Of which more hereafter. Only provided, this
difference always be put; that we imagine no true resemblance of the Person in
the one, as we do in the other, and that our devotion reflect not on the
similitude of the Person, but of the Apparition, and on the reality of some
gracious operation thereof.

by, or through, any such Image, to, or upon, its Exemplar, or Person
represented: Or, again, the Exemplar any greater influence, by, or through it,
upon those, who supplicate him before it. Nor seems the Expression of the
Council of Trent, Sess. 25. [Per Imagines quas osculamur, and coram quibus
caput aperimus and procumbimus, Christum adoramus, cujus illae similitudinem
gerunt] to have any other meaning than this, That per osculationem imaginum,
and apertionem capitis etc. coram illis, adoramus Prototypum: that by, or in,
that inferior reverence and respect we give to them, we testify the Honor or
Adoration we bear to him, they represent to us: as appears also by the words of
the Council immediately preceding. -- Non quod credatur etc. sed quoniam honos
qui eis exhibetur [ i. e. that Cult given them, expressly declared inferior by
the Council of Nice, to whose explication the Council of Trent referrs us]
refertur ad Prototypa, quae illae representant. In which sense, it is noted by
Estius, 3. Sent. Did. 9.. 3. that this Saying of St. Basil, and some others,
Quod Honor Imaginis transit in Prototypum, is taken, both by the second Council
of Nice, by Pope Adrian, Resp. Carol. c. 8. by Damascen, De Fid. Orthod. 4. l.
17. c. and also is understood to be taken so, and in such sense disputed
against by the Caroline Books, l. 3. c. 16. and not in that other sense applied
to it by some Schoolmen. As the Honor done to his Image, or to the Chair of
State, redounds to the honor of the Prince, yet is not the same we give to the
Prince. Thus then per Imagines we worship the Prototype; but not, as if by, or
through, these Images, as a more advantageous or acceptable medium of our service,
we direct our proper worship to the Prototype, as some Protestants seem willing
to mistake it. Or, if any will have the Council to speak here not of the
inferior Adoration terminated in the Image, but of the supreme, given to the
Prototype, then the Council in these words [ Per Imaginem Christum adoramus]
must be understood to use per only to signify the motive, or occasion, of our
worship. As that Saying of St. Gregory, Epist. 7. l. 53. long ago expresses
it: Et nos quidem ante Imaginem Salvatoris non quasi ante Divinitatem
prosternimur; sed illum adoramus, quem per Imaginem aut natum, aut passum etc,
recordamur. But I say, tho Catholics may thus make the Image, or rather our
beholding it, a medium of exciting the Remembrance, and so the Love, Honor,
Worship, of the Exemplar, yet they make it no medium of the foresaid worship to
the Exemplar or Prototype [ Non quod credatur (says the Council of Trent,
Sess. 25.) inesse aliqua in its virtus, propter quam sint colendae: vel quod
fiducia in iis sit figenda.] Lastly, Catholics pretend no advantage, in the
use of such Images, either to render our Prayers, or Worship, more acceptable
to God, or his Saints, or more effectual to us, save so far as the frequent
beholding such Representations may excite, and increase our devotion,
affection, and love, and imitation of their Virtues etc. and this devotion,
fection, imitation obtain a more gracious acceptance and reward.

viz. Ut quoties illas Imagines sive effigies oculis corporeis intuemur, toties
eorum, in quorum memoriam and honorem adaptantur, Actus and sanctitatem ad
imitandum memoriae oculis meditemur. And, and Ut quicunque coram illis
[imaginibus] talem Sanctum honorare studuerit, Illius precibus and obtentu a
Deo gratiam in praesenti, and aeternam gloriam obtineat in futuro. Where the
reward follows the devotion of the Supplicant, not any virtue of the Picture.
And, if some Pictures or Images happen to be frequented with men's Prayers (I
mean, to the Person represented by them) more than others, because some
Miracles have bin done, as in some holy Places more than in some others, so
where some Holy Pictures or Images are, more than where some others; yet are
such Miracles no more affirmed to be done by any virtue of such Images (which
is by the Church declared to be none at all in any, Non quod credatur inesse
aliqua in iis virtus) than by the virtue of such Holy Place; But only from
God's good pleasure; a reason of which, as to the places, and times, and other
circumstances he chooses, we are not to enquire. Now, as no such corrupt
Imaginations concerning any Divine influence or virtue of Images have ever bin
in the Christian Church, so have always some such Imaginations attended all
former Idolatrous worship of Images that have ever bin; Heathen, or Jewish.
Unless it were an Idolatry, peccant only in the Exemplar; worshipping that which
is represented by the Image (suppose the deceased Emperor) for a God which is
not so; and not at all faulty about the Image, if using it only as a Memorial
of him. For, some Idolatry may be without, or beside, and was before, any
Images.

before, to be directed to, any Image; (excluding here the Prosopopeias
sometimes found in the Church's Poetry (as, O Crux, ave spes unica: for,
Crucifixe) and by the learned, who use them, sufficiently understood in a
Catholic sense) they being held, as without life, or knowledge, so without any
animation or inhabitation of the Deity [ non quod credatur inesse aliqua in iis
Divinitas, -- Vel quod ab eis sit aliquid petendum, says the Council, Sess.
25. And Bellarm. De Imag. 2. l. 18. c. Precaturi ad Imagines accedimus, non ut
invocemus imaginem, sed ut memoriam ejus, quem orare volumus, nobis imago
refricet: This indeed being the chiefly professed Catholic use of them.]
Neither do Catholics offer any Sacrifice to them; a thing the Heathen
professed: or use any other external Ceremony of worship whatever, appropriated
by God to himself.

or Worship due to the Exemplar unto them: either Latria or Divine Worship to
the Images of our Lord Christ, or to the Metaphorical and Historical ones of
the Trinity; or that inferior called Dulia to those of Saints. And therefore in
their applying either the term of Adoration, or of Religious Worship to Images
or any other sacred thing or person, save to God only, they declare their not
taking or using these words in the most severe, strict, or proper sense; for so
they grant them to be used to signify only the supreme worship due to the
Divine Majesty.

Of which thus St. Thomas, 22ae. q. 81. art. 5. Religio est, quae Deo debitum
cultum offert. And Art. 1. Religio est virtus, per quam homines Deo debitum
cultum and reverentiam exhibent. And Religio (says he) habet duplices actus:
quosdam quidem proprios and immediatos, quos elicit, per quos homo ordinatur ad
solum Deum; sicut sacrificare, and adorare, and alia hujusmodi. Here we see
both Religio and Adoratio appropriated to God. Vasquez in 3. Part. D. Thom.
Tom. 1 Disp. 98. c. 1. Vera sententia, Duliam qua Sanctis cultum exhibemus,
peculiarem esse virtutem a Latria, out Religione, distinctam -- atque adeo
Religionem circa cultum solius Dei versari. And, -- Cum Religio circa cultum
Dei solum versetur, cultus and honor, qui proxime Sanctis defertur, ad ipsam
non poterit referri; alioquin si esset actus Religionis, Latriae quoque
diceretur. Latria enim and Religio idem sunt. Bellarm. De Sanct. Beat. 1. l.
12. c. Aliquando accipiebant Patres nomen Religionis [strictius] ut convenit
virtuti illi speciali quae habet pro objecto cultum Dei, and quae distinguitur
specie ab ea virtute qua colimus Sanctos: aliquando largius, pro omni illa
virtute qua colimus vel Deum, vel Dei amicos, aliasque res sacras, and quae
distinguitur a cultu politico. Franciscus a Sancta Clara. Prob. 37. De Invoc.
Sanct. p. 348. Objectum [actus] Religionis est Deus solus. Cultus quo veneramur
Sanctos non est religionis actus; nec est actus civilis; quia objectum non est
aliquid civil, sed supernaturale, scil. Sanctitas eorum.

Nice, and that of Trent. 1. That the Council of Trent in the Decree De
Reliquiis Sanctorum and sacris Imaginibus, Sess. 25. purposely forbears to use
either of these expressions Adoration, or Religious Worship. Sanctorum cum
Christo viventium (says it) sancta Corpora a fidelibus veneranda esse.
Sanctorum reliquiis venerationem atque honorem deberi, and eas-a fidelibus
utiliter honorari. Imaginibus Christi and Deiparae Virginis etc. debitum
honorem and venerationem impertiendam. Et Christum adoramus, Sanctos veneramur.
A thing observed not only by P. Veron and others in defense of this Council,
but by Daille, De Religios. cult. objecto 4. l. 1. c. with this uncharitable
censure annexed, That they did it out of cunning to conceal the true Doctrine
of their Church. I would he and other Protestants would make good use of this
their not speaking their mind to submit to their moderate Decree, and they will
be content he should forbear any subscription to their mental Reservations; or,
if he will, to their Schoolmen's Speculations. His words are, Haec illi
versute, ut solent. Primo enim, non adorationem, aut cultum religiosum (quae
vera est ipsorum sententia) sed venerationem suis Reliquiis decernant,
superstitionis suae dedecus hujus vocabuli ambiguitate obumbrantes. But indeed
such was the Councils prudence, to cut off occasion from them who seek
occasion, and to deprive their adversaries of any advantage (whose style
therefore, we see, much displeases them) from such general and equivocal words
(tho cautiously explained, when formerly used) of making plausible declamations
to the vulgar against her innocent Doctrine. This for Trent.

Nice uses indeed the term of (...), Adoration, but usually accompanied and
qualified with some diminutive Epithet, and explained by veneratio, osculum,
amplexus, honorabilis salutatio, reverens accessio etc. And in their Epistle to
the Emperors Act. 7. shows the word Adoration to be equivocal; and, to show a
salutatory Worship as well as Latrical and Divine: That in the Scripture, as it
is used to God in the Decalogue Dominum Deum tuum adorabis; so to Men also
frequently, as Abraham adoravit filios Heth: Jacob, Esau, and Pharaoh: David,
Jonathan, etc. That for the Fathers Gregory Nazianzen says, Sermon. de
Nativitate Christi; Bethlehem cole and praesepe adora (The like we find in St.
Jerome. Apol. contra Ruffin. 3. l. Bethleem meam reversus sum; ubi adoravi
praesepe and incunabula Salvatoris.) On which, -- Quis (says they) nisi
insensatus existimet haec (...) pronunciari. They urge the Church Hymn (...),
Crucem tuam adoramus Domine; Quod certissime (say they) salutatio est, and
dicitur. Thus they defend the word Adoration to be used to express a salutatory
Honor.

For which we have Chemnitius, Exam. Conc. Trid. p. 4. p. 696. his Confession
thus far. Quidam (says he) vocabula mitigare studuerunt, ut Act. 3.
Constantinus Cypri Episcopus dicit. -- Suscipio venerandas Imagines:
Adorationem autem, quae fit secundum (...), tantummodo Supersubstantiali and
Vivificae Trinitati conservo. Et Act. 7. Dicunt veram latriam soli Divinae
Naturae competere. Esse autem aliam honorariam adorationem: sicut Jacob
adoravit Esau. Genesis 33. Abraham filios Heth. Genesis 23. Jacob Pharaonem Genesis 47.
etc. Quando itaque dicitur, Imagines adorandas, non intelligi cultum Latriae:
Sed adorare idem valere, quod salutare, amplecti, and amare, sicut Pharisaei
scribuntur amasse salutationes in foro, Matt. 13. etc. Volunt igitur quidam
vacabulo Adorationis in Actis illius Synodi nihil aliud intelligi, quam
exhibitionem bonoris seu reverentiae quae fit externo aliquo gestu, vel
inclinatione capitis, vel genuflectione, vel amplexu, osculo, and hujusmodi.
Thus he; rightly; if instead of Quidam he had put, Omnes. For, we see, it is
the public stating of the whole Council in Act. 7.

Lastly, whatever the word (...) or Adoration may properly signify, the same
Fathers declare in their Decree, that the veneration, or reverence, or call it
what we will, that is given by them to Images, neither for the inward
intention, nor outward ceremony or signs of it, is any other, than that which
is generally given even by the Iconoclasts to other sacred things, to the
Cross, the holy Utensils, the Gospels, Relics, Churches, and such as the
Christians of those days gave also to the Emperors Statues. Now, the worship
meanwhile they exhibit to Images certainly is not what their expression may
seem to some most properly to signify, but what they explain themselves to mean
by it; and, if such worship lawful, their supposed a fault is only verbal. And
here also the Caroline Books (observing this wariness in this Decree of Nice,
as Daille and others in that of Trent) 3. l. 17. c. say, the Council did this
to palliate and disguise their Error to the common people: (of which more
anon;) And 2ly, 3. l. 16. c. That tho the learned do avoid such a mistaken
Adoration, yet the unlearned are scandalized thereby, and fall into it: which
also now is the last Plea of Protestants against the Roman Church.

Religious is not used at all by either Council, and is by those Roman Authors,
which use it, explained to mean, not Divine, but only an inferior worship of
Persons, or Things Sacred or Holy, to contradistinguish it to that worship
given to Persons dignified in the State, or to some things relating to them
merely upon a Civil account. And so was it used by St. Austine long ago. --
Memorias Martyrum (says he, Contr. Faustum 20. l. 21. c.) Populus Christianus
religiosa solemnitate celebrat. And elsewhere, De Civ. Dei, l. 8. c. 27.
Quaecunque igitur adhibentur religiosorum obsequia in Martyrum locis, etc. And
De Trinitate, 3. l. 10. c. speaking of sacred things. Honorem, tanquam
religiosa, (says he) possunt habere; stuporem, tanquam mira, non possunt. And,
as if he had foreseen the present quarrel about it, and endeavored to prevent
it, he has thus discoursed on the latitude of the use of this word, De Civ.
Dei 10. l. 11. c. Et ipsa religio quamvis distinctius non quemlibet, sed Dei
Cultum significare videatur; unde isto nomine interpretati sunt nostri eam quae
Graece (...) dicitur: tamen quia Latina loquendi consuetudine non solum
imperitorum, verum etiam doctissimorum, and cognationibus humanis atque
affinitatibus and quibusque necessitudinibus dicitur exhibenda religio [and so
much more Sanctis] non eo vocabulo vitatur ambiguum, cum de cultu Deitatis
vertitur Quaetio: Ut fidenter dicere valeamus, Religionem non esse nisi Dei
cultum: quoniam videtur hoc verbum a significanda observantia propinquitatis
humanae insolenter auferri. Quae itaque (...) Graece, Latin autem Religio
dicitur, sed ea quae nobis est erga Deum, hanc ei tantum Deo deberi dicimus,
qui verus est Deus, facitque suos cultores Deos. Thus St. Austine. Clear also,
that the word Adoration, by the Council that uses it, is declared to be
applied to Images in no other sense, than as it is by the Scriptures
(notwithstanding Dominum Deum tuum adorabis) to men, to scabellum, montem
sanctum, Templum etc. and by the whole Christianity of that Age, to the Cross
and other Sacred things; an Antiphon in the public Liturgy of the Church, on
Good-Fryday, being -- Crucem tuam adoramus Domine, See Ordo Romanus. And
Alcuinus, De Divinis Officiis, who is thought to be the Penman of the Caroline
Books, in his Comment on the Liturgy Die Parasceves there uses the same word.
-- Venit Pontifex and adorat -- deosculatur Crucem. And, -- Qui non possunt
habere de ligno Domini salva fide adorant illam [Crucem] quam habent; meaning
hereby veneration of it.

I say then, after this, Why stay we still in the entrance of the Controversy,
and make verbal quarrels? What means such Language, as this, of Bishop Andrews?
Respon. Ad Apol. p. 200. 202, 203. In secundo praecepto Legis Adoratio non
restringitur, absoluta est. 2. Distinguit Cardinalis de Adoratione ea, and non
ea, ubi Lex ipsa non distinguit. Relativam sanctitatem tribuit Imaginibus, id
est, minimam. Quibus adorationem tamen vindicat, id est, cultum maximum. [Is
this, Abraham adoravit filios Heth, or, adorate scabellum, cultus maximus? Or
must not Bishop Andrews distinguish at least in the former?] Non adorabis omnem
similitudinem. Immo adorabis aliquam similitudinem. An non ex diametro
contraria? No: if we distinguish concerning Adorabis. So a late Author, Dr.
Stillingft. Romans Idol. c. 1. p. 87. 'God (says he) challenges all Religious
Adoration to himself [What? In whatever sense Adoration or Religious can
possibly be taken? properly, or improperly?] Again, p. 89. 'The Synod [of Nice]
said, it intended to give no proper Divine Worship to Images. But that is not
the Question, what they say; but what the nature of the thing does imply.
Whether that Religious Worship, they give to Images, is not part of the
Adoration which is only due to God. The nature of the thing, that is, of the
Worship that is expressed by their words: and what is that then? Not Latria,
say they, but honoraria and salutatoria Adoratio. Such, and only such, (for, if
not, name what the Nicene gave to Images, that the Gallican gave not to the
Cross?) as is given to the Gospels, and Holy Vessels. And is this such an
Adoration as is only due to God? Or is Pope Adrian hard set to show it was not
so? What means, I say, such loose and confused discourse? 'If (says another,
Dr. Hammond, Of Heresy,. 9. n. 18.) the Council of Nice define not for
Adoration of Images, then it is not rejected by us [ define not for Adoration:
does he mean Adoration here, as that Council declares they took it, for
Veneration? And will Protestants allow this?] And, if it does define for
Adoration, then was it rejected by Franckfurt. But means he here Adoration,
sicut Deificae Trinitati, which Nice, as well as Franckfurt, rejected? Or,
taken for Veneration, which Franckfurt denies to Images indeed, but allows to
all other holy things: viz. To the Image of the Cross, tho not, of our Lord:
and, will that Doctor, think we, granting the one, differ with us for the
other? What mean Protestants, after the distinguishing and clear dealing of the
Church, to speak thus in the Clouds? When they name Religious, take heed of
telling us what they mean by it; or of touching the Catholick's explication of
their meaning of it? Do you understand by it, (say we) any inferior veneration
or reverence given to such things as are called sacred, and used in our
Religion and Service of God? You your selves allow it, and give it; see below,.
51. and the Gallican Bishops did so, as much as Nice. Do you mean supreme and
divine Worship due only to God? Catholics deny it to any Creature, as much as
you. Why is here made in Protestant Writers such a Petitio principii still? Why
are not the former Disputes contracted, and this only discussed: Whether sacred
Images, or Images of sacred Persons, our Lord, his Holy Mother, and the Saints
are without Idolatry capable of such a veneration, as is, or at least has bin
heretofore, given generally by Christians to other holy things? Or, Whether the
veneration also of some things not sacred, if only done to them in such a
manner, as we honor or reverence things sacred, amounts to Idolatry? Or,
Whether he, who acknowledges such adoration of Images, as was anciently of the
Cross, maintains Idolatry? Lastly, Whether some (...) (supposed, not granted)
in their expression, as to the word Adoration, or Religious (yet these terms
not used in the Council of Trent: and only the one of them used, but this
explained and qualified in the Council of Nice) can amount to Idolatry by their
Doctrine?

Nice (referred to by that of Trent; which made this Article concerning Images,
and some others in some have, for concluding the Council before the death of
the Pope, then dangerously sick.) The Decree of that Council, Act. 7. runs
thus: Definimus venerandas (says that Council) and Sacras Imagines dedicandas,
and in Templis sanctis Dei collocandas habendasque; quo scilicet per hanc
Imaginum pictarum inspectionem, omnes, qui contemplantur, ad prototyporum
memoriam, and recordationem, and desiderium veniant: Illisque salutationem, and
honorariam adorationem exhibeant; non, secundum fidem nostram, veram latriam,
quae solum Divinae naturae competit; sed, quemadmodu^ typo venerandae and
vivificantis Crucis, and sanctis Evangeliis, and Reliquiis sacris, oblationibus
suffitorum and luminarium, reverenter accedimus [where note, that this latter
Quemadmod um oblationibus suffitorum and luminarium reverenter accedimus typo
(or, what if they had said imagini?) venerandae and vivificantis Crucis and
Sanctis Evangeliis, and Reliquiis sacris, was the universal practice of the
whole Church in those days, whether Eastern, or Western, Iconoclasts, or
Catholics.] See the same Declaration, made by several members of this Council,
occurring often in the 2d, 3d, 4th, and 6th Acts of it. In this last, the
Iconoclasts, then also, accusing the Catholics of exhibiting Latriam to their
Images, Epiphanius in his Reply exclaims; O insanientem linguam -- quae
Christianorum inculpatam fidem in simulachrorum arbitratur translatam culturam.
Nemo enim Christianorum eorum, qui sub caelo sunt, imagini latriam exhibuit.
Etenim hoc est Gentilium fabulamentum, Daemonumque invocatio [ viz. to give
latriam or Divine Worship to Images.] The same is reiterated by Adrian in his
Answer to the Capitalare ( Act. 4. cap. 56.) Qualiter in eorum explanaverunt
definitione, demonstrantes eis [imaginibus] osculum and honorabilem
salutationem reddere, nequaquam secundum fidem nostram veram culturam, quae
decet solum divinam naturam. And the Epistle of the Nicene Council to the
Bishops has these words; Quare eas [imagines] honorabiliter adoramus, and
salutamus; idem enim significant haec duo verba. This of the clear resolution
and explication of that Council.

Gregory, consulted concerning it; and which both the Nicene Council and Pope
Adrian on one side, and the Caroline Books, and the Gallican Bishops on the
other, professed to correspond and concur with, we do find him indeed denying
adoration to Images; but adoration taken strictly sicut Deo; but yet allowing
veneration to them, as to other Holy Things (as Pope Adrian also in his answer
to the Caroline Books represents it to Charles the Great.) Thus He in his
Epistle to Serenus, 9. l. 9. Ep. Et quidem quia eas adorari vetuisses omnino
laudavimus, fregisse vero reprehendimus: where the Reason of non-adoration
rendered by him shows him to mean it of Adoration striclly so taken. Quia (says
he) omne manu factum adorare non liceat, quonian scriptum est; Dominum Deum
tuum adorabis, and illi soli servies. So also in his Epistle to Secundinus, l.
7. Ep. 53. sending to him a Picture of our Lord, as Secundinus had requested of
him, He adds. Scio quidem, quod imaginem Salvatoris nostri non ideo petis, ut
quasi Deum colas. By these two Dominum Deum tuum adorabis, and non quasi Deum
colas, we see the Adoration he excepts against: But then in the same Epistle he
acknowledges a prostration before such Image, as a thing lawful. Et nos quidem
non quasi ante Divinitatem ante illam [the forementioned Image of our Lord]
prosternimur Sedillum adoramus, quem per imaginem aut natum, aut passum
recordamur. On which Pope Adrian in his Answer to Charles his Books, c. 50.
Act. 4. Sic and Secundino docuit, non quasi Deum colere, sed ante easdem sacras
imagines se prosternens, non quasi ante Divinitatem, ante ipsas prosterni. And
thus Spalatensis, De Repub. 7. l. 12. c. n. 47. Videtur [Gregorius] quidem
fateri, se fideles ante imaginem solere prosternere, sed explicat in hac
prostratione non imaginem, sed per imaginem exemplar adorari. Again in his
Epistle to Januarius, l. 7. Ep. 5. when a zealous new Convert had carried the
Image of our Blessed Lady and the Cross, and by force set them up in the Jews
Synagogue of that place where he lived, St. Gregory reprehends the fact done
without the Bishops Order; and requires Januarius the Bishop, That -- sublata
exinde cum ea qua dignum est veneratione Imagine atque cruce, debeat quod
violenter ablatum est reformare etc. Here is Veneration. But Jonas
Aurelianensis, In Lib. Sacrament. quotes a Prayer of his, wherein he uses the
word Adoration also taken in a larger sense to a thing made with hands, viz.
The Cross. -- Deus qui unigeniti tui Domini nostri Jesu Christi pretioso
sanguine humanum genus redimere dignatus es, concede propitius, ut qui ad
adorandum vivificam crucem adveniunt, a peccatorum suorum nexibus liberentur.
Thus St. Gregory; whose Doctrine both the Caroline Books, the Emperor Charles,
and Pope Adrian appeal to. See Adriani Respons. cap. ult.

Gregory, we find -- venerabilium Imaginum Picturae, in the 82. Canon of the
Council in Trullo. Inter venerabilium imaginum picturas Agnus etc. After this
A. D. 726. a Council was held at Rome by Pope Gregory II. against the
Iconoclasts, urged by Pope Adrian in his Answer to the Caroline Books, c. 12.
Act. 4. which decreed not only the lawful use, but Adoration, of Images. Again,
not long after the Constantinopolitan Council of the Iconoclasts held under
Constantinus Copronymus, 754, another Council was assembled at Rome by Pope
Stephen IV. A. D. 769. 20. years before that of Nice, to which Council, (as
Anastasius relates it in the Life of Stephen) were sent at the Pope's Request
by Charles the Great and his Brother, twelve Gallican Bishops, persons eminent
for Learning. His words are, -- Dirigentes ipsi [Papae] Christianissimi Reges
duodecim Episcopos ex eiisdem Francorum regionibus nimis Divinis Scripturis and
Sanctorum Canonum ceremoniis doctos and probatissimos viros. Now this Council
approved the Decree made concerning Veneration of Images in the former Council
held under Gregory II. See Adrian's Respons. Act. 4. c. 12. And, as Anastasius
relates in the life of Stephen, subtilius multa perindagantes statuerunt magno
honoris affectu ab omnibus Christianis ipsas sacras venerari imagines, sicuti
ab omnibus praedecessoribus hujus Apostolicae Sedis Pontificibus, and cunctis
venerabilibus Patribus usque hactenus de earum honor observatum, effectum, and
cunctis, ad memoriam piae compunctionis est traditum. Thus that Council under
Stephen. Some years before this Council, and not long after that held against
Images under Constantinus Copronymus, and some 20 years before that of Nice,
the Eastern Patriarchs Cosmas of Alexandria, and two Theodorus's, one the
Patriarch of Antioch, directed to Paul I. Bishop of Rome a Synodical Epistle;
In qua (says Adrian, Respons. ad Lib. Carol. Act. 3. c. 2.) de sacratissimis
subtili narratione, qualiter una cum nostra S. Catholica and Apostolica
universali Romana Ecclesia ipst -- Orientales orthodoxi Episcopi and
Christianus populus sentiunt, and in earundum Sanctarum Imaginum veneratione
sincero mentis affectu ferventes in fide existunt, studuerunt, intimandum. And
afterward, -- Si quis non adorat imaginem sive figuram Domini nostri Jesu
Christi, neque humanationem ejus confitetur [because some Iconoclasts held Deum
secundum humanitatem nun circumscriptibilem esse] talem impium Anathematizamus.
He also adds, -- Quam synodicam in Latino interpretatam eloquio Praedecessor
noster quondam sanctissimus Dominus Stephanus Papa in suo Concilio quod and
quod and ipse pro sacris imaginibus una cum diversis Episcopis in partibus
Franciae seu Italiae fecit, suscipientes ac relegentes placuerunt etc. Thus two
Roman Councils, and in the later also the learned Gallican Bishops, and also
all the Eastern Patriarchs contended for, and decreed, Veneration of Images
before that of Nice.

Nice which was held in A. D. 787. and what passed before it: about some three
years after it, and four years before the Council of Franckfort, were written
the Caroline Books, some think, See Matt. Westmonast. A. D. 793. by Alcuinus
the Emperor's Tutor, against the Nicene Council, and Adoration of Images. I say
three years after that of Nice, as appears in the Preface. Gesta praeterea est
ferme ante triennium and altera Synodus etc. But meanwhile the Author or
Authors of these Books knew nothing of Pope Adrian's Legates, present in it, or
his or the Eastern Patriarchs consent to its Acts, but l. 1. c. 6. censures it
because the Roman Church was not consulted by the Nicene Council, nor had given
her consent in this matter. Quae Ecclesia Romana (says the Capitulare, l. 1.
c. 6.) nullis synodicis constitutis caeteris ecclesiis praelata est, sed ipsius
Dei authoritate primatum tenet dicentis; Tu es Petrus etc. Tibi dabo claves
etc. And afterward, -- Quod regulariter omnes Catholicae debent observare
Ecclesiae, ut ab ea post Christum ad muniendam fidem adjutorium petant, quae
non habens maculam nec rugam portentuosa haeresum capita calcat, and fidelium
mentes in fide corroborat. And concluding that Chapter thus, Ipso [ i.e. Petr]
interveniente, cujus Cathedrae sumus sequaces, regni coelorum, cujus ille
Claviger factus est, mereamur esse compotes. Therefore these Books were sent by
Charles to Pope Adrian to consult his judgment, who also sent to the Emperor
Charles his Answer to them, in defense of that Council, probably before the
sitting of the Council of Franckfort; the Act of which Council, if condemning
Adoration of Images, likely, he would not have passed over in silence, had he
written after it.

An. Dom. 794. and four years after the writing of these Books was the Council
of Franckfort convened, and that Apostolica authoritate as it says, for
suppressing a new Heresy inclined to Nestorianisme of Felix and Elipandus, and
for settling the disturbances made by it in Spain. In this Council, after the
condemnation of the Heresy of Felix and Elipandus, is said to be passed this
Decree against the Nicene Council concerning Adoration of Images, first
published by a Protestant; since, out of a very ancient Copy, as he says, and
perhaps the same wherein the Protestant found it, by Sirmondus. 2. Allata est
in medium Quaestio de nova Graecorum Synodo, quam de adorandis imaginibus
Constantinopoli [put for Niceae] fecerunt, in qua scriptum habebatur, ut qui
imagines Sanctorum ita ut Deificam Trinitatem servitio aut adoratione non
impenderent, anathemata judicarentur. Qui supra, Sanctissimi Patres nostri
omnimodis and orationem and servitutem eis renuentes contempserunt, atque
consentientes condemnaverunt. Much dispute has been, and many reasons on
either side produced, concerning the true Decree of this Council, whether it
was for, or against Adoration, i. e. Veneration of Images: Historians varying
in this matter, and the former published Acts of this Council containing
nothing thereof. But for the present we will suppose this forementioned Decree
genuine; i. e. grant all, our Adversaries can desire, and proceed only to
examine, how the Nicene Decree is any way debilitated thereby: Desiring this on
the other side to be granted me, that Pope Adrian, at least, confirmed no such
Decree of Franckfort, upon these considerations: 1. Both because Adrian
professed to the Emperor his admitting and confirming the Decree of Nice. 2.
And also writ an Answer in defense of it to the Caroline Books; and
particularly Act. 3. c. 9. to that Chapter ( l. 3. c. 17.) which charge the
Nicene Synod with the very same error as this Franckfort Decree does; where he
shows, that the Nicene Synod maintained just the contrary. And 3. because in
some parts of that Answer he produces two forementioned Councils held at Rome
(one of them by his immediate Predecessor Stephen IV. the delegated Bishops of
France also consenting) to have decreed the same Veneration of Images before
that of Nice; as also, his Predecessor St. Gregory to have taught it. And
lastly, because the Gallican Bishops assembled at Paris under Ludovicus Pius in
824, when the former transactions of Franckfort could not be unknown or
forgotten, accuse Pope Adrian for siding with, and defending the Council of
Nice, and Adoration of Images; not justly done, if his latter Act at Franckfort
was contrary to, and condemned, both the Council of Nice, and consequently his
own Answer. Neither, tho Ado in his Chronicle, and so others after him,
mentions the presence of Pope Adrian's Legates in this Synod of Franckfort (and
they might be there, and dissent) yet do I see any probability thereof; because
there is no mention made of them (as always uses to be) in the Acts of this
Council; where there is, of all the other members of it; and of the presence of
the Emperor Charles: and it is also manifest, that Pope Adrian's Epistle to the
Spanish Clergy against Elipandus, inserted in that Council, was procured by
Charles his Agents at Rome before its sitting.

Franckfort it self, we see it condemns those that give such Adoration to the
Images of Saints as to the Deifical Trinity: which condemnation is such, as
both the Council of Nice, and Adrian, and the present Roman Church do willingly
admit and subscribe to; the Definition of Nice, as appears before, being
point blank opposite to any such Adoration; Non secundum fidem nostram, veram
latriam, quae solum Divinae naturae competit; sed quemadmodum typo venerandae
Crucis, and Sanctis Evangeliis etc. Only the application of such a Tenet, and
such an Anathematisme, to the Council of Nice is that which it is most manifest
the Fathers at Franckfort erred in; and the cause of such mistake seems to be,
that the Question, indeed, about Adoration, and the report of such an
Anathematisme by the Nicene Council [ in qua scriptum habebatur, says the
Franckfort Decree] was allata in medium; but not the Copy it self; or, if the
Copy, that Copy must be false: for in express words the true Copies have no
such thing, but just the contrary. For we see, that the Copy of the Acts of
this Council, tho it is granted, well known to the Author of the Caroline
Books, and to the Assembly at Paris some twenty years after this at Franckfort,
yet was not common in the West, or came into many hands; insomuch also as that
it was unknown to St. Thomas, and the ancient Schoolmen. Hence that much cited
Passage of Hincmar a Writer of those times, Contra Hincmar. Laudun. c. 20. [
Septima autem apud Graecos vocata universalis, Pseudo-Synodus, de Imaginibus
quas quidam confringendas, quidam autem adorandas dicebant, neutra pars
intellectu sano definiens, sine authoritate Apostolicae Sedis non long ante
nostra tempora Niceae est a compluribus Episcopis habita, and Romam missa, quam
etiam Papa Romanus in Franciam direxit, unde tempore Caroli Magni Imperatoris,
jussione Apostolicae Sedis, generalis Synodus in Francia convocante praefato
Imperatore celebrata, and secundum Scripturarum tramitem, traditionemque
majorum, ipsa Graecorum Pseudo-Synodus destructa est, and penitus abdicata, de
cujus destructione non modicum volumen, quod in Palatio adolescentulus legi, ab
eodem Imperatore Romam est per quosdam Episcopos missum.] is found to have many
mistakes in it: 1. who first mentions the Constantinopolitan and the Nicene as
one Council, divided into two extremes in their Opinion; 2. that it was held
without the authority of the Roman Bishop, (which Error the Caroline Books had
spread in the West, tho the Acts of the Nicene Council often make clear the
contrary,) mention the presence of his Legates, and in Action 2. recite Pope
Adrian's Synodical Epistle, sent by them, fully agreeing with the judgment of
the Council concerning veneration of Images in such manner as other holy
things. 3. That Pope Adrian, having received a Copy of it, sent it to Charles;
and that, by the Pope's Order, a General Synod was called by the Emperor, in
France he says; but, surely, means this of Franckfort, wherein the Greek
Pseudo-Synod was condemned; and that a large Book, written of the condemation
of it (meaning the Caroline Books) was sent from Charles by some Bishops to the
Pope: whereas such Books were written indeed, but long before the Synod of
Franckfort; and so the Volume sent to Adrian not by some Bishops of the
Council, but by Engilbert an Abbot a Favorite of Charles, and so answered by
him probably before this Council; which, was assembled indeed by the Apostolic
Authority, but upon another occasion, the Heresy of Elipandus: Lastly, the
Nicene Council maintaining Adoration of Images, but in a much more mitigated
sense than Hincmare, and the Gallican Bishops, all deceived by the Caroline
Books, apprehended it. The same mis-opinion of this Council of Nice also had
Jonas Aurelianensis, who, writing against Claudius Taurinensis, an Iconoclast,
yet declares himself also an enemy to the Adorers of Images. Quod cum sciant
(says he) Imaginibus nil inessc Divini, majors invectione digni sunt, quod
honorem debitum Divinitati impendant egeno and infirmo simulachro; atque
idipsum nonnullis Orientalium, qui eodem sceleratissimo errori mancipantur,
respondere solere. In like manner seems the Synod of Franckfort, not having
seen (nor perhaps the Emperor) (I know not by what miscarriage or concealment)
the Acts of Nice, or Adrian's Answer, to have bin deceived by the Caroline
Books divulged some years before, and exhibited in that Synod.

Caroline Books, which occasioned the Franckfort Canon seems to be contained in
the 3. l. 17. c. where the words of Constantine a Cyprian Bishop in his Vote 2.
Counc. Nice. Act. approving the Synodical Epistle of the Eastern Patriarchs
runs thus: -- (...). That is, Concors efficior, suscipiens and amplectens
honorabiliter sanctas and venerabiles Imagines. Atque Adorationem quae secundum
Latriam soli supersubstantiali and vivificae Trinitati emitto. Et non ita
sentientes Anathemati svbjicio. But the Caroline Books give it thus: Se
suscepturum and amplexurum honorabiliter Imagines, and servitium Adorationis
[or (...)] quod consubstantiali and vivificatrici Trinitati debetur, ei se
redditurum. Here mistaking at least in the sense, ei for eis: (as afterward in
the same Chapter where he recites it, it is not ei, but illis:) and referring
it not to Trinitati, but Imaginibus: and then carried away with Passion the
Author of the Capitulare forementioned says, -- Caeteris consentientibus,
because none of the other Bishops censured this vote at all: Nor had they
reason, as Constantine delivered it. And then, having thus made this passage
his own, tho he read the Decree of the Council point blank opposite. Non veram
Latriam, quae solum Divinae naturae convenit etc, and so the whole current of
the Discourse of that Council, yet it is clear to him that all that is but
palliated stuff; and this one Bishop speaks the true Opinion of them all. His
words in that Chapter are: -- Errorem detegit [this Bishop] infaustum, quem
illi videntur plebibus ingerere palliatum. Aiunt enim: Non adoramus imagines ut
Deum, nec illis divini servitii cultum impendimus, sed dum illas aspicimus and
adoramus, illo mentis nostrae acumen difigimus, ubi eos, quorum illae sunt,
esse non ignoramus: at contra iste illorum detegens errorem, and suam pandens
absque ulla obumbratione cogitationem, fatetur se quale Sanctae Trinitati, tale
illis exhibere servitium, talemque adorationem: sicque absurditatem quam illi
introrsus retinent latenter, hanc iste egerit patenter. Thus he (whereas the
highest word, this Bishop spoke, of the honor of Images, is (...)) and so
proceeds to the censure of his anathematizing the dissenters. By all which it
appears, this is the very place (most grossly mistaken) on which the Franckfort
Fathers grounded their Canon; condemning, as they had reason, such an impious
Anathema. And thus (by giving credit to the Caroline Books) one Bishops vote
mistaken to say the contrary to what it does, passes for the true (but
concealed and palliated) meaning of the whole Council; and its plain
Declaration in the public Decree, Non veram Latriam, afterward also often
pressed by Pope Adrian, is not admitted to be heard against it. This discovery
is none of mine, but Dr. Hammond's candid dealing in this matter; who says it
is a plain calumny to that Bishop. He is seconded also herein by Mr. Thorndike,
Epilog. l. 3. p. 363. 'It is to be granted (says he) that, whosoever it was
who writ the Book against Images under the name of Charles the Great, did
understand the Council [of Nice] to enjoin the worship of God to be given to
the Image of our Lord (for of any other Image of God there was no question in
that Council) but it is not to be denied, that it was a mere mistake etc.
Again: That the Decree of the second Council of Nice enjoines no Idolatry, I
must maintain as unquestionable, supposing the Premises. The honor we give to
an Image is not the honor we give to the Principal, but only by the
equivocating of terms, according to the Decree of the Council, and therefore
that honor of Images, which the Decree maintains, is no Idolatry. And in Just
Weights p. 128. Tho this Council acknowledges, that that Image it self [of our
Lord] is honored by the honor given (before the Image) to that which it
signifies; yet It distinguishes this honor from the honor of our Lord; and
therefore teaches not Idolatry, by teaching to honor Images. Thus he
vindicates this Council both from the censure of some Protestants (Idolatry)
and from that of Franckfort, and the Caroline Books not so rigorous. In which
Books I grant this Doctrine of Divine Worship given to Images to be imputed to
the Greeks not only in the forementioned Chapter, but frequently elsewhere; as
in 3. l. 24. c. -- 4. l. 21. c. but no other proof of it any where produced,
but only this passage of Constantine the Cyprian Bishop, and their using the
word Adoration: which, after the application of it in Scripture to inferior
worships, nay, by the Censurers of Nice, to the Cross; and, were there none of
these, after the Councill's explication of their innocent meaning (so that they
can be charged only with the abuse of a word, not error in the sense) seems
great injustice. And so also seems that, 2. l. 27. c. Si omnes Imaginum
adoratione carentes secundum illorum falsissimam opinionem pereunt, infantes
Baptismatis unda loti, and Corporis Dominici edulio, and Sanguinis haustu
satiati, qui necdum Imagines adorare valuerunt, and sic e saeculo migraverunt,
pereunt. And so the same Author's accusing them for passing such Decrees
without the consulting, or approbation, of the Apostolic See; when in the very
beginning of the Acts of the Council the Roman Legates are the first that are
named; and { Act. 2.) set down and recited in the Council, Pope Adrian's
Epistle maintaining the Veneration of Images.

But, however these things be, Catholics stand both to the Decree of Nice and
Franckfort; as to what the former affirms, so to what the later condemns; both
well agreeing, both most orthodox; the later only erring in this, that they
condemned it as the Greeks Opinion, of whom it is most manifest that they
professed the contrary.

Franckfort justly charged those of Nice to have allowed to Images Honors
truly Divine; tho they acknowledge meanwhile of them, that they denied (as
also the Roman Catholics now do) those Honors to be truly Divine, which they
allowed, I answer: That then those of Franckfort, or others since, ought to
instance what particular Honor that is, given by Nice to Images, that is held
due only to the Deity. Now first, for the interior Honor, which is given to any
thing, none can censure others; for, this none can know; and therefore none can
affirm of what sort it is: of which thus Spalatensis well (7. l. 12. c. 47. n.)
Distinctio Latriae, Duliae, Hyperduliae, and aliarum inferiorum adorationum ex
solo hominis interno pendet, quod internum non substat Ecclesiae judicio. And
it is well gathered by him there, that it was something external said, or
acted, by which Serenus perceived the Massilians to give to Images an undue
Adoration Next then, for exterior Honor, all that I find professed by those of
Nice, or objected by those of Franckfort, is, (not giving to them any Divine
Attribute, or Virtue, not Sacrificing, or erecting Temples, Praying to them,
etc, but) osculari, amplecti, salutare, whether by uncovering the head, or
kneeling, or prostration, oblatis perlustrare luminaribus, odoriferis
thymiamatibus honorare, besides using the term adorare taken in a general
sense. Now none of these, or perhaps some other that may be added, could the
Franckfort Fathers pretend due only to the Deity, because themselves gave them
all, and allowed the lawfulness thereof, tho not to Images, yet to some other
Creatures; to Men, to the Figure of the Cross, to the sacred Utensils, to the
Holy Gospels, to Holy Relics, to Churches, to the Emperor's Statue, and the
like; and in no other manner did the Nicene Fathers give them to Images, than
Franckfort, or the Gallican Bishops (for instance) to the Holy Cross. For
Example: If the one Incensed, or set up Lights before the Cross, not imagining
the Cross either saw the Lights, or scented the sweet Odours, but in Honor of
Him that was Crucified upon it; so did the other before the Image of our Lord,
not imagining it to see, or smell.

Nice freely allowed to other Holy things; and meanwhile disallowed them to
Images, upon such Reasons as these, which occur frequentlly in the Caroline
Books. Adoratio scabelli pedum Domini was commanded in Scripture, not so that
of Images; Capit. Caroli. l. 2. c. 5. l. 3. c. 24. and Adoration also of Men
has an example in Scripture, not so that of Images, Ib. 1. l. 9. c. But, if
this were good arguing, neither might the Gallican Bishops adore the Cross, the
Gospels etc. of which we have in Scripture neither a Command, nor Example.
Again; they use Veneration of the Cross, because, Crucis signum magnum in se
habere mysterium: illud adeo esse a Redemptore mundi sacratum, ut Divini
nominis invocatione illatum, alia quaeque censecret and benedicat. Which things
cannot be said of Images. But neither can they of Relics, to which yet they
allow Veneration. But then concerning Relics this Book says, that and Non
sunt coaequandae Imagines Reliquiis Sanctorum Martyrum and Confessorum; eo quod
Reliquiae aut de Corpore sunt, aut de his quae circa Corpus: l. 3. c. 24. but
so neither is the Cross or Sacred Utensils de Corpore, or circa Corpus; yet are
they venerable. But then they have another reason for the veneration of Sacred
Utensils, which will not suit to Images; for -- Sine Imaginibus, and lavacri
unda, and sacri liquoris unctio percipi, and thymiamata adoleri, and
luminaribus loca sancta perlustrari, and Corporis ac Sunguinis Dominici
consecratio effici potest, sine vasis vero nunquam. But what then? May not that
be in some other respect venerable that is not in this; as the Cross, the
Gospel, and Holy Relics are? And, as other things have a relation to sacred
Persons, for which they become venerable, that is not applicable to Images; so
Images have a special relation, namely that they afford a lively representation
to our minds of the Exemplar or Prototype, which the others do not. From which
it would be a weak arguing to conclude, therefore Images only venerable, not
they. So, for the veneration of Basilica's and Churches, they have another
reason. Aliud est loca divinis cultibus mancipata luminaribus perlustrari [ i.
e. in the day time also] and in eisdem locis and orationum and thymiamatum Deo
[which must be understood not as any special external Cult now required by him]
fumum offerri; and aliud Imagini oculos habenti and nihil cernenti lumen
offerre, and nares habenti and nihil odoranti, thymiamata adolere; aliud est
loca divino cultui mancipata venerari, aliud picturis luminaria and thymiamata
offerre. Thus the Capitulare. But then as such Lights and Incense are used
within Churches in honorem Dei and Christi, to whom such Churches are
consecrated (yet, I suppose, without any reference to the Divine Sight or
Olfaction) and not in any honor of the senseless wood and stone of such
Fabrics; so are the same things used before the Images of Christ etc. that are
set in these Churches, in honorem Prototypi, which sees, and smells, and not in
any honor of the senseless matter and colors of such Images, or Painters work.
And much-what like things are there said of the rest. Add to these things in
the Capitulare, what Bellarmin (in Append. de Cultu Imaginum 4. c.) relates out
of the latter Synod (as they call it) at Paris: Multa testimonia proferentes
pro adoratione Crucis, cum rationem reddere volunt, cur signum vel lignum
Crucis adorandum sit, and non sint adorandae Imagines Christi, dicunt eam esse
causam; quia Christus in Cruce suspensus fuit, non in Imagine; and quia per
Crucem nos redemit, non per Imaginem. To which he: Certe Christus non in signo
Crucis, aut in ligneis illis crucibus, quae adorantur in Ecclesiis, suspensus
est. Cum ergo liceat per adversarios Crucis Imaginem colere, cur Imaginem
Crucifixi colere non licebit? Now therefore, when in thus much the Franckfort
Fathers are agreed with the Nicene, That the Cross and Relics etc. may have
the external veneration, which the Nicene allow also to Images, no such
exterior signs or symbols of Honor may be styled Divine Worship, or due only to
the Deity: At least neither East nor West, neither the Nicene, nor Anti-Nicene
Bishops of those times thought them so. And this, supposing the worst, that
such worship external or internal, were mis-applied to Images, yet so long as
it held lawfully communicable to some other Creature, extreme folly and
nonsense there may be in such misplacing it, but can be no Idolatry. No
Idololatria or Iconodulia, if you will, because no latria or dulia; as on the
other side, such worship, as, if given to some creature, is Divine, can be
exhibited to no other creature at all without Idolatry. And the Author of the
Capitulare, in charging the Nicene Fathers with giving Divine Worship to
Images, yet does not, that I can find, any where charge them for it with
Idolatry, but with segnities, insania, and the like; (which, methinks, might
teach some late Writers that modesty in their language toward the present both
West and Eastern Churches, which these observed toward the Eastern only.) And
l. 3. c. 16. he seems to free the learned among the Greeks from any great error
in it. Nam etsi a doctis quibusque (says he) vitari possit hoc, quod illi in
adorandis imaginibus exercent, qui viz. non qui sint [quid], sed quid innuant,
venerantur, indoctis tamen quibusque scandalum generant, qui nihil aliud in
his, praeter id quod vident, venerantur and adorant. But then, why is not the
Controversy a little mollified and reduced to this, whether all Veneration, or
also use of sacred Pictures were better to be by all laid aside, than such a
gross mistake by any incurred?

Caroline Books, or Divines of Franckfort, or of Paris, assembled some thirty
years after Franckfort under Ludovicus Pius, who denying such Honors lawful to
be exhibited to Images, yet freely gave the very same to other sacred things;
by which such external acts of honor are cleared from necessarily being, or
signifying in themselves any Divine Worship. Where it is observable, that
Daille in his Treatise of Images, l. 4. c. 3. tho he says of the Nicene
Fathers, that in denying to give any Divine Honor to Images, yet
notwithstanding they actually gave to them those which were so: (For, says he
-- se prosternere, to prostrate our selves, to be uncovered, to hold up our
hands as an act of humility, to make prayers, to offer incense, and lights, are
not these services, we render to God?) and tho he spends a whole Chapter, Ibid.
c. 6. in justifying the Synod of Paris that censures Nice and Pope Adrian (yet
makes no mention at all of any censure of Franckfort against them) against
Bellarmin's reflections upon it, Yet, when he comes to the main Point, and that
whereon the Cardinal chiefly insisteth, -- Quod superat omnem admirationem,
illud est, quod multa testimonia proferunt pro adoratione Crucis -- Cum ergo
liceat per adversarios Crucis imaginem colere, cur imaginem Crucifixi colere
non licebit? And, -- At inquiunt nihil manu factum colere fas est. Quid igitur
(says he) Lignum vel signum Crucis non est manu factum? Codex Evangeliorum,
and sacra vasa, quae horum opinione veneranda sunt, quid sunt aliud nisi opera
manuum humanarum? Et tamen verum est, nihil manu factum esse colendum eo genere
cultus, quo Deus ipse, qui omnino non est factus, sed omnium rerum factor
colendus. To this the main Objection, and so much, you see, pressed by the
Cardinal, I say Daille in that Treatise, (as also Protestant Writers
ordinarily,) returns no Answer; passes it over in silence, and takes care his
Reader hear nothing of it; and so does a late Author that goes as high as any
in his charge. For, indeed, what can he, or they, say to it? But that such
Idolaters as the Accused were, such also the Accusers: such as the Orientals in
respect of Images, such the Gallican, German, or Brittanick Clergy, in respect
of other things: finally the whole Church, then, Idolaters. And what matters
it, whether such in respect of the Images of our Lord, or those of the Cross?
hanging lights, or burning sweet odours before the one, or the other? And to
what purpose labor they to show some part of the West opposite to the East, as
to veneration of Images, when they have both these united, against themselves,
as to Adoration of, and using, all those outward ceremonies of Honor to the
Cross, as the other do to Images?

Idolatry, as to the Cross, and Holy Gospels etc, let us see now in what
particular of those Honors generally exhibited to these a Protestant can verify
it. They cannot surely in these; their being uncovered, kissing, embracing,
kneeling, prostration, (I name not praying to them, for, that is generally
disclaimed) for these are no Ceremonies of Worship appropriated to the Deity;
but lawfully exhibited to Creatures. But if perhaps they shall pitch upon the
luminaria and suffita, lights or sweet odours (or, if any other may be named
such like) that they are expressions of respect and honor only applicable to
the Deity, upon what ground can this be said?

Lights: In setting forth a show with the greater pomp, Protestants as well as
Catholics, think they lawfully use them. In times of solemn Joy we make
Bonfires; we use Torches in Funerals, not all or always for necessity, but in
honor of the Deceased; and in particular they are the fittest Emblems of the
present splendour and glory of our Lord and his Saints in Heaven whose Images
(but in relation to the Person represented) we honor with them. [ Erat lucerna
ardens, says our Lord of the Baptist] They were used anciently, and that on
the day time, at the reading of the Holy Gospel, which was delivered to us by
the Lux Mundi our Lord: a Custom defended by St. Jerome against Vigilantius;
-- Per totas Orientis Ecclesias, Epist. contra Vigilantium (says he) quando
legendum est Evangelium, accenduntur lucernae, jam sole rutilante: [and this
reason given] non ad fugandas tenebras, sed ad signum laetitiae demonstrandum.
And Rivet, in his Debates with Grotius; Exam. Animad. Grot. Art. 21.
acknowledges the ancient Christians to have met the Statues of their Christian
Emperors (brought into Cities as it were to receive their homage, where the
Emperor could not come in person) cum cereis and incensis, with lights, and
burning sweet odours, to express a Civil Honor to the Persons these
represented: a Custom mentioned also in 2. Nicene Council, Act. 1. Si enim
Regum laureata and Iconas missas ad civitates vel regiones obvii adeunt populi
cum Cereis and incensis, non cera perfusam tabulam, sed Imperatorem honorantes
etc. Concerning this thus Bellarmin, De Reliquiis 2. l. 3. c. declares the
Catholick's intention. Non offerri cereas Martyribus, tanquam sacrificia, sed
accendi in signum laetitiae. Ignem enim accendi solere ad laetitiam
significandam in rebus profanis: praeterea ignem, Gloriae signum esse; unde
Imperatoribus Romany ubique Ignis praeferebatur. And in the 2. Nicene Council,
Act. 4. we find both them and sweet odours, thus defended and expounded, Epist.
Germani ad Episc. Claudiopol; -- Sed nec illud scandalizet quosdam, quod, ante
Imagines Sanctorum, luminarium concinnatio, and suavis odoris thymiamata fiunt;
symbolice namque talia celebrari ad honorem eorum ezcogitata sunt etc. Indicia
sunt namque sensibilia lumina divini ac sine materia luminis dati [sanctis in
caelo]: porro Aromatum incensum purissimae and totius S. Spiritus inspirationis
and repletionis insigne. And St. Austine long ago in the 27th Chapter of his
8th Book De Civitate Dei, Entitled De modo honoris quem Christiani Martyribus
impendant, speaking of such Ceremonies used at the Memorials, or Sepulchers, or
Reliquaries of the Martyrs: -- Quaecunque igitur (says he) adhibentur
Religiosorum obsequia in Martyrum locis, ornamenta sunt Memoriarum, non sacra
vel sacrificia mortuorum tanquam Deorum.

Burning sweet Odours: It it granted, that as the sacrificing of Beasts, so the
fuming of Incense joined with certain circumstances of its being offered upon
the fire of the Altar, by a Priest, of such a composition etc. was under the
Law a Ceremony of the Divine Worship not communicable, nor lawful to be
performed, upon whatever rectified intention, to any other. But yet among the
Jews, as the killing of Beasts also for food, so the burning of Incense or
sweet Odours, divested of such circumstances, was never prohibited to be used
otherwise than only in the Divine Service. Use all manner of Perfumes on any
occasion the people might, only this excepted, that they should not be of the
same composition with that of the Sanctuary, Exodus 30.37, 38. Now the Church is
far from using such perfuming with any such circumstances as may give it the
appearance of a Sacrifice, or such Oblation of it as was made to God under the
Law; for, she acknowledges none, neither that of Beasts, nor of Incense, nor
any other, lawful now under the Gospel to be offered in this manner, either to
any other, or to God himself, save only that of the Body and Blood of our Lord
in the Eucharist; the other being Levitical, typical, abolished Rites. She also
abhorrs the use of it (as also she does of any other the least common Honor,
any kneeling, or bowing) as it was required of the ancient Christians to the
Heathen, Gods, or Emperors, or their Statues, i. e. with an Altar erected
before such Statue, a Fire kindled on It, and Incense to be cast thereon, or at
the least imposed upon them as an external acknowledgment, or confession of
their believing some Divinity in the Person, to whom it was offered. She only
uses such Odours as a common Ceremony of Honor, frequent in times of Joy, to
entertain the Smell, as Lights and Bonfires do the Eyes; Hymns, Music and
ringing of Bells, the Ears. And when used in the Divine Service, it is so not
only by the Priest (the proper Minister of a Sacrifice) but inferior Ministers;
who incense or perfume therewith, not only the Altars and Images of Saints, but
the Book of the Gospels, the Priest and other Clergy, and the people. In
Ecclesia (says Bellarmin, De Imag. 2. l. 17. c.) non-Sacerdotes incensum
offerunt, idque non solum Deo, sed etiam populo: See the Rubricks in Ordo
Missae. So that, if the Saints in Glory be Deified by such a Ceremony, so are
the People, and the Books too. Several ends of the Church's using it Bellarm.
De Missa, 2. l. 15. c. names, such as these: -- Ut significetur bonus odor
Evangelii, 2. Cor. 2.15. Christi bonus odor sumus Deo. Ut significentur
orationes Sanctorum, Rev. 5.8. and, amongst others; Ut teter odor, si quis ex
multitudine hominum in Ecclesia existeret, abstergatur. And Thurifications or
wasting sweet Odours on this manner, methinks, should be no more suspected of
Idolatry, than sprinkling Holy Water. We find mention of these two last
thymiama and luminaria in the 4th Canon Apostolical, and provision for these
numbered amongst the Oblations allowed to be brought to the Altar: And these
Canons, in the Protestant's judgment, surely as ancient as Constantine's days.
And Daille, De Relig. cult. objecto 2. l. 15. c. with his Negative Arguments
contending such Customs to have bin unknown to the ancient Christians, yet
extends this purity of the Church in the ignorance of them no further, than
till the beginning of the 4th Century, the times of Constantine; that is no
further, than till the Church, lifting up her head out of long Persecutions,
had the first opportunity to honor her Martyrs with a greater external
Solemnity and Triumph. About which times supposing, not granting, that she had
borrowed and adopted these emblematical Ceremonies into her Service out of
Gentilisme, yet a rectified intention purifies the external action; and David
made no scruple of using the spoils of the Heathen for the more adorning the
House of God. And, if the Christians may not use at pleasure what Paganism
has formerly abused, nor honor God's Saints with any thing formerly applied to
Idols, then neither may they with bowing to them, for this the Heathen did to
their Idols: nor, for the same reason, may Protestants retain any Customs
supposed formerly abused by the Roman Church. Lastly, if these two of Lights
and Perfume shall amount to Idolatry, so Idolatry will be introduced into the
Church in the times of Constantine, and so an hundred years before the
Protestant account, and extremely disorder their Calculations about the forty
two Months, or 1260. years of Anti-Christ's Reign: Neither will this leave that
Church, which our Lord promised Hell Gates should not prevail against, one
minutes respite as it were, but remove it immediately from the Captivity under
Heathen Rome, and Idolatry without the Church, to that Captivity much greater
under the Christian Antichrist (as they style him), and Idolatry, within it.
Meanwhile, this is willingly granted, That to incense or burn lights before any
Image or other Creature whatever with some of those mis-apprehensions mentioned
before. 4, etc. is an act of Idolatry, as burning Incense to the Brazen Serpent
was, if done upon any such superstitious account, or in any such way as God
under the Law required it only to himself: and therefore this Serpent was
removed and broken by Hezekiah, 2. King. 18.4. But so also was it Idolatry to
bow the knee to the same Serpent. Now, all such superstitious intention in
incensing Images, the Cross, the Gospels and the like, do Catholics renounce,
and profess whatever is offered at, to, or before, such Images, as Perfume,
Lights, Tablets, etc. to have relation only to the Dignity of the Person
represented, and not to any at all in the Image, and to be used as expressions
of Joy and Gratitude, or honorary Ornaments of it merely for the Exemplar's
sake, or also as Memorials and Monuments of some Benefits received by the
Supplicants from him.

Thus I have showed the Gallican Bishops to have given the self same veneration
to Crosses and other sacred things, as the Nicene did to Images; and have
vindicated both of them from giving to sacred things, in these external
Ceremonies used toward them, any Divine Honor; as also the ancient Christians
in their using the like to the Statues of their Emperors. And so have cleared
this matter, as, That the Fathers of the Council of Nice expressly denied their
giving any Latria or Divine Worship to Images; so, that no particular Note or
sign of Worship exhibited by them to Images can be proved such: And
consequently, that, in the condemning of those, who (to use the words of
Franckfort) Imagines Sanctorum, ita ut Deificam Trinitatem servitio aut
adoratione impendunt, both those of Nice and Franckfort in their Decree
perfectly agree.



First, then, It is clear concerning the former of them, the Council of Nice;
that, whatever it was in it self, when held, or, how much soever that of
Franckfort following in the West (supposed opposite to it) might derogate from
the universality of it, yet that it was received, and admitted afterward for a
General Council in the Council of Florence, Sess. 5. Ferrar. even by all the
Western Provinces, as well as by the Eastern; nemine contradicente; and
therefore, since such reception at least, obliges as General. But the
acceptance of the Decrees thereof by the West, long before the Council of
Florence, appears by the general Practices there, for many Ages before the rise
of Luther, in the same Veneration of Images with the other, (some stick not to
say, greater). Yet higher, that the 8th Council, held, within a hundred years
after this Council, acknowledges and ratifieth this as the 7th Council, and
reiterates particularly the same Decree concerning Veneration of Images. See
Can. 3. thereof. -- Sacram Imaginem Domini nostri Jesu Christi aequo honor cum
libro Sanctorum Evangeliorum adorari decernimus. Dignum est enim, ut secundum
congruentiam rationis and antiquissimam traditionem propter honorem, qui ad
principalia ipsa refertur, etiam derivativae Imagines honorentur, ut Sanctorum
Evangeliorum sacer liber: atque typus pretiosae Crucis. The 8th Council, I say,
whether the Photian, or Anti-Photian, Council be taken for it (of which see
what Dr. Stillingfl. says in Romans Idol.. 10.) for both of these confirmed
this, as the 7th General Council. See Council. Photian. Act. 5. apud Baron. An.
Dom. 879.

2ly, Clear, that as the Grecian Bishops, and the Patriarch of Constantinople
were present there, so all the other Oriental Patriarchs, hindered by the
Saracene Persecution from coming in person, sent their Legates thither, and
with this Council concurred in their Judgment. For, thus says the Epistle of
the Palestine Hermites recited in the Council Act. 3. that from John and
Thomas, who were delegated to the Council from those parts, habebitis trium
Apostolicorum thronorum concordem sententiam, and concinentem concordiam, qui
-- illam [Synodum] quam septimam dicunt [ i. e. under Constantinus Copronymus
against Images] non modo non recipient, sed uno animo and voce detestantur.
Again, the Declaration concerning Images, recited in this Letter, accordingly
is taken to be the sentiment of the Oriental Patriarchs, and not of these
Hermites only, by the whole Council, as is seen by their several speeches upon
it. Benedictus est Deus, quod Orientis Sanctissimi Praesules in confessione
adorationis Imaginum venerandarum consoni cum Adriano etc. inventi sunt. -- Cum
videam literas, quas ab Orientali Dioecesi Sanctissimi Archiepiscopi ad
Tharasium rescripserunt etc. Literis ab Orientalibus Archipraesulibus etc.
acquiesco: no notice being taken of the Hermites, which implies them in this
matter only to have bin these Prelate's Instruments. And so this Declaration
was taken to be by the Caroline Books, which urge some passages of this Letter
about Images, as sententiam fidei Theodori Archiepiscopi Hierosolymitani. Of
which Theodore also Adrian in his Answer to these Books testifies thus (2. Cap.
Act. 3.) Iste cum caeteris praecipuis Patriarchis, viz. Cosma Alexandriae, and
Theodoro alio Antiochiae dudum Praedecessori nostro -- Paulo Papae miserunt
propriam eorum rectae fidei Synodicam. To which may be added the Accusation,
which the Nicene Council brings against the former Council under Constantinus
Copronymus for this defect therein ( Act. 6. Tom. 1.) Quinetiam neque
concordantes sibi habuit Orientis Patriarchas, Alexandrinum, inquam,
Antiochenum, and Urbis Sanctae summos Pontifices etc. With what boldness is
this done, and how easily retorted, if themselves at the same time were in the
same default? To conclude; this Seventh Council is also found to be afterward
confirmed by the Legates of these Eastern Patriarchs in the 8th General Council
(take whether you will, the Photian pretended by the Greeks, or the
Anti-Photian affirmed by the Latins) which see in their Acts.

3ly, Manifest also, that this Council was subscribed likewise, as to its
Definitions about Images, by the Roman Legates; and confirmed, and afterward
also defended, against the Capitulare, by Adrian the then Bishop of Rome (this
is out of dispute on all sides): and by him not standing alone, but adhered to
by some part at least of the Western Church; as Baronius observes out of
Hinchmar. Episcopus Rhemensis contr. Laudun. Episc. 20. c.; and as may be
collected from the Decrees of several Western Councils before this of Nice,
recited before. 22. whereas there met in that of Franckfort only the Bishops
from France and Germany (tho these in a great number) and some Bishops from the
North part of Italy such as were under the dominions of Carolus Magnus and
nearer to Franckfort. Neither was it confirmed by the Bishop of Rome, whose
consent, as necessary, Charles's Books urge against that of Nice: Not confirmed
by him, I say, as to this point, supposing this Synod decreed any thing against
Veneration of Images: or concerning the Error of Nice in such their Decree. Of
which (as has bin said before) this may be a sufficient proof, that the same
Pope owned the Confirmation of the Decree of Nice for Images, defended it
against the Capitulare, and is inveighed against by the Episcopal Meeting at
Paris under Ludovicus Pius twenty four years after Franckfort, for his
justifying, and weakly maintaining the Nicene Decree; whenas of his later
confirmation of a contrary Decree of Franckfort, had there bin any such thing,
which also could not be unknown to them, they might have made great advantage.
This of Franckfort therefore, being supposed to have made a contrary Decree
concerning Image Worship to that of Nice (as indeed it has not) yet being
herein unconfirmed, nay dissented-from by the Occidental Patriarch, and all the
Oriental, by part of the Western Prelacy also then, and by the whole Western
Clergy since, who in later Ages have received the other as General, can no way
stand in competition with that of Nice confirmed by all the Patriarchs; and, in
later Ages at least, received as General by all the Western, as well as
Eastern, Clergy; nor can we rationally doubt, to which of these we owe
Obedience.

Nice concerning Image Worship (referred-to by Trent) as well Negative for
Latrin, as Affirmative for an inferior Veneration, such as is of other Holy
things; when therefore that superior honor is spoken of, either latria, or
dulia, that is given, and due, to the Exemplar, either the internal honor of
the Soul, or external of the Body; [for, note, that the Latria or Divine
Worship consists of both, and the external act receives its specification from
the internal, and not one, but both these we equally give to our Lord then
also, when one prays to him, not before, but without, an Image] I say, when
this superior Worship is spoken of, tho here, we uncover our heads, kneel, or
prostrate our selves before an Image, nay kiss also and embrace it, yet is the
Image neither objectum, nor ratio adorationis, but only adjunctum, as the
Cardinal, De Imag. 2. 1. 23 c. has it; a circumstantial, an inductive, a
motive thereof. For, the mental intention is supposed here wholly to direct (as
it can, at pleasure) these outward notes of Honor (some of which are
accidentally and concomitantly applied to the Image, but without any purpose of
honoring It thereby) to the Prototype; and the kiss or embracing of it, and
immediately touching it, is, in such worship, mentally no more intended to it,
than the kneeling, prostration, or prayers, which as it is, then, made before
it, so is made at another time, in the very same manner, and intention, to the
Prototype without it. Neither is such external Latrical worship imagined to be
conveyed to the person represented, either by, or through, the Image, as a
Medium to it; but the Image is a mere circumstance of such Adoration; as time,
and place, are, and any Creature of God may be; yet a circumstance much more
beneficial for reminding us of such duty, as also for rendering this service
more fixed and steady, or intense and devout, than others be. And in this sense
is the Synod of Metz to be understood? held An. Dom. 1549. after the beginning
of the Reformation, and in the suspension of that of Trent, for settling the new
Controversies in Religion: which concerning Images speaks plainly thus, Cap.
41. -- Non proponuntur Imagines in Ecclesia ut adoremus eas, and colamus, sed
ut per eas quid orare, colere, venerari and imitari debeamus, admoneamur. Non
ut colamus, i. e. cultu Latriae; [for certainly such a veneration and reverent
treatment of them as sacrorum vasorum these Fathers denied not.] In explication
of which they use this Simile as Vasquez, In 3. Thom. Disput. 108. c. 14. cites
their words out of another Copy that contains their Acts more at large than
that in Binius; -- Codicem oculis perlustrans, cum ad Venerabile and tremendum
Nomen Jesu devenerit, caput aperit, inclinatur, and suspirans in coelum oculos
attollit [so do Protestants] and ob id, omni reprehensione, and Idololatriae
suspicione caret, siquidem non literas etc. sic honorat, sed cogitatione and
veneratione mentis suae ad eum honorandum and adorandum rapitur, cujus memoriam
hae literae ei suggerunt. Cur ergo superstitionis aut Idololatriae reus
peragitur, qui ante imaginem crucifixi Domini caput aperit, aut procumbens
adorat, cum nequaquam imaginem putet adorandam [i. e. latria, the Cult both
exterior, and interior, he then gives to our Lord, just so, as, before, the
other did at the sight of his name] sed cum cord veneretur and adoret, quem
prose natum, passum etc, recordatur. But here it is not denied, That the same
numerical external mark of honor may truly be said to respect, and may be
lawfully exhibited at the same time to, both the Image, and the Exemplar, if
here accompanied with a double internal intention; one higher, respecting the
Prototype, and another inferior, respecting the Image: As the same putting of
our hat, and being uncovered, may be performed at once to the Prince, and to
our Father attending upon him: but, doubtless, with a much different internal
honor. So was the external bowing of the people but one, when they are said to
have therewith worshipped God, and the King. 1. Chron. 29.20. And of such
outward Cult it is truly said, -- Eundem esse posse in Imaginem, and Exemplar.
This of the Councils touching this Subject.

Bellarm. De Imag. l. 2. c. 22.. 4. (and so the uncurious may, omitting what
follows, pass on to. 40.); yet the later Schoolmen, to whose hands the Acts of
this second Nicene Council have come, have generally conformed to its language,
and have taken much pains also to reduce the varii modi loquendi of their
Predecessors to the same intention and meaning; who are supposed not to have
seen this Decree, because they have not mentioned it; and who, upon a
Philosophical Maxim, That idem est motus in Imaginem and Exemplar, have used
expressions somewhat different from it, and apt to be mistaken. Estius faith of
St. Thomas, In 3. Sent. Did. 9.. 3. Probabile est S. Thomam hanc Concilii
definitionem non legisse, quam si legisset, aliter de Cruris, and Imaginis
Christi adoratione fuisset locutus. And Bellarm. De Imag. c. 22. Valde
credibile S. Thomam and alios Doctores Scholasticos illius temporis non vidisse
Nicaenam Synodum secundam, neque octavam Synodum Generalem, neque Epistolam
Hadriani Papae pro defensione Synodi Nicaenae. Nam haec omnia longo tempore
latuerunt, and hoc nostro saeculo primum edita sunt. And, Ibid. he says since
these known: Cur ergo, quaeso, non loquimur, ut Patres nostri loquuntur? And
Vasquez, In 3. Thom. Disp. 109. c. 3. in vindication of St. Thomas, and other
former Schoolmen says; -- Nullus Scholasticorum sic loquitur: Imagini Christi,
aut Trinitatis, Latria [he means latria taken in its strict sense, for
submissio animi, or servitus in affectu consistens] tribuenda est. And, -- Qui
diceret, se exhibere latriam Imaginibus, quae est divina servitus in affectu
solo consistens, concederet eo ipso, se Imaginibus tanquam Diis servire. It is
true, that Vasquez himself uses this language; Eadem adoratione cum exemplari
Imagines esse adorandas: but he declares his meaning to be eadem adoratione i.
e. externa, as inclination corporis, genuflectione, quam exhibemus etiam
Exemplari in Latria; but not, eadem adoratione interna, i. e. submissione animi
and servitute, tanquam bono summo and excellentissimo: which internal
submission is the Latria proper only to God; but the external notes we use
thereof are common also to others. Now, to give any such interior Adoration i.
e. submissio animi tanquam excellentiori, tho the lowest or least that can be
imagined, to an inanimate picture, Vasquez, in defense of his Opinion, says
very truly, and so must all Catholics with him, that any such person agit
perverse, and abjecto animo; and may rightly be called either Iconolatra i^ be
yielding such submission to an Image tanquam bono summo and excellentissimo; or
Iconodulos, if as se excellentiori. But herein is Vasquez censured by others,
as mistaken; that he thought all inferior honor and veneration to be
necessarily such a submission tanquam, excellentiori. Meanwhile a late
Protestant Writer, Stillingfl. Romans Idol. c. 1.. 11. p. 104. has very
uncandidly made use of this passage of his to show Catholics confessed to be
Idolaters, whether they say, they give a supreme, or whether an inferior,
worship to Images, even by the testimony of their own Writers. For (as he
urges) Bellarmin says; to give Latria, or the supreme and self same Worship
that is given God to an Image is Idolatry (which, as said by Bellarmin, so is
granted): and then Vasquez (he citing this Passage) says, that he who gives an
inferior worship distinct from the Prototype to an Image is also an Idolater.
Thus that Author. But, for this later, Vasquez first restrains the inferior
worship, he speaks of, submissio animi, and servitus tanquam excellentiori;
and, next, says, that such a one is either Iconolatra, i. e. if he gives it to
such a thing as superlatively excellent; [but then such worship given to an
Image tanquam bono summo and excellentissimo cannot rightly be called an
inferior worship; of if called so, Catholics in such a sense renounce it and
grant it to be Idolatry.] Or he is Iconodulos: which later is most true, and,
as said by Vasquez, so will not be denied by Bellarmin, or any other rational
person. Thus then a supreme worship given to Images (according to Bellarmin) is
Idolatry: and an inferior Worship also given to Images, (according to a sense
Vasquez gives of it) is Iconolatry. Whilst meanwhile an inferior worship given
to Images in the Catholick's sense thereof neither exhibited to them ut bono
excellentissimo, nor excellentiori se, is very innocent and lawful. Of which
sense of Vasquez thus Cardinal Lugo, De Incarnatione Disp. 36.. 3. n. 36. Non
possumus prudenter concipere allam prorsus adorationem respectu Imaginis, qua
submittimus nos illi, praeferentes illam nobis: hoc enim esset stultum
mendacium, quia absolute loquendo meliores sumus nos, quam Imago S. Petri. Ergo
prudenter operando debemus nosmetipsos praeferre imagini tanquam digniores and
excellentiores. Nemo ergo potest dicere, quod adoratio Imagnis includat etiam
talem internam submissionem; nec de hoc potest esse rationabilis controversia.
But then: by the inferior honor or worship, not only external, but interior
also, that is allowed by Catholics to Images, is not meant any such
submission, as to a thing more excellent than the honourer, as Vasquez
supposes; but only a certain internal esteem of it, as well as external
respect to it, for some nearer relation it has (as a Picture has by its
similitude) to some Person, that is honored by us as more excellent than our
selves; which our esteem of the Exemplar we have a mind to show, not to the
Picture, but to others, or also to the Exemplar it self, by the external
gestures and civilities we perform to, or before, his Image: of which I shall
speak more particularly below. 49. without which internal intention of showing
such exterior reverent treatment of such Image, the external treatment it self
seems insignificant. And therefore Sunrez thus censures this Opinion: That thus
no honor at all is indeed allowed to the Image, the external note signifying
nothing, when standing single, and no internal intention of reverence or esteem
at all to the same thing accompanying it. See him in 3. Thom. Disp. 54.. 5. Si
interna intentio cultus non cadit in imaginem, sed sola actio exterior [or
externa nota cultus] circa illam versatur, ex intention colendi Exemplar, ex
ea non solum sequitur, Imagines minus coli, quam Exemplaria, sed etiam
sequitur, illas non coli. Thus Vasquez and St. Thomas, and other ancient
Schoolmen, whose expressions he defends, according to the sense he gives them,
in seeming to say so much beyond the Conciliary Decree of Nice, are thought to
say nothing at all; or less, than must be said to justify the truth of this
Decree viz. That there is not only an empty external note, but also some
interior and real honor and respect due, and given to, Images.

Thorndike; 'To say that the Image of our Lord is to be honored as He is, is
perfect Idolatry. But he, who believes the Son to be of the Father's substance
[as all the Schoolmen do] and his Picture to be his Picture [as all mankind do]
cannot say so if he be in his wits. Thus Mr. Thorndike. Who then can easily
believe such a thing of them, who are granted to acknowledge neither any
peculiar Divine Presence to such Image; nor any other virtue in it: and
expressly grant, that he who worships our Lord with latria before an Image, does
no more give such honor to the Image, than he, that worships the King with
Regal Honor, gives the same regal honor also to his Clothes, to his Robes, to
his Purple, to his Crown that he wears (a Simile often used, yet not devised by
the Schoolmen, but borrowed from St. Epiphanius, In Anchorato, and from St.
Austine, De Verbis Domini Sermon. 58.): Or no more than he, that bows to our Lord
at the naming of Jesus, or at the producing, or reading the Gospels, worships
in the same manner the Book of the Gospels; or the Letters or Syllables of the
Name Jesus. For, these Schoolmen hold Images and those other things capable of
the worship of the Exemplar only in the same manner: If Images of our Lord
capable of Latria, so the rest: See Vasquez, Ibid. Disp. 108. c. 11. The Title
of which Chapter is, -- Eodem modo, atque Imagines, Nomen Jesus, and alias res
sacras [he names Crucem, vasa sacra, librum Evangeliorum etc.] esse adorandas.
And see Suarez Disp. 54.. 6. And Lugo, De Incarnat. Disp. 36.. 5 saying the
same. When Bellarmin speaks of giving to our Lord before an Image the cultus
Latriae, De Imag. 2. l. c. 23. he says the Image here is neither suppositum
quod adoratur, nor ratio adorationis, sed quiddam adjunctum, and shares no more
of this Honor, than the Kings garments do of that we give the King; and he
says, that such Worship is applied to the Image only improprie and per
accidens, De Imag. 2. l. 21. c. and then again, to bring off this expression,
he says, -- Quod non dicitur nisi improprie, simpliciter potest negari. And
for his Simile, may not one truly say, that in the honor given by him to the
Royal Majesty sitting in his Robes, the Robes have no share at all? Vasquez, as
we have seen, before. 37. allows to the Image only an external Note of Honor,
but no internal Cult at all, proper, or improper, supreme or inferior; i. e.
(say others) allows them no honor, or adoration at all, which they say cannot
be gone in any manner by external gestures only, without any internal
intention. But then, when they speak of an internal respect or honor given to
the Image, as the proper object of such respect for the Exemplar's sake, not
only any latria, but any submissio animi tanquam excellentiori is herein
desclaimed: of which says Lugo, non potest esse rationalis controversia.

[Non latriam], it seems unjust, against this, to make use of some
contradictions and inconsistencies (were there any such) of some private
Authors. To them we may say, as long ago Cardinal Bellarmin, De Imag. 2. l. 22.
c. -- Cur, quaeso, non loquimur, ut Patres nostri loquuntur? And, if it be
lawful to desert not only the expressions, but opinion of St. Thomas in other
points, why not in this? Nor, from such expressions, can any have the least
pretense either to accuse the Roman Church of Idolatry, or reject its
Communion. This, of some School-Expressions. And this in 4th place from. 16. of
the Roman Church's not acknowledging any either Latria, or Dulia to Images.

5ly, Neither does she give to them any external sign of honor, which the
Divine Majesty has appropriated to his own service and worship. They sacrifice
not to them, as all former both Heathen and Jewish Idolatry did. And, as for
any other signs of respect given them, they have bin already cleared before.
31, 32.

Thorndike's Argument set down below,. 48. For that so she can be no true
Church, neither the whole, nor any true part of the Church Catholic (which, if
it cannot maintain any Heresy, can much less Idolatry. See Annotation on Dr.
Stillingst. p. 73. l. 13.) Yet Protestants do not deny the Roman to be a true
Church. And, should they, they would destroy a legal Mission or Ordination of
their own Church-Ministry or Clergy received from this Church.

IV. The third Head proposed being thus dispatched, IV.. 42.
What Cult or Worship, practiced by all former Idolaters, Catholics do deny to
Images; I come next to show you, what they allow.

1. First then, they maintain a very beneficial use of the Images of our Lord
or his Saints set before us when we pray; and especially, when subject to
distraction of thoughts in Prayer, that the sight thereof may serve to heighten
our devotion, and the better confine our meditation on the Person, or sacred
Story represented, and hinder our Imaginations from straying abroad; may serve
to excite in us acts of Honor, Love, Affection to such Persons, a grateful
remembrance and imitation of them, of their Heroic Virtues, and valiant
Sufferings, a passionate representing to them (the Persons I mean, nor the
Pictures) our present condition, and imploring their aid and intercessions etc.
From the more frequent practice of which acts, occasioned by these sensible
memorials of our Blessed Lord, and his Saints, Catholics experience so great
an advantage in raising their affections, as that they are not easily by the
groundless clamours of Idolatry (or of the peril thereof to Christians, wherein
Heathens are made so subtle) to be frighted out of them: Nor the Church moved
at all to restrain the good use that is made of, and fruit received by, them.

2ly, Catholics do maintain a certain honor, reverence, or veneration properly
due and lawful to be given to the Images or Pictures of our Lord or his Saints,
and that per, in, or secundum, se, to the Image in it self, and as the proper
object of such Honor or Veneration.

3. But 3ly this only a relative honor and not given propter se;. 44. n. 1.
but such, whereby, out of the love and honor we owe to the Prototype, we have
an affection also to those things that any way appertain to it, to any Relick,
Representation, Memorial of it. To understand which (if it needs any further
explaining) we may observe with Suarez, In 3. Thom. 7.25. Disp. 54.. 4, 5. That
to, or in the presence of, an Image a twofold Adoration may be performed. 1.
Either an Adoration both internal and external (the external still following
the intention of the mind) only to the Exemplar, and none at all to the Image
(the Image or Picture serving only as a Motive thereto, or a Remembrancer
thereof) of which we have spoken before,. 36.2. Or an internal and external
Adoration, such as that we here speak of, directed only to the Image (not the
Exemplar) as its proper object; tho the honor we owe to the Exemplar be the
sole motive thereof: so that, if it be done to an Image of our Lord, it
proceeds originally from the honor we owe unto our Lord, tho it is not that
Honor: Or also, one and the same external gesture subservient to a double
internal intention; one, directed to the Figure; the other, to the thing
designed by it. Now both these Worships are by the Church maintained lawful,
and this later in the second Nicene Council vindicated, against those who, tho
they were no Iconoclasts, but allowing the use of Images, yet denied it lawful
to pray, or bow before, to kiss, or embrace, or to use lights, perfumes, or
show any other signs of honor to, them (therefore these called by Epiphanius,
2. Conc. Nic. Act. 6. in fin. (...), and (...) semi-pravi, and falso very)
whenas yet those very persons that denied these lawful to Images, performed the
like Ceremonies to the Cross, the Book of the Gospels, and other sacred
Utensils. Against these therefore it concerned the Church to vindicate such
long-practiced Salutation, or honorary Adoration of Images. Which also was
defended in that Council, by the like civil Honors and Ceremonies relating to
the Exemplar by Christians without scruple performed to the Emperors waxen
Effigies or Statues; brought into Cities for their doing homage, where the
Emperor could not appear, and receive it in person. -- Si enim (says a Bishop
there, 2. Conc. Nic. Act. 1.) Regum laureata and Iconas missas ad civitates vel
regiones obvii adeunt populi cum Cereis. and Incensis, non cera perfusam
tabulam, sed Imperatorem honorantes; Quanto magis oportet in Ecclesiis etc. And
Act 2. Epist. Adriani ad Imperat. such like words are quoted out of St.
Chrysostom, Sermon. in 5. fer. Paschae. -- Neque enim quando Imperials vultus
and Imagines in civitates introducuntur and obviant Judices and plebes cum
laudibus tabulam honorant, vel supereffusam cera scripturam [or sculpturam] sed
figuram Imperatoris: To which I may add, that of Athanasius, Contra Arrianos
Sermon. 4. mentioned before, -- Qui adorat imaginem Regis in illa adorat ipsum
Regem: quippe cum ipsa Imago nihil aliud sit quam Regis forma ac species: and
also the civil honors, that are, in relation to the Prince, tho in his absence,
given in the Chamber of Presence, and, to the Chair of State. And, see in
Nazianzen, in Julian. Orat. 1. the advantage Julian thought to make of such
Honor given to Princes for an artificial inducement of Christians to commit
Idolatry by representing some of his Heathen Gods in the same table with the
Emperor, that so they might either worship both, and so pass for Idolaters; or
neither, and so suffer for disloyalty. And the heavy punishment inflicted, and
greater threatened by Theodosius the Emperor to the Citizens of Antioch for
their casting down the Empresse's Statue there, is well known (of which St.
Ambrose, in Psalm. 118. Sermon. 10. -- Qui statuam contempserit Imperatoris,
Imperatori utique fecisse videtur injuriam, and qui imaginem Imperatoris
coronat, illum honorat, cujus imaginem coronavit.) And, if, to show their hate
to a person, people do, as it were naturally, abuse their statues; and
Magistrates that cannot reach the Persons, do execution on great Delinquents in
effigy, vnco impacto ad latrinas, ad Gemonias, it is as natural for those who
love the person, to honor them.

4ly, Catholics affirm, that there is no prohibition in any part of the first
(or call it,. 44. n. 2.
if you please the second) Commandment of either of these two, 1. the making
and use; or 2. such veneration, as is here asserted, of the Images of our Lord
and his Saints. The words are these, Non habebis Deos alienos coram me. Non
facies tibi sculptiple, neque omnem similitudineme, quae est in coelo desuper,
and quae in terra deorsum etc. Non adorabis ea, neque coals. Ego sum Dominus
Deus tuus, sortis, zelotes. Where being prohibited in the first part to have
(or, if you will, to worship) any God save the true, we are consequetly much
more prohibited to have to such an end, or to worship, any similitude or Image
of them; the worship of which is still for the sake of that it represents: and
therefore St. Austine, Quaest. in Exodus 71. concludes all but one precept, the
later part explaining the former, -- Non erunt tibi Dii alii praeter me: Hoc
ipsum (says he) perfectius explicatur, cum prohibentut colenda figmenta. And,
-- Quo pertinet, non facies tibi Idolum, nisi ad id quod dictum est, non erunt
tibi Dii alii praeter me. Now these words Non adorabis ea, neque coals, or
servies, cannot be understood of any veneration or reverence whatever given to
any Image whatever (as some do enlarge it) for many reasons.

1. Because there will seem the same reason of extracting, from the Non facies
tibi in the Text, the not making or having any such Images, in any sense, or to
any end, whatever. But the making and use of them Protestants allow; and the
Jews, under the Law, practiced: Solomon making many figures in the Temple, for
which he had no command; and God himself also, after he had given them this
Precept, commanded several Images or Similitudes to be made, as the Cherubims
joined to the Ark (to which Solomon added two more much larger before it) and
afterward the Brazen Serpent, an eminent Type of the Crucifix; tho this
foreseen, that it would afterward be abused to Idolatry. Which command shows,
that if any making of Images was prohibited to the Jews (as some Catholics
affirm) yet, that thus far this Precept is not to be accounted Natural, or
Moral, but only Ceremonial (as those Catholics also limit it) may be gathered
from the Divine Dispensation therewith, in some particular counter-commands for
the making them, so soon after he had given it. Of this matter thus Mr.
Thorndike, Just Weights, c. 19. p. 126. 'It is far more reasonable to say, That
the Cherubims, the brazen Serpent, the Bulls, and other Images in Solomon's
Temple, were no breaches of it, than to say, That God did dispense with his own
Precept in those cases, having no appearance of any dispensation in the
Scripture, in which the Precept and the seeming breach are both recorded. But
it is manifest, that the Jews allow some kind of Imagery. And it is manifest,
that the public Authority of that Nation, or Religion, could never dispense in
that which God's Law had prohibited.

2ly, Because the worshipping or serving in this Precept, which God challenges
only to himself, and becomes jealous, as he says, if communicated to any
others, must be extended to other things besides Images and the likenesses of
things, even to all the Creatures themselves: To the Host of Heaven (See Deuteronomy.
4.14.19. where this Precept being delivered more at large these are joined with
the Sculptiles.) To any sacred things also, to Gideon's Ephod, to the Egyptians
living Ox; to the Emperors and Potentates of the Earth; the Deifying of whom
was a great part of ancient Idolatry; and rather to those things the more,
which, among the Creatures, are the more dignified, and so may sooner provoke
the Lord to jealousy, and which things indeed are the principal object of all
such worship, and the likeness of them honored only at the second hand for
their sake. This then supposed, both these seem very unreasonable; either to
say, this Precept forbids any worship whatever to be given to any Creature: or
that it forbids only a Latria, the giving supreme or divine Worship to any
other thing, but indeed prohibites meanwhile the giving any Worship at all
whatever to Images: Especially, when the temptation to Idolotry is more
dangerous, where the object thereof is more excellent; and when neither the
practice of the Heathen, nor Jewish, Idolatry was so only addicted to Images,
but that it extended to other Creatures; and those that were amongst these the
more glorious; (therefore also was the place of the Body of Moses deceased
concealed from the Israelites:) and, again, when the self same Worship or
Veneration ( i. e. for the relation things have to another thing that is
honored by us) which, if given to Images, is said to break this Precept, yet
is allowed to be safely given to other holy things, upon such relation, without
any violation of this Precept. For, I suppose, those who make any Veneration of
Images a breach of this Law, do not so any veneration or reverence given to
sacred things. Or, if they do, the Adorate scabellum Psalm. 98. and Moses's
putting off his shoe because the ground was holy, Exodus 3.5. Jos. 5.15 Genesis
28.16, 17, 18. do warrant the contrary. And venerabantur quondam Judaer Sancta
Sanctorum (says St. Jerome, Epist. 17. Ad Marcellam.) from which he inferrs,
Nonne tibi venerabilius videtur Sepulchrum Domini? Yet was the Ark also, as
well as the Images of the Cherubims, liable to be adored with such a kind of
Worship, as might be flat Idolatry.

It is most true then, and willingly conceded to those who, I know not to what
end, do press it, that if God declares, that any worship whatever given to an
Image is Idolatry, no distinction about worship can save us from it; but, as
you see, most reasonably still maintained, that God in this Precept, or
elsewhere in the Scriptures, has declared no such thing. And, were the sense
of Scriptures here disputable, yet from whom ought we to learn it rather, than
from the Church; which we have showed in her supreme Councils to expound them
otherwise? Lastly, supposing all Veneration of Images prohibited in the second
Commandment, yet if the Veneration practiced against the Precept be such only,
as is lawfully given to other Creatures, as to sacred things, the
misapplication thereof to Images will be a fault, or a sin, because
transgressing some part of God's Law: but not therefore the sin of Idolatry;
because no honor is done to it, but what may be lawfully done to the Creatures,
and those, as to their substance, the meanest; and so no Divine Jealousy raised
thereby.

1st, the making or use of any Images. 2ly, thus far they restrain and contract
this Precept to be a ceremonial and temporal one, belonging only to the Jews, a
Nation, and in an Age, much inclined to Idolatry: 3ly, grant this Precept not
prohibiting the Jews the Adoration of other things sacred, the Temple, the Ark,
etc. from which they collect, that the prohibition therein solely of
Image Worship has nothing of Morality in it: by all which their opinion is
rendered useless to Protestants, who urge it. 4ly, They labor here under
several difficulties: as not only God's commanding the Images of the Cherubims,
and afterward of a Serpent, to be made, but Solomon's voluntary framing several
figures, as without command, so without trespassing any: and their answers to
them seem to some other Catholics not satisfactory.

This concerning no prohibition in the first or second Commandment either of
the making, or of the Veneration of Images, such as is maintained by
Catholics, viz. only a relative honor, and though given per, in, or secundum
se to the Image, yet not propter se; but such, whereby, out of the love and
honor we owe to the Prototype, we have an affection and respect also to those
things that any way appertain to it.

5ly, But, then, this respect or esteem of it is not affirmed the very same
that we exhibit to the Prototype it self; nor any such honor, as implies out
submission to it; or it a thing held more excellent, than our selves. No
inanimate thing being, in reason, capable of such a subjection and homage from
Man; or an inferior from the superior. But such an inferior reverence and
respect, as is given to other relatives and appertinents of Holy Persons, or
Instruments of Religion: Such as is given Typo venerandae Crucis, and Sanctis
Evangeliis, and reliquis Sacris, as the Second Nicene Council (referred-to by
that of Trent) declare their meaning; and so again the 8th General Council cap.
3. recited before,. 20, etc. Such as is given to the Holy Cross, to the Book of
Holy Scriptures, to the Sacred Utensils, Churches, Altars, lastly to the Holy
Name of JESUS: for, as I have showed, both the Councils and Schoolmen do
compare and equal all these; and defend that of Images by the other, as to the
same kind of honor, cult, or reverence given them: tho this reverence may be
gradually different, as the Person represented is more excellent; or the thing,
so honored for his sake, more nearly relating to him.

Of these thus Bellarmin, De Imag. l. 2. c. 21. Non debetur Imagini Honor qui
debetur Deo, sed minor. Non asserimus eundem honorem, sed aliquem honorem
deberi Imagini. Again, Ibid. c. 19. Imago cum sit res inanimata, and sensus ac
rationis expers, non est honoris capax propter se: and ideo Imagines non
honorantur absolute, sed relative ad Prototypum. Qui honor transit ad Exemplar
mediate and quasi consequenter: nam qui honorat imaginem alicujus sine dubio
honorat propter eum cujus est Imago, Ibid. c. 21. And. Imagines venerandae eo
modo quo veneramur Evangelia, and sacra vasa.

6ly, A Veneration or Reverence due to Holy things as the ancient Opposers of
Nice did, so the soberer sort of Protestants do willingly, acknowledge.

To Bellarmin, urging, That Judaei solebant, prostrati ad terram, venerari
imagines Cherubim, Bishop Andrews answers, Resp. ad Apol. c. 8. p. 204. At
Cherubim etc. non adorarunt. Nam veneratos esse eos Sanctum Sanctorum non
dubitamus, qui and ipsi Templa veneramur: Sed ad Adorationem nimis angusta
venerandi vox. And Cap. 1. p. 35. Rex adorationem Reliquiarum reprehendit, non
Venerationem. And p. 50. Tandem autem eo forte recidet ut non alium eis honorem
congruere dicturus sit, quam libro Evangelii vel vasis Sacramentorum: De quo
neque nos habebit valde repugnantes. Thus He. But, if that Veneration of the
Images of the Cherubim be allowed, which he yields of the Temple, no more is by
Bellarmin or Catholics desired. But, then, for the term Adoration or
Incurvation: the Scripture uses this term for Scabellum pedum twice, and for
Templum, and Montem Sanctum too; See Psalm. 98.5 Adorate Scabellum: And ver. 9.
and Psalm. 131.7. and Psalm. 5.8. Or, if in all these by reason of a Prefix (...)
before the word, they are to be translated ad Scabellum, ad Templum, incurvate
vos Templo, or ad Templum, yet the Scripture uses the same mode of expression
for Abraham's worshipping of the Sons of Heth, and Jacob of Pharaoh (where is
the same Article (...) too, and as much reason for translating ad filios Heth,
as ad Scabellum, or ad Templum:) I say in these the word Adorare is used and
applied to them notwithstanding Non added in the second Commandment to the very
same Hebrew word, that is used in the other, Exodus 20. Non adorabis ea, neque
coals, that is, non adorabis, neither any thing, nor the Image or Similitude of
any thing, Sun, Moon, or Stars, in Heaven or in Earth. This Abraham adoravit
filios Heth must force the Bishop not to restrain the word always to the
Supreme, or Divine Worship. And then, Adorare being taken sometimes for
venerari as it runs adoravi filios Heth, so it may also adorate Scabellum, and
Templum, without an Ad; and he may safely say, if Templa veneramur, so Templa
adoramus; both signifying the same inferior worship or honor. But, however,
Veneration of Temples, and other holy things, and, if I mistake him not, of the
Cherubims, Bishop Andrews allows. Thus he also elsewhere, Sermon. on Phil. 2.10.
p. 478. of the Reverence due to the Holy Name of JESUS. 'He is exalted (says
he) to whose Person knees do bow; but, to whose Name only, much more. And, --
His Name he left behind to us, that we may show, by our reverence and respect
to it, how much we esteem him; how true the Psalm shall be, Holy and reverend
is his Name. Look to the Text then; and let no man persuade you, but that God
requires a reverent carriage, even of the Body it self: And namely, this
service of the Knee; And that, to his Son's Name. Do it to the sense; have mind
on him that is named, [there is the relative honor of it] and do his Name the
honor, and spare not. The same he says there also of the Holy Mysteries in the
Eucharist. 'There are (says he, wondering at it) that forbear to do it at his
Name: Nay at the Holy Mysteries themselves: Where his Name is (I am sure) and
more than his Name, even the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. Thus He.

Again: Bishop White against Fisher, p. 224. says, -- 'Religious Adoration may
be founded on some certain kinds of Union, 1. Personal, 2 Substantial, or 3
lastly Causal, relative, or accidental; to wit, when by divine ordination
things created are made instruments, messengers, signs, or receptacles of
divine grace, as the holy Sacraments, and the Word and Gospel, and the
Ministers of the Church etc. Christ himself is present, assistant, and
operative, in and by these instruments, and has commanded reverence to be used
toward them; accounting the love, faith, and honor which are yielded to his
created Word, to be love, faith, and honor to himself. And before p. 219. Upon
the relative union also between the King and his Image, showed by F. Fisher out
of St. Athanasius, Contra Arrianos Sermon. 4. Upon which that Father there
concludes; Qui igitur adorat imaginem, in illa adorat ipsum Regem, quia cum
ipsa imago nihil aliud sit quam Regis forma ac species, the Bishop grants, --
'That the Images of Kings sometimes (says he) not always, in civil use, and
custom, not in Religion, may be taken, and reverenced for the principal. [I
suppose then in civil use and custom, not in religious, so may our Lord's
Image too, sometimes. And then, why not at any time, either his or the King's?]
De Sanctorum Reliquiis and Imaginibus etc. (says Spalatensis, Ostensio Errorum
Suarez, cap. 2.) cultum in his distinguo, ac Venerationem: Humanum neque Rex,
neque Orthodoxi negabunt; religiosum vero and divinum omnino negandum esse
affirmo. And afterward distinguishing -- Excellentiam, qua a Deo fuerunt
supernaturaliter exaltati, and solam civilem excellentiam in ipsis, he says,
-- Honor eodem humano utramque excellentiam and divinam and humanam in homine
prosequimur: Religioso autem, hoc est divino, honor solum Deum prosequendum
esse arbitramur. [and as well might he, if he pleased, have distinguished a
Religious honor into Humanus and Divinus.] Bishop Mountague, in his Appeal to
Caesar, chap. 21. says; 'That no Religious Honor or Worship is to be given to
Images; but yet, -- That all Reverence simply cannot be abstracted from them.
'And can a man (says he there) have the true Representation of his Prince,
Patrons, etc. without awe, respect, regard, love, reverence, moved by aspect,
and wrought in him? I profess my imperfection, or what they will call it, it is
so with me. And quotes this out of Junius in his Animadversions upon Bellarmin,
De Imaginibus; -- Hoc nemo nostrum dicit, non esse colendas [Imagines] nec ullo
modo. Suo modo coli probamus, velut Imagines; at non religioso cultu, qui aut
superstitiosus est, aut impius. Nec cum aliorum scandalo, sive cultus
separatus, sive conjunctus cum eorum cultu intelligatur, quorum sunt Imagines.
Bishop White also of Images themselves speaks thus in the beginning of his
Discousse, p. 208. 'The Advocate of Imagery [Fisher] should first of all have
declared, what he understands by Worship of Images, whether Veneration only,
largely taken; or Adoration, properly so called. Veneration may signify
external regard and reverence of Pictures, such as is given to Churches, and
sacred Vessels, and to ornaments of sacred Places; and, according to this
notion, many have approved or tolerated Worship of Images, which deny
Adoration: And amongst the many here he means not only Papists but Protestants:
For there he quotes also this place of Junius for it; and, before him, cites
the Council of Nice, that we may see both agree. Some cult, honor, reverence we
see then here allowed as to other holy things, so to Images. As for our stiling
it a religious Cult we cannot hinder but that Protestants may take the word (of
which see enough before,. 16 etc.) as that Catholics dare not apply it so to
any thing save to God. Of the Equivocation that is in this, and many other
words not easily to be avoided, Mr. Thorndike says well, Epilog. 3. l. 30. c.
p. 353. where speaking of the term of Religious as applied to the honor of
Saints he says; 'Whether this Honor be Religious, or Civil nothing but
equivocation of words makes disputable. And, -- That all is to be imputed to
nothing but want of proper terms for that Honor, which Religion enjoines in
respect of God, and that relation which God has settled between the Church
Militant and Triumphant, being reasonably called Religious. -- And being
neither civil nor humane honor, but such as a Creature is capable of for
Religion's sake, and that relation which Religion setleth. Thus He. But that
then, when otherwise agreed, we may not fall out about words, tho this honor is
given to the Image not of a Statesman, but of an Holy Person, and to other
things because they are sacred and belonging to Religion, yet rather than the
propriety of two words shall separate us, let them, so as allowing it, freely
style and call it, if they please, a civil Veneration of the Name of JESUS, and
of the Eucharistical Mysteries, of the Images of our Lord, and his Mother, of
the Apostles, Martyrs, and other Saints. For indeed we are all spiritual
Fellow-citizens, Phil. 3.20. and our Religion a celestial (...) or
Commonwealth, and our Lord the Head of it, Heb. 12.22, 23.

Again, thus Mr. Thorndike, Just Weight, c. 19. p. 128. (according to his free
language in free times.) -- 'The Furniture and Utensils of the Church were
honored in the spotless times of the Church, as consecrated to God's service;
tho the honor of them being incapable of honor for themselves, was manifestly,
and without any scruple, the honor of God. But Images, so long as they were
used to no further intent, than the ornament of Churches, the remembrance of
holy Histories, and the raising of Devotion thereby (as at the first they were
used by the Church) [and so are still] came in the number [I add; and so ought
to receive the honor] of things consecrated to God's Service.

Lastly, thus Daille Traicte des Images. c. 7. in his Answer to St. Gregory's
forementioned Expression [ea qua dignum est veneratione] seems to allow some
Veneration to such things, so it be not cult, ou service religieuse. 'A certain
degree of respect and honor (says he) is due to all the Instruments of
Religion: as to the persons and things of the Church, to the Priests, to the
Chalices, to the sacred Bibles, which every one calls venerable, yet none
deferrs to them the religious service which those of the Roman Communion now
adays render to Images. See also Ibid. p. 340. 376. And Apol. des Eglis.
Reform. c. 10. One of his Answers to the Text Adorate Scabellum ( Psalm. 98.)
is; -- 'That this Adoration of the Ark was an inferior species of honor to the
Adoration of Latria, which is due to none but God. Thus He. This inferior
reverence then due to holy things let him allow to the Images of our Lord and
his Saints, and, for any further latria or religious service, he shall be
dispensed with. And here I may conclude with what a modern Controvertist (
Spencer, Scripture mistaken. p. 128.) writ not long since in debating the sense
of the Second Commandment, 'That what Worship soever a well-minded Protestant
should judge may be given to the Holy Name of JESUS, when he sees it either
printed in a Book, or engraven in a Stone, without all Superstition, or
Idolatry, or breach of the Second Commandment [I add, or what the Jews might
give to the Ark,] let him give the same to any Image of our Savior, and in the
same manner, or at least judge that the like may lawfully be given to it, and
no more in this point will be required of him to be esteemed conformable to the
Doctrine, and Practice of the Roman Church.

To the Testimonies of Protestants confessing a certain Reverence and Honor due
to Holy things might be added the Testimonies of the Fathers, and constant
Practice of the Church in all former times, and the several commands and
examples thereof occurring in the Scripture, Ye shall reverence my Sanctuary,
Lev. 19.30. and 26.2. And Adorate Scabellum pedum ejus, and that, quia sanctum
est, since both in the Hebrew are of the same Gender, Sanctum or Sanctus may
relate either to Scabellum, or Dominus; and the place where it was was called
Sanctum Sanctorum: Such things, I say, I might collect if I thought this were a
thing that would be much questioned, save by some late profane Sects, that cry
down also all Things and Persons sacred, the Clergy, and Churches.

I call those representing Holy Persons), Such Honors, for the external signs
thereof, have used to be in ancient times, and still are in the Roman, as also
Oriental, Churches, uncovering the head, bowing, kissing, embracing, lights,
perfumes, etc. As we see also, men place in their Closet, kiss, or embrace, the
Picture or Effigies of a person whom they dearly love, without any fear of
either Idololatria, or Idolodulia in such a Practice. Again, For the internal
intention joined with such outward gestures, this also non ullus cultus eorum
qui tribuuntur naturae intelligenti, as Bellarmin observes; or any such
submission of mind, as he that honors it acknowledges himself inferior to it;
which Vasquez therefore (taking internal Adoration in so strict sense) justly
rejects as unapplicable to any Image, or inanimate thing in what consideration
soever; but an inward esteem and value of them for some particular relation
they have to some other object more excellent than our selves; as also an
intention by the outward gestures we use to show, not to the Image to which we
perform them, but to any persons capable of understanding our action, the
Prototype, or others, the esteem we have of any thing so nearly belonging to
such a person.

F. Suarez thus expresses it, In 3. Thom. Disp. 54.. 5. Est Existimatio quaedam
Imaginis -- ut est similitudo ad personam sacram, or -- ut est quaedam res
habens relationem ad tale exemplar; Propter quam honor illi exhibetur non ea
intention, ut Ipsa illum percipiat [such cult belongs only to things
intelligent] sed solum ut convenienti and reverenti modo tractetur, juxta
existimationem, quae de illa haberi debet; atque adeo ut haec ipsa existimatio
ipsism actionibus significetur and ostendatur: Significatio autem haec, sicut
non fit propter Imaginem quae adoratur, ita neque fit ad ipsam, id est, ut ipsa
percipiat animum and intentionem adorantis; sed, hoc modo, ordinatur
significatio ad eum, propter quem fit adoratio, vel certe etiam ad alios, qui
adorationem vident [whereby such person would testify to them his honor of the
Prototype.] Unde per tale officium adorationis homo non ita se submittit
Imagini, ut profiteatur se inferiorem illa [which may remove Vasquez's scruple]
sed solum profitetur Imaginem pertinere, seu esse aliquid ejus, qui superior
and excellentior est. In which worship of the Image virtualiter exhibetur rei
intellectuali debitus cultus, quamvis in expressa and formali intention hoc
non habeatur. Thus Suarez, De Mysterio Incarnat. Disp. 36.. 3. n. 39. And Lugo
thus -- Animus exercendi exterius circa Imaginem ( dando ei superiorem locum,
honorifice eam tractando etc.) propter excellentiam Exemplaris, quam
repraesentat, eas actiones submissionis externae praestat, quas exercere
solemus circa excellentiores and dominos (sed non quod volumus significare,
quod interius existimemus Imaginem esse nobis superiorem vel dominum) quia
totus hic honor debetur Exemplari etiam in sua Imagine. This I have exhibited
at length out of these two judicious Schoolmen, to avoid many cavils about the
mode of this inferior worship and observance that is given to, and terminated
in, Images; as also, in other sacred things.

8ly Catholics contend; That it does not hence become necessary, that this
Existimation or external reverent Tractation of inanimate things, performed to
them in consideration of some other sacred or honorable person they appertain
to, should therefore be the same or equal, of all things that have any manner
of Relation to such Person; or, that the estimation of many such things,
circumstances considered, should be accompanied with any such external note of
respect or honor. So a Prince's Servant, a person much resembling him, a
Kinsman, a Friend, or Favorite, an Ambassador, his Chair of State, his Robes,
may all receive honor from us for the Prince's sake, yet not all an equal to
that we give the Prince; or one of them, to that we give to some other; or all
on the self same, but on a very different, account. And again, some other
things of a less valued relation to him receive no external mark of esteem at
all; or, not in so special a manner, as the former. The same case it is in
several things as they relate to God, (which, on many accounts, the whole
Creation does.) 1. First God, here, may be worshipped both with internal and
external supreme Adoration, bowing, kneeling, prostration etc. in the beholding
and contemplating, and so in the presence, of any of his Creatures, a Man, the
Sun, the Stars, or any other whatever: I see not how any rational man can deny
it. Yet exteriorly to do this in the sight of others, who may misinterpret our
intentions, and mistake the direction of our Worship, especially when the thing
is of a greater essential or substantial dignity before, or toward, which we
perform it; and which may be to us the occasion of it, it is not convenient.
And the same case it may possibly be in giving such Adoration before a Picture
or other sacred thing in a Country wholly given to Idolatry; and in whom the
light of Reason is so far extinguished, as that they worship Pictures for Gods.
The same case I say, in the incurring a fault, not of Idolatry, but of
Indiscretion. And perhaps this may be the reason of the rarer use of Pictures
in the first four Ages of the Church, when the Christain world was not as yet
so well cleansed from Heathenisme; not that the use of these was not then held
lawful, or also beneficial; but, that, for other considerations, not so
expedient. 2ly. We may also retain a certain esteem and value of the lowest of
God's Creatures, that is terminated in it; but for the Maker's sake; of a Fly,
an Ant etc, much more of the Sun. But here also we stand obliged to the
observing a decency; and not giving a scandal in any our external expressions
thereof, which are fitly reserved for other much more principal or special
Relatives. 3ly, Other things therefore there are of a more special relation and
connection to the prime Object of Honor and Adoration, as consecrated to God's
more immediate service, or some way representing or minding us of his presence:
Such are Churches, Altars, the consecrated Symbols of the Eucharist, the sacred
Utensils and Chalices, Holy Relics, Holy Cross, the Holy Name of JESUS, and in
the last place, sacred Images or Pictures; which I call sacred, tho some of
them be not consecrated, if they be such as represent and carry a similitude of
Sacred Persons, viz. of our Lord, or his Saints; the natural property of which
copies, being to bring into our mind and renew in us, the remembrance of their
Originals that are sacred, gives us a sufficient title to style them so too;
and the Church, having found a singular benefit in such an effect of them, has
frequently dedicated, consecrated and exposed, several of them in her public
places of worship for the same use; which adds also a further degree of
Reverence to those so dedicated.

Now, what those things punctually are, which are to be treated with such a
special reverence or esteem as due to them on the former account, this surely
ought to be left to the judgment and arbitration of the Church, and of our
Canonical Superiors, whose office it is to weigh the con-or inconveniences, the
decency or indecency thereof; and private persons may safely act herein
according to her declarations and directions. Neither, such external reverenc
being so required, may we withdraw it for fear of scandal, as in the former but
now mentioned, but we are to correspond to the Church's Constitutions in our
obedience; and those who take scandal are to endeavor to rectify their own
fault, not ours, in conforming themselves also to the same judgment; always
remembering that passage of St. Austine, Epist. 118. -- Si quid tota per orbem
frequentat Ecclesia, quin ita faciendum set disputare insolentissimae insaniae
est. If Images then, representing holy Persons and Stories, are numbered and
ranked among these things venerable, by the Church, i. e. by the most supreme
authority of its Councils; and the veneration of them there resolved (as has
bin showed. 12. etc.) we need no more thus bandy arguments pro and con, but
securely rest in an humble obedience, and leave the care of preventing or
remedying mistakes, and the considering of the just extent of the Second
Commandment and other Scriptures, to the same Authority.

England do to all deny it) as to Churches (nicknamed by some others
Steeple Houses) to Altars, to the Holy Name of JESUS, to the sacred Symbols of
our Lord's Body and Blood, tho they deny it to Images, are concerned, here, as
much as Catholics; 1. both to make a distinction between exhibiting such
reverence to these, and promiscuously doing this to any Creature, because that
all things also some way relate to God: as, between the reverence given to
God's Sanctuary, or to his Altars, and given to the Sun. Lev. 26.2. And again,
2. to distinguish the reverence they give to these from that superior honor
they give to those for whose sake they honor these; the reverence they give to
God's Sanctuary, from that they give to God himself. Neither may they produce
here any such arguments as current against the Veneration of Images, which will
confute their own practice as to Churches, Altars, the Holy Name of JESUS etc.
as some very unconsiderately do; and as will further appear, if we take that
which a late Writer has said concerning the reasonableness of worshipping the
Sun rather than an Image, and apply it to worshipping the Sun rather, than any
other sacred things, Churches, Altars, etc. such as Protestants also show
Reverence to.

Romans Idol. p. 69. against a Protestant uncovering his head, or showing any
reverence to a Church, to the Altar, or to the Holy Name of JESUS: or against
the Gallican Bishops that opposed Nice, bowing to, and incensing Churches,
Altars, the Gospel, the Holy Utensils, the Cross, etc: or the same may be
applied if you will against bowing to the King's Chair of State, or the
Emperor's Image. 'It seems (as he goes on there) much more reasonable for me to
worship God by prostrating my self to the Sun, or any of the heavenly Bodies,
nay to an Ant, or a Fly, than to a wooden Table, or to a Stone-building, or to
the leaves of a Book, or a few letters put together in a word, or to two sticks
across, or to a silver Chalice, or to a wooden Chair. For, in the other I see
great evidences of the power, and wisdom, and goodness of God, which may
suggest venerable apprehensions of God to my mind; whereas these can have
nothing worthy admiration, unless it be the skill of the Artificer. And I
cannot for my heart understand, why I may not as well, nay better, burn Incense
and say my Prayers to the Sun, having an intention only to honor the true God
by it, as to do both those, burn Frankincense and say my Prayers, in a Church,
or before the Altars, or a Cross [I say here before, because as Protestants
going into a Church or before an Altar to pray, yet do not pray to the Church,
or Altar; so neither do Catholics to an Image. And, as Protestants do not burn
Frankincense in a Church, that the Church or Altar may scent it; so neither
Catholics, that the Image.] I am sure the Sun has far more advantages than
any artificial Table, or a curious Structure can have, the beauty and influence
of it may inflame and warm ones devotion much more. If the danger be, that I am
more like to take the Sun for God, than a Church, a Table, or a Book; on that
account, that which deserves most honor should have least given it, and that
which deserves least should have most. Then,

After his own reasoning ended, Thus he may set the Heathen himself upon the
Protestant; as he there does, upon the Catholic. 'I (says the Heathen)
proceeding only upon such principles as these, that there is one supreme
infinite Being who makes use of some more illustrous Beings of the world to
communicate benefits to the rest, on which account I think my self bound to
testify the honor I owe to the supreme Deity by paying my due respects and
honor also in subordination to him, to those subservient and ministerial
instruments of his, am not afraid of what any Prelatist in the world can say
for my confutation. Nay I am tempted to laugh at their folly, and despise their
weakness, who plead for the Worship of God in, or before, a dull and rude heap
of stones, or frame of wood, and condemn me for honoring God in the Sun the
most noble part of the Creation. If they tell me, that the supreme God must
have a Worship proper to himself. Yes, I answer them in their own terms, I by
no means question it, and that is it, which is called [by them, and the
Fathers, See St. Austine, De Civ. Dei, l. 10. c. 1.] (...), which is reserved
to the supreme Deity, all that I give to the Sun is but (...), which deserves
an (...) because of its eminent usefulness. [But here the personated Heathen
mistakes a little: for, as the veneration of holy things is not by Protestants,
so neither that of Images by Catholics, called any (...), see before. 49. much
less do Catholics do the same things to an Image, which they do to God
himself, as this Author tells his Reader a little after.] 'If they say, I make
the Sun God by giving it religious worship: no more, than they do Temples and
Altars [for, the Catholick's Veneration given to Images is held no more
religious in any sense, than that of Protestants to Churches, Altars, the Holy
Name of JESUS etc, words and things relating to Religion, not Civil commerce.]
'If they urge, that God has forbidden worshipping the Host of Heaven, and so
the Sun, Yes, that is, giving the Worship of the supreme God to them, but not a
subordinate, relative, inferior, worship, which was all I intend; and I hope
they are not so ignorant of the nature of humane actions, as not to know that
they go whither they are tended; and my intent was only to honor the true God
by it. It would be too tedious to prosecute the rest of his Discourse,
justifying the worship of the Sun rather than of any other sacred things
against the Protestants as much, as, of it, rather than of Images, against
Catholics. And the same joint defense against such Heathen may serve for them
both: That such relative reverence or veneration is not performed to those
things more, that are in their essence more noble, than others (for, what
comparison herein between the Sun and a Church?) Nor yet, to all things that
have any relation to him, whom we principally and soveraignly honor (for, so
have all God's Creatures whatever); but to those only, that have a nearer and
more immediate relation to him either by consecration to his service, as
Churches Altars etc. or also a representation of his Person (as the Images of
our Lord,) or, some other way. In the reverent treatment of which things, tho
these incapable of any sense thereof, yet in the sight of them who behold it,
we devoutly express our honor and homage to the person to whom they belong.
And, what things it is meet should receive such a respect, we must prudently
leave to the judgment and arbitration of the Church, and our Spiritual
Superiors.

enough, if an example there be of something equal and parallel to it, the
veneration of some other sacred things: or enough, for the lawfulness of such
practice, if no prohibition found thereof in the sacred Writ, as I hope for two
of these, the making, and use, of Images or Pictures, Protestants will accord.
The honor and worship of our Lord and his Saints all will allow a duty: what
ways or modes also of honoring them more immediate and direct, or also more
remote and relative are lawful, or also expedient, and when, it belongs to the
Church to determine, and to prescribe to us; and we are obliged to acquiesce in
her judgment, and submit to her Injunctions. Lastly, It will not follow from
the nonpractice of any such veneration of Images for some Ages, in all or some
part of the Church, that therefore the lawfulness of such a practice is no
Apostolical Tradition; because all things lawful are not, as to practice, in
all times so expedient. And perhaps this might be the reason, as has bin said,
of the rarer use of Pictures in the first four Ages of the Church, because the
Christian world was not as yet so well cleansed from Heathenisme; and so, in
later times, of the veneration or use of Images not being so universal in some
parts of the West, as latelier converted from Heathenisme, and still
neighboring upon them.

Chemnitius, Exam. Conc. Trid. part. 4. De Imaginibus. -- Caepit in ipsis etiam
Templis usus esse Imaginum, non sane ad cultum and adorationem, sed partim ad
historicam commonefactionem, partim ornatus gratia. Et caeptum hoc fuit
potissimum circa An. Dom. 380. Quoting a Passage of Gregory Nyssen Orat. in
Theodorurn Martyrem. Et Pictor etiam artis suae stores induxit, in imaginibus
exprimens res Martyris praeclare gestas, labores, cruciatus, immanes tyrannorum
aspectus etc. Christique certamini praesidentis humanae formae effigiem. Haec
pictor, tanquam in libro loquente, artificiose depingens, Martyris certamina
nobis exposuit. Solet enim etiam pictura tacens in pariete loqui, maximeque
prodesse etc. Thus Gregory. See also Daille Traicte des Imag. c. 4. But, for
Chemnitius or him to argue, those Pictures to be first made, or introduced into
the Church about this time, because at this time spoken of; or at such time as
these were seen here, yet not the like to have been elsewhere, because not
mentioned, as here, are, both unreasonable. There are indeed produced by them
two Testimonies in that Age that seem very prejudicial to Images. The one a
Canon of Conc. Elibert, c. 36. -- Placuit Picturas in Ecclesia esse non debere,
ne quod colitur aut adoratur in parietibus depingatur. The other a Passage in
an Epistle of St. Epiphanius to John Bishop of Jerusalem. Who, as he was
traveling in Palestine, coming to a certain Church and seeing a Picture as it
were of our Savior or some Saint painted on a Veil, and a Lamp hanging before
it, took and tore it, as holding such a thing unlawful, and against Scripture,
to be hung up in a Church. Because the place is much pressed, I will set you
down the Story in his own words relating to the Bishop of Jerusalem his action,
and sending that Church another Veil in stead of that he had torn. -- Cum
venissem ad villam quae dicitur Anablatha, vidissemque ibi praeteriens lucernam
ardentem, and interrogassem quis locus esset, didicissemque esse Ecclesiam, and
intrassem ut orarem: inveni ibi velum pendens in foribus ejusdem Ecclesiae
unctum atque depictum, and habens imaginem quasi Christi, vel Sancti cujusdam:
non enim satis memini, cujus imago fuerit. Cum ergo hoc vidissem, in Ecclesia
Christi contra authoritatem Scripturarum hominis pendere imaginem, scidi illud,
and magis dedi consilium custodibus ejusdem loci, ut pauperem mortuum eo
obvolverent, and efferrent. Illique contra murmurantes dixerunt: Si scindere
valuerat, justum erat ut aliud daret velum, atque mutaret. Quod cum audissem,
me daturum esse pollicitus sum, and illico esse missurum Paululum autem morarum
fuit in medio, dum quaero optimum velum pro eo mittere: arbitrabar enim de
Cypro mihi esse mittendum. Nunc autem misi quod potui reperire, and precor ut
jubeas presbyteros ejusdem loci suscipere velum a latore, quod a nobis missum
est: and deinceps praecipere, in Ecclesia Christi ejusmodi vela, quae contra
religionem nostram veniunt, non appendi. But 1st both these prove beyond that,
for which the objecters press them; by opposing also the making or use of holy
Images, at least in Churches: the first forbids the painting or placing of them
in Churches: the second tears, and defaces those found there. Protestants
approve neither of these: Let themselves then frame an Answer to them.

2ly, For the first of these, I grant, there might be good ground for such a
prohibition, considering the times: the Council being very ancient and held in
Spain before that of Nice, at which time a great part of the West were
Heathen-Idolaters: and taking the Adoratur in their sense not for any inferior
Veneration, but such as the Heathen gave to their Images, the Prohibition was
prudently made for that very reason -- Ne quod adoratur, in parietibus
depingatur; or, which comes to the same, Ne quod in parietibus depingitur,
adoretur: i. e. Ne putetur Deus Christianorum esse illud quod in parietibus
depingitur, as the Heathen God's were; and lest such Pictures should there, by
any new Converts, be adored with any such corrupt notions as formerly were
their Idols. To this purpose speaks Mr. Thorndike, concerning both these places
objected. 'Granting (says he, Just Weights, c. 9. p. 127.) that Epiphanius and
the Council of Elvira did hold all Images in Churches dangerous for Idolatry;
(of which there is appearance) it is manifest, that they were afterward
admitted all over. And there might be jealousy of offense, in having Images in
Churches, before Idolatry was quite rooted out; of which afterward there might
be no appearance. But no manner of appearance, that Images in History should
occasion Idolatry to those Images, in them that hold them the Images of God's
Creatures; such as are those Images, which represent histories of the Saints,
out of the Scriptures, or other relations of unquestionable credit. Thus He. 2.
Next; for the other of Epiphanius: (supposing, neither that Epistle, nor that
Passage in it falsified) it seems, that he had the same jealousy with the
Fathers of Elvira, tho not so much cause, considering his times; and, by some
of his words, that he held also the use of Images in Churches to be against
Scripture; in which therefore Protestants, as well as Catholics, must hold him
singular, and not to be credited: and the rather, because what is urged out of
other Fathers of the same age, Basil, Gregory Nyssen, and Nazianzen, allowing
this use of them, shows him to be heterodox herein. And the Fathers of Nice,
Act. 6. Tom. 5. out of the same pretended Epistle of his to Theodosius the
Emperor that the Iconoclasts urged for his disallowing Images, extract such a
Confession of his: Multoties locutus sum cum comministris meis, ut auferrentur
Imagines, and receptus non sum ab eis, neque audire vocem meam saltem paululum
passi sunt. Which Comministri (say those Nicene Fathers also) were such as
Basil, Gregory Nazianzen, and Nyssen, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Amphilochius, and
Cyril of Jerusalem. Epiphanius also, in this Epistle, confesses that the
people of the place, where he tore the Veil, murmured against him for it, and
this probably (if we consider such allowed use of Images elsewhere) not only
for the loss of their Veil, but for his controlling, as those times were, a
blameless practice. Which practice, by what the aforesaid Nicene Fathers Ibid.
relate, his own disciples and followers imitated afterward also in Cyprus,
building a Church in his honor; and -- cum multis aliis titularibus picturis
imaginem ejus in ipso templo collocantes. This of the use of Images in the
fourth Age.

3ly, Granted also by Protestants, that the Veneration of Images was practiced
in the fifth Age. Of which thus Daille Des Imag. l. 3. c. 7. 'In the second
half of the fifth Age, and in the whole that followed, we find frequent
passages that speak of Images, and some also that make mention of venerating
and serving them: [but the word serving he should either have omitted, or
showed it in some testimony of that Age.] But then meanwhile it is granted by
them, that the veneration of sacred Relics and of the Cross was a custom of
the fourth Age, and that God also then honored these with many Miracles. Now
this fourth Age was the first wherein the Church enjoyed a liberty of its
public Service and Ceremonies; and wherein the Church-Practices and History
were more exactly by a greater plenty of Writers, and in larger Volumes,
recorded.

[See Chamier Tom. 2. l. 20. c. 9.. 35. in his Answer to the Testimonies of the
Fathers -- Trecentis post Christum annis nullum omnino vestigium extat
adoratarum Reliquiarum, vix etiam conservatarum nisi in Sepulchris. Ergo ea
veritas non est Christiana [a nonconsequence; for, a Truth may be in an Age, in
the Writings of which it is not set down and registered.] Nam deinceps antea
confessus sum and invectum id studium and auctum. And see Daille in his Book De
Relig. cultus objecto confining himself both for the non-veneration of Relics,
and of the Cross, to the three first Ages, and granting the practice of them in
the fourth. But then, for the silence of the Writers of the three first Ages,
we must remember him of what he has said in his Vray usage des Peers, l. 1. c.
1. when he thought it his interest to show the Fathers Works unserviceable for
the deciding of modern Controversies; viz. '1. That the Writings of the three
first Ages were few, the faithful, for the most part, rather contenting
themselves to write their Faith in the hearts of men etc. than to amuse
themselves in composing Books of it: 2 That the greatest part of the Writings
then published are perished. Where also he recites the Names of eight and
twenty Authors, whole Works are lost; and the Works, such as are certain and
not contested, of eight only, that are of any note, to have descended to us;
yet when another descant better served his turn, he elsewhere, De Relig. cultus
objecto, l. 5. c. 3. amplifies the Writings of these times on this manner --
Cum ex primis illis saeculis (says he) auctorum ecclesiasticorum plurium quam
viginti quinque supersint monumenta, quorundam pauciora, aliorum plura,
aliquorum etiam plurima, and quidem luculentissima -- monstrum esset ingens and
inauditum, and plane incredibile, si veluti facta quadam inter se conjuratione,
eam rem omnes ubique constanter in tam multis libris tacuissent, quae in tota
Christi sui Ecclesia pro insigni Christiani cultus part haberetur. (And in his
Noveaute des Traditions Romans, part. 1. c. 3. p. 14. published some years
before, he says much what the same, reciting there particularly those many
famous Writings of the three first Ages that have descended to our times.) His
argument concluding hence, that what these mention not, then was not. But what
is this insignis Christiani cultus pars, he there speaks of? The veneration of
the Cross: as if this were some great and fundamental Article of the Catholic
Faith. Well: for the Cross I appeal to the equal Reader, whether the Heathens
objecting then to the Christians the Adoration of it mentioned by Minutius
Felix and by Tertullian, Apologet. c. 16. calling the Christians Religiosos
Cruris, (with whom Justin Martyr seems to speak like things concerning it, In
Apolog. 2.) as well as the Apostate Julian's reproaching them with it
afterward, mentioned by Cyril Alexandrinus, In Julian. l. 6. does not show some
Veneration given to the Cross also before the fourth Age. Indeed so often as
this was objected these Authors had reason to deny such an Adoration of it, as
the other charged them with, namely an Adoration of two pieces of wood across,
parallel to that given by the Heathens to their Images, as imagining some
Divinity or Virtue resident therein. [ O miseri homines (says Julian) quum
serventur arma quae magnus demisit Jupiter etc. cessatis adorare and colere,
and interim Crucis lignum adoratis; imagines illius in front and ante domos
pingentes;] But yet such Adoration so early objected seems rationally to infer
some reverence and honor done by the Christianity of those times to it, as to
other holy things. Neither hence may Daille justly draw the same consequence of
the Christains Veneration of an Asse's Head from the Adoration also of this
objected to them; because we find not any such Practice in the sourth, or the
following Ages of the one, as we do of the other; nor no such practice of the
one, an Asse's Head, in any Age at all; But the Objection of it probably
grounded on a fabulous Story, related by Tacitus.]

Anstine at Rome about An. Dom. 388. De Moribus Ecclesiae c. 34. much urged by
Protestants -- Novi multos esse sepulchrorum and picturarum adoratores,
speaking of turba imperitorum, as he there calls them amongst Christians, as it
declare; both of these, the worship of Pictures then, as well as of Relics, to
have bin done in an excessive and superstitious way by some, so seems it to
imply both also, and not one of them only, done in a laudable way by others;
and that, if there was an inculpable Veneration of Holy Relics in that Age (of
which, and the due Honors done to the Sepulchers of the Martyrs, see much in
his Civ. Dei 22. l. 8. c. and 8. l. 27. c.) so also, of Holy Pictures too; the
excess of such a Practice among the simple and unlearned being not likely,
where none at all was among the prudent and discreet.

V.. 58.
10. Such appearing to be the Doctrine of the Church in her retaining the use of
Images, I come now to what was in the Fifth place proposed, That She is not
answerable for the faults of those that practice otherwise: (Especially having
laid a strict charge on all Bishops, Conc. Trid. Sess. ult. de Venerat. Imag.
both for the remedying all indecencies in the making of such Pictures, and
removing any Superstition in the use of them.) Nor can those be excusable who
desert her Communion, for any such Practice, to which she no way obliges; or
also, which she with them condemns: and much less, for such expressions, as
being used more freely in her Hymns and Poetry, are taken by them in such a
sense, as they do, or may, know, her common Doctrine disclaims. So long as our
own practice is no way hindered from going along with the Church's Doctrine, we
may not allege any other men's practice to warrant a discession from her; may
allege no more that of Idolatry, perhaps, than that of Adultery, Murder, or
Blasphemy in her. 'Let Practice and Doctrine go together, we agree; said Bishop
Mountague, Appeal to Caesar, p. 257. If he speak of a general Practice, this
demands too much; but where our Practice, and the Church's Doctrine may go
together, there we cannot justly disagree; he the Practice of some others how
it will. 2. Again; neither is the Church of Rome hereupon more obliged to
abrogate a lawful Veneration of Images, because Protestants are offended at it
as liable to abuse, than Protestants to lay aside (which they do not) the use
of Images, because the Puritans are offended at them, upon the same account.

Distinctio Latriae (says Spalatensis, De Rep. Eccl. 7. l. 12. c. 47. n.) and
aliarum inferiorum adorationum ex solo hominis interno dependet; quod internum
non substat Ecclesiae judicio [I add, neque cujusquam alterius.] And, not
certainly known, ought to be most charitably interpreted (especially in the
practice of people instructed in the common Creeds, and Principles of
Christianity, perfectly opposite to Idolatry.) And therefore that Passage of
St. Austine, in Psalm. 113. is very unreasonably urged by some Protestants --
Quis autem adorat, velorat intuens simulachrum, qui non sic afficitur, ut ab eo
se exaudiriputet, ab eo sibi praestari, quod desiderat, speret? Which, as it
was spoken by him of the Heathen [Quis Gentilium] of whom he says also a
little before that -- Quoniam in illo figmento non invenit vitalem motum credit
numen occultum. And -- effigiem viventi corpori similem sine vivo aliquo
habitatore esse non putat. So can it be no way applied to the common principles
of any Christian: and, to find it false, let but the Objecter, if a Christian,
try the experiment of the Quis upon himself; and, looking on a Picture when he
prays to our Lord, tell, whether he thinks it hears him. And, since Protestants
at other times do so freely exalt the knowledge of the Heathen too, that they
were not so stupid as to worship Stocks and Stones, or Pictures, the works of
their own hands, but only the Gods by such Representations which are only the
visible Memorials of them, (which they do to make the Christian run parallel
with the Heathen Idolatry;) why do they not meanwhile reflect on the great
uncharitableness, on the other side, toward Christians, in fancying or
representing them so stupid and void of understanding in their addresses to
Images or Pictures, ut ab illis se exaudiri putent etc. I say then, as to the
internal act of Veneration or Reverence given by any Catholic to an Image,
since it can no way be known to Protestants, it ought to be charitably
interpreted, that it does not deviate from the Church's Doctrine.

external, I grant it may discover it self to be such as may be unlawful, or
idolatrous; as, by the form of their Vocal Prayers addressed to such Images;
Sacrifice, erection of Temples, and Altars, to them; a wrong confession of
their Faith concerning them, in attributing to them something Divine, or some
other of those misapprehensions mentioned in the beginning of this Discourse.
2. etc. Of which some Christians were guilty long ago in St. Gregory's time, as
appears by the Fact of Serenus, and in St. Austin's, by his -- Novi multos etc;
and so, for ought we know, some may be still. But then, for those exernal acts
of Veneration, that ordinarily appear among Catholics (as kissing, burning
lights, perfuming, or incensing them, uncovering the head, kneeling, praying,
before them) I have showed before. 49. etc. that there are none of these but
may be lawfully used (abstracting from a bad intention) in expressing the honor
we give to a creature; and therefore cannot be chargeable with Idolatry; and
that all these are used also by Protestants in the honor they do to some of the
Creatures. If then an Anti-ceremonial Puritan seeing a true Son of the Church
of England, that he may say his Prayers the more devoutly, going into a Church
and uncovering his head so soon as he enters into it, or into the Chancel at
least; bowing toward the Altar or Communion Table there, sometimes also burning
Frankincense there, (a thing as lawful, I suppose, as it is in our own houses,)
bowing at the Holy Name of JESUS, kneeling down at his receiving of the Holy
Mysteries in the Eucharist; in his taking a solemn Oath, kissing the Gospels;
in the Interrment of an honorable Friend lighting up many Torches, not for
need, but as an Honor to the Deceased, and an Ornament of his Funeral, etc: as
a Puritan, I say, would be censured to offend very much against Charity, if he
should accuse or mis-construe him herein to commit a most gross Idolatry or
Superstition (for, possibly he may do so) in giving Divine Worship to a frame
of Wood, or a Name, in Incensing a pile of Stone, in imagining God to dwell in
a Fabric made with hands, in lighting a dead man to his Grave etc. If I say
this would be a most uncharitable and unjust Accusation in a Puritan toward a
Protestant-Conformist, how will not a Protestant stand guilty of the same
fault, when, beholding a Catholic kneeling and saying his Prayers before an
Image, he charge him with praying and giving Divine Honors to it, with
conceiving some Divinity resident in it, or Virtue issuing from it, or, that it
is lighted with his lamp, smalls his sweet odours, and hears his requests. This
of the difficult discovery of an Idolatrous Practice in any: In which, as it
happens in several other matters, I fear, for the most part, the guilt of the
Accuser is greater, than of the Accused.

Protestants, who charge the Church herewith, to reflect what an heavy guilt it
leaves upon themselves, if such Accusation should be false and without cause;
and what consequences pernicious to themselves it draws along with it. For 1.
if it be a great fault to charge unjustly any private person with so heinous a
crime, as Idolatry; what is it to charge the whole Catholic Church, East and
West, with the Practice thereof now for above a thousand years; and this,
notwithstanding our Lord's precious Blood shed for this his Church, and all his
Providence over it, now when all Power in heaven and earth is committed to him;
and notwithstanding his express Promise of protecting it for ever against the
gates of hell? What is it, thus to call their innocent Mother a Whore, for
committing such spiritual Fornication; and their supreme Spiritual Father
Antichrist? 2. And next: What consequences does it draw after it, most
mischievous to their Salvation? Since, after they have once fixed such an
Apostasy upon their supreme Spiritual Governors and Guides, and after they have
thus cried Corban, they conceive themselves freed and absolved from any further
Obedience they owe them: And, by withdrawing Obedience, abandon themselves to
all those errors and disorders from which this supreme Church Authority would
have restrained them. Nay some are so frighted herewith, as they know not how
to stay longer under any Church Authority at all; but run away also from those
Ecclesiastical Governors who have discovered this Idolatry and Antichrist to
them; and from that Church Discipline also, and those Ceremonies, which these
judge still fit to retain; as thinking they discern in all these some
lineaments and resemblances of him. And so by God's just judgment what
aspersions these inferior Guides have laid upon the Supreme, these other, their
Subjects, have returned on them. And several sober Protestants of late (See Dr.
Hammond) who seem to have better weighed these things, in laboring against
these Puritan Sects to free their own Church Government from such an
imputation, have also enlarged themselves so far, as to release the Roman from
it: and have joined themselves with the Catholic Writers to remove Antichrist
and his Seat and Kingdom quite out of the verge of Christianity.

Rome. Would any of them correspond so far with Mahomet's Religion (whom yet
they account not bad enough to inherit the title of Antichrist, or charge of
Idolatry) as they do with the Pope's? Let them then either remit such
Accusation, or prosecute more severely and more speedily fly from, such a
guilt. We can never run far enough from this Grand Enemy of our Lord. For (as
the Apostle, 2. Cor. 6.14.) 'What fellowship or communion has light with
darkness? what concord Christ with Belial? what commerce Jerusalem with Babylon?

Let therefore those Zelots who are so forward to heap such an extremity of
Impiety on the whole Church of God for so many Centuries before Luther, or also
on the whole present Church besides Luther's Followers, consider well that
necessary consequence thereof, which some others of their own side, to deter
them from such a charge, have observed. For -- 'If (as Mr. Thorndike. Epilog.
3. l. p. 357.) these Practices which the Church of Rome allows [and which we
have handled here] were necessarily Idolatries, then were the Church of Rome
necessarily no Church [I add, nor any other for many Ages before Luther, or the
present besides Luther; for, in these Practices all else agree:] 'The being of
the Church, and of Christianity, presupposing the worship of one true God,
exclusive to any thing else. And elsewhere, Just Weights, 2. c. p. 11. 'They
that own the Church of Rome for a true Church [and if it be not, where was the
Catholic Church before Luther?] must contradict themselves, if they maintain
such a supposition, as that the Pope is Antichrist, or the Papists Idolaters.
[Their charge is too high to be possibly true; and to render her not innocent
and free from their complaints they must necessarily make her less wicked.]
Again the same Author Ibid. c. 19. p. 128. 'He that sees (says he) the whole
Church [for the East, as well as West, practice these by them styled
Idolatries] on the one side, and only Calvin [and his Followers] on the other
has he not cause to fear, that they who make them Idolaters without cause will
themselves appear Schismatics in the sight of God for it? And therefore (much
more modestly) he says, Epilog. 3. l. p. 364. That the honor of Images which
the Church's Decree maintains is no Idolatry. And Ibid. p. 416. That the
Idolatries which he grants to be possible (tho not necessary) indeed to be
found in it, are by the ignorance and carnal affections of particulars, not by
commands of the Church or the Laws of it. And, of the great danger of censuring
such general Practices of the Church, thus Bishop Forbes, speaking of one of
the supposed Idolatries, Invocation of Saints, De Invoc Sanct. 3. c. p. 322.
and Totius Ecclesiae universalem consensum spernere aut damnare res long
periculosissima est. And much more, in abuses only of some, that which he says
is true, p. 326. -- Non continuo propter periculum abusus, aut etiam abusum,
quem reipsa cernimus, legitimus rei usus, cum scandalo totius Ecclesiae,
tollendus, aut damnandus est.

Idolatry. And again: So great an Envy he has to the Honor he sees given in
the Church to the sacred Humanity of our Lord in the Holy Mysteries, and to his
Martyrs, and Saints, and all that which any way appertains to them, that he now
chooses rather to represent himself a great Zelot of preserving Worship and
Adoration entire to the one only God; and of not communicating any of his
Excellencies to the Creature: He pleads much our Lord's sole worthy
Intercessions and Mediation, and the necessity of performing all our Devotions
out of the assurance of Faith and a Divine Command: He insists much on a
spiritual and refined internal service of God, without any superstitious regard
had to times, persons, places, and such as is divested of external and formal
Rites and Ceremonies. Lastly; both by some of the new Reformers within the
Church, and by Mahomet without it, he mainly cries out against Superstition,
Ceremonies, a multitude of Sacraments, and their virtue, Special Ordinations
and Characters of Priesthood, Will Worship, Idolatry, which last also is
aggravated to the uttermost and extended to far greater subtilties, than
heretofore it was supposed to comprehend: And by this new device he has
wrought so effectually on many, that the memory of God's former Saints and
Martyrs is almost quite obliterated and worn out among them; and the Offering
the Evangelical Sacrifice grown much into desuetude; Holy Churches saving on
the Lord's day shut up; Holy Festivals no more observed; Sacred Persons are
seeking to credit themselves with laical, and undistinct, Habits; sacred things
grown into contempt; and not enjoying so much as a negative reverence, I mean,
freedom from contumely: the Divine Worship at last so refined and purified,
till it is become invisible; and, by taking away the necessary circumstances,
the very substance and life thereof is perished; and by disjoining the corporal
and mental, the interior and exterior, Worship, neither the one, nor the other
is, by some at all, by others so devoutly, or frequently, performed. And all
this, forsooth, this new Angel of Light promoteth in opposition to former
Idolatry and Superstition. Was not the Great False-Prophet Mahomet, and the
whole frame of his Religion, at least one of the chiefest Conceptions of
Satan's old age, and Masterpiece of all his Works? And, who so great an Enemy
to Sacred Images as he? or who with greater zeal throws down, and declares war
against, all Idolatry? And, by him Satan, instead of his former Pageantry and
Puppets, after that God's Messiah was sent with a most Spiritual Law, and the
Divine Grace to persuade men to it, has also now, set up a sensual,
non-ceremonious, facile, Anti-law; and a sword to compel men to it.

Idolatry, so, as to deny a due Honor to the Instruments of God's glory; (nor
so prodigal or ignorant of the Divine Excellencies and Prerogatives, as to give
any part of them to any other: In her honoring God's Saints, or, for their
sakes, any thing that appertains to them, she knows that all such Honor finally
terminates in God, the sole Fountain and Donor of all that is in his Creature
Honorable: And his Saints now without all vanity or self-pleasing accept such
Honor, in conformity to God's will; and because it is for his Honor, that it
should be given them; And He is also honored by them for bestowing such honor
on them: And God's Kingdom, without all Jealousy, remains in an Eternal Peace.
Amen.

FINIS.

