A SERMON PREACHED JANUARY XXX. 1684 / 5. BEING THE FAST FOR The Martyrdom of
King Charles I. of Blessed Memory.

By BENJAMIN WOODROFFE, D. D.

LONDON: Printed by J. P. for John Blyth, and are to be sold at John Playford's
Shop near the Temple-Church. 1685.

TO THE SACRED MAJESTY OF King JAMES II.
'T Will need no Excuse, that I should lay any part of my Labors at your
Majesty's Feet, where all I can perform is so just a Debt, and but the natural
effect of that Duty I owe, both as a Subject to the best of Princes, and as a
Servant to the best of Masters; nor, I trust, will it be a Presumption in One,
who has had the Honor to stand by Your Majesty in some of those Dangers,
where nothing, but that Divine Providence which preserved you for a Crown,
could have been your Shield, to presage, that it is for some great and
extraordinary Blessing to these Kingdoms, that you are now seated on the
Throne. And it is most reasonable to expect, that, so much natural Goodness, so
great Courage, and Bravery of Mind, so sacred a Reverence for your Word, so
tender a regard to your Dependants, so true a Love to your Country, so
inviolable Faith, and Allegiance to your Sovereign, all which made you so much
admired whilst a Subject, should receive the greatest Luster from a Royal
Diadem; for they are but the same Virtues You have still to exercise in a
larger Sphere. If then there was an Allegiance you owed, and so exemplarily
paid to your Royal Brother, it is what is only exalted in being now immediately
due to none but him who is King of Kings; What was then natural Goodness is now
Clemency and Mercy; what was then Courage and Bravery of Mind, is now an
undaunted Resolution to defend yours and your Subjects Rights; what was then
the Reverence you had for your sacred Word, is now the persisting in all your
Royal Purposes of Grace to your good Subjects; what was then your tender regard
to your Faithful Dependants, is now, as you are the Father of your Country,
your equal Indulgence to all your Children; what was then your true Love to
your Country, is now advanced into your Royal Care and Protection of it. These
are the things that will now fill your Majesty's Thoughts; and these the great
things that will hereafter be registered by that Fame which already speaks you
so great at home and abroad, and has by your mighty Actions carried the Glory
and Terror of the English Nation to the remotest Parts of the Universe: and I
question not, but the nearer Parts of it, France and Spain, and those other
your Allies, who have seen or felt your Courage, will dread to awaken it. It Is
only Treachery (the heinous nature whereof I treat on in this following
Discourse) can disturb your Reign: it is that which has done so much Mischief
already among us, and threatens more under the new Name of Trimming. God, who
has set you upon the Throne, and advanced your Triumphs by Sea and Land into
an Absolute Sovereignty in both, grant that no Storm may from thence arise to
infest you in either. Thus Prays,

Your Majesty's Most Dutiful and Obedient Subject, B Woodroffe.

JEREMIAH 3. 8. But her Treacherous Sister Judah Feared not.
I Am afraid I scarce read my Text without Offense to some: so suspicious does
Guilt make men, that it is hard to choose the plainest piece of Scripture to
speak on, on such Occasions as these, but they think it is presently Reflection
and Satyr. But however, that ought not to deterr the conscientious Preacher; it
did not Jeremiah, the Penman of these Words, from his Duty; and I trust it
shall not me from mine: which I take in such a day as this is, a day of so
great Rebuke, Indignation, and Sorrow, to be that of our present Prophet, Chap.
1. 8. not to be afraid of their Faces. Alas! that is scarce our case, those who
are most concerned in the Reproof seldom appearing among us on these sad
Solemnities, and let it rest as a Brand of Ignominy, and everlasting Reproach,
on their damned Principles and hellish Malice, that they so far still abett the
execrable Treason, as not in so many Years, after so many repeated Testimonies
of God's Judgments on the Nation, after the Sword, the Plague, and Fire, after
(if these are less affecting) such miraculous Discoveries of their new
Attempts, their Bands, their Leagues, their Covenants, their Associations, and
whatever other their Conspiracies so plainly laid open, they so far countenance
the Villainy, as not to be humbled for, or ashamed of it. To these Men it is my
Text addresses in the name of treacherous Judah, i. e. of those, who under the
Covert of the best Religion, against the most manifest Tokens of Divine
Vengeance, as I shall by and by have occasion to enlarge, go on obstinately in
their wicked Counsels, and harden themselves in Mischief, for that was Judah's
Condition, and is the import of the following Meiosis, feared not, would be
wrought upon by no Instruction whatever, would not be warned, take any Example,
and reform. And the method I shall take in speaking on this Argument, shall be,

I. To consider the heinous nature of Treachery.

II. To show what the Treachery of Israel was.

III. How her Sister Judah exceeded her in her Guilt; and then with reference
to what is the Subject of this Day's Lamentation.

IV. To draw the Parallel in our own Case; and

V. To sum up all by way of Inference.

I. Of the heinous nature of Treachery, and that in these ensuing Particulars.

1. Treachery is a Sin that is most opposite to the Divine Nature, to the very
Being and Essence of God himself: for God is Truth and cannot lie, Titus 1. 2.
and every degree of Falsehood is a departing and revolting from him, as he is
the Author of Being; it is so far to unmake his Creation, because to make things
to be what they are not; to give another Place, Use, and Signification, than he
intended his Creatures: besides, to be treacherous, to be false, to be
hypocritical, is, what in the Sinner lies, to take away his Omniscience,
because to act as if he had no sense or awe of an all-seeing Eye. Which is the
reason, why it is spoken of in Scripture, as what is so hateful to God, Why his
Wisdom, as well as his Truth and Holiness, can neither join with or approve it.

2. Treachery is a Sin that is most opposite to the Interest of Mankind in
general, as it is what cuts the Nerves of all Society, wholly destroys civil
Commerce, undermines all Laws, and subverts the very Foundations on which
Government and Order, the Being and Welfare of every Commonwealth, subsists.
Treachery is that Sin which gives a Nation one Neck to be beheaded at a blow.
Admit this in a State, and what will become of the Rights and Property either
of Prince or People? Who can call any thing his own, where Forgery,
Subornations, and Perjury, set the price on every honest man's Head and Fortune?

Admit Treachery in an Army, and what will signify the giving either Word or
Colors to be the distinguishing Symbols between them and their Enemies? What
the Command or Example of the wisest and most valiant General, if these are
only Signals to the Traitor to turn Sword, Pike, Musket, or Canon, upon him?
Most uncertain must the Voice of the Trumpet be, if when that sounds a Charge,
the false Heart beats a Retreat? What will it avail to raise Forts and lay in
Magazines, if those within the Walls undermine all? If it be only to prepare
Bulwarks for others to infest us thence?

Admit Treachery in our Councils, and what can the Wisdom of the most profound
Politician profit?

Admit Treachery into Court, and where is the Safety of a Prince among all his
Guards?

Admit Treachery on the Bench, (Bribery and Partiality are so) and how will
Laws themselves be taught to speak Injustice and Oppression? What will become
either of the Prerogative of the Prince, or the Property of the Subject, where
the mercenary Judge makes private Interest and Advantage the Rule of his
Decrees? Or how must this encourage the corrupt Banker, if what is his Crime,
the Wealth I mean unjustly detained from the Widow and Orphan, shall be his
Protection and Defense.

Admit Treachery in the Church, and how will Conscience trim to the Overthrow
of all its Canons?

Treachery, wherever it is, is like the Plague in the Heart, that is therefore
most fatal, because it shows not its self in its natural and outward Tokens. To
conclude this Head, If Treachery lurk in the Bowels, what will be all our Care
in any State whatever? What our Preparations for Peace or War? What our Wealth
and Honor? What all our Stores and Provisions? but like fraughting a goodly
Vessel with the richest Merchandise, giving it sufficient Ballast, fitting up
tall and stout Masts, spreading abroad the most glorious Sails, with all the
finery of Flags and Streamers to set her off, and after all, boring a Hole in
her bottom, whereby she must certainly founder before she gain her Port.

3. Treachery is a Sin that is most contrary too to the Interest of him in
particular who is guilty of it; for to none is Treachery more false than to the
Contrivers of it: witness the Fate of Absalom, Achitophel, Zimri, Judas, and of
the Devil himself. Scarce is there any Instance, in Divine, or Profane Story;
but, as you read it in one of the proper Psalms for this Day, He that made a
Pit and dug it, falls into the Ditch which he made. Psalm. 7. 15.
And, to follow the Metaphor I just now made use of, how can he who bores the
Hole in the Vessel hope to escape in the common Shipwreck? Or should he
otherwise provide for the present Danger, and get timely to Shore, yet is not
the Hand and Heart of every man against such? For he who is once false in his
Nature, has put off his Title to the common Protection due to Mankind; has
outlawed himself, and is become Vulpinum Caput, the Fox, or Wolf's Head,
devoted to common Hatred and Ruin.

Not to say, which is often found upon Experience, that he is the mark of his
own Vengeance; for how frequently does the Traitor's Heart prove most
treacherous to it self? how often does it gall and torment him? And to say
truth, how is it the concern of Providence such should be false to themselves,
and not with all their Cunning be able to elude the Divine Omniscience, whose
care of Mankind, of the World and its Government, they so much defy?

4 Treachery is a Sin (and that one would think should make it not to be so
over charming) that is the very Transcript and Copy of the Devil; for, He is a
Liar, and the Father of Lies: He is the Arch-Traitor, who began his Treachery
in Heaven, and is still acting it in all the Deceits and Impostures by which he
enterprises on the unwary Sinner: he is in this sense most the Prince of
Darkness; and the utmost lesser Traitors can boast of all their hidden Plots,
is, That they are listing themselves as his Subjects; and where can that
Villainy end which goes to Hell for its Example and Authority? I shall scarce
need to add, that

5. Treachery is a Complication of all other Sins and Miseries; which is
another Aggravation of the Cheat, that it seldom ends where it begins; that the
Guilt and Villainy increase in the acting, and he who at the first mention of
the horrid Sin is apt to say with Hazael, 2 Kings 8. 13. Am I a Dog that I
should do this great thing, is Dog, Wolf, Bear, Lion, every thing to which the
Father of Lies can prompt him, before he has done.

'Twould be superfluous to mention the Baseness of the Traitor's Mind, how mean
and unmanly the Spirit with which he is acted! how apt to stoop to any Drudgery
to save that stinking Breath in's Nostrils which already corrupts the Air he
lives in, is the great Nuisance and Pest of Humane Society. There Is something of
Bravery in open Violence; for, it is to bid our Enemy stand upon's Guard, to bid
him look to, and defend himself: but, to hide the Weapon wherewith we intend to
give the Stab, to flatter him to the Face whose Ruin we are then designing, to
greet, and at the same time smite under the fifth Rib, to say Hail Master, and
betray, are the Acts of a Judas, or a Devil in him.

This as to our first Head; viz. The heinous nature of Treachery. Our second is,

II. To show, what the Treachery of Israel was?

Now that I doubt not in the beginning of it to limit to their Revolt from the
House of David, from their Allegiance to their natural Lord and hereditary
Sovereign, and (what can scarce be divided) from their Loyalty to God himself;
for so we find it in matter of Fact, 1 Kings 12. 16. where Jeroboam and his
Accomplices had no sooner answered the King, What portion have we in David?
neither have we Inheritance in the Sons of Jesse, but the next News we have is,
verse. 26, 27. their cutting themselves off from any Portion in God, from any
Inheritance in his established Worship and Religion; And Jeroboam said in his
Heart, Now shall the Kingdom return to the House of David, if this People go up
to do Sacrifice in the House of the Lord at Jerusalem: As before, their
Obedience to their lawful King, so now, their Duty to God himself is become a
Grievance; It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem, behold thy Gods, O
Israel, etc.

But was there nothing but this Revolt that was in the whole time of their
continuing to be a People charged upon Israel? Yes, many are the particular
Guilts with which the Prophets load them; but this seems to be the Cause, this
the Burden of all the rest, that they walked in the ways of Jeroboam the Son of
Nebat, who made Israel to sin. This was the pulling up the Sluice that let in
all the Inundation that afterward over-flowed them, this so black a Stain,
that no length of time, no possession of the Crown, could ever purge it; for so
the Holy Ghost tells us, v. 19. That Israel rebelled against the House of David
to this day: And the continuing in this Sin, and the fatal consequents of it,
was that which at last made them to be cast off by God, delivered into the
Hands and Power of the Assyrian, and as to any Account we have of them ever
since, lost, from being so much as a People, in that Captivity; for now, as
it is Hosea 1. 6. they became Lo-Ruchama, and Lo-ammi, v. 9. no more either his
beloved or his People; to show them their Sin in the Punishment of it, they,
who revolted from their lawful Sovereign, and their God, were to abide many
days without a King, without a Prince, and without a Sacrifice, and without an
Image, and without an Ephod, and without Teraphim, Hosea 3. 4. Without any
established Government, without any the least show, the very counterfeit dress
and surface of Religion: and when to be restored, it will be only by returning
to their Allegiance to the Posterity of David; as it follows v. 5. and
afterward shall the Children of Israel return, and seek the Lord their God and
David their King.

But if this be so great a Guilt, how comes God to declare, he does it upon the
occasion of Rehoboam's taking Arms to reduce the Rebels, and bring back the
Kingdom again to Judah, 1 Kings 12. 21. 24. that the thing was from him?

I answer, It Is one thing for God to approve, another to permit any Action. 1.
'Twas from him, as thereby the House of Solomon was to be punished for their
own Rebellion against God, in forsaking him, and worshipping Idols, 1 Kings 11.
33. 'Twas from him, as their not walking in his ways to do that which was right
in his eyes, had exposed them to his just Judgments.

2. 'Twas from him, as by his Providence, as he had purposed to overruled their
Sin to his own Glory.

3. 'Twas from him, and therefore not to be punished by their Sword, as he
would take to himself to repay the Vengeance that was due to so notorious a
Revolt: as he did by those many Severities inflicted on them, by those many
Changes of the Succession, no less than nine or ten times, whilst they
continued to be a Kingdom and People, to see if any pouring them from Vessel to
Vessel would cleanse them from their Dregs; and when that could not be, by
giving them up (the greatest Judgment that can befall any Nation) to that
Anarchy and Confusion they so much affected.

But however, 'twas just in God thus to treat one and the other, to punish
Judah by Israel's Rebellion; this will in no case excuse the Actors, no more
than it will acquit the Devil of his implacable Malice, that whom he seduces by
his Temptations, he is likewise appointed to be the unhappy Instrument ('it is
his Doom as well as his Nature) to torment.

But might not some great Indignity put on Jeroboam, some very signal
Disobligation stirring up a Man of public Spirit, justify his utmost
Resentments? Might there not be some public Grievances that were necessary to
be redressed? Or, Might not Religion be called in to assist in so good a Cause?

Let us see then what stands upon Record in these Matters; for it is the common
case of most Traitors, and was theirs who contrived and acted the black Tragedy
of this day.

1. As to the great Indignity put on Jeroboam, the very signal Disobligations
he had from the Government, and what moved his public Spirit, you have the
History, 1 Kings 11. 26. And Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, Solomon's Servant, even
He (that is the Emphasis the Holy Ghost puts on it) He, who stood in so near a
Relation of personal Duty, and stricter Attendance to his Master, who was of
his constant and daily Guard (as every Domestic to a Prince is) even he lift
up his hand against the King. And this was the Cause that he lift up his hand
against the King; Solomon built Millo, and repaired the Breaches of the City of
David his Father; 'twas a Distaste taken at the Strength and Security of his
Prince, the Envy he had at his Greatness and Power; for we find very little
Oppression or Injustice charged on Solomon's Reign. Indignities and
Disobligations he had received none from Solomon, till he stood in open
Defiance and Rebellion. All that Solomon was faulty herein, was, his advancing
Jeroboam to that Dignity, whereby he began now to think himself a Match for his
Prince, v. 28. He had made him Ruler over all the Charge of the House of
Joseph: so dangerous is it to raise men of turbulent and ambitious Minds, that
like Lucifer, presently Ascendam, and ero similis altissimo, I will ascend, and
be like the most high, is what comes next into their Thoughts; Their Height
makes them giddy, and every thing turns round about with them; their Glory only
fits them, ('it is the Pattern the Son of the Morning has left his Followers) to
be greater Devils.

2. As to the public Grievances necessary to be redressed, (for it is pity
there should not be some color for so brave an Attempt) what were they? We
must again consult the History, as it is related, 1 Kings 12. 4. and the whole
Complaint summed up in that grievous Yoke Solomon had put upon them; and what
that was, you have at large 1 Kings 4. 7. etc. 'Twas only the more regular
ordering of his Kingdom and Family; 'twas his settling his Dominion abroad, and
securing to them Peace and Plenty at home; 'twas his making Judah and Israel to
dwell safely, every man under his Vine and under his Fig Tree, from Dan even to
Beersheba, v. 24. 25. Their great Grievance was, That the Wisdom of God was
with him, chapter 3. v. 28. that according to that Wisdom he framed those steady
Rules of Policy, which the Sons of Belial, who were for casting off every Yoke,
whose dissolute Lives could bear no Restraint, could not withstand.

And how clamorous and noisy are they presently in their Complaints, how
diligent to find a fit Person to head the Faction? and who so fit as a
discontented Courtier, a disobliged Favorite; Jeroboam must be called home
from Egypt, 1 Kings 12. v. 3. A Fugitive presently adopted into a Patriot, and
none so proper to assert the Rights and Liberties of the People, as one, who by
his Rebellion had forfeited all his own. These are their intolerable
Grievances, and not to be redressed, but by destroying Root and Branch;
Rehoboam is the present Oppressor, his Father Solomon made the Yoke, and
David's Name too must be brought in to increase the Odium; v. 16. What Portion
have we in David? neither have we Inheritance in the Son of Jesse: What good
did we ever receive from any of the Line? No, the Succession must be altered,
we'll choose our own Prince; Jeroboam is our Man: Solomon was cunning, and
would have bribed him by high Offices to have been of's Party, but the
Temptation was in vain; he was of a more public Spirit, a truer Patriot, and
more a Lover of his Countury, than thus to be taken off. He shall be or
General, he our Protector, to thy Tents, O Israel!

From which, put together, it is obvious to note,

1. That it is not the Wisdom of the Prince, the Justice, or Prosperity of his
Reign; not the eminent Piety and extraordinary Virtues of those who sit on the
Throne, can exempt them from being malign'd by Factious, Seditious, and
Ambitious Spirits; for then Solomon and David would have been free from such
Reflections; or, what is infinitely above any of these Comparisons, then would
Heaven, the Kingdom of God, and the Seat of his Glory, have been secured from
Treason. But if the Throne of the wisest and best Princes, if the Throne of God
himself be not free from Conspiracies, as indeed the more Happiness, the more
Peace and Prosperity, the more Holiness any Kingdom enjoys, the more likely is
it to be the Mark and Prey of the Traitor, the more malign'd and opposed by the
Devil and his Instruments, This may serve to lessen our Admiration, though at
the same time it ought to heighten the Grief and Repentance of this Day, that
both a Solomon and a David fell in so wise, so prosperous, (for what was not
the Nation blessed with under his Reign, before those unhappy times) so
religious a Prince. As also,

2. From hence we may note, how impossible it is to oblige a Rebel to his Duty.
But why should we admire, that Preferment could not retain Jeroboam in his
Allegiance, when the highest place in the Court of Heaven could not retain
Lucifer (that Spirit who works in the Children of Disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2.)
in his. But I proceed to the third Enquiry in this matter; viz.

3. Whether Religion in any sort might not be called in to assist in so good a
Cause? 'Twas the Course Jeroboam here took, and is the usual practice of the
Rebel; and but requisite to such Designs it should be so, there being nothing
that has a more powerful Influence on the Minds of men, than the being
persuaded, that he who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, whose Prerogative
it is to set up one and pull down another, has his hand in the Revolution: To
this purpose, Divine Authority shall be urged for the Change: There goes a
Prophecy of Jeroboam, that he should Reign, 1 Kings 11. 13. etc. and what
should he do but hasten the fulfilling of it? Who would not obey a Revelation
in such a Case? Who would not concur with Providence to put the Crown on his
own head? Or is not the reforming of Religion, ('it is that Jeroboam, good Man,
chiefly aims at) the suiting it to the Nature of that Infinite Being we adore,
in appointing him public Worship at Dan and Bethel, a just Plea? Behold the
Heaven and the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him, how much less any house
Man can build? What is the Glory and Magnificence of the Temple at Jerusalem,
to his immense Majesty? What the holiness of any particular place, to him who
is every where? Why must we confine the Deity, or restrain his Presence and
Blessing to one City, whose Goodness is over all his Works? Is it not his
Temple wherever a pious Soul inhabits? his Residence wherever his Grace and
Power show themselves? Why is Jerusalem better than Shechem? Why Zion (are not
all parts of the World alike his Workmanship?) better than Dan and Bethel? Why
must we go up to Jerusalem to Worship, who can reach heaven any where with a
devout Prayer? Come, it is not the Place, but the Sacrifice; not the Temple, but
the Offering God respects, not a long and tedious traveling with the Feet, but
the quick and frequent Ascent of the Heart he accepts. To tie all Holiness to
the Cathedral of Jerusalem, is but a Trick of the house of David, a Politic
Fetch of Solomon and his abused Wisdom, to continue the Succession in his Line,
whatever the Person be, how great an Enemy soever to his Country, to our
Property, and true Religion; it is but to strengthen an Oppressive Kingdom,
instead of Whips (it is what Rehoboam bid us expect) to chastise us with
Scorpions: We have had too much already of the Father's Loins, to venture the
Trial of the Son's Little-finger, 1 Kings 12. 10. No, this is a Yoke is
intolerable to be borne by freeborn Men, those whom God owns for his peculiar
People: What! to be denied the Liberty of our Religion? to have our Consciences
fettered? not to serve God in any place? to have Jehovah, another piece of
Solomon's Cunning, to be no where so much as mentioned, but where they please?
Thus to limit the holy One of Israel, who can endure it? What honest-hearted
Child of Abraham? Brave, Faithful, Comprehending, Abraham, who set up an Altar
wherever he came, can submit to the Tyranny? Jacob, I am sure, thought not so
ill of Bethel, Genes. 28. 19. as these high-flown, ceremonial Churchmen do:
The Promise of the Blessing is to all Nations, and why then must we be thus
unreasonably restrained to one pitiful Spot of Ground? No, We have been too
long fooled with these Shams and Fopperies; David would fain have been at it,
in building a house too, had not God forbid him; Solomon, the craftier of the
two, made a shift, by the Strength of his Navy, (come, 'twas nothing else but
his prosperous Pyracies) to heap up a little more Wealth than his Neighbors,
by his wheadling and drawing in other less wary Princes to assist in the Work,
to set up the Idol: but, God be thanked, we are better instructed now in the
Reason of Religion, and have Strength, and hands as well as hearts, to defend
it; We know our God is a Spirit, and as such he has so often appeared for us,
and as such we will Worship him. Far be it from us who have been formerly
rescued from Slavery by so many Miracles, to run into it again; We have a brave
and worthy Patriot to be our Captain; Jeroboam, whom Solomon himself durst not
but prefer, he well understood the Eminency of his Parts and Valor, and could
not even then suppress his growing Merits. It Is a Providence, and we ought to
lay hold on it, that we have so gallant, so conscientious a Leader, who has so
true a Value for our Rights and Religion, to thy Tents, ('it is a just and noble
Cause, the Cause of God and his People) to thy Arms O Israel. For thus may we
suppose some bold seditious, blasphemous Ringleader, some Plebeian Orator then
inflaming the Mobile; it is the method Incendiaries usually take to make
Religion serve the Cheat; 'twas the Artifice of our Modern Saints; and how far
it is apt to prevail on those who cannot distinguish between Noise and Reason,
Zeal and Rage, the cursed Villainy of this day does but too plainly declare.

But to see then whither there be any weight in this sort of arguing; and,

1. As to the Prophecy that went of Jeroboam, that he should Reign; (I the more
willingly take notice of this, because too we have had our Revelation-men,
those who never wanted a Vision, a Prediction, an Euthusiasm, to color the
Rebellion) If God's foreseeing and predicting any Event must justify it, what
Action is there, ever so heinous, what Crime, ever so vile, will be left
unjustified? Does his Omniscience, who sees what is future as if present, purge
the Guilt? then would the oppressing of the Children of Israel by the
Egyptians, the Murders of Hazael, the Madness of Jehu, the Treason of Judas,
the coming of Antichrist and false Prophets, of the Man of Sin, and Son of
Perdition, 2 These. 2, 3. be all hallowed by the Oracle. For what is there of
these or any other Villainies, that comes not within the compass of his
Knowledge? But to assert them therefore to be the Effects of his Will and good
Pleasure, to be what he approves and allows, (which is what those would
insinuate who make use of this Argument) is to forget, that he has as well
predicted a Day of Judgment wherein to arraign, and a Hell to punish such
Offenders. There Is a vast Difference between foretelling an Event, either good
or bad, that shall be; and revealing or commanding a Duty that ought to be
done. God never intended a Prophecy, as such, to be a Rule; nor will it any
more absolve the Traitor that his Wickedness is foretold, than 'twill those of
whom the Apostle speaks, 2 These. 2. 11, 12. to whom God sends strong Delusions
(they whose case it is would do well to consider, what should be the cause of
so heavy a Judgment on them) that they should believe a Lie, that they might be
damned. This as to the Prophecy of Jeroboam's Reigning, and the Insufficiency
of arguing any Right from thence: 'Twas the Case of David before him, but so,
that he stayed God's time for the fulfilling of it; left it to him who foretold
it, to take his own method, and use his own means, to verify the Prediction.
Let us see, whether

2. The Pretense of Religion in any sort, or the new modelling thereof (it
shall be called reforming by the Usurper) to serve the Revolt, be any better
Plea? There Is no doubt, as I before observed, but the Name of Religion is a
very powerful persuasive: the bringing God into the Party is what must beget an
Awe and Reverence for whatever shall be acted. But why should a Jew (for I
would confine my self to the merits of the Cause before us) be imposed upon to
think that God, who has given his own Name and Authority to Princes (Exodus
22. 28. Thou shall not revile the Gods) who has not only required that the
outward Actions of the Subject, their Words and Language, be dutiful; but (as
if he would share with them his own Prerogative of taking Cognizance of the
Heart and its Motions) that they pay them the Reverence of their very Thoughts,
(for so it runs, Eccles. 10. 20. Curse not the King, no not in thy Thought.)
That God, who has entailed so great Temporal Blessings on the Obedience paid
to him, ('it is by all agreed to be one meaning of the Fifth Commandment,) who
has so immediately entrusted them with the Care of his Laws and Worship, has
so well qualified them for the discharging that great Trust, who gave Wisdom to
Solomon, Piety and Courage to David, promised his Presence and Blessing to them
all, (2 Samuel 14, 15, etc. 29.) made their Persons sacred, and anointed them for
his own? Why, I say, should a Jew be imposed upon to think, That God, who has
so far joined his own Interest, Honor, and Authority, with that of his
Vicegerents, so far imprinted his own Sovereignty and Character upon them,
should so forget all this, as to conspire with any Usurper against them? should
encourage or approve the Revolt, which, as it is declared in the Case of Corah
and his Accomplices rising up against Moses and Aaron, is no other, than
gathering together against himself.

And as the present Religion of the Jew, however by the Mutinous falsely glossed
upon, could be no Plea, so much less ought any new Model thereof ( Reforming as
the Usurper will style it) be contrived to serve the Revolt: for what though
God be every where, must he not therefore have any Place set apart for his more
solemn Worship? Or is not the appointing it at Dan and Bethel (were that the
true state of the Question) as much a limiting the Holy One of Israel, as 'twas
at Jerusalem? If there must be no distinction of Place in his Service because
he fills all places by his Essence, why don't they as well level Heaven and
Earth, and make his Throne and his Footstool the same? Or is it not at the
Choice of God himself, to put his Name, promise his Presence, and manifest his
Glory, more in one Place than another? Besides, it is not to limit himself, who
is immense and infinite, but his Worshippers; it is to secure a public and
certain Homage from them in some place, who if left to themselves, would be apt
to pay it in none. I meddle not with the Typical and Mystical Reasons, why
Jerusalem is preferred before all other Places, but only frame the Objection
for the mutinous Jew, as it might likewise suit the Pretenses of our Reformers,
who upon just as good Grounds set up their separate Meetings, their seditious
Conventicles and Congregations, as Jeroboam did his Calves at Dan and Bethel,
in Opposition to the established Order and Decency of our Church, till they
disturbed the Peace of it, (for that is the import of its Name) of our
Jerusalem. Which, to sum up the Argument for both, is no more than this, (and
let it be spoken to the Confusion of their Cause) That what the Rebel attempts,
is not to be justified, but by corrupting the Religion he pretends for it, by
debauching its Principles and renouncing its Precepts; that only Schism and
Idolatry are proper Advocates for Rebellion: and, to speak truly, it is the same
Anarchy in the Church that brings in Schism and Idolatry there, (for Idolatry,
the setting up more or other Gods is a Commonwealth and Populacy in Religion)
as it is, that brings in Faction and Sedition in the State: Both are from
Republican, i. e. Atheistical Principles: And it is no wonder, (let them take to
themselves for once the Honor of their free Philosophy) it is no wonder, I say,
that Commonwealths are observed equally to cherish all Religions; i. e. to
govern (whatever they talk to the Prejudice of Monarchy) to extort from, and
oppress their Subjects, rather their Slaves and Vassals, as if they believed
none.

I have said what I intended concerning Israel's Treachery, with the Remarks
thereon I thought necessary to the present Subject we are on:

III. How her Sister Judah exceeded her in her Guilt, comes now to be spoken
to: Which I pretend not to apply to the same Guilt in Specie; for Judah had not
revolted from their Allegiance to their Prince, but what was of a much higher
nature, from their Faith and Allegiance to their God; and on that account their
sin was the greater, as 'twould have been had their Crimes been otherwise the
same, the Guilt of Judah would have been the more notorious of the two:
because, as I before touched it, heightened by these following Aggravations:
viz.

1. That what Judah did, was under the Covert of the true Religion; 'Twas
against the clearest Revelation of their Duty, the most sensible Demonstrations
of the Divine Power and Goodness, the Presence of God himself with, and his
peculiar Providence still presiding over them; in a word, against those great
and distinguishing Privileges which no other part of Mankind could pretend to.

2. That what Judah did, was not only against so great Mercies, but against as
great Judgments too; those manifest Warnings of that good Providence, I mean,
which had so tenderly dealt with her, as to make her Sister Israel the sad
Example of that Vengeance, he would thereby have deterred her from; it is the
Argument of the Context, and the Emphasis of the Text, yet her treacherous
Sister Judah feared not. And for the true Religion to prostitute it self to
that Sin it so expressly prohibits, for those who could not be ignorant of their
Duty to make their extraordinary Knowledge only serve to instruct them in
greater Impiety; those who could not but be sensible of the singular Favors of
Heaven toward them, to improve all to the dishonor of their great Benefactor,
and turn his Grace into Wantonness. For those who had before their Eyes such a
Spectacle of what their Sin must end in, if not forsaken and amended, as that
of forlorn rejected Israel; for them to make the Law, to administer to their
Guilt, the Promises or Threats therein contained to promote their Impiety, such
signal and miraculous, whether Mercies or Judgments, only drudge to Sin and
Hell, that is the Aggravation, that is the Horror. And now I come with reference
to what is the Subject of this Days Lamentation,

IV. To draw the Parallel in our own Case; for we have our Israel and Judah
too; give me leave so to express it, those, on the one hand of a corrupt and
superstitious, and on the other, as they give themselves the Style, of the true
Protestant and best reformed Religion, both deeply concerned in the heinous
Guilt of Treachery, and that, as I showed it in the Case of Jeroboam and his
Complotters, as it extends to a joint Revolt from God and the King, to the
undermining the Government in Church and State, both highly guilty in this
matter, but the latter the more inexcusable of the two.

As to the Guilt of the former, i. e. of the Church of Rome, whom in the
Parallel I here call Israel, will not their usurped Primacy, so contrary to the
Doctrine of Christ, Matthew. 20. 25. and afterward their pretended
Infallibility, the only Prerogative of Heaven's Crown, taken in to justify
that and every other Usurpation whatever, too nearly resemble the Apostasy of
Israel? And what have these Calves of Dan and Bethel, (to follow the Allusion)
ever since bleated out, but the Excommunicating, Deposing, and Extirpating of
Princes, and Hell and Damnation to all who would not join with them in the Holy
Cheat. The ill Consequences whereof, have been felt no where more than in these
Kingdoms whereof we are; witness the Slavery in which Prince and People, for so
many Ages together, were held by it; and when the Yoke was cast off, What
Plots, Conspiracies, and Treasons, were still hatching by those of that
Communion? So notorious, so hateful were their Practices, till at length
whatever Mischief befell the Nation, was suspected to arise from thence: So
general was the Odium of that Name, that like a common Thief, every Felony, by
whomsoever committed, is charged upon them: and it has been the common Craft
of every Party almost, to raise the Suspicion upon the Papist, and send the Hue
and Cry after them, that so themselves might pass unapprehended, and wholly fly
from Justice. How far they had a share in contriving or acting the Tragedy of
this Day, (for that too has been charged upon them) God who knows the Secrets
of all Hearts, can best tell; and there will be a day of Revelation of all
things: How far in l ae r Conspiracies, they would do well to look to, who
pretend so much to abhor and detest their Corruptions. For this I cannot but on
this Occasion take notice of, That

1. The Jesuits, those great Plotters of that Religion, and private
Presbyteries, came first into England about the same time.

2. That they both behaved themselves, in their several (if several) Designs by
the same Model; the one in indicting Councils, summoning Synods, enacting and
reversing Orders, and exercising of all manner of Papal Jurisdiction; the
other, in appointing Meetings both Classical and Synodical, in setting down
Decrees, in reversing Orders, in electing Ministers, exacting Subscriptions,
executing Censures of Suspension and Excommunication, where they thought good,
writing exactly by the same Copy.

3. That the Principles on which they proceeded to these Enormities, were, and
are still the same. What those of the Romish Communion do by virtue of the
Power pretended to be lodged in the Church, and absolute Jurisdiction, Christ,
as they would persuade their Disciples, has given to his Vicar over all the
World; That the Brethren (for so they styled themselves) arrogating to their
Presbyteries, as they are the chief Ministers of the Kingdom of Christ, are to
uphold his Throne, to weild God's Scepter, and manage his holy Yoke (for so
they phrase it) which is their Discipline.

4. That if the Motto of the one be (so some tell us the Jesuits is) Woe to
Princes, the Republican Humor and rebellious Attempts of the other may serve
for a Comment on it. I shall give but one Instance of this thorough Accord of
these Brethren in Iniquity, and it is a very eminent one: it is what I find in
two several Authors about the same time, when these Innovations were bringing
in among us, the one a Calvinist, the other a Romanist, both publishing their
Books,

1. Under the same Title, De jure Magistratuum in subditos, and Officio
subditorum erga Magistratus.

2. Using the same Arguments, and mutatis mutandis, the very same words, only
such Alterations made as might serve their several Hypotheses; and

3. Concluding in the lawfulness of resisting, deposing, and extirpating
Supreme Powers. The several Authors are Johannes Baptista Ficklerus of the
Romish Persuasion, and an Anonymous Disciple of John Calvin; and the later of
the two has the Honor to be first on the Argument: Their Books were published
between the Years of 1576 and 1578, both within the time of Buchanan's Writing
and Publishing his De jure Regni apud Scotos; all which, i. e. the first coming
of the Jesuits into England, the settling of private Presbyteries by the
Brethren, and the writing of these several Books, one in France, another in
Germany, a third in Scotland, to which I might add the many most virulent
Pamphlets then sent abroad at home, such as Goodman, True Obedience, Martin
Mar-prelate, the Demonstration of the Discipline set out by Penry and Udal,
Ministers, by Job Throckmorton, Knightly, Wigston, Laics, in 1588. the same
Year when the Queen was deposed by Sixtus Quintus his Bull, and the King of
Spain came with his Armado to seize the forfeited Crown: and all this just
about the time when Subscription was in England first required to the Book of
Articles, so much the dread of all Innovators both in Church and State, because
so much for the Stability of both; Ab uno disce omnes.

But, because how near Brethren soever they are in Iniquity, yet there is
nothing in which they are so uneasy as to be thought such; let us a little
more distinctly see what the Guilt of the one is in this Affair, and how the
others is aggravated beyond it.

It Is Guilt, very enormous Guilt, to be those, who like Jeroboam the Son of
Nebat make Israel to sin, who corrupt and adulterate the Principles of
Religion. This, in the first Instance of it, certainly is a Guilt of the most
heinous Nature, and horrid Consequence imaginable. But these are not the
Circumstances of the present Comparison between Israel and Judah; for it is
Israel (as I asked leave to express those of the Romish Persuasion) under the
unhappiness of their being seduced, and led out of the way; Revolted Israel,
Israel under the Prejudice of false and corrupted Principles, under a kind of
Necessity of being deceived, we are speaking of; Israel too, made the Subject
of the greatest judgments. For what Hatred, what Scorn, what Disgrace and
Punishment, have been thought too much for such Offenders? Our Annals are full
of their Story, our Laws most strict and severe against them. And between such,
and Judah, i. e. those who still own the Purity of Religion, and the Principles
thereof, those who have seen what has been done to such Criminals, what they
have suffered for their Wickedness, and yet make those Principles a Covert for
their Falsehood, those Sufferings an Encouragement for themselves to act greater
Villainies; between such I say, and Judah, hangs the Scale, and on these
Accounts must turn on her Side. For what will aggravate Sin if not its being
committed against the general Principles, as of all Religion, so of what Men
particularly profess, and the highest Professions and Protestations to the
contrary? What more expose to more dreadful Judgments than the hardening
themselves against so manifest and just an hand of God? as they have seen upon
others in the like Guilt, and have felt upon themselves, (an Example, one would
think, that might work on them) in having their own so miraculously detected,
and in some measure already punished. I speak it not with Respect to Israel,
those of a corrupt and adulterated Religion, but, to give our modern Saints
still the Honor of the Comparison, with respect to Judah; I speak it too in
vindication of the reformed Religion, the glorious style whereof they so
unjustly usurp, and are so great a Scandal to. What, I say, will aggravate Sin,
if not the continuing in it under such Circumstances? 'Twas the Horror of their
Case in the Text, and so God himself enforces it, And I saw, when for all the
Causes, whereby backsliding Israel committed Adultery, I had put her away, and
given her a Bill of Divorce, yet her treacherous Sister Judah feared not.

What remains, is, that

5. We sum up all by way of Inference.

Use 1. From hence it appears, why in Scripture Treason and Rebellion are
represented under so black a Character; as being a Sin which equals the worst
of Murders, supposes the same Rancor of Mind, arises from the same Passions of
Avarice or Ambition, and in the fatal Consequence of it, must end in Ruin, and
that such as carries the immediate marks of Divine Vengeance along with it; for
with reference to all these St. Jude denounces the Woe, v. 11. Woe unto them,
for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran greedily after the Error of
Balaam for Reward, and perished in the Gainsaying of Core: And long before
Samuel had told Saul ('it was in his particular Case of Disobedience, and that
upon the most specious Pretense of Piety and high Devotion, out of a seeming
Zeal for God's Honor, that he who gave him the Victory might himself by
Sacrifice share in the Spoil; 1 Samuel 15. 15. The People spared the best of the
Sheep and of the Oxen, to sacrifice unto the Lord) but applicable to the same
Sin wherever it is found: Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft, and
Stubbornness is as Iniquity and Idolatry; and that will carry in it these
several Aggravations.

1. It Is a Sin that in its exciting Cause usually springs from Pride and
Discontent; the very Sin of the Devil in Heaven it self.

2. It Is a Sin that supposes the renouncing of God and his Religion. Whatever
we may pretend otherwise, it is the very unchristning the Man, the drawing him
off from his very Vow of Baptism, whereby he professes to renounce the Devil
and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World; from the
Obedience he then professed to Christ his Lord and General; it is the being
ashamed of his Cross, and what the sad consequence thereof is.

3. It Is a Sin that puts us out of God's Protection; out of the Care of his
Wisdom and Providence; and no wonder, that being abandoned to our selves and
the Devil

4. We should be still hurried (another fatal Attendant of this Guilt) from one
degree of Wickedness to another, that we should be seduced by its bewitching
Charms (such as the High Outcries for Liberty, Property, or Religion, (whether
there be any reason for it or no) led on by Fears and Jealousies (the proper
Symptoms of those who deal with the Devil) to all manner of Impieties. And so
the latter Clause of that forementioned 1 Samuel 15. 15. imports, which tells us,
that Stubbornness is as Iniquity and Idolatry: Iniquity, as it opposes
whatsoever is just and equal in the Laws of Men; Idolatry, as it sets up the
Imagination of the Fool, the fine Model and Platform he bewitches himself with,
the Idol of his own creating, in the place of God.

5. It Is a Sin, Witchcraft is, (and if Rebellion be such it must take the same
Fate) that must never hope for Success; Witchcraft puts the Wretch out of the
Protection of Heaven, and cannot expect its Blessing. And this alone, one would
think, should be enough to disparage the mad Attempts of the Rebel, that as
Gowry is said to have made his Remark, when he was hatching his Treason, that
no Conspiracy was ever so formed amongst all that he had met with, as not to be
defective in one Circumstance or other, (and therefore he would take care to
outdo them all) and needs it must be so; for it can never take God into the
Counsel, never have the Help of his Wisdom and Providence to accomplish it: a
shrewd Defect indeed, and such a Circumstance, as might serve to recover Men to
their Wits, if any thing were sufficient to recover him who is so bewitched
with his own Pride, Malice, or Revenge, some of the necessary Ingredients in
this Sorcery: and what is still more dreadful than all this,

6. It Is a Sin that shall be eternally punished with that Despair in Hell, with
which it is begun, and prosecuted on Earth.

Use 2. From hence see the many and great Reasons we have to detest the
execrable Treason of this Day. Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in Askelon:
That ever Religion should be prostituted to serve so great a Villainy! That the
Holy Name of God should be made use of to countenance the Murdering of his own
Vicegerent. 'Twas David's Question to the Amalekite, who might have pleaded the
Royal Command of Saul, and but a sort of Allegiance paid to him in his Anguish,
to stand upon him and slay him, 2 Samuel 1. 14. How wast thou not afraid to
stretch forth thine hand to destroy the Lord's Anointed? Is it nothing to have
the Divine Character effaced? Nothing to be guilty of Royal Blood? To behead
the Nation at a Blow, and then bring him by whom Kings reign, into the
Conspiracy? Blessed Savior! Was this thy meaning when thou commandedst to give
to Caesar the things that are Caesar's? Was this the Reason of thy submitting to
Civil Powers, that thy Disciples must presently construe it, to signify their
Right to depose them? Or, was it for this Thou inspired'st good St. Paul to
tell us, We must needs be subject not only for Wrath but Conscience sake, Romans
13. 5. that for Conscience sake we should Rebel against them? I might farther
aggravate the Fact, from the Excellency of the Person, his Clemency, his
Justice, his Temperance, his Chastity, his exemplary Piety and Patience; but
it is too stupifying an Argument to dwell on; and therefore shall only add this,
that the only way not to make all this horrid Guilt ours, is that which God
predicts, as what must lead to the Recovery of Israel from that Captivity their
Rebellion brought upon them; which shall be my last Use; viz.

Use 3. A turning to God, and (for they must go together) to our King; so it is
Hosea 3. 5. Afterward shall the Children of Israel return, and seek the Lord
their God, and David their King. There is a sort of Allegiance, there is a Duty
we can still pay to the Royal Martyr; what was wanting to his Person let us pay
to his Memory, rather let us pay to what of him survives, our Dear Sovereign;
for He too suffered in and with him. Let us consider, who 'twas that set either
Father or Son on the Throne, and let us not forget to pay all Duty and
Allegiance there: it is the only Method left us to redeem the Nation, and make
the Stain of the Guilt not public still. Let us above all disclaim the
Principles on which 'twas acted: let neither Israel nor Judah, Religion under
any Name whatever, so unhallow it self, as to justify the least Degree of
Treason It Is a Debt we all owe to the Honor of our great Master's Name, which
has so much suffered on either hand, as to take care that that be no longer
thus reproached; for thus to dishonor him and his Gospel, certainly is more
than to crucify him afresh; it is to make him the very Malefactor on the Cross,
to make him the Barabbas, the Author of Sedition and Murder; in the greatest
Detestation and Abhorrence whereof, give me leave to conclude with the Words of
the Apostle, Wherefore you must needs be subject. It Is the Duty, as Christians,
we owe to that Holy Name; it is the truest Honor you can do the Gospel, to free
it from those Abuses to which turbulent and seditious Men prostitute that Holy,
Heavenly, and Peaceable Doctrine. You are those who your selves expect Crowns,
('it is the Name under which the future Glory you hope for is expressed) and is
the Rebel fit to be advanced to that Dignity? you expect an everlasting
Kingdom, think not a little Patience and Subjection too much to pay for it: you
look after Eternal Joy, let not Repining and Murmuring be the Preparatives for
it! Submit to those whom the Lord has set over you; It Is your undoubted Duty,
and it is your Reward: your Reward here, in that Peace, that Quiet, that
Content, (and what does not that Name contain?) which such a Temper leads to,
and enjoys at present; and 'twill be your Reward hereafter in that State of
everlasting and unalterable Obedience to the King of Kings, in which Heaven and
its Happiness will consist.

Now unto the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only Wise God, be Honor
and Glory for ever, and ever, Amen.
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
England's Black Tribunal: Containing the Trial of the Blessed Martyr-King
Charles I. with the Dying Speeches and Behavior of many of the Nobility and
Gentry who suffered Death for their Loyalty by the then Rebels. Sold by Henry
Playford near the Temple-Church. 8o. Price bound 2 s.


