TWO DISCOURSES.

THE FIRST, Concerning the SPIRIT of MARTIN LUTHER, and the ORIGINAL of the
REFORMATION.

THE SECOND, CONCERNING THE CELIBACY OF THE CLERGY.

Printed at OXFORD. An. 1687.

CONSIDERATIONS Concerning the SPIRIT of M. LUTHER, and the ORIGINAL of the
REFORMATION.

CONTENTS.
PRoperties of the good, and evil Spirit.. 1. By which the spirits of New
Teachers are to be tried Luther's Holy life whilst a Monk.. 2. The several
degrees of his fall.. 3. n. 1. The first degr. his taking up a new doctrine,
whilst yet a Monk, (as more consolatory,) of Justification by Faith alone. Ib.
And devising new Comments on the Epistle to the Romans, and Galatians,
prejudicial to good works proceeding from Grace.. 4. Where 1. That the
Church'es doctrine concerning Justification was much mistaken, or much
mis-related, by him.. 6. 2. That his new opinion concerning it is detested by
many judicious Protestants.. 7. 3. Void of Consolation, and contradicting it
self.. 8.
The 2d. degree upon the former doctrine, his holding a parity of all
justified, as to their future reward.. 9. And vilifying Religious vows and
works of Mortification, and Penance, especially Celibacy.. 10. Writing against
Monastic Vows.. 11. n. 2. And much recommending the state of Marriage,
vilifying Celibacy.. 11. n. 3.4, 5, 6, 7. Throwing off his Monks Hood, and
marrying a Nun.. 12. Leaving off his Canonical hours of Prayer.. 13. The 3d.
degrees. His rejecting the authority of the present Church.. 14. The 4th. degrees. His
denying the then present to be a true Church; or the Clergy thereof a true
Ministry, affirming the Pope to be Antichrist, amp;c.. 15. n. 1. and. 16, 17,
18. The 5th. degrees. His rejecting the authority also of the former, and ancient
Church; Councils, and Fathers.. 15. n. 2. and. 19, 20. Some instances, and
testimonies-
1. Concerning his rejecting the present Church Authority.. 16. 2. Maintaining
the Pope to be Antichrist.. 17: 3. The former Ordinations of Clergy invalid..
18. 4. His rejecting Councils.. 19. 5. And Fathers.. 20.
The 6th. degrees. His setting up his own authority, and maintaining his own
doctrines, as certain and infallible truths.. 21. n. 1. and. 24. n. 1. (Tho
these in his former, and latter time much varying. ib.) The 7th. degrees.
Impatiently suffering opposition, excommunicating and anathematizing any
others, tho Reformed, that contradicted his doctrines.. 22. and. 25. The 8th.
degrees. His altering the public Service, -- ordaining a new Ministry; --
Abrogating and burning the former Canon Law.. 23. Instances and Testimonies for
these.
1. Concerning his certainty of the truth of his own doctrines.. 24. n. 1. Of
those also that he maintained against other Reformed,. 24. n. 3. 2. Concerning
his censuring and condemning those of the other Reformed opposing him.. 25.
Where also of their reciprocal censures of him for it.. 26. 3. Concerning the
instability of his doctrine.. 27:
9th. degrees. His fierce, contentious, and railing spirit discovered in all his
controversy-writings.. 28. Some instances thereof. 30. 10th. His frequent
Communications with the Devil, acknowledged by himself.. 32. Where Of the great
variety and subtilty of Satan's temptations.. 34. When this Tempter is
undiscovered.. 35. When this Tempter is discovered.. 37.
And that Luther had no secure ground to rely on, that he was not by him most
miserably deluded.. 38. 11. In particular; concerning Satan's famous
disputation with him, touching the Mass; Nullity of the present Clergy;
Justifying Faith; etc. and Luther's behavior therein.. 39: Remarks upon it,
and the invalidity of those Arguments of Satan, that prevailed with Luther..
40. amp;c. Of Zuinglius his being in like manner deluded by Satan.. 44. etc.
12. That probably Luther discovered not these wiles of Satan, but served him
ignorantly.. 46. And therefore was a more dangerous instrument of his.. 47. And
that there wanted not specious pretenses for several things in his
Reformation.. 49: Nor some personal qualities that rendered him acceptable to
his sect.. 50.
13. The resemblance of Luther's change of Religion in several particulars to
that former of Mahomet. 14. The Trial of Luther's spirit (as before described)
whether this were good, or bad, by the properties of these two spirits
mentioned in the begnning of the Discourse.. 58. Where 1. That Truth and
Holiness, Error and Vice, have a necessary connection.. 60. 2. That where more
corrupt doctrines are believed, and taught; there, for the general, must be
found more dissolute lives.. 61. The several bad fruits springing from Luther's
doctrine, that presently appeared, and were confessed, in his own time.: 62.
15. The manner of his Death.. 64. Conclusion. Where concerning the just limits
of blaming, or censuring other men's lives and actions.
CONSIDERATIONS Concerning the SPIRIT of MARTIN LUTHER, and the Original of the
REFORMATION.
Properties of the good
. 1. THE Spirit of God is described by the Apostle (1 Cor. 13.) in its
properties to be -- long-suffering, kind, not envying, nor vaunting it self,
not puffed up, not easily provoked, thinking no evil, bearing all things, etc.
and the fruits thereof to be -- love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, meekness, continency, temperance, Gal. 5.22. -- And the wisdom that
is from above to be -- pudica, pacifica, modesta, suadibilis: chaste, pacific,
modest, easy to be entreated. Jam: 3.17. -- And the Spiritual man to be -- Non
litigans, mansuetus ad omnes, docibilis, patiens, cum modestia corripiens, etc.
No wrangler, mild toward all men, docible, patient, correcting with modesty. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. When he is reviled, to bless; when he is defamed. to entreat;
when persecuted [without resistance] to suffer it. 1 Cor. 4.12. -- Is described
to wage a continual war against the flesh; in watchings, in fastings, in
various castigations, subjections, and mortifications of the body, 1 Cor. 9.27.
2 Cor. 11.27. These are the Properties of the good Spirit.

And evil Spirit.
On the contrary, the Spirit of Satan, and of this world, and those acted
therewith, are described by the Apostle Romans 1.29. to be -- Pleni invidia,
contentione, malignitate, detractores, contumeliosi, superbi, parentibus
[superioribus] non obedientes, inventores malorum, incompositi, (...): -- full
of envy, contention, malignity, detractors, contumelious, proud, disobedient to
parents [superiours,] inventers of evil, unsettled, and dissolute, without
natural affection, without fidelity. -- And (2 Timothy 3.1.) to be, seipsos
amantes, elati, superbi, parentibus [superiorbus] non obedientes, sine pace,
incontinentes, tumidi, voluptatum amatores, pietatis speciem habentes, virtutem
ejus abnegantes: lovers of themselves, haughty, proud, disobedient to parents
[superiours,] unpeaceable, incontinent, puffed up, lovers of pleasures, having
an appearance of piety, but denying the virtue of it. And by St. Jude, v. 8.
etc. to be carnem maculantes, dominationem spernentes, Majestatem
blasphemantes, in via Cain abeuntes: Defilers of the flesh, despisers of
Dominion, blasphemers of Majesty, who have gone in the way of Cain. [departing
out of the Church.] (Genesis 4.19).) And -- Errore Balaam effusi: "have poured out
themselves in the error of Balaam; [ cursing the Church and people of God: Number.
c. 22.] And, in contradictione Core theuntes; "Perished in the contradiction of
Corah: [ opposing Moses the Lawgiver, and Aaron the High Priest, Number. c. 16.]
And much-what the same by St. Peter, (2 Ep. 2.10. etc.) to be -- Dominationem
contemnentes, audaces, sibi placentes, Sectas non metuentes introducere,
blasphemantes, or, Majestates non metuentes blasphemare: Contemners of
Dominion, bold, self-pleasers, not fearing to introduce Sects, blasphemers, or,
not fearing to blaspheme Majesty's. I recite so many places, to show the
unanimous consent of the Holy Scriptures, and writers, in describing the
qualities of this evil Spirit, reduced principally to these two. 1. Fleshly
Lusts. 2. Contention and disobedience. These are the properties of the evil
Spirit, by which the Spirit of new Teachers is to be tried.

Now so often as the Teachers of new and strange Doctrines come into the world,
professing opposition to those received from our present Superiors, and to the
common tenants of the Church, Christians are directed by St. John c. 4. v. 1.
to try such Spirits whether they be of God. -- And are instructed, by our Lord,
Mat. 7.16. that they shall know and discern them by their fruits; and then, by
the Apostles (as you have seen) what in particular these fruits are.

Dr. Luther then being one of these, and the last that has appeared (when the
Church of God was at peace, and unanimous in her doctrine and discipline) to
have broached new ones, and departed out of this fold, and become the Founder
of another Model of Religion; it seems reasonable, and of much concernment,
that all Christians, so soon as any is acquainted herewith, do put themselves
in the same posture now, as they should have bin in, had they lived at the
first appearance of Luther, when all remained in the bosom, communion, and
faith of that Church which he opposed; and first try his new Spirit by the
marks or fruits here premised, before they any longer follow it; or stray from
the fold of this Church, to hearken to the voice of that Stranger. Which trial
the more to facilitate to them, it seems to me no uncharitable act, having
heretofore for my own satisfaction made some search into this man's writings,
opinions, and actions, to present them with a brief relation of such passages
of his Life, and branches of his Doctrine, drawn chiefly from his own
Testimony, or those of his Friends, and fellow-Reformists, ( i.e. the persons
most favorable to his good reputation) as I esteem to serve best to this
purpose. I pray God it may any way serve for advancing his glory, and his
truth, for which it is intended. Amen.

Erford, an University in Germany, (...) holy (...) w^^^st (...).
being much terrified by the sudden death of an intimate friend and companion,
slain (some say) by a thunderbolt, put himself into a Monastery of the
Augustine Friars there, against his Parents consent; and after his
Probationer-ship ended, took the three Vows of Religion, Poverty, Celibacy, and
Obedience, about the 22th. year of his age. [See Melancthon, in praefat. 2.
tom. op. Luther. -- Luther. de votis Monastic. praefat. ad Patrem. where he
says, Se terrore and agone mortis subitae circumvallatum, vovisse etc. That
being surrounded with the terror and agony of a sudden death, he had vowed
etc.] Here for some time he lived in his profession a very strict, chaste, and
sober life, and most obedient to his Superiors. Himself several times
professes so much of it: -- Vixi Monachus (says he, De votis Monasticis,) non
sine peccato quidem, sed sine crimine: I lived whilst a Monk, tho not sinless,
yet without grievous crime. And on Gal. 1.14. (in imitation of the great
Apostle,) -- Si quisquam alius certe ego, ante lucem Evangelii, pie sensi, and
zelavi pro Papisticis legibus, and Patrum traditionibus (says he.) -- Qua
potui diligentia conatus sum eas praestare: plus inedia, vigiliis, orationibus,
and aliis exercitiis corpus macerans, quam omnes illi qui hodie tam acerbe
oderunt, and persequantur me, etc. Before the light of the [new] Gospel, if
ever any, certainly I, had pious sentiments, and was zealous of the Papistical
laws, and traditions of my Fathers. -- I endeavored to keep them as diligently
as I could; macerating my body with fastings, watchings, prayers, and other
[spiritual] exercises, more than they all, who at this day so bitterly hate and
persecute me, because I now detract from those [good works] the glory of
justifying. For in the observation of them I was so over-diligent, and
superstitious; that I laid a greater burden on the body, than without
endangering its health it could well bear. I reverenced the Pope out of pure
conscience, not for the sake of preferments. -- Again, ibid. on verse. 15. Ego
in Monachatu externe non eram sicut caeteri homines, raptores, injusti,
adulteri ^^sed servabam castitatem, obedientiam, paupertatem; denique liber a
curis praesentis vitae totus eram deditus jejuniis, vigiliis, orationibus,
legendis Missis, etc. Whilst a Monk, I was not outwardly, as other men,
extortioners, unjust, adulterers; but I observed chastity, obedience, and
poverty: and lastly, dis-engag'd from the cares of this present life, I wholly
gave my self up to fastings, watchings, prayers, saying Mass, etc. And -- Tanta
erat autoritas Papae apud me, ut vel in minimo dissentire ab Ipso putarem
crimen aeterna damnatione dignum. So great with me was the authority of the
Pope, that in the least to dissent from him I judged a crime worthy of eternal
damnation. And thus Melancthon of him, ( Praefat. in 2. tom. Luther.) Receptus
[in Monasterium] jam non solum acerrimo studio doctrinam Ecclesiae discit, sed
etiam summa disciplinae severitate se ipse regit, and omnibus exereitiis
lectionum, disputationum, jejuniorum, precum, omnes long superat. Vidi
continuis quatuor diebus, cum quidem recte valeret, prorsus nihil edentem, aut
bibentem. Being admitted [into the Monastery] he not only learns by very hard
study the doctrines of the Church, but practices her discipline also with the
utmost rigor and severity; in all exercises of lectures, disputations, fasts,
prayers, etc. surpassing all others. I have known him, when in perfect health,
neither eat nor drink for four days together. [ For there was also a Monastery
of Augustine Friars at Wirtenberg, wherein Luther lived for many years, after
he was removed from Erford to that new-founded University for his pregnant
parts and learning.] Neither did Luther leave off his Monks hood till 1524.
sixteen years after his coming thither; after which the means of this Monastery
was given to the Elector, and he became a private Housekeeper; and the next
year after, a married man. (See Melch. Adams vita Luther. p. 128. 131.) -- And
it appears by what is objected to him by the Devil, in his book de Missa
angulari, or privata, and unctione Sacerdotum, that for fifteen years after his
entry into the Priesthood, (which was in 1507. a year before his remove to
Wirtenberg,) he ceased not almost daily saying Mass; against the idolatry of
which he afterward so much enveighed. -- Audisne Excellentissime Doctor, (says
Satan here,) number ignoras, te quasi per annos quindecim privatas Missas quotidie
fere celebrasse? Hear you this, most excellent Doctor? Don't you know, there
was scarce for fifteen years together a day, in which you missed saying private
Mass?

Luther having begun thus in the works of the Spirit,. 3. n. 1. The several
degrees of his Fa^^.
if shutting out the cares of this life, chastity, temperance, fasting, and
most strict obedience to his Superiors, (which usually is joined with great
humility, and low esteem of our selves) may be called so; now see how by gentle
degrees he fell from them, and finished his course in the liberties of the
flesh. Which thing came to pass in this manner. Melancthon relates of him, (
Praefat. in 2. tom. Luth.) -- Saepe eum cogitantem intentius de ira Dei and
mirandis poenarum exemplis, subito tantos terrores concussisse, ut pene
exanimaretur. That oft-times, whilst meditating intently on God's wrath and
wonderful examples of judgments against sinners, on a sudden such terrors
struck him, that he was left almost dead. And in this desolation (says he)
Senis cujusdam sermonibus in Augustiniano Collegio Erphordiae saepe se
confirmatum narrabat; cui cum consternationes suas exponeret, audivit eum de
fide multa disserentem; seseque deductum aiebat ad Symbolum, in quo dicitur,
Credo remissionem peccatorum. Hunc Articulum etc. He used to tell, how he had
been confirmed by the words of an old Friar of the Monastery at Erford; whom
upon his relating to him his consternations, he often heard discoursing many
things about Faith, and was at length brought by him to that article of the
Creed, in which it is said, I believe the forgiveness of sins. This Article the
old man expounded thus: That it was not enough to believe only in general (as
the Devils also do) the remission of sins to others; but that God commands
every one to believe his own sins remitted to him in particular. [True, we
performing some conditions besides only believing this; but these are not
spoken of.]

The ^^degree of his fall, his taking upa new Doctrine, whilst yet a M^nk, as
more consolatory, of Justification by Faith alone.
Thus the old man taught him; and this, as himself says (de Missa privata,) the
Devil also urged to him, and he believed him. Primum nosti; nullam tunc [ i.e.
when a Monk, and a Roman Catholick] habuisti cognitionem Christi, nec veram
fidem; and quod ad fidem attinet, nihilo melior fuisti quovis Turca, etc. First
you know, you had then [i.e. when a Monk and a Roman Catholick] no knowledge of
Christ, nor true faith; in point of which you were no better than any Turk. For
the Turks, and even the Devils themselves believe the history of Christ's
Nativity, Passion, etc. but Turks and we damned Spirits do not trust in God's
mercy, [i.e. toward our selves.] And in the same manner teaches he himself,
(in Peter 1.2.) Cognitio Dei veraea est, quod sentias Deum and Christum, tuum
esse Deum, tuum Christum; id quod Diabolus, and falsi Christiani non possunt
credere. -- Hujusmodi fiduciam nequeunt habere malae conscientiae, i.e. [saith
he, expounding malae conscientiae] sincera fide vacantes. The true knowledge of
God is this; That you believe God and Christ to be your God, and your Christ:
which thing the Devil and false Christians cannot do: -- Such a firm confidence
as this guilty consciences cannot have: guilty consciences, i. e. [saith he,
expounding himself] void of true faith. Accordingly he says in his 11th.
Article, asserted by him against the condemnation of Pope Leo. -- Creed
fortiter te absolutum, and absolutus vere eris, quicquid sit de contritione: Do
but stoutly believe that you are absolved, and absolved you will be, whether
you have contrition or no. Where if he say, that none not-contrite can possibly
credere se absolutum; whence gathers he this? For in other things we often
believe, or are strongly persuaded of, things not true. Again, if he hold every
one so believing to be necessarily contrite; why says he quicquid sit,
"whether contrite or no, and not rather quoniam sic constat de contritione?
"from your contrition it must be so. Again, in his 15th. Article: -- Magnus
error (says he) est eorum, qui ad Sacramentum Eucharistiae accedunt; huic
innixi, quod sint confessi; quod non sint sibi conscii alicujus peccati
mortalis; quod praemiserint orationes suas, and praeparatoria; omnes illi
judicium sibi manducant, and bibunt. etc. They err greatly, who come to the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, relying on this; that they have confessed to a
Priest; that they are conscious to themselves of no mortal sin; that they have
said their prayers, and done other preparatories thereto: All such eat and
drink damnation to themselves. But if they did but believe, and were confident,
that they should obtain grace there, this faith alone were sufficient to render
them clean, and worthy. Again, Article the 6th. -- Contritio quae paratur per
discussionem, collectionem, and detestationem peccati, qua quis recogitat annos
praeteritos vitae suae, etc. The contrition that is got by examining,
recollecting, and detesting ones sins; whereby a man calls to mind his whole
life past, in the bitterness of his soul, pondering on the hainousness, the
multitude, and the filth of his sins, the loss of eternal bliss, and
condemnation to everlasting woe: this contrition, I say, makes a man a
hypocrite, nay even a greater sinner than he was before. Of which being
questioned, he expounds himself; -- Se loqui de contritione naturali, and
impia, extra fidem: "that he speaks of a contrition natural, and impious,
without faith. But why so freely then condemns he such a contrition as he
describes with facit hypocritam etc. as if these are not, or cannot be
consistent with faith? unless he means with his faith, believing our sins are
forgiven, for this cause only on our part, because we believe they are so. So
in Captiv. Babyl. cap. de Baptismo, he says, -- Quam dives est homo
Christianus, vel baptizatus, qui etiam volens non potest perdere salutem suam
quantiscunque peccatis, nisi nolit credere? O the riches of the grace of a
Christian, or one baptized; who cannot, if he would, loose his salvation, tho
by never so great sins; unless he obstinately refuse to believe. [As if this
(his sort of faith) were the only condition required of us to be made partakers
of the application of Christ's merits to us; a compendious and easy way of
salvation.]

n. 2.
( Com. meant. on Gal. c. 1. v. 15.) -- Ego in Monachatu Christum quotidie
crucifixi, and falsa mea fiducia, quae tam perpetuo adhaerebat mihi,
blasphemavi. -- Servabam castitatem, obedientiam, and paupertatem; denique
liber a curis praesentis vitae totus eram deditus jejuniis, etc. Whilst a Monk,
I daily crucified and blasphemed Christ by my false confidence, which so
perpetually adhered to me. -- I observed Chastity, Obedience, and Poverty:
finally, being free from the cares of this world I gave my self wholly to
fastings, watchings, prayers, saying Mass, etc. -- Meanwhile, under this
sanctity and confidence in my own righteousness, there lurkt in me a perpetual
diffidence, [viz. then destitute of his own new-minted faith, creed fortiter te
absolutum, and vere eris absolutus; Stoutly believe that you are absolved, and
absolved you shall be,] 'doubting, dread, hatred, and blasphemy toward God.
And that righteousness of mine was no other than a mere stinking jakes, and
most delightsom kingdom of the Devil. For Satan loves dearly such kind of
Saints, as destroy themselves body and soul; and defraud and deprive themselves
of all the blessings and good things of God. Meanwhile in such there reigns
their own impiety, blindness, doubting, contempt of God, ignorance of the
Gospel, etc. And -- Quo sanctiores fuimus, hoc magis excoecati eramus, and
purius Diabolum adorabamus. Nemo nostrum non erat vir sanguinis, si non opere,
tamen cord. The more holy we were, the greater our blindness, and the more
entirely did we worship the Devil. Not one of us but was a man of blood, in
Thought at least, tho not in Deed. Here not to meddle out of what intention
himself did perform, and live in, such pious practices, which, it seems, was as
expecting, Justification, or Salvation from the perfect righteousness of these
his works, abstracting from God's mercy, (for Christ's merits and perfect
righteousness) forgiving sins; yet, why presumes he to condemn any other
Religious at all, as if they did their good works on this account? For who can
we imagine amongst them, since it was the common doctrine of the Church then as
now (excepting himself) that did not hold their liability to commit sin still,
as long as they lived; and who believed not remission of these their sins, as
well those after Regeneration, as those before, through and for the Merits of
Christ, and his perfect righteousness and sufferings, or that held all their own
good works pure and void of all imperfection, or venial sin?

Romans, he went on to disparage the goodness of man's works proceeding from
sanctifying Grace, And devises new Comments on the Epistle to the Romans and
Galatians, prejudicial to g^od works, proceed^ng from ^race.
which is infused by God into the Regenerate, for Christ's Merits; maintaining,
in the 32 Article asserted by him, that -- Opus bonum optime factum est veniale
peccatum secundum misericordiam Dei, sed mortale peccatum secundum judicium
Dei. That a good work, never so well done, is a venial sin in respect of God's
mercy; but a mortal one in respect of his justice. And that -- Nemo est certus
se non semper peccare mortaliter, propter occultissimum superbiae vitium: "No
man is certain, that he does not sin always mortally; by reason of that hidden
pride lurking in every one. Therefore also he expounds that text, 1 Pet. 1.17.
[ Qui judicat secundum uniuscujusque opus "who judges according to every ones
work,] and other the like texts on this manner: i.e. says he, ex operibus te
Deus judicabit, and evincet, si eredideris: By thy works God will judge, and
manifest thy faith, if thou believe. Much also he spoke of the captivity of
man's Will, and its servitude, as unable to do any good; and of liberum
arbitrium, 'Free-will, that it is figmentum in rebus, and titulus sine re; "a
mere fiction, and empty name; of which he speaks thus. ( Assertio Artic. 36.)
-- In caeteris Articulis, de Papatu, de Conciliis, Indulgentiis, aliis non
necessariis, magis ferenda est levitas and stultitia Papae, and suorum, etc. In
the rest of the Articles about the Papacy, Councils, Indulgencies, and other
unnecessary matters, the levity and folly of the Pope and his followers is
somewhat more tolerable: but in this the very chiefest and best article, and
indeed the sum and substance of our religion, their miserable error and
madness is to be lamented and bewailed. And he is said to have preferred his
book de servo arbitrio, before any other part of his works, ( Melch. Adams
vitae Luth. p. 170.) which thing I suppose was done by him, the stronglier to
support his new doctrine of imputative Justification solely by Christ's
righteousness: but which seems to have a very malignant influence upon men,
inducing the neglect of their endeavor to observe the divine commands; unles
at the same time man's ability to do good by God's grace be maintained as
great, as it is, in our own corrupted will, small, or none; but Luther here
made no such recompense. And in this new doctrine of his, he says, ( Comment.
on Gal. 1.11, 12.) he was much encouraged, and confirmed by the commendations
which he then received from one Dr. Staupitius, one of the same Order; who
said, It pleased him much, that the doctrine, which he preached, yielded glory,
and all things else unto God alone, and nothing unto man. This Staupitius, a
great man amongst the Augustine Friars, was at first a great encourager of
Luther in his disputations concerning Indulgencies, but afterward withdrew
himself from him, exhorting him to humility, and obedience to the Pope. To whom
Luther afterward in an Epistle to him, (see Adams vit. Staupitii, p. 19.) --
Quantum tu me ad humilitatem exhortaris, tantum ego te ad superbiam exhortor:
tibi adest nimia humilitas, sicut mihi nimia superbia. Et reprehendit (says
Adams) quod judicio Papae se submisisset. I exhort you as much to Pride, as you
me to Humility, You are as much too humble, as I too proud. And he reprehends
him for submitting to the judgment of the Pope.

Paul's Epistles to the Romans and Gal. to extol his new fiduciary faith,
depress good works in the manner you have heard; and this nine or ten years
before the Controversy about Indulgences began; his doctrine herein (as new
things usually do, especially those that tend to liberty) taking many; and
applause making him still to seek after the discovery of more faults in the
Church's former doctrines. At this time (says his Scholar Melancthon, Praefat.
in 2. tom. Luther. who also was translated to the new-founded University of
Wirtenberg, some years after Luther, for his famed learning in the Greek
tongue,) Eruditis gratum erat, quasi ex tenebris educi Christum, Prophetas,
Apostolos; conspici discrimen legis, and Evangelii; promissionum legis, and
promissionis Evangelicae; quod certe non exstahat in Thoma, Scoto, and
similibus. The Learned were well pleased to see the doctrine of Christ, the
Prophets, and Apostles, as it were brought to light; and the difference betwixt
the Law and Gospel, the Legal promises and the Evangelical one now cleared to
'em; which in the writings of the Schools, Thomas, Scotus, etc. were not at
all, or but obscurely, to be met with. Concerning which error in Justification
(the chief matter surely in all our Christianity) he there also says; That --
Origenica aetas effudit hanc persuasionem, mediocrem rationis disciplinam
mereri remissionem peccatorum, and esse justitiam, de qua diceretur, Justus ex
fide sua vivet. Haec aetas pene amisit totum discrimen Legis, and Evangelii;
and sermonem Apostolicum dedidicit. In Origen's time first arose that
persuasion, That a little disciplining of reason was sufficient to merit
remission of sins; and was that Righteousness, whereof it is said, The Just
shall live by faith. We of this age have well nigh lost all distinction of law
and gospel, and unlearnt the doctrine of the Apostle. [O ridiculous pride, and
self-conceit!]

Luther also proceeded to such bold speeches both concerning the Fathers, and
also in comparing the writings of the New Testament in order to his doctrine of
sole Justification by Faith, of which in his Preface to his Enarrations on Pet.
he says, -- Qui hoc potissimum and majori prae caeteris studio tractarunt,
quod sola in Christum fides justificet, ii omnium optimi sunt Evangelistae,
etc. Those, that more particularly and diligently than the rest treat of this
doctrine, That Faith alone justifies, they are the best Evangelists of all.
Hence may you more properly say, The Gospel of St. Paul, than of Matthew, Mark,
Luke; these latter being little more than a bare Historical narration of the
works and miracles of Christ. [What not of his Doctrines, and Sermons also, and
of the way to salvation he taught us?] And afterward, censuring the Fathers,
on c. 1. v. 8. Benedictus Deus etc. O Deus (says he) quam parum de hac
praedicatione [ viz. Omnia nobis dona a Patre donata ex mera misericordia citra
nostrum meritum] in omnibus libris invenitur, etiam iis, qui optimi habentur?
etc. O God! How little of this doctrine [viz. All our Gifts bestowed on us by
the Father, out of his mere mercy without our merits] is there to be found in
all even reputedly the best books? In all the writings of St. Hierome, and St.
Augustine, how is there nothing at all, not so much as the words? [i.e. his
sense of the words of St. Peter, a sufficient autocatacrisis.] We ought thus to
preach Jesus Christ, viz. That he dyed, and rose again; and why he dyed, and
why he rose again; that men moved by such preaching may believe in him, and
believing be saved. [ Here must be interposed his solum, else what more
frequent in St. Austine, and St. Hierome?] This is indeed preaching the true
Gospel; and whatsoever by whomsoever is preached otherwise, Gospel it is not.
And a little below: Inde facile discitur, Epistolam Divi Jacobi nomine scriptam
haud quaquam Apostolicam esse Epistolam etc. Thence may we easily learn that to
be no Canonical Epistle that is ascribed to St. James; [ this makes sufficient
way for his straminea and arida, worthle^s, and dry as a straw,] there being
scarcely the least tittle of this doctrine in it. [But then, how much do we
read there contrary?]

Luther himself also with this his new invention, That abstracting from this
device, he (most impiously) makes bold, much to prefer the Mohammedan and Turks
religion, as to good life and practice, before the Christian. It is necessary I
set you down his words, that what I say here may be believed. Thus then he in
an Epistle before a Treatise De Moribu^ and Religione Turcarum, joined with the
Alcoran, and some other Treatises against the Alcoran, published by him, as he
says, on purpose; because those, who had writ against the Alcoran, concealed
the good things of the Mohammedan Religion, but mentioned and confuted the
odious; but that Author had declared it with much integrity. Now- Ex hoc libro
(says he) videmus Turcarum seu Mahometi religionem caeremoniis, poene dixerim
and moribus, esse multo speciosiorem, quam nostrorum etiam Religiosorum and
omnium Clericorum. Nam ea modestia and simplicitas victus, vestitus, etc. By
this book we see the Religion of the Turks or Mahomet is much more plausible
for show and ceremony, I had almost said, and for good life too, [that word
stuck a little with his modesty at first,] than that even of our Religious, nay
all the Clergy put together. For no where amongst us are to be seen that
modesty and simplicity of diet, apparel, houses, all things; or the like
fasts, prayers, public conventions of the people, as this book recounts. Then
the miracles, and the prodigious abstinencies and severities of their Religious
whom of our Monks do they not quite put down and shame? And this is the reason
why from the Christian faith so many revolt, and so pertinaciously adhere to
Mahometanisme. Again, -- Christiana Religio long aliud and sublimius aliquid
est, quam Ceremoniae speciosae, rasura, Cucullus, pallor vultus, jejunia, horae
Canonicae, and universa illa facies Ecclesiae Romanae per orbem, etc. Christian
Religion is quite another and far more sublime thing, than a few specious
ceremonies, shaven crowns, cowls, pale countenances, fastings, Canonical hours
of prayer, and all that outward pomp of the Roman Church all the world over:
for in all these the Turks infinitely go beyond us. [Will he stay here? No.]
Christiana religio long aliud est quam boni mores, seu bona opera. Nam in his
quoque ostendit is liber Turcas long superiores esse Christianis nostris.
Christianity is quite another thing than a good life, [ now without a paene
dixerim,] or good works; for even in these also, as this book shows, the Turks
far outdo us Christians. And -- Nunc video quid causae fuerit, quod a Papistis
sic occuleretur religio Turcica; cur solum turpia eorum narrarunt, sc. Quod
senserunt id quod res est; si ad disputandum de religione veniatur, totus
Papatus cum omnibus suis caderet, etc. Now I see the reason of the Papists
concealing many things of the Turkish Religion, and relating only the
deformities thereof, viz. because they were sensible (which is the plain truth
of the business) that should Religion once come to be disputed, the whole
Papacy with its adherents, unable any longer either to defend their own
religion, or to confute the Mohammedan, must needs fall to the ground; since
they would be obliged to confute those things, themselves most of all allow of,
[i. e. good life, good works, fastings, ceremonies, etc. named before.] Yet
worse, Discant (says he) religionem Christi aliud esse quam caeremonias and
mores; atque fidem Christi prorsus nihil discernere, utrae caeremoniae, mores,
and leges, sint meliores, aut deteriores: sed d^scant, omnes in unam massam
contusas ad justitiam nec esse satis, nec ^is esse opus. Let them know (says
he) that Christianity is something else than ceremonies, and good living; and
that the faith of Christ says not one word, whether their ceremonies, customs,
and laws, or ours, be better or worse of the two: but let them know this, that
all these pounded in one heap together would neither be sufficient nor needful
to justification. And again: -- Si quis hos articulos teneat ( scil. quod
Christus sit filius Dei, mortuus pro nostris peccatis, resuscitatus ad vitam
nostram; Quod side in Illum justi, and peccatis remissis salvi sumus, etc.) --
Quid illi noceat, etc. If one does but believe these articles, ( viz. That
Christ is the Son of God, who died for our sins, and rose again for our
justification; That being justified by faith in him we obtain remision of our
sins and salvation thereby) what worse is he, tho he neither fast, pray, watch,
nor use abstinence so much? tho he be not altogether so modest in his diet,
apparel, carriage, housekeeping, etc. Let both Turks and Papists excel in
these things if they please; yet at the same time void of true [i.e. his]
faith, etc. Thus, if we may believe this new Doctor, and unless we will take
his new fiduciary faith for the substance of Christian Religion, Mahomet
(notwithstanding all the assistances of Grace and the Holy Spirit acting in the
Church, and so dearly purchased for it by our Lord,) has outdone Christ, and
the Alcoran the holy Scriptures; as to the producing and establishing of
Sanctification and good Works, as to mortifying the flesh and worldly lusts, as
to the devout service of God, praying, watching, fasting, etc. And our Lord,
who gave himself for us, that he might purify unto himself a peculiar people
zealous of good works: Titus 2.14. and who gave himself for his spouse the
Church, that he might sanctify, cleanse, and purify it unto himself, not having
spot or wrinkle etc. Ephesians. 5.26, 27. is in this his chief end much out-gone by
other Religions, and their working upon the bare stock of Nature, Nature
depraved, without Regeneration, without God's Spirit of Grace. At tibi imperet
Dominus, 'the Lord rebuke thee. If Christian Religion be not the holiest
Religion, it is not God's. As for the Relation he urges, it gives no such
character of the Mohammedan Religion as he pretends; secondly, did it, it must
deliver a lie; nor ought any Christian to give more credit to it than to
Mahometanisme.

Luther. Wherein first, he has shamefully mistaken, Wh^re 1. That the Churches
doctrine concerning Justification was mistaken, or mis-related.
or mis-reported, the common doctrine of the Church in all ages, (as indeed the
reformed Religion chiefly subsists by mis-relating or mis-construing the
Catholic tenants; and the greatest mischief the Devil does in the world, is by
his lying:) He has shamefully mis-reported the Churches doctrine, I say; which
doctrine holds our Justification to consist, not only in infused Grace, or
inherent Righteousness through Christ's merits, (tho it is most true, that the
Regenerate are formally made just, holy, and righteous, of formerly sinners,
and impious, by Grace infused into them by God for Christ's merits sake,) but
also in remission of sin through Christ's merits; and in remission of sins, not
only before our Regeneration, but after it also; in which also they
acknowledge, that in multis offendimus omnes, 'in many things we offend all.
[See Conc. Trent. sess. 6. c. 7. Justificatio non est sola peccatorum remissio,
sed and renovatio interioris hominis per susceptionem gratiae, etc.
Justification is not only remission of sins, but also renewal of the inward man
by susception of grace; therefore, not renewal alone, but also remission of
sins. -- And Bell. de Justif. 2. l. 6. c. -- Vtraque pars Justificationis; id
est, remissio peccatorum, and donum renovationis: Both parts of Justification;
i.e. remission of sins, and the gift or grace of renovation of the inward man.
And see Cassand. consult. on Art. 4.] This is the faith and profession of the
Monks, that watch, fast, and pray; ancient, and modern; ( Luther excepted.)

See what Dr. Hammond, of Fundamentals, 2. That his new opinion, concerning it,
is detested by many judicious Protectant.
c. 12, 13. Mr. Thorndike, Epilog. 2. l. 7. c. p. 41. Just Weights, c. 9. p.
57, 95. and others have written against the Solifidian, and Fiduciary, as most
pernicious errors:] Nay, I may say, at least the consequence thereof, even
detested by Luther himself in his latter time. For thus he, -- In visitatione
Saxonica, Multi, dum audiunt [from the Evangelical Teachers]; ut solummodo
credatur, omnia ipsius remitti peccata, fingunt sibi fidem, etc. Many being
taught, that they need only believe that their sins are remitted, devise a new
faith to themselves; and fancying themselves clean become temerarious, and
self-secure thereby. Which carnal security is worse than all the errors that
were ever heard of to this day. Elsewhere in a Sermon super Evang. Dominicoe
Iae Adventus. he observes his reformed, magis vindictae cupidos, magis avaros,
magis ab omni misericordia remotos, magis immodestos, and indisciplinatos,
multoque deteriores, quam fuerint in Papatu; to be more revengeful, covetous,
cruel; more immodest, unruly, and much worse than under Popery. And in his
Preface to the Gal. he mentions a new Sect, [ quam minime omnium (says he)
praevidissem, aut sperassem,] i.e. which of all things he should least have
forethought or looked for] of such as taught; That the ten Commandments ought
to be taken out of the Church. Thus as he saw the bad weeds, that grew up out
of his doctrine, he endeavored, but in vain, to tread down, and stifle them:
and the bad influence which this new tenent speedily had on many of Luther's
Disciples, was observed by many others. Thus Erasmus complains in an Epistle to
P. Melancthon, 1524. -- Vt largiamur esse vera quae docet Lutherus, -- quid
inutilius ad Christianam pietatem quam haec audire vulgus indoctum, hoec
instillari auribus adolescentum? Pontificem esse Antichristum; Episcopos, and
Sacerdotes esse larvas; Constitutiones hominum esse haereticas; Confessionem
esse pestiferam; opera, merita, conatus, esse voces hoereticas; nullum esse
liberum arbitrium, sed omnia necessitate geri; nihil refer, qualia sunt
hominis opera. Haec a nonnullis nuda circumferuntur, and ab improbis in
pessimam partem rapiuntur. etc. Supposing Luther's doctrines true; yet what can
be less tending to promote Christian piety, than to have it taught the vulgar,
and instilled into the ears of young men; That the Pope is Antichrist, Priests
Hobgoblins, Humane Constitutions heretical, Confession pernicious; works,
merits, endeavors, heretical words; That there is no free will, but all things
governed by fatal necessity; no matter, whether a man's works be good or bad?
These things without any welt or guard thus plainly taught, by the simple are
greedily caught at, and interpreted even in the worst sense by the bad. I know
you will say the follies of some, whom you deservedly call monsters and the
worst of villains, are not to be imputed to Luther. Yet these very monsters are
cherished by those whom Luther himself owns for the champions of the
Evangelical doctrine. The first preaching of our Savior's Gospel produced a
new sort of men to the world: what sort of men this new Gospel has brought
forth, I list not to tell you. Perhaps with you they are otherwise, but here I
assure you they are such, as were I to make a bargain, I had rather deal with
any Papist than them. Lastly, some, I have formerly known excellent men, and
even by nature very virtuously inclined, I now see grown much worse. -- And ad
Vulturium Neocomum. -- Profer mihi, quem istud Evangelium ex commessatore
sobrium, ex feroci mansuetum, ex rapaci liberalem, etc. Bring me one, who by
this new Gospel is become from a drunkard sober, from fierce mild, from
covetous liberal, of a reviler well-speaking, of shameless modest: and I will
show you a great number made thereby worse than themselves. And in another
Epistle ( fratribus inferioris Germaniae:) -- Quos antea (says he) noveram
puros, candidos, and fraudis ignaros, eosdem vidi, ubi se sectoe dedissent,
loqui coepisse de puellis, lusisse aleam, etc. Some persons, whom I knew
formerly innocent, harmless, and without deceit, no sooner have I seen joined
to that Sect, but begun to talk of wenches, play at dice, leave off prayers;
grown extremely worldly, most impatient, revengeful, vain, like vipers tearing
each other. I speak by experience. Calvin. l. 6. de Scandalis. -- Cum tot
hominum millia cupide (says he) ut videbantur, nomen dedissent Evangelio, quam
pauci, obsecro, a suis vitiis resipuerunt? Imo, quid prae se major pars tulit,
nisi ut excusso superstitionum jugo, solutius in omnem lasciviam diffluerent,
homines Lucianici and Epicurei? Of so many thousands, seemingly eager in
embracing the [new] Gospel, how few since have amended their lives? Nay, to
what else do the greater part pretend, but by shaking off the heavy yoke of
superstition, to lash out more freely like Epicures, or men of Lucian's faith
and temper, into all manner of looseness and lasciviousness. Musculus loci com.
c. de Decalog. -- Evangelici nostri adeo sibi ipsis facti sunt dissimiles, ut
cum in Papatu fuerint in erroribus ac superstitione Religiosi, in luce
veritatis agnitae sint ipsis hujus saeculi filiis prophaniores, leviores,
vaniores, and temerariores. Our [new] Gospellers are grown so unlike
themselves, that whereas under the errors and superstitions of Popery they had
yet some sense of Religion in them: now since the light of the Gospel has
shined to 'em, they are become more profane, light, vain, and temerarious,
than the very children of this world.

3. Void of consolation, and contrad^cting it self.
Thirdly, he broached a doctrine full of fraud and delusion in it self, and
when it is thoroughly examined, void of all that consolation and security it
pretends; tho few, that are taken with it, discern this. For first, he grants
this full persuasion, that their sins are forgiven them, to be such a faith, as
some may feign it to themselves, and think they have it when they have it not.
So that, tho all fully persuaded are certainly justified, yet we may believe
our selves fully persuaded, and from this justified, when we are not so. 2ly.
That it is such a faith when true, as has always good works joined with it, as
the fruits, and signs thereof; by which our selves and others, and God at the
last day, try it, whethe true. For so he is pleased to interpret the
Scriptures, of God's judging every one according to his works, that is, by his
works God tries him, whether he has this true faith: so that, tho not when he
is justified, yet when he has this true faith, or full persuasion, whereby he
comes to be justified, every one must go about trying this by his own good
works; the way by which other men, and also God tries it. Since then some may
fully believe that their sins are forgiven, that do not rightly believe so; and
there is no sure sign, but the necessary fruit of it, Good works, or Christian
Virtues, (to which I add Repentance and Contrition) to know this true faith
from the false; are not we still reduced to the performance of these at least,
as the necessary fruits of true faith, and to the reviewing of these for the
discerning our spiritual condition? And are not Monks to look upon their
fasting, and prayers, and mortifications, contrition, and repentance, their
temperance and continency, and obedience, and other Christian virtues, from
these at the least to collect the truth of their Faith? and from that to
collect the truth of their Justification? and is not Luther left still, as well
as when he was a Monk, for trial of the truth of his faith, in the same
solicitude, and doubtfulness, concerning his good works? First, That they be
externally such; and then, That they be also inwardly sound, and free from
Hypocrisy and Pride: which if they be not, the Monks before he was born knew
and taught, as well as he, that they were nothing worth. I say not, sollicitous
that they be every way perfect, and without sin: for no Monk unless it were
Luther) believes, that it is necessary they should be so; because they believe
Remission of all their sins in all their works, us well those after their
Regeneration, as before, through the sole merits of Christ; and say every day,
dimitte nostra debita, 'Forgive us our trespasses. Now what avails it then here
to tell me; that nothing, but non-believing can damn me; when this is tacitly
reserved; that when ever good works are not in me, I am necessarily an
unbeliever? And to tell me, that if I strongly believe that I am absolved, lam
absolved from my sins, quicquid sit de contritione, 'whether contrite or no?
When this is reserved, that if I have not contrition, I never do or can with a
true faith strongly believe that I am absolved from my sins.

The 2d. upon the former doctrine, his holding a par^ty of all just s^ed as to
the future reward.
Luther having made this progress in discovering a new Evangelical Faith;
whereby he placed man's Justification only in it obtaining the application of
Christ's merits, and the imputation of his righteousness unto us; and on the
other side much vilified the righteousness inherent in the regenerate by
infused Grace, (yet which Grace also was obtained for them through Christ's
merits); he proceeded to hold a kind of equality in dignity and honor, and
celestial reward, amongst all that are once justified, notwithstanding the
great difference of their works and inherent holiness: to which purpose, on 1
Pet. 1.3. he says, -- Quia. vero renati sumus Filii atque Haeredes Dei, pares
sumus in dignitate and honor Divo Paulo, Petro, and Deiparae Virginia ac Divis
omnibus. Habemus enim etc. Forasmuch as being regenerate we are thereby the
sons and heirs of God; we are also equal in dignity and honor to St. Peter,
St. Paul, the Bl. Virgin, and all the Saints. But we have the same treasure,
and all good things from God in as large a measure as they; since it is
required, that they be regenerate too, as well as we. Wherefore they have no
more than any other Christians. And -- Fidei simplicitas (says he) nos omnes
ante conspectum Dei pares facit: ( Exeg. in 1 Cor. 7) i. e. the simplicity of
says makes us all equal in the sight of God. And on 1 Pet. 1.2. -- In
sanctificatione Spiritus; -- Cogita (says he) te ideo sanctum esse, quod
Verbum Dei habeas, quod regnum Coelorum tuum sit, quod solid justus ac sanctus
per Christum evaseris. Reckon your self therefore holy, because you have the
Word of God, because yours is the Kingdom of Heaven, because you are become
truly justified and sanctified by Jesus Christ. [Which all the faithful partake
alike.] And -- Quod super terram vivimus (says he) nulla alia, fit causa, quam
ut etiam aliis adjumento simits, -- ut ad fidem and alios adducamus: That we
are continued alive still, [after thus sanctified by faith,] it is for no other
reason, but that we may help others, and bring them to the faith.

and vilifying religious V^ws, and works of Mortification and Penance,
especially Celibacy.
and religious Discipline, instituted for withdrawing souls from temptations
and occasions of sin; Vows of Poverty, or not retaining more than necessaries;
Obedience to Superiors Commands, i. e. in all things not unlawful; retiredness,
Canonical hours of Prayer; fastings, disciplines, etc. used in Religious
houses, as being; the seeking of Justification, or Salvation, per opera legis,
per legem factorum, traditiones and inventiones hominum; justitias carnis, etc.
by the works of the Law, the law of Works, Traditions, and huma mane
inventions, carnal righteousness, etc. To which purpose he says, (Adversus
falsum nominatum Ordinem Episcoporum.) -- Illi insani, ignarique fidei prorsus,
and Spiritus, imperiti prorsus rerum etc. in his Tract entitled, Against the
Episcopal Order falsely so called; Those mad, ignorant fellows as to faith and
the spirit, knowing nothing at all what belongs to spiritual things, seek to
further and advantage them by their pitiful, sorry, little good works forsooth;
their fasts, hair-cloths, scraps of prayers, confining themselves to such a
part of the Monastery. Thus also he in his Comment on 1 Pet. 1.5. -- Qui in
virtute Dei custodimini per fidem in salutem. -- Ratio huc atque illuc ducitur
de uno opere in aliud, quippe quae cupiat suis operibus in coelum conscendere,
hinc illa tot Collegiorum, Monasteriorum, Altarium: etc. On those words, Who in
the virtue of God are kept by faith unto salvation: Reason (says he) is tossed
this way, and that way, from one work to another, as seeking to scale heaven by
its own works. Hence such an inundation of Colleges, Monasteries, Altars,
Priests, Monks; but in us, who believe, God keeps a right mind in all things,
etc. For many seek to take heaven by force, [ as St. Paul, 1 Cor. 9. I chastise
my body, and bring it into servitude,] and strait break in upon it. And
therefore voluntarily they lay a cross upon themselves. So impossible is it for
humane reason not to boast of its own works; but those things God condemns. And
thus he writes in an Epistle to Stanpitius, an encourager of his for some time,
but afterward alienated from him; who in his advice to him told him, that --
Poenitentia vera non est, nisi quae ab amore justitiae and Dei incipit: That is
not true repentance, that does not spring from the love of rightness, and of
God. [Words most true indeed: for without the love of God, and righteousness,
or holiness, can be no acceptable Repentance.] Haesit (says he) hoc verbum
tuum in me, sicut sagitta potentis acuta; his inhaerens ausus sum putate eos
falsos esse, qui operibus poenitentiae etc, Those words yours were to me as the
sharp arrow of the mighty; and whilst I thought on them, at length I was so
bold as to dare to think those deceived, who attribute so much to works of
repentance, that they have scarce left us any thing at all thereof of besides
certain formal satisfactions, and most dull tedious Confession, etc. [As if
these did not proceed from the love of God, and of holiness; and the greatest
mortifications usually were not of those who more fervently love God and
virtue; or mortifying the flesh, and having, or being led by the Spirit, were
(...) inconsistent.] And in his Colloquies, c. 37. p. 392. -- That no man ought
to lay a Cross upon himself, or to make choice of a Tribulation, (as is done in
Popedom): but if a Cross or Tribulation comes upon him, then let him suffer it
patiently; and know that it is good and profitable for him; for we must learn
(says he) that Satan is a liar, and a murderer, and that heaviness of spirit
comes of the Devil, who out of mere hatred wishes that we might not enjoy so
much as one hours solace, or comfort. He advises his also to shun
solitariness. -- 'The Papists ( says he p. 406.) do teach it, that if we
intend to know Christ, and to keep our hearts pure, then we should covet to be
solitary, and alone, and not amongst much fellowship: a man should be a
Nicholas-brother, etc -- 'The same (says he) is a Devilish persuasion,
directly against the first and second Table of God's commandments; which
teach, that we should do good to our neighbors; therefore we should use their
company and fellowship. The same allegation is also against Matrimony, against
House-laws, and Temporal Government. We see that our Savior Christ (when he
was here on earth) led no such solitary kind of life, he was not much alone;
there was always a tumult of many people about him; he was never alone but when
he prayed. More and greater sins are committed when people are alone, than when
they keep themselves to fellowship. When Eve in Paradise walked alone, then the
Devil utterly misled and deceived her. I have my self found, that I never fell
into more sin, than when I was alone. God has created mankind to fellowship,
and not to solitariness; which with this strong argument is approved: God in
the Creation of the world created man, and woman, to the end that man of the
woman should have a fellow. Solitariness inviteth Melancholy; and one beting
alone has offensive, heavy, and evil cogitations. To conclude; when one is
alone, so has he strange thoughts, and construeth a thing always in the worst
sense, etc. Melancholy is an instrument of the Devil, through which he
accomplisheth many things. [The less reason he has to commend solitude it
seems, who found his own so comfortless, and peccant.] Such language as this,
this man uses, contrary to the Spirit of our Lord, ( Mat. 19.12.) and St.
Paul, (1 Cor. 7.1, 7, 8, 34, 35, 38, 40.) and the Church of God in all ages.
And thus was he a new kind of Reformer, from restraint of Laws to Christian
liberty; from Mortifications to Evangelical Indulgences; from the having an
active holiness and righteousness in our selves, to the procuring of a passive
righteousness in Christ; without our working at at all as necessary to it
derived to us, and put upon us; wherewith being clothed, we reply to the
Devil, Have I sinned, let Christ answer for it? ( Colloq. 14. c. Comment. in
Gal. Praefat.)

His writ^ng against Monastic^ Vows.
This he also frequently inculcated to his followers: -- That all heaviness of
mind and melancholy ( i. e. about matters of salvation) comes of the Devil;
and thus God has sent his Son into the world, not to fright but to comfort
sinners. ( Colloq. c. 37. p. 392.) That in their anxieties concerning faith and
salvation, the chiefest Physic for such a disease was firmly to hold, such
cogitations not to be theirs, but that mod sure and certain they come of the
Devil; therefore they must use the highest diligence to turn their hearts upon
other thoughts, and beat out such cogitons; to repair to Godly company, and
avoid being alone. I mention this only to show, that, tho this his counsel
according to some circumstances is very good, yet, considering his notion of
faith nursing all men in security concerning their own works, and obedience, it
may be very pernicious to many persons in shaking off, and discarding the
wholesome admonitions of their own Conscience, (which should move them to a
sorrow-working repentance, and reformation,) as the suggestion of Satan.

adversari fidei, praceptis Dei, Libertati Evangelicae; were contrary to faith,
the commands of God, and Evangelical liberty: And when told of the many former
great Saints that had happily lived in such observanee; -- Non nego (says he)
sanctos viros hac perversitate faeliciter usos, and miraculo divino servatos:
That holy men have happily made use of this perversenes, and miraculously been
preserved, I deny not.

(...) much rec^^^^ ding the st^^^ of Matri^^^^ and vil^^ying Celibacy.
He writ also much in recommendation of Matrimony, and disparagment of Celibacy,
contrary to the judgment and doctrine of our Lord, and of St. Paul, and of the
Fathers, and former Church, For whereas our Lord says, Matt. 9.12. -- That
there be those, who have made themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of
Heaven-sake; [which implies their Eunuchism to be from such a gift of God as is
attained by their endeavors; and that this is pursued by them for a better
attainment of the Kingdom of Heaven]; and so recommends such an Eunuchism to
all, with a Qui potest capere, capiat, 'He that can receive it, let him receive
it: and whereas after him St. Paul does the same, 1 Cor. 7. from v. 32. to the
end, preferring Celibacy before Marriage, to those who have power over their
own will, and a firm resolution thereto, v. 37. for many reasons that are
advantageous to salvation; as for their being freed from the cares and troubles
in the flesh; for their minding the things that belong to the Lord, how they
may please the Lord: that they may attend wholly upon him without distractions;
that they may be holy both in body and spirit; whereas the married care also
for the things of the world, how to please a husband, or a wife, and so are in
some sort divided; I say, whereas such things are delivered by our Lord and St.
Paul, recommending much a single state of life before marriage, for the better
serving of God therein here, and so receiving an higher reward for this better
service hereafter in heaven: This man, as if possessed with a contrary spirit,
says, -- Christus ipse non consuluit [coelibatum,] sed potius deterruit;
manifestavit solum and laudavit. (De Votis Monastic.) Christ himself did not
advise us to, but rather deterred us from, Celibacy: he only told us of it, and
commended it. And the like he faith of St. Paul, in 1 Cor. 7. * urging, to
prove this he says, our Lord's words, -- Non omnes capiunt verbum illud, sed
quibus datum est: All receive not this word, but those only to whom it is
given. [ Whereas indeed it is given to all those, who use a just endeavor for
it; like to those who, he said before, made themselves Eunuchs; * and urging
St. Paul's words, -- unusquisque proprium Donum habet ex Deo, Every one has
his proper gift of God, [ Proprium donum, 'proper gift indeed, but this
according to the endeavor he uses for it, getting the mastery over his will,
etc.]

Contineney to be a gift of God; but then he will have it a gift no way
acquirable by us, as other gift s and graces are, but such as Miracles be, no
way in our power to be procured by our prayers, or attained by our industry. --
Cast (says he, Epist. to Wolphgang us Reisembusch.) and integre vivere, tam
non est in mann nostra quam omnia reliqua Dei miracula. gratia, and opera: To
live chaste, and undefiled, is no more in our power, than the either Miracles of
God, his grace, and his works. And ibid. -- Deus improbat istud votum, non
secus ac si vovissem Dei Matrem me velle fieri, aut novum coelum condere velle;
God disapproves such a Vow as that, all one as if we should vow to become the
Mother of God, or the maker of a new world. A Gift he admits, but so rare, as
-- Vbi unus castus est, ibi plusquam centies milie eonjugatorum esse debent:
There ought to be more than one hundred thousand married persons, for one chaste
person not so. ( Exeges. in 1 Cor. 7.) And therefore, tho not knowing anything
of particulars, he accuses most impiously all Monasticks and Religious
generally of living in continual fornication or uncleaness.

And therefore as the Apostle advises to Celibacy so many as can master their
Wills, so Luther advises all to Marriage; not considering first with himself,
whether they may not have this gift; nor yet showing, since he makes it so
singular, and unacquirable, how it may, by those that have it, be known: yet
whereas surely it concerns so many as have vowed to God perpetual Celibacy, and
also have received from God this gift of Continency, not to break such their
Vow which they are able to observe, and wantonly change it for Matrimony; and
will not all such fall under St. Paul's censure, as those Widows did he spoke
of in 1 Timothy 5.11. -- That they waxed wanton against Christ, and married? And
upon these terms at least it seems to have concerned Luther also, both for
himself, and Katharine Bora his wife (both these having vowed) first to have
cleared the point, that they were denied the gift of continency; of which
denial every motion of lust that arises can be made no certain sign, since he
says, that the continent also may have some lustings, as is showed by and by.
And if he might discern his own inconsistent with that gift, yet how he could
also know the Votaress Katharine also to be so, I am to learn. But also
concerning his own Gift, since he discerned no lustings which he suffered in
the heat of his youth, and when a Friar, to have been inconsistent with the
gift of continency in him; it seems strange how he could be assured, those that
assaulted him after forty years old (had he used the due means of quenching
them) to be so. Meanwhile as St. Paul recommends Celibacy, so thus he pleads
for the necessity of Marriage, in his Epistle to Wolphgangus, mentioned before,
without taking notice of any such gift as Continency; -- Qui se hominem esse
agnoscit, ille in audiat, quam Deus super omnem carnem pronuntiat sententiam,
dicendo nimirum se nolle quenquans vivere (...), sed multiplicare, Genesis 2. --
Qui vero adeo (...) manner statuit, ille nomen hominis a se de^onat, plane
faciens se Angelum esse, aut Sp^ritum. Hoc enim a Deo nulla modo conceditur,
(...) vivere volens plane (...). Non video hic quicquam consultius, quam
clausis animi oculis quantocius ipsum opus aggredi ad quod a Deo creatos nos
esse videmus and sentimus, dum magnis flammis quotidie in carne nostra
adurimur. -- Ne quaeso conemur sanctiores esse Abrahamo. He that owns himself a
man, let him hear the sentence pronounced by God upon all flesh, saying he
would have none live celibate, but multiply. Genesis 2. -- But if any one does
resolve to live single, and without the care and trouble of children, let him
lay aside the name of man, since he makes himself a downright Angel, or Spirit.
For so impossible is it to live unmarried, that to attempt it is plainly to
fight against God. What can be more advisable therefore, than with all
possible speed to set about that very work, for which we plainly perceive, by
the hot schorching flames daily burning within us, we are created. [ But not
those perfons, I hope, who have the gift of Continency; among whom might be the
person he writ to, who had also made a vow of it. -- Pray thee let us not
strive to be holier than Abraham And from such a necessity he held of the act
of Marriage, and the want of the gift of Continency, it is that in his Sermon
de Matrimonio he thus states the point. -- Vbi alter alteri se subduxerit, ut
debitam benevolentiam persolvere nolit, hic opportunum est, ut maritus dicat;
Si tu nolueris, alia volet. Si Domina nolit, adveniat Ancilla. Si public and
ante conspectum Ecclesiae renuat, repudia eam; and in vicem Vasti Ester
surroga. Where the one withdraws and witholds due Benevolence from the other,
[speaking of the Married,] here the husband may very well say to the wife, If
you will not, another woman will; For lack of the Mistress, welcome the Maid.
If she refuse, publicly and in the face of the congregation put her away, and
put Ester in Vashti's room.

(Sermo de Matrimonio) Si te continere non posse improperes, te plane mentiri
respondebo. Nam haud dubie Deus tibi robur impertiet: If you so far slander
your self, as to say you cannot contain; I must tell you plainly you lie; for
without doubt God will enable you. [I hope without miracle, and yet not without
such a man's cautious endeavors thereof] In case also of ones having a bad and
unsufferable wife, he gives this advice. -- Si far minus potest [i.e. illius
malitiam,] ne pejus comittat, divortium faciat, and perpetuo inconjugatus
permaneat: If he cannot bear with her [frowardness] rather than do worse let
him divorce her, and not marry after. [He here also presuming of the husband's
Continency.] He says also of himself, that during his Monastical life, in
which he passed all the heat of his youth, not marrying till after forty, he
lived continently. He grants also those that have the gift of Continency not to
be without lustings, but these such as they conquer. Neque dubium est, (says
he speaking of the Apostles -- Melius nubere quam uri, 'better to marry than
burn,) quinii quibus castitatis donum concessum est, quandoque libidinem
sentiant, eaque tententur; sed quia transit and passim deperit, ideo eorum res
in summa non est ustio: No doubt, says he, but they that have the gift of
continency sometimes feel some lusting within them, and are tempted with it;
but because it passes away, and dies, [quenched doubtless by their rejecting
and diverting their thoughts, as their passions are more tameable, and their
affections to continency stronger,] theirs in fine is not burning. And it is
seen often, that men, at some time much given to lust and fornication, have
afterward lived most chastely their whole life without marrying, who could not
have done so without having this gift from God; and therefore this gift seems
such, as without their own fault and neglect they might have had from God
sooner.

Paul's -- De Virginibus praeceptum Dei non habeo; 'as concerning Virgins, a
commandment of our Lord I have not. 1 Cor. 7.25. (to which the next words are,
Consilium autem do, but council I give,) he grants that here the Apostle,
Virginitatem cuique liberam relinquit, "as to Virginity leaves every one to his
own liberty. But then says he, Vbi praeceptum non est, ibi nec meritum, nec
merces, coram Deo relinquitur, sed libertas quaedam per sese; where there is no
precept, there is no place left for merit or reward before God; but bare
liberty only, and no more. Quite contrary to St. Paul. c. 9.18. What is my
reward, etc. and contrary to our Lord's -- Qui potest capere, capiat, "he that
can, let him receive it; and St. Paul's -- Consilium autem do, "Counsel I give;
and his Been facit, "Does well, said of Marriage; but Melius facit, "Does
better, of a single life: And is there then a reward with God for doing well,
but none for doing better? And if Continency be a means of serving God more
constantly, and free from distraction, has it not in this a sufficient reward
why it should be preferred?

Paul's 1 Cor. 7. say otherwise?) but then he will have it better only as to
the enjoying tranquillity and quiet in this present life. To which purpose he
says, ( Exeg. in 1 Cor. 7.) -- Hoc vere est Virginitatem pradicare, ejus tum
altitudinem, tum merita coram Deo non adducere, merum otium and tranquillitatem
ejus in hac terra commendare. This is truly to commend Virginity, not to praise
its height and excellency before God, but the bare quiet and tranquillity it
affords in this life. And upon St. Paul's -- Bonum est hominem sic esse, it is
good for a man so to be, 1 Cor. 7.26. he comments -- De caducis hujus temporis
Apostolus locutus est bonis, the Apostle speaks of the fading and temporary
things of this life. And upon -- Qui non jungit melius facit, v. 38. 'He that
joyneth not [his Virgin in Matrimony] does better, De bonitate hujus mundi
(says he; intelligendum est, It is to be understood in respect of this world
only. As if the Apostle had not expressed himself before sufficiently, for its
being much better in order to the things not of this, but of the next, world,
and to the serving of God. But now to the contrary hear we Luther concerning
the state of Marriage, what advantages as to men's salvation that has before
Celibacy. Christiano (says he), quem alia post hanc manet vita, prudenter
impendio agitur, ut hic pauciores bonos dies transigat, quo in futura patria
incessanter melioribus abundet; (Exeg. in Cor.) Sic quoque; Domino been visum
est, quum marem and faeminam condidit, and coadunavit: In a Christian, who
looks for another life and country, it is exceeding prudent to take care to
have as few good days as he can here; that so he may incessantly enjoy the more
hereafter. For so it was the will and pleasure of God, when he created male and
female, and made them both one flesh: [viz. that neither of them might see many
good days here.] Again, to the same tune afterward: Debebant (says he) haec
inverti, ut matrimonium verus Spiritalis (status), id quod res est,
appellaretur; Ordines autem Religiosorum very saeculares and mundani status, id
quod sunt, nominarentur: These things ought to be inverted, [i.e. the calling
of the state of the Religious Orders Spiritual, and the Conjugal, Mundane,]
Matrimony should have been called the Spiritual state, as indeed it is; and
Religious Orders the Secular and Mundane, as really they are. For, says he,
Perpende sacras Religiones etc. quid aliud est, quam eum statum quaerere, in
quo non opus sit nec oculos quidem in coelum attollere, quotidiani panis
expectandi gratia. -- Sin uxorem duxeris, primus insultus adest tibi; Qui te,
etc. For consider the Religious Orders: what are they else but such a state of
life, wherein a man needs not so much as lift up his eyes to heaven to beg his
daily bread? -- But are you married? immediately the first outrageous onset is
this, How will you now maintain your self, your wife, and children? which is
enough, not only to teach and stir you up to think of God's grace and
goodness, but enforce you also to have faith in him, whether you will or no.

Thus he, not minding well what he says: As if our Lord, Mark. 4.19. -- Luke
8.14. -- 21.34.14.20. and St. Paul, 1 Cor. 7.28, 32, 34, 35. had not named
cares of this life as great obstructions to piety. He further proceeds,
comparing these two states. -- De usu vel abusu statuum in praesenti nihil
disserimus, caeterum de condition and natura statuum in sese; ac concludimus
Matrimonium velut esse aurum, Spiritualem vero statum [i.e. Religiosorum] ut
stercus; propterea quoa illud ad fidem, is vero ad impietatem promoveat: With
the good or bad use made of these two states I meddle not at present, but only
their different natures and qualities in themselves; and I conclude, that the
state of a Married life is as Gold, of a Religious as Dung: because the former
tends to faith, the latter to impiety, [i.e. by its plenty and want of cares,
and because non ex labor suo vivit, it does not live by its own labor.] But
if he speaks further how a Spiritual estate or Celibacy may be abused, he seems
before to abstract from this.

Encomiums, and practice thereof; and saying (in Colloq, 50. p. 451.) -- That
the Devil, who stirs men up to lustful thoughts, laughed in his fist at St.
Jerome's striking himself with stones at his remembrance of the Virgin he had
seen dancing at Rome; at St. Bennet's rolling himself in thorns; St. Francis's
embracing Snow-balls; St. Bernard's chastising himself, and by his rigors
getting a most loathsome stinking breath: and saying, That he much marvelled
that the holy Fathers suffered themselves so fiercely to be tormented with such
foolish tribulations; well to be remedied, as long as Maidens are forth coming.
Most rashly condemning the Monasticks and Religious generally of strange lusts,
and uncleannes. Yet of the most (...) whom he could know nothing of any such
inchastity, or incon^^nency, and he presumed it of them, even contrary to his
own experience of himself, when a Monk; who testifies of himself, -- se
servasse castitatem; and vixisse Monachum, non sine peccato quidem, sed sine
crimine: that whilst a Monk, he had lived chastely, (in that only happy time of
his;) and tho not sinless, yet without any grievous crime.

His throwing off his Monk's Hood, and marrying a Nun.
as you have heard him say, even in the greatest heat of his youth so strictly
kept it; so that he might reasonably presume Continency a gift that was in his
power, tho it should not be in all men's; and therefore his vow of it, as of a
thing in his power, obliging; in the forty second year of his age, when the
boylings of Nature were now well assuaged and passed over, he boldly dissolved
this his Vow, and took a wife; and her not a woman dis-engaged from a single
life, but who was a Votress also to Christ, of preserving her Virginity; of
which, for any thing he could know, she might also have the special gift. Her
name was Katherine de Bora, a professed Nun; who with some others corrupted by
the doctrine of Luther, and other new Reformists, had not long before deserted
her Cloister. And thus these two Votaries (to use the Apostle's language)
having cast off their first faith and promise of serving God in a single life,
and waxing wanton against our Lord (whom they had formerly taken for their only
Spouse) married to one another. And the reason Luther gave for such his
marriage, was not this, burning, or fear of incontinency; but that he might
leave his own Doctrine confirmed also by his own example. (Epist. ad Mich.
Stifel.)

Yet a thing it seems it was, which himself also not long after much regretted,
as may be conjectured from those words of Camerarius, in vita Melancthonis, p.
102. and Adam. vit. Luth. p. 130. who says, that -- Melancthon non modo
Lutheri dolorem moderatus est, sed illum quoque consolando crexit; and
tristitiam molestiasque ejus hilaritate colloquiorum levavit, and ad pristinam
eum alacritatem reduxit: When Luther was in his dumps, [concerning his
marriage, and the offense given by it,] Melancthon's jests and merry talk etc.
made him laugh, etc. And by Luther's procurement Melancthon also himself, when
now forty years old, took a wife; nuptias conciliante potissimum Luthero, '
Luther chiefly making the Match, says Adams vit. Melancthon. p. 350. -- And of
it thus Luther in an Epistle to Langius: Philippo ducitur Katharina Crappin;
quod me Authore agi clamant: Ego homini, siquae sunt, optima facio, nihil
moratus universorum clamorem: Philip has married Katharine Crappin, by my
means, they cry. I do for the man that which is best for him, [ to account
marriage optimum, best, he must know Melancthon not to have the gift of
Continency,] 'not mattering all their clamors. Thus he. -- In the same year
also that himself married, and probably a little before it, he writ an
exhortatory Letter to Wolfgangus Reissenbuch. ( in 7. tom. Operum.) of the
Order of St. Anthony, one tied with Vows as himself was, to break them, and
take a Wife; telling him his Vows were unlawful, because impossible; 'as, says
he, if I should vow to be the Mother of God: urging to him (instead of Matt.
19. Qui potest capere capiat, he that can reecive it, let him receive it, and 1
Cor. 7. -- volo omnes sicut meipsum, 'I would all men to be as my self, -- and
-- qui non jungit, melius facit, 'he that joyneth her not in marriage, does
better) the 2d. of Genesis v. 18. Non est bonum esse hominem solum, it is not good
for man to be alone, -- and Genesis 1.28. the precept, Crescite, and
multipl^^amini, 'increase, and multiply. And, Adae filii sunt, (says he) and
manebunt homines: hanc ob causam debent, and coguntur, iterum ex se relicto
semine, procreare homines: Men as being, and still like to be, sons of Adam,
are under not only duty, but necessity of begetting others to leave behind 'em.
-- And -- Qui adeo (...) man^re statuit, ille nomen hominis a se deponat; plane
faciens se Angelum esse, aut Spiritum; Homini enim a Deo nullo modo conceditur:
He that resolves to continue single, let him renounce the name of Man, since
it is plain he must be an Angel or Spirit. For God has given no such gift to man.

Nam non duxi uxorem, ut diu viverem, sed ut meam doctrinam, forte mox post
meam mortem conculcandam, iterum proprio exemplo relinquerem confirmatam, pro
infirmis: I married a wife not to live the longer, but to leave my doctrine,
[what of the lawfulness of Votaries to marry? not such, I hope, as have the
gift of Continency,] (which perhaps, when I am dead, may be trampled upon)
backed by my own example and practice, for the weak brethrens sake.

As leav^ng ^ff his Canonical Hours of Prayer.
the recital of his Office, or Canonical Hours, wherein the whole book of
Psalms is entirely repeated every week, besides many other Lections out of the
Scriptures and Fathers, in his declining from the Church he by little and
little threw off this yoke also; first deferring these Devotions to dispatch
them altogether on Saturday; then discharging himself of them quite, and
instead of them being satisfied with the recital only of the Lord's prayer. Of
which thus Hospinian, ( Hist. Sacram. part altera fol. 4.) Lutherum etiam post
impugnatum Papatum aliquot annos se macerasse recitandis Horis Canonicis; cum
autem per labores crescentes non posset illis quotidie vacare, totam diem
Sabbati septies repetendis impendisse; done^ a Philippo admonitus eam
superstitionem abjecerit, motus hac Philippi oratione; Si peccatum esset, etc.
Luther, after he had impugned the Papacy, yet still for some years macerated
himself in reciting the Canonical Hours. Afterward when through business he
could not attend it every day, he employed every Saturday for the repeating
them seven times together, till advised by Philip he rejected that
Superstition. The argument that moved him was this: If the omission of the
recital of those Prayers was a sin, he was guilty already in not performing it
daily as the law required: if no sin, why should he lose so much time from more
profitable and better things? Luther answered, the advice was good, and from
thence forward he would instead of the Hours recite the Lord's Prayer.Tho I
find it is said in his life, Melch. Adams. p. 166. -- that -- Sumsit sibi fere
quotidie certum tempus ad Psalmos aliquot recitandos: That he daily allotted
himself some time for the recital of some Psalms. And himself says in an
Epistle Tom. 1. p. 222. -- Psalterium exigit integrum virum, the Psalms alone
are enough to take a man's whole time. Which makes me believe, that he never
totally cast off this Holy Exercise.

His rejecting 3ly. the Authority of the pre^^^^ Church.
not displeasing to many, as yiedling much comfort to great sinners, and
relaxing strict life; the next thing which followed, was the throwing off his
Obedience to her Authority. But this by certain degrees. Questioned for his
Doctrines, and upon this cited to Rome, he made friends to have his cause heard
in Germany. Heard, and condemned in Germany (by Card. Cajetan for one, a
moderate and learned Prelate,) he now appealed to Rome, and to the Pope. But
well perceiving also, that his doctrine would be most certainly condemned there
(as it was) he suddenly intercepted this Appeal with another (see Adams vit.
Luth. and opera Luth. 1. tom.) made from the Pope to a Council. But perceiving
that neither thus (the usual former laws of Councils being observed; or only
this law of all Assemblies, that the much major part shall conclude the whole)
his doctrine could stand, (as indeed it did not) he appeals yet again from
Councils to Scripture: where now he knew himself safe (as any Heresy, tho never
so absurd, would be) in choosing that to be the Judge, or decider of the
Controversy, which could never deliver any new sentence on any side; and
concerning the meaning of whose former sentence is the present Controversy. But
if he means here an Appeal to the Scriptures, i.e. to that which either
Christian Princes, or the common professors of Christianity in general (for
such he names for his Judges sometimes) shall declare to be the true sense of
them; here first, it seems unreasonable, concerning the meaning of God's Word,
to prefer the judgment of the Laity before that of the Clergy; of the Churches
subjects, before that of their Governors. Secondly, Thus also his cause is
lost; for after all his allegations of Scripture produced, and divulged in his
writings, the Princes and the Common people also of Christianity, that condemn
his doctrine, did then, and do still very much out-number those who approve it.

The 4th. his d^nying the then present to be a true Church, or the Clergy
thereof a true Ministry, affirming ^he P^pe to be Antichrist.
He stayed not here, only in an absolute disobedience [not only of non-assent,
but also of open contradiction] to all Church Authority; but proceeded so much
farther, as to deny the present visible Church, or that of many former Ages, to
be a true Church, (he, De judicio Ecclesiae de quavis doctrina, making this the
only note of the true Church, that therein the Gospel be purely and sincerely
preached); or to have in it any true Clergy, or Ministry. And again, from this
defect of a true Clergy he argued, that there had bin formerly in celebrating
the Eucharist no true Consecration of the Elements for operating the presence
of the Body and blood of Christ, [tho the meanwhile he justified his own, and
his Disciples Consecration to be effectual herein]: and therefore that the
people had continually committed idolatry in worshipping the naked bread as
Christ's Body. This urged to him, as he says, (De Missa privata and unctione
Sacerdot.) by the Devil, to reduce him, for many years guilty of such
Non-consecrations, to despair, he assented to, and afterward maintained. Next
from this he made yet a further discovery, of the chief Bishop in the Church,
the Pope, his being Antichrist; the Bishops his Apostles; and the Universities
his Lupanaria, or Brothel-houses, (for the Universities much afflicted him.)

the 5th. his rejecting the authority also of the f^rmer and ancient Church,
Councils, and Fathers.
Thus having cast off, blasted, and defied to the uttermost all present
Church Authority; next, solicited that, at least concerning the sense and
meaning or right exposition of the Scriptures, he would stand to the judgment
of the ancient Church, and be tried by it: This also he expressly renounced,
frequently vilifying the doctrine of the Fathers, their weak interpretations of
Scriptures; and accusing them of many errors and contradictions.

Some Instances and testimonies. 1. Concerning h^s rejecting the pres^ t
church-^^^ho^ity.
For these things it were easy to produce out of his Writings a multitude of
testimonies.

For the newness of his opinions, and his marching alone against the Doctrines
of present, and former Church, he every where acknowledges it, not to say
glories in it, as a thing arguing his singular illumination and wisdom. Nay
Erasmus (Ep. to Justus Jonas) says it was observed of him; That where he
agreed in Sense, yet he strove to express himself contrary to the former usual
doctrine. Aiunt Lutherum, aliquoties, quum eadem doceat quae caeteri, tamen
verbis ipsis id videri conari, ut diversissima videatur adferre; as
particularly appears in his Expositions of some of his condemned assertions.
(Assertio Articulorum.) -- See his book de Captivitate Babylonica, in the
entrance of his discourse on the Mass, where -- ( Rem arduam (says he) and
quam forte sit impossible convelli aggredior; ut quae tanto saeculorum usu
firmata, omniumque consensu probata, sic insedorit, ut necesse sit majorem
partem librorum, qui hodie regnant, and pene universam Ecclesiarum faciem
tolli, and mutari, penitusque aliud genus caeremoniarum induci, seu potius
reduci. Sed majori cura verbum Dei oportet observare, quam omnium hominum, and
Angelorum intelligentias. A hard, and perhaps unfeisible task, the abolishing
that, which being ratified by the practice of so many ages, and approved by
general consent, is at length so settled, that the greatest part of books now
in vogue, nay almost the whole face of the Church must be taken away and
changed, and quite another kind of ceremonies induced or rather reduced. But
the word of God is more to be regarded than all the wit of men or Angels. And
in his Preface to his book de abroganda Missa privata. -- Quot medicamentis
(says he), quam potentibus, and evidentissimis Scripturis meam i^ sius
conscientiam vixdum stabilivi, aut auderem unus contradicere Papae, and credere
eum esse Antichristum, Episcopos ejus esse Apostolos, Academias esse ejus
Lupanaria? quoties mihi palpitavit tremulum cor, and reprehendens objecit eorum
fortissimum etc. With how many powerful remedies, and most evident Scriptures,
and yet all little enough to my wavering conscience, did I bring my self at
length to dare (one single man) to contradict the Pope, and believe him to be
Antichrist, the Bishops his Apostles, the Universities his Brothel-houses? How
often have I trembled, and quaked for fear, and chidingly objected to my self
that their strongest and only argument? Are you, alone in the right? Is all
the world besides in the wrong? In the Preface to his book, Adversus falso
nominatum Ordinem Episcoporum, he, as it were repenting of his former respects,
thus defies them, and withdraws his doctrine from theirs, and all humane
cognizance and censure. -- Jam ante pronuncio, me de c^tero (quandoquidem palam
veritati resistitis) non tantum honoris habiturum vobis, ut me, aut meam
doctrinam, vestro, vel ullius Angeli de Coelo, judicio subjicere digner. Satis
enim nunc datum est stultae huic humilitati etc. I now declare before hand,
that for the future I will not vouchsafe you so much honor, as to submit my
self or doctrine to your judgment, or an Angels from heaven. Enough of this
foolish humility already. -- As for those pertinacious hypocrites and
Pharisees, let 'em know, that [Doctrine] is not only past the judgment of men,
but (as the Apostle says) of Angels too.

(...) The P p^'s be^^g Antichrist.
which was the foundation of all his animosity and courage against the Church
Catholic; an error corrected of late by many learned Protestants, Grotius,
Hammond, Thorndike, and others.

3. The inv^l^d^ty of the Clergy.
the Devil seems to have bin the first discoverer thereof to Luther, by this,
as Luther apprehends, to make him despair. He therefore ( de Missa privata and
Unction Sacerdotum, as Luther himself relates it) strongly accused him of his
and the peoples committing idolatry, so often as he had said Mass, (which was
usually every day) in adoring only a piece of Bread; and this because he was no
true Priest, nor rightly ordained, and therefore neither rightly consecrated;
but the Elements still remained Bread and Wine. Again: proved, that he was no
true Priest formerly, no more than the Turkish Priests are truly so, because he
had no right faith, nor was a true believer, [i.e. after Luther 's new way of
faith, of which both the Disputants were agreed that it was the right]. Again,
neither rightly ordained according to our Lord's Institution, because -- Non in
Sacerdotem Sacramenti, sed in Sacerdotem Oblationis Ordinatus est; Ordained a
Priest, not to consecrate a Sacrament, but offer a Sacrifice: and because, sibi
soli, non Ecclesiae ministravit, 'ministred to himself alone, [ viz. in private
Masses, etc.] and not to the Church. After which Satan thus concludes, voce
gravi, and forti, 'in a grave and strong voice: Ergo nunc hoc urgeo, te non
consecrasse in tua Missa, sed obtulisse, and adorasse tantum Panem and Vinum
and aliis adorandum proposuisse; This therefore ^urge, That in your Mass you
did not consecrate, but offered only, and your self adored Bread and Wine; and
elevated it to be adored by others. These Arguments, how weak soever they may
seem to you, or me, and for all that the Father of Lies spoke them, persuaded
Luther; and, convinced, he would not give the Devil the lie, but fairly, upon
this conference, dismissed his former private Masses, and his Sacerdotal
unction. -- In summa (says he) nos ab ipsorum Pri^atis Missis, ab unctione
Episcoporum liberati sumus: viderint ipsi nunc Domini Papistae etc quomodo sua
Pergama defendant: In fine, we are freed from their private Masses, and the
Ordination of Bishops: Let the Lordly Papists etc. now see to defend their
Posts. And afterward in the same discourse argues thus against the Clergy that
then was: -- Sive in ipsorum Missa adsit Corpus Christi, sive non adsit, de quo
ipsi fint solliciti, tuno extra gravem culpam non sunt. Si enim tantum adest
Panis, and vinum, (ut res dubia est, and periculo plena,) ipsi sunt maximi
impostores sub Sole, etc. si adest, ipsi maximi sacrilegi; etc. In their Mass
whether Christ's Body be present or no, (about which let them be as solicitous
as they please) they are greatly to blame. For if there be only bread and wine
(as the question is doubtful and dangerous) they are the greatest impostors
under the Sun. But if Christ's body be there, they are most sacrilegious, in
not communicating it to others, as well as receiving it themselves. Thus
Luther, perceiving the former Priesthood or Ministry invalid, and uneffective,
fell to ordaining, and raising another Ministry of his own; that ever since,
when it consecrateth, fails not to produce in the Eucharist a
Consubstantiation of Christ's Body at least; so the people may safely adore.
This of his nullifying the former Church'es Clergy.

(Assertio Artic.) Ego docco Conciliis dissentire, Hi r^j^cti^g Counc^ls.
and r^sistere, si quando contraria Scripturae statuunt: Scripturam, inquam,
volo judicem esse Conciliorum: I teach men to dissent from, and resist the
Decrees of Councils, when contrary to Scripture. [He must mean here contrary to
what he apprehends to be the sense of Scripture.] 'I will, I say, have
Scripture to be the Judge of Councils. Again, in his book, De judicio Ecclesiae
de gravi doctrina, he says, -- Christus adimit Episcopis, Doctoribus, and
Conciliis, tum jus, tum potestatem, judicandi de doctrina, ac tradit illa
omnibus Christianis in genere: Christ takes from the Bishops, Doctors, and
Councils, both the right and power of judging Controversies, [he means so as to
oblige others,] and gives them to all Christians in general, [ he means as to
judge every one for himself; quoting there for it, Jo. 10. Oves meae vocem meam
audiunt; alienum autem non sequuntur, sed fugiunt, etc. My sheep hear my voice,
they follow not a stranger, but flee from him. And 1 These. 5. Omnia probate,
'Try all things.] So in Assertio. Art. 36. contra Regem Angliae -- Attendite a
falsis Prophetis, 'beware of false Prophets. Mat. 17.15. -- Haec sola
authoritas satis esse queat adversus oninium Pontificum, omnium Patrum, omnium
Conciliorum, omnium Scholarum sententias, quae jus judicandi and discernendi
solis Episcop^s and Ministris tribuerunt. -- In ipso Concilio Nicaeno, omnium
optimo jam tam incipi^bant leges condere, and jus istud sibi vindicare -- Quare
si talis error, tantum sacrilegium, tanta longitudine temporis regnavit, semel
volo tot Sophistarum os obstructum etc. -- Jus condendi leges solius Dei est.
This one Text (says he) may suffice against the authorities of all the Popes,
Fathers, Councils, and Schoolmen, who attribute to Bishops and Ministers the
sole power of judging and deciding Controversies. -- In the very Council of
Nice, the best that ever was before or since, even then began they to make
laws, and claim that power. -- Wherefore since such an error and so great
sacrilege has been able to prevail so long, I will once for all that these
Sophisters leave their prating etc. -- The right of making laws is God's alone.
And, in Articulis de Papatu, de Conciliis, Indulgentiis, aliisque non
necessariis etc. In the Articles (says he) about the Papacy, Councils,
Indulgences, and other unncessary trifles, the levity and folly of the Pope and
his followers is more tolerable, etc. In Assert. Art. 28. concerning the
Church'es Laws in things indifferent: Sive Papa, sive Patres, sieve Concilium
sic aiunt, sic sentiunt, nemini debent etc. For the Pope, or Fathers, or
Councils saying, or thinking this or that, it ought to prejudice no man: but
let every one, in things not necessary to salvation, abound in his own sense.
And de abrog. Miss. -- Quod sine verbo Dei ordinatur, non ab Ecclesia, sed a
Synagogo Satanae sub Ecclesiae nomine ordinatur: What is ordained without the
word of God, not the Church but the Synagogue of Satan, under her name, ordains
it. And in the distractions of the new Reformation some motioning a Synod to be
called amongst them, as necessary for set^ling them, he gives his grave
judgment of Synods thus, (in tom. 2^ p. 243.) Quantumvis bono zelo tentata, est
res mali exempli, ut probant omnia Ecclesiae Concilia ab initio: A thing,
however zealously attempted, yet of ill example; as all the Councils of the
Church do show. [ So far, as not to spare that of the Apostles, Act. 15.] Ita
ut in Apostolico Concilio, fere de operibus and traditionibus magis quam de
fide etc. In the Synod of the Apostles was treated in a manner of works and
traditions, rather than of faith; but in all others since, never at all of
faith, but always of opinions and questions. Insomuch that I begin to suspect
and hate, as much almost the name of Councils, as of Free Will. Whence we may
gather that a Council was appealed to by him, only because he hoped none would
be called, or assembled, and that he was content to stand to a Judge that would
never hear his cause; and that this was like the thief's appeal from God and
the Country, to be judged by Christ and his twelve Apostles. At length when he
saw that a Council was already called, and likely would be convened; he, to
prevent the damage it might do to his new Religion, (which he well foresaw,)
took his pen, and writ a book of Councils, A. D. 1539. five years before the
Council of Trent began, and before that he could raise any particular quarrel
against it; wherein he forbears not to asperse even the most sacred and famous
Councils that ever were, the Apostolical, Act. 15. and the first Nicene;
arguing from the in junction of the first, to abstain from blood, and things
strangled, (which was only temporary), that it is lawful not to obey the
decrees of Councils; and saying of the second, That its Canons are foenum,
stramen, ligna, stipulae 'Hay, straw, wood, stubble: And concerning the third
Canon, prohibiting the Clergy, Ne haberent secum mulierem extraneam, nisi forte
sit matter, aut soror, aut avia, aut amita, aut matertera; That they should not
have with them [in their 'house] any woman that was a stranger, unless their
Mother, Sister, 'Grandmother, or Aunt, se non intelligere Sanctum Spiritum in
hoc Concilio, "That he did not understand the Holy Ghost in this Council:
Again, An vero nihil aliud est negotii Spiritui Sancto in Conciliis, quam ut
impossibilibus, periculosis, non necessariis legibus suos ministros obstringat,
and oneret? Has the Holy Ghost nothing to do but to bind and burden its
Ministers with impossible, dangerous, and unnecessary laws? Lastly, affirming,
Majus lumen accedere Doctrinae Christianae ex Catechismo puerili, quam ex
omnibus Conciliis, That the Christian doctrine received more light from the
Childrens Catechism, than all the Councils. Not considering the end of these
great meetings, not to prescribe Catechisms, or known Principles, but to decide
matters controverted, and to support the Church'es Doctrine or Discipline,
where some pertinacious adversaries, or corrupt manners have invaded them.
Lastly, we may judge how he would have received the sentence of another Council
aganst himself, by his censure of the Council of Constance its condemnation of
J. Husse; concerning which he uses this language etc. ( Assert. Art. 30.)
Omnes articulos Johannis Huss Constantiae esse damnatos ab Antichristo, and
suis Apostolis, in Synagoga illa Satanae, ex sceleratissimis Sophistis
congregata, and in faciem tuam, sanctissime Vicarie Christi, tibi libere dico,
omnia damnata Johannis Huss esse Evangelica, and Christiana, tua autem omnia
prorsus impia, and Diabolical: All John Huss'es Articles were condemned at
Constance by Antichrist and his Apostles, in that Synod of Satan made up of
those wicked Sophisters; and I tell you plainly to your very teeth, you most
holy vicar of Christ, That all John Huss'es condemned doctrines are Evangelical
and Christian, but all yours altogether impious and Diabolical.

(...) And Father^.
In the conclusion of his book contra Reg^m Angliae, he says: Non ego quaero,
quid Ambrosius, Augustinus, Concilia, and Vsus saeculorum dicunt. -- Miranda,
est stultitia Satan^, quae iis me ^mpugnat, quae ipse impugno; and perpetuo
principium petit. -- Pro liberate ego pugno, Rex pro captivitate: I care not
what Ambrose, Augustine, Councils, and the practice of Antiquity says. A strange
folly of Satan thus to oppose me with those very a^guments I impugn; and always
beg the question. -- I fight for lib^rty, the King for slavery. [ Slavery, in
submitting to the Fathers.] (...) In ass^rtione Articul. -- Jam quanti errores
in omnium Patrum scriptis inventi sunt? Quoties sibi ipsis pugnant? Quis est,
qui non saep us Scripturas torserit? In the writings of every one of the
Fathers, how great errors are there? How often do they contradict themselves? Who
is there of them, who does not very many times wrest the Scriptures? And (in
the beginning,) -- Primum scire cont^statosque cos volo, me prorsus nullius
sancti Patris authoritate cogi velle, nisi quatenus judicio divinae Scpipturae
fuerit probatus, etc. I will have 'em know, and do take 'em to witness, That I
will stand to no Father, further than he shall be allowed by the Word of God,
[i. e. his own sense of it,] which thing I know they will take very ill. -- And
they say the Holy Scriptures are not to be interpreted by a private spirit. --
And -- Cur non liceat hodie, aut solum, aut pri^ um sacris literis studere,
sicut licuit primitivae Ecclesiae? Why may we not now, as well as they of the
primitive times, study only or chiefly the Scriptures? [as if nothing desended
by Tradition.] -- In his Protestation before his book De abrogatione Missae. --
Protestor imprimis (says he) adversus eos, qui insanis vocibus in me sunt
clamaturi; quod contra ritum Ecclesiae, contra statuta Patrum, contra pro^atas
Legendas etc. First of all I protest against those, who shall furiously cry out
of me, for teaching contrary to the rites of the Church, the doctrine of the
Fathers, approved Legends, and most ancient custom, That I will hear none of
these things. -- Be it known to the ignorant Popes, wicked Priests,
sacrilegious Monks, etc. that we are not baptized, nor do believe in the name
of Augustine, Bernard, Gregory, etc. Tell not me, Bernard lived and wrote so and
so; but so he ought, according to the Scriptures, to have lived and writ.
Concerning the chief Controversy, that of the Mass, being pressed by King Henry
the 8th. with the authority of the ancient Church concurring with the present,
that it is a Sacrifice; and using it as such, he answers thus. -- Vltimo dicta
Patrum inducit Rex pro Missario Sacrificio, and ridet meam stultitiam; quod
solus vellem sapere prae omnibus. Hoc est quod dixi, etc. Lastly, the King
alleges the Fathers for the Sacrifice of the Mass, laughing at my folly, that
would be wiser than all the world besides. Is it not as I said? these
block-headed Thomists have nothing to produce for themselves but a multitude of
Authors, and ancient custom. -- And Captiv. Babylonica, he resolves, -- Si
nihil habetur, quod dicatur, satius est omnia negasse, quam Missam Sacrificium
esse, concedere. Is there naught to be replied? [i.e in answer to the Fathers.]
Better however to deny all, than grant the Mass to be a Sacrifice. And on the
same matter, in Missa privata: -- Hic non moramur (says he) si clamitent
Papistae, Ecclesia, Ecclesia; Patres, Patres; quia, ut dixi, hominum dicta aut
facta nihil in tam magnis causis curamus. Scimus enim ipsos Prophetas lapsos
esse, adeoque Apostolos: etc. Here we value not the Papists crying, the Church,
the Church; Fathers, Fathers: because, as I said, what men say or do in such
cases as these, it matters not. For we know, the very Prophets, nay even the
Apostles themselves, have erred. By the words of Christ [i. e. by that which he
apprehends to be the sense thereof; wherein why may not he be mistaken, if
others are?] we judge the Church, the Apostles, nay even the Angels. Lastly, see
his Colloquies c. 27, 29, 30. what a character he gives of the Fathers to his
companions: That God's Word of it self pure, bright, and clear, through the
doctrines, books, and writings of the Fathers, (like milk streined through a
Coal-sack) is very sorely darkened, falsified, and spoiled. -- That there is
great darkness in the Books of the Fathers, concerning Faith. That Austin wrote
nothing to the purpose concerning Faith: -- For he was first rouzed up and made
a man by the Pe^agians. -- That at the first he willingly read Austin; but when
the door of St. Paul was opened unto him, (insomuch that he knew what was the
righteousness of faith,) then he had done with St. Austin; and that the Fathers
were of very small value. -- That Chrysostom was only a talker; Bazil, merely a
Friar; Cyprian, a weak Divine; Tertullian, amongst the Church-teachers a mere
Carolostadius. That Bernard did nimium tribuere praeceptis, and libero
arbitrio, attribute overmuch to precepts and freewill. That Macarius, Antonius,
and Benedictus, brought apparent mischief to the Church with their Monkery;
that they lead a private grizly kind of life, far from a Holy. That he knew
none among the ancient Teachers of the Church that he hated like Jerome; for he
writes only of fasting, of victuals, of virginity, etc. teaches nothing
neither of faith, nor hope, nor love, nor of the works of faith. -- That the
Fathers stumbled oft-times, and mingled in their books many impertinent and
Monkish things. -- That the Apology of P. Melancthon surpasses all the Fathers
of the Church, yea St. Austin. -- And in his Preface to his Works he says: Non
in omnibus omnium Patrum scriptis, tantum reperiri Eruditionis Theologiae,
quantum in locis hisce Communibus: Et si omnia, illorum Scripta conflentur, and
colliquescant, non tamen Locos Philippi inde prodituros: More learning to be
found in those Commonplaces, than in all the Fathers; which all melted in one
lump together, would not make one such book as Melancthons. Such stuff as this
it seems he usually vented; and his friends Aurifaber, and others, who heard
them from him, had not the discretion to conceal them, and to cover his shame
and nakedness.

The 6th his setting up his own authority, and maintaining his own doctrines as
certain and infal^^ble truth.
This his contempt and low esteem of all other humane authority, and of their
doctrines, was accompanied (as usually) with a most high esteem of his own; so
greatly liable to mistakes and errors he thought others, so little himself; and
how much uncertainty he put in their opinions, so much certainty in his own;
confidently stiling by the name of God's word his Expositions, and sense
thereof, tho these contrary to that formerly delivered; using frequently such
expressions; That if an Apostle or an Angel from Heaven should come, and teach
contrary to such his Expositions, let him be Anathema; and, -- That if he was
deceived, God had deceived him; and such things he said, not only of those
Expositions of his against the Church of Rome, but those made against other
Protestants; those made against Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, etc. and of the
contrary of which his Protestant-posterity think themselves most certain;
equally certain always of his being in the right: and having no less affirmed
his certainty even in those things wherein himself afterward changed his
opinion: who is much noted, both by his enemies, and friends to have
contradicted in his latter, many things in his former Works: (as better
discerning truth, say the one, as more still departing from it, say the other);
and to have contradicted those Expositions of Scripture concerning the Lord's
Supper in his latter writings against Carolslad, and Zuinglius, which he
delivered for certain in his former against Catholics. See the particulars --
showed by Hospinian hist. Sacram. 2. part. fol. 8, 9, 12. and so of many
things, whereof he was once certain, he became afterward as certain of the
contrary.

Tho these in his latter, and former times much varying.
For example, see in his doctrine of Consubstantiation, wherein he was opposed
by other Protestants, he pretended as much certainty, and as clear revelation
thereof in God's word; as in any of those, wherein he opposed the former
Church. -- Si quisquam mihi persuadere potuisset (says he Ep. ad Argent.) in
Sacramento praeter panem and vinum esse nihil, magno beneficio me sibi
devinctum reddidisset; gravibus enim curis anxius, in hac excutienda materia
multum desudabam; omnibus nervis extensis me extricare and expedire conatus
sum; etc. Could any man have persuaded me, these was nothing but bread and wine
in the Sacrament, he had much obliged me. For being in great perplexity, I took
great pains in discussing this point; I endeavored with all my might to
extricate and free my self, as well perceiving I should thereby very much
incommode the Papacy, in the first place. But I see I am caught, no way of
escaping left me: For the words of the Evangelists are too plain and clear to
be forced to any other meaning. Again: -- Declaring against the new
Sacramentarians, ( Epist. qua se excusat de Sacramentario errore apud Hospin.
fol. 133.) -- Haec mea in Sacramenti negotio fides est, de qua certus sum, quam
etiam nemo mihi hominum eripiet unquam: etc. In the business of the Sacrament
this is my faith; whereof I am certain, and which no man shall ever take from
me: which also I profess, that all may see, that I assent to the clear and
manifest words of Scripture against all errors ancient and modern; and resist
the malice and wiles of the Devil; for Christ our Lord will not lie to me. So
contra Regem Angliae, Decerno (says he) impium esse, and blasphemum, si quis
dicat Panem transubstantiari; Catholicum autem, and pium, si quis cum Paulo
dicat, Panis, quem frangimus, est corpus Christi, Anathema sit qui aliter
dixerit, and Iota vel apicem unum mutarit: To say with Paul, The bread which we
break is the Body of Christ, [i. e. in his way of Consubstantiation,] I aver to
be orthodox and pious; as, That the Bread is transubstantiated, wicked
blasphemy. Let him be Anathema that shall say otherwise, and change one Iota or
tittle. Yet besides that, Zuinglius, Calvin, and his followers tell me, that
Luther's certainty in this point was but a delusion, and God's Word revealing
no such thing as he pretended; a little before his going to Islebium, and but a
few days before his going out of this world, Jan. 23, 1546. it is reported,
that his former certainty in this point vanished; and Melch. Adams in his life,
p. 165. relates such discourse as this passing between him and Melancthon, and
sets down several witnesses of it; and the same story is yet further confirmed
by Hospinian ( fo. 201. etc.) -- Lutherum fateri, se longius in Controversia
Sacramentaria progressum. Tum. Melancthonem suasisse, ut leni scripto edito
sese explicaret. Ad id respondisse Lutherum: -- Hoc modo totam doctrinam
suspectam seredditurum. Luther confessed he had gone too far in the
Sacramentarian controversy. Then Melancthon advised him, by publishing some
moderate Treatise, to explain himself. To which Luther answered, That by this
means his whole Doctrine would become suspected. None of his Doctrines having
been to his followers more assured by him, more zealously maintained than this;
and I suspect some artifice of his in such his assurances of his doctrines,
from that Apology made by him to those who blamed his mordacity, and railing.
-- Video (says he, 2. tom, Ep. p.6) quae nostro saeculo quiet tractantur, mox
cadere in oblivionem, nemine eacurante: "I see now adays, things modestly
written [such as are delivered without asseverations of the truth thereof] are
quickly forgotten, none regarding them. [ Without crying, verbum Dei, the Word
of God, he would have found few followers.]

T^^ 7^^. impatiently s^ffering ^pposition; (...) m^ru^icating, and
^n^^hematizing ary others, tho re^^rme^i, that contradicted his doctrines.
From this his great self-opinion, in his own so freely dissenting from, and
opposing all other Ecclesiastical Magistrates, yet he was noted to suffer
impatiently any opposition made to himself, and could not well brook any
Reformation different from his own; as appears in his disallowance of those
made at Wirtenberg, in his absence, and in his quarrels with Carolostadius; not
indeed requiring conformity to his doctrines, out of any authority he claimed
to impose them, which authority he renounced; but yet (which is somewhat more)
from a certainty of divine truth, which he pretended to be in them; and whilst
he refused any obedience given to him as a Magistrate, he seems willingly to
have admitted it to him as an Oracle. But yet as he had thrown off the yoke of
the Churchauthority; so many others that pursued the Reformation, saw no
reason, why they should be subject to his; but took the same liberty to dissent
where they pleased, from him, as he had done from die Church; and by the
measure he had meted, it was measured to him again. So that within a little
time after his revolt there grew, in the Reformation, Sect after Sect, accusing
one another of error, as all of them did the Church; Anabaptists, Zuinglians,
Antinomians, etc. insomuch that in his Preface to his Comment on the Galat. he
says, himself had encountered above twenty Sects, but (as he fancied,) laid
them a gasping, and crushed all he grappled with. Ego (says he) qui jam sum in
ministerio Christi viginti annis, quanquam nihil sum, vere possum testari, me
plus quam viginti sectis esse petitum, etc. In the twenty years I have been a
Minister of Christ, although I am nothing, (2 Cor. 12.11.) I can truly attest,
above twenty Sects have assailed me. And in Genesis c. 6. published not long
before his death: -- Quantum Sectarum excitavit Satan nobis viventibus? Quid
futurum est nobis mortuis? Profecto tota agmina Sacramentariorum,
Anabaptistarum, and Satan that has raised so many Sects while we are alive,
what will he do when we are dead? Truly whole swarms of Sacramentarians,
Anabaptists, Antinomians, Servetians, Campanists, and other Heretics, (who,
vanquished by the purity of the Gospel, and assiduity of preaching, now lie
lurking, and only wait for an opportunity to set up their doctrine,) he will
then bring out? Again, in cap. 24. Muncerus, and Sacramentarii, neglecto and
Sacramentis, nihil aliud nisi Spiritum sonant, idque nobis viventibus,
docentibus, etc. The Sacramentaries neglecting the Word and Sacraments talk of
nothing but the Spirit, and this even whilst we are yet living, preaching
against, and opposing them: what will they do then, when we shall be silenced
by the Grave? Again, thus he, concerning the Sacramentarians, in an Epistle to
Fred. Michonius. -- Habet Sacramentaria Secta jam, ni fallor, sex capita uno
anno nata; mirus Spiritus, qui sic dissentiat sibi. Hi omnes Spiritus invicem
diversi argutis dimicant argumentis etc. If I mistake not, six heads of the
Sacramentarian Sect have sprung up in one year. A strange spirit, that is thus
at odds with it self! All these Spirits, whereof no two are alike, combat one
another with subtle arguments. They all pretend revelations, obtained by
prayers and tears; and yet against us they are agreed, It is well for us
through Christ, who makes them thus wrangle among themselves for our sakes,

The 8^^. ^is ^l^ering the public Serv^ce; Orda^ning a new M^nist^y^^ abrog
t^^g, and burn^ng the fo^mer Canon Law.
( apud Hosp. fol. 20) and remitted the former obligation of Confession of sins
to the Priests, and Fasting before receiving the Communion; and generally held
in matters of Religion no Ecclesiastical [i.e. humane] laws obliging: (see
before. 19.) Began a new Ordination of Bishops and Ministers ( vita p. 129.)
descending from him; after having declared their former Unction null, and God's
Church to be only that where the Gospel was purely preached; that was his. By
the same authority, assisted with the power of the Prince, he made new Bishops,
and put them in the places of the deceased. Against the Canonical Election of
another, made his intimate friend Ausdorse Bishop of Neoburg, (see M^lch. Adam
vita p. 150.) and Georg. Anhal^tinus Bishop of Mersburg. By the same Authority
he sentenced the Canon Law consisting of the former decrees amassed, as well
those of Councils, as those of Popes, to the fire; and assembling the
University solemnly burnt it in Wirtenberg. ( vita. p. 115.) By the same he
frequently pronounced Anathema's and Excommunications to those reformed, that
dissented from him in Opinion.

(...).
For the things said here, it is easy to produce a multitude of testimonies.
Concerning his presumption of his own Doctrines, and Expositions of God's Word,
he says, (see before. 16.) -- Illum se, aut ^^^am doctrinam, Episcoporum, aut
ullius judicio Angeli de Coelo subj^cere non dignari: he scom'd to submit
himself or his Doctrine to the judgment of the Bishops, or an Angel from
Heaven. And -- Extra aleam positam esse eam omnis humani judicii, sed and
omnium Angelorum; 'past the censure of men or Angels. [ All this only out of a
high presumption, that his Exposition of the Scriptures was true, the Church'es
false.] And in an Epistle to Melancthon, ( Adam. vit. Luth. p. 138:) -- De
publica causa satis magno, and otioso animo sum, qui scio certo ipsam esse
justam, etc. Certainly knowing the public cause [i. e. his own reformed
Tenents] to be just and true, and Christ's and God's, I am courageous and
unconcerned enough about it. -- The threatenings of these bloody Papists I value
not a --: if we come to the ground, Christ will tall with us. -- I had rather
fall with Christ, than stand with the Emperor. In his answer to the Emperor's
Edict. 1531. concerning his way of Justification by Faith alone, opposing the
Church'es former doctrine in this point: -- This Artide (says he) will they,
nill they, [ the Pope, Emperor, etc] will stand, Hell-gates cannot prevail
against it; the Spirit of God does dictate this unto me, this is the true
Gospel, etc. -- Casting the Pope's Bull, the Canon Law, and the writings of his
Adversaties into the public fire in Wirtenberg, he used this insolent speech,
joined with that insolent act: ( vit. Luth. Adams p. 115.) -- Quia tu
conturbasti Sanctum Domini, conturbet te ignis aeternus: because thou have
disturbed the Holy of the Lord, get thee into eternal flames, -- And upon Gal.
1.11, 12. he thus answers an Objection made against the newness of his Doctrine
taught, contrary to that of the former Church, by so inconsiderable a person;
which answer, because it seems to contain all the defense he could make for
himself, I will set you down at large.

Paul, fitting the application thereof to himself. -- Quod Paulus long
inferior esset reliquis Apostolorum Discipulis, qui, quod docerent, and
servarent, acceperant ab Apostolis. -- Cur igitur inferiori vellent
obtemperare, and authoritatem iposorum Apostolorum, qui Doctores essent omnium
Ecclesiarum totius orbis terrarum, contemnere? Valde igitur (says he)
speciosum, and robustum hoc argumentum Pseudo-Apostolorum fuit; etc. Paul being
much inferior to the other Disciples of the Apostles, who had received from the
very Apostles what they did and taught; -- why therefore should they obey him
that was inferior, and despise the authority of the Apostles themselves, who
were constituted Masters of all the Churches in the world? This then (says he)
was the specious and great-argument of the false Apostles, which even now adays
retains its force with many. What! say they, the Apostles, the Holy Fathers,
and their Successors, have taught so, and so; the whole Church judges so, and
believes so, and it is impossible for Christ to permit his Church to err for so
many ages. And do you now pretend to be wiser than so many holy men, than the
whole Church etc? Thus it is, that the Devil transforming himself into an Angel
of light, treacherously sets upon me by the virulent tongues of certain
Hypocrites: We stand not much upon, say they, either Pope, or Bishops. -- Nay
we detest the hypocrisy and impostures of Monks etc. But we cannot in the least
suffer the authority of the most holy Catholic Church to be infringed. There
are so many ages now, that she has constantly judged so, and taught so; all the
Doctors of the Primitive Church, most holy men, much greater and more learned
than you, have still judged and taught the same. And who now are you, that dare
depart from all these, and force upon us different tenants? His answer to this
is: Quando Satanas hoc urget, and conspirat cum carne and ratione, perterresit
Conscientia, and desperate, nisi constanter adte redeas, and dicas; Sive Sanctus
Cyprianus, Ambrosius. Augastinus, sive Sanctus Petrus, Paulus, aut Johannes,
imo Angelus de Calo al^t^r doceat, tamen hoc certe scio quod humana non suadeo,
sed div na; he^^st, quod Deo omnia tribuo, hominibus nihil: Memini initiom^^
causae Do^^orem Staupitium tunc summum virum, and Vicarium Ordinis Angustini,
ad me dicere: Hoc mihi, inquit, placet, quod hac Doctrina, quam pr^dicas,
gloriam, and omnia soli Deo, tribuit, hominibus nihil. Deo a ^^m (...) quod
luce clarius est) nimium gloriae, bonitatis, etc. attrib^i non potest. Haec vox
vehementer me tum consolabatur, and consirmabat^ Malto aus^ta ^^tias est
tribuere nimium Deo, quam homi^^bus. Ibo (...) cum ^id (...) dicere possum;
Esto sane, Ecclesia, Augustinus, and alii Doctores, item Petrus Apostolus, imo
Angelus de Coelo diversum doceant, tamen mea doctrina est ejusmodi, quod solius
Dei gratiam, etc. When Satan urges thus, and conspires with flesh and reason
against us, our conscience is troubled, and will certainly despair, unless we
resolutely stir up our selves, and say, Tho St. Cyprian, St. Ambrose, St.
Angustin, tho St. Peter, Paul, and John, yea an Angel from Heaven teach the
contrary, yet this I certainly know, that the things I propose are not humane
but divine, i. e. I attribute all to God, and nothing to men. I remember well
what Dr. Staupitius, a prime man then, and Vicar of St. Augustin's Order, told
me in the beginning of my preaching: I like well, said he, that this Doctrine
you teach gives glory, and indeed all things to God, and nothing to men; for
who sees not, that too much honor, goodness, etc. can never be attributed to
God? These words of his comforted and strenthned me extremely; -- Much safer is
it to give too much to God, than men. For then I may boldly say, let the
Church, and St. Augustine, with the rest of the Doctors, let St. Peter the
Apostle, nay an Angel from Heaven teach otherways, yet certain it is, that my
Doctrine [of Justification by faith alone without our works] is of that nature,
that it illustrates and extolls the grace and glory of God alone, and condems
[in the matter of salvation] whatsoever wisdom and righteousness of men. Here I
cannot be mistaken etc. A second time he renews the Objection; At ais; Ecclesia
est sancta, Patres sunt sancti, But you tell me, the Church is holy, the
Fathers are holy: and answers it thus; Been; sed Ecclesia, quamlibet sancta,
tamen cogetur orare, Remitte nobis debita nostra. -- Ergo neque mihi, neque
Ecclesiae, neque Patribus, abque Apostolis, neque Angelo e Coelo credendum est,
si quid contraverbum Dei docemus. -- Alioquin hoc argumentum Pseudo-apostolorum
maxim valuisset contra Pauli Doctrinam. Quia profecto magna, magna, inquam,
res fuit, opponere totam Ecclesiam cum toto choro Apostolorum, Galatis, contra
Paulum unicum, and eum recentiorem, and minimum authoritatis habentem: nec enim
libenter dicit, Ecclesiam errare; and tamen necesse est dicere, eam errare, si
extra vel contra verbum Dei aliquid docet. Petrus Apostolorum summus vivebat,
and docebat extra verbum Dei, etc. Well, but tho the Church be never so holy,
yet she is fain to pray, forgive us our trespasses. -- Therefore there is no
believing either me, or the Church, or the Fathers, or Apostles, or an Angel
from Heaven, if we teach any thing against God's word. Otherways this argument
of the false Apostles would have run down St. Paul's doctrine. For, believe me,
to the Galatians it was no small difficulty to oppose the whole Church with all
the Apostles against St. Paul alone, and him the latest, and of least authority
amongst 'em. -- Neither was he willing to say the Church erred; yet it is
necessary to say she errs, if she teaches any thing besides, or against the
word of God. Peter the chief of the Apostles did live, and teach otherways than
he ought by the word of God, therefore he erred. [ Taught and erred, false; his
Example, not Doctrine, was false.] Neither did Paul then connive at his error,
(tho it appeared slight,) because he well saw the evil, that might thence arise
to the whole Church. -- Therefore neither Church, nor Fathers, nor Apostles,
nor Angels are to be believed, unless they teach the pure word of God. Yet
still the Objection will not be thus satisfied, but returns on him again. Hoc
argumentum (says he) and hodie maxim praegravat causam nostram. Nam si neque
Papae, neque Patribus, neque Luthero, etc. cedendum est, nisi doceant purum Dei
Verbum, cui tum credendum est? Quis interim certas faciet Conscientias, utri
purum Dei verbum doceant; nos, an adversarii nostri? Non and ipsi jactant, se
purum Dei verbum habere, and docere? Nos Papistis non credimus, quia verbum Dei
non docent, neque docere possunt. Econtra ipsi acerrime nos oderunt, and
insectantur, ut pestilentissimos Haereticos, and seductores. Quid hic
faciendum? Number cuivis fanatio spiritui permittendum, ut doceat quae velit; and
This argument, says he, even at this present time does much molest our party.
For if we must neither believe Pope, nor Fathers, nor Luther, etc. unless they
teach the pure word of God, who then shall we believe? who will be able to
assure our hearers, whether I, or rather my adversaries stick to the pure word
of God? for do not they also boast that they have and teach it? We reject the
Papists, because they neither do, nor can, teach the pure word of God: and they
on the other side mortally hate and persecute us as pestilential Heretics, and
seducers. What can be done in this case? Must every fanatical spirit be
licensed to teach what he pleases; whereas the world can neither hear nor
endure my doctrine [any better than theirs.] -- For tho we openly profess with
Paul, that we preach the pure Gospel of Christ, it avails us nothing; and we
are forced to hear that this profession of ours is not only proud, temerarious,
and vain, but blasphemous also, and diabolical; on the other side to submit our
selves, and yield to the fury of our enemies, is to make both Papists and
Fanatics grow proud and insolent: these, by bringing up and teaching, what the
world never heard before; those, by obtruding again and confirming their old
abominations. To this again he briefly replies: -- Quisque igitur videat, ut
certissimus sit de sua vocatione, and doctrina, ut cum Apostolo certissime, ac
securissime ausit dicere; Etiamsi vos aut Angelus e Coelo etc. Let every one
therefore take great care to be most certain and secure of his vocation and
doctrine, [ alluding to what the Apostle says, Gal. 1.8, 15.] that with all
security he may venture to say with the Apostle, Tho an Angel from Heaven etc.
The fu^r me of which triple Reply is agreeable to our former observation: --
Certissimus sum de mea vocatione and doctrina: I am most certain of my vocation
and doctrine. And -- Hoc certe scio, quod humana non suadeo, sed divina; 'This
I certainly know, that the things I teach, are not humane, but divine: and the
applying to himself against the Fathers the answer of St. Paul against St.
Peter, and others, -- Etiamsi vos aut Angelus de Coelo etc. "Tho an Angel from
Heaven etc. as if like this Apostle he also had some extraordinary calling to
his Ministry; or, as if his opinions were like his faith; that being assured
of their truth, makes them truth.

Of those also that h^ m^i^^^^^^d ag^^^st other Ref^rmed.
And this presumptive certainty, and plerophory this man had, not only of those
tenants of his maintained against the Papists, but in those also maintained
against any other Reformed. In his greater Confession, answered by Zuinglius,
wherein he maintains Consubstantiation, he says: Si incertus, and obscurus
contextus, and sensus omnino habendus; illum potius habere velim, quem ex Dei
ore progressum certe scio: If it be necessary to have some context or sense
that is obscure, above all others let me have that, which I am certain comes
out of God's mouth. The Landgrave of Hasse calling the assembly at Marpurg of
the Saxon and Helvetian reformed Divines, chiefly inviting Luther to it, he
returns this answer; Nihil fructus ex Colloquio sperandum, nisi pars adversa
accedat animo cedendi: siquidem cedere ipsis non posse, qui certus sit de Verbi
sententia: There is no good to be hoped of any meeting, unless my adversaries
come with a mind prepared to yield: for it is impossible for me to yield to them,
being most certain of the sense of the Word, [i.e. of his Consubstantiation.]
Here I cannot but put him in mind of an Observation he makes (Colloquio c. 35.
p. 352.) of some other Sectaries of his time, with whom he had much bickering:
who (he says)were so spiritually bewitched by the Devil, that they were so far
from confessing and acknowledging their errors, that they f^rely boasted, yea
would not stick deeply to swear, that they have the most assured truth. And
when some of them he confuted by many sentences of Holy Scripture, (especially
those that are the chief, and ringleaders of such Heresies; yet all labor is
lost; for they quickly have their glosses, wherewith they make babbling and idle
Oppositions against the sentences of Scripture; insomuch that by our
admonitions they are not only nothing bettered, but are the longer, the worse
obdurate, and hardened. This (says Luther) should I never have believed, (that
the Devil in such sort could trim up his lies, and make them so like unto the
truth,) if the open experience of these times had not delivered the same unto
me. [Alas! what he saw in others, why feared he not in himself, straggling from
the Church?]

Carolostadius, upon some provocation of ill language, taxing something in his
doctrine concerning the Eucharist, as they were together in an Inn; he
presently grew so hot, and impatient, that he challenged him to a public
Encounter of writing one against another; and the other desiring to have this
controversy rather privately composed; He, too confident of the victory, in a
war that has lasted ever since amongst the Reformed, and divided them into two
bands even until this day, further obliged his adversary to it, by delivering
to him a Crown of Gold, as a gage of the quarrel. -- Ex concitato isto animi
fervore (says Hospinian Hist. Sacram. 2. part. 4.32.) aureum nummum extractum
ex pera ipsi [Carolostadio] offert [Lutherus], inquiens: En accipe, and quantum
potes animose, contra me dimica. Quod et si recusaret primum Carolostadius, and
rem cognitioni piae permittendam moneret, ac peteret: tandem tamen cum
urgeretur, hunc aureum nummum accepit, and marsupio suo recondidit; Luthero
manum in sponsionem pactae and susceptae Contentionis porrigens: pro cujus
confirmatione Lutherus ipsi vicissim haustum vini propinavit, and. -- In the
heat of his passion he [Luther] pulled out of his purse a Crown of Gold, and
offering it to the other, [Carolostadius;] Here, take this, says he, and do thy
worst against me. And although Carolostadius stood off at first, and desired and
asked him to consider a little better on it, yet at last being more provoked,
he took the Gold, and put it up, and gave Luther his hand, to show he accepted
the challenge, which Luther for his part ratified, with a glass of wine. And --
Haec, Christian Lector, fuerunt infelicissimi istius certaminis, quod ex pacto
and sponsione susceptum tot jam annis Ecclesiam gravissime exercuit, infausta
auspicia: quae si quis diligenter apud se animo, sepositis affectibus, expendat
ex quo spiritu fuerint profecta, tanto rectius and aequius, non solum de toto
hoc certamine, sed etiam de Polemicis Lutheri scriptis, in quibus, quod semel
in invidiam Carolostadii, and adversariorum suorum adio defendendum susceperat,
quoquo modo asserere, and tueri, quam cuiquam opinione sua cessisse videre
maluit, est judicaturus. etc. These were, Christian Reader, ( as Hospinian goes
on) the unhappy beginnings of that unfortunate contention and strife, which
undertaken by pact and agreement has now for so many years grievously torn our
Church: which things whosoever, setting all biassed affections aside, shall
seriously ponder from what spirit they came, shall be much better thereby able
to judge, not only of this whole quarrel, but also of Luther's other Polemical
writings; in which whatsoever he has once set down to the prejudice of
Carolostadius, of other adversaries, he shall find him defend, and hold it any
way, rather than to seem in the least to yield to any. Neither will he
hereafter much admire (such is the lamentable state of humane frailty) why
Luther appeared so vehement, and upon occasions so various and changeable, in
this his affected passion for contention and victory. [Prosecuting more eagerly
the conquest of his Enemy, than the discovery of Truth.]

2d. Conc^rning his consuring and condemning those of the other reformed
opposing him.
For his censuring and condemning such other reformed doctrines as were contrary
to his own, as freely as the Roman, pronouncing them Heretical, and upon this,
removing them from his Communion, as fathering also on the Devil whatever
opinions differed from his, and making especially all his Protestant
adversaries Sathanized, Super-sathanized, and thoroughly possessed by him; and
amongst other ill names, frequently also calling them Devils: See what
Oecolampadius writes concerning this to his friend Zuinglius, (Ep. ante,
respons. ad Luth. Confess.) -- Suavissima (says he,) amicissimaque, si non
etiam frequentissima, sunt Suermeri, Nebulones, Daemones, and alia hujus
generis quamplurima, quae, quam infirma sit humnae naturae conditio, nos
erudire debent: His most sweet and friendly, if not most usual terms, are
Suermers, Knaves, Devils, and other such like, which must be a document to us
of the infirmity of humane nature. Neither did ever any yet, I think, in his
invectives and reproaches use this word so much as he has done, boldly
pronouncing also of Oecolampadius, and other adversaries of his, whom he heard
died suddenly, that they were strangled by the Devil. (See below. 32.). See his
answer ad Argentinenses. -- Respondere non posse, si damnare non liceat; that
it was in vain for him to answer, without they would give him leave to condemn.
And -- Alterutros esse Satanae ministros, vel ipsos, vel se; that either they
[the Zuinglian Divines] were the Ministers of Satan, or he himself [Luther.]
And elsewhere, ( -- Liber contra Sacramentarios.) Haereticos serio censemus,
and alienos ab Ecclesia Dei Zuinglianos, etc. We do without all question judge
the Zuinglians to be Heretics, and aliens from the Church of God, etc. And --
Quicunque credere nolit, in Eucharistia panem (post verba Consecrationis) esse
verum, and natural Christi Corpus, is a me abstineat Epistolis, scriptis, vel
sermon, neque ullam meam expectet communionem: whosoever does not believe that
the bread in the Eucharist (after the words of Consecration) is the true and
natural body of Christ, let him never dare to write or speak to me, nor expect
in any way to communicate with me. And in his Confessio parva, he says, -- se
nullius fanatici, ( sive is sit Stenkfeldius, sive Zuinglius, sive
Carolostadius, sive Oecolampadius, sive quisquam alius haereticus (...), hoc
est, Christi hostis, and blasphemi, consortium recipere, nec literas, libros,
salutationes, benedictiones, scriptiones, aut nominationem, intra animi sui
penetralia admittere, nec visu vel auditu dignari, decrevisse: That he will
neither keep company with any Fanatic, (whether it be Stenfeldius, or
Zuinglius, or Carolostadius, or Oecolampadius, or whatsoever other Heretic,
(...), i.e. bread-eater, winedrinker,) that is, with any enemy of Christ, and
blasphemous person, nor receive either letters, books, salutations,
benedictions, or writings from them, nor even name them, or vouchsafe so much
as to hear or see them. Ib. Neminem pro illis orareposse, peccare enim eos ad
mortem: that none can pray for them, because they sin unto death. Ib. -- Malle
centies discerpi, vel comburi, quam illorum doctrinae consentire: that he had
rather a thousand times be torn in pieces, and burnt, than assent to their
doctrine. -- And -- Hoc testimonium, hancque gloriam ad Tribunal Jesu Christi
secum allaturum, quod Suermeros, Sacramentorum hosts, Carolostadium,
Zuinglium, Oecolampadium, Stenkfeldium, eorumque discipulos, Tiguri, and
ubicunque sint, toto pectore damnarit atque vitarit: that he would carry this
testimony and glory along with him to the Tribunal of Christ, that with all his
might and main he had condemned and avoided the Suermers, enemies of the
Sacraments, as also Carolostadius, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Stenkfeldius, and
their disciples, whether at Zurich, or wheresoever else they be. And concludes
his major Confession with a Protestation; That if at any time hereafter, I
shall say or write otherwise than now I hold in this my Confession, (especially
about the Sacrament,) it is false, and comes from the Devil. He is said also in
his later time, perceiving some variety of opinion, especially by Melancthon's
indifferency, to begin to spread it self at Wirtenberg, to have mediated a
prescribed form of doctrine, (tho contrary to his former principles,) in which,
siquis aliter quam ipse sentiret, Wirtenbergae non duraturum; if any should be
of a contrary opinion to him, he should not stay at Wirtenberg. Upon which
foreseen by Melancthon he writes thus to Calvin: -- Totos jam annos viginti
expecto exilia, propterea quod ostendi me (...) non probasse: Every day for
this twenty years have I expected to be banished, for showing a dislike to
(...), i. e. Bread-worship. [He means of the Lutheran party.] See Hospinian.
fol. 193. etc. and 249. And all this he says chiefly in opposition of or to
Calvin's way of Real presence; how orthodoxly, how certainly, let Calvin's
followers judge; and by this judge of the certainty of his other doctrines
also, so authoritatively maintained by him against the former Catholic Church
of God.

Where also of their reciprocal censures of him for it.
Therefore for this great fault of self-pleasing, and confidence in his own
opinions, expositions of Scripture (when, as they say, he most grossly erred);
and for the frequent contradictions observed in his former, and later writings,
inconsistent with such certainty, yet which he always pretended, as much in his
first (till these recanted), as in his last, Tenants; as likewise for the
varying of his doctrine according to his adversary; expounding Scripture a
contrary way, as he had occasion to make use thereof against the Church of
Rome, or against his anti-sects Reformed; of which see many instances
Hospinian, f. 8. etc: I say, for all these, he has not escaped a heavy censure
even of his brethren, when they found themselves to suffer from such his
exorbitances. Thus speak of him the Tigurine Divines in their Confession:
Proprii cerebri figmenta usque adeo illi placent, ut quotquot illa, haud secus
ac Dei Oracula, and Revelationes, non recipient, pro asinis habet, and nihil
intelligere putet: 'He dotes so far upon the fictions of his own brain, that he
takes for mere fools and asses, all those, who receive them not as Oracles and
divine Revelations. And again, -- In omnibus Correptionibus suis plurimum
maligni spiritus, quam minimum vero amici and paterni animi deprehenditur: In
his reprehensions you may frequently find marks of a malign spirit, but little
or nothing of a friendly and fatherly affection. And thus Conradus Gesnerus in
his Bibliotheca: -- Illud non est dissimulandum virum esse Lutherum vehementis
ingenii, impatientem, and qui, nis^per omnia sibi consentientes, far nesciat:
It cannot be concealed, that Luther is a man of a vehement spirit, impatient,
and of such a humor, as can endure none but those who side with him in all
things. -- And thus Zuinglius, in resp. ad lib. Luther. de Sacrament. as to
Protestant Controversies, accuses Luther's new Expositions of Scriptures, for
as erroneous as consident. -- Tu leges fingis, juxta quarum Praescriptum
Scripturae sanct^e intelligi debeant, quas alioquin in tuo sensu minus tueri ac
asserere potes. Eas Traditiones praescribis, quae Dei verbum nusquam tradidit;
nec traditas quoque ullo modo admittere, aut far potest: You frame laws to
your self for the understanding of the Scriptures, which other ways you would
not be able to assert, and abett, in the sense you would have them. You
prescribe such Traditions, as never were delivered by the word of God, nor can
be suffered or admitted by it. And again in his answer to Luther's Confessio
magna, p. 478. En (says he) ut totum istum hominem Satan occupare conetur?
cum in verborum sensu misere fallitur, and errat, Dei est, ut ipsum excuset,
and pro ipso satisfaciat: Behold (says he) how wholly Satan has possessed
that man! when he grossly mistakes the sense of the words, no less than God must
be brought upon the Stage, to make the excuse, and satisfy for him. Again, --
Clandestinum quoddam effugium sibi hoc modo praeparare conatur, hoc videlicet;
Si seductus aut falsus sum, Deus me seduxit, and fefellit, nam hujus verbo me
totum commiseram. etc. A fecret refuge upon occasions he thus prepares for
himself; If I am seduced, says he, if I am deceived, God has seduced me, God
has deceived me, for to his word alone I gave my self over. And in the mean
time he does not consider, that the very Pope of Rome, and all other Heretics
may say the same. etc. And again, -- Non ex verbis modo, quae non alia arma,
quibus se defendat, quam convitia, probra, and immites increpationes continent,
verum etiam ex ipsis sententiis, and violenta Scripturarum tractatione, ipsum
non aliquo Fundamento vere solido inniti videre liceat. Tot enim sententias
absurdas, etc. You may gather, not only out of his words, which have no force
in them, besides strong calumnies, and merciless reprehensions; but also out of
his citations, and perverse using of Scripture, that he is not grounded upon
any solid foundation. For he brings so many weak and absurd sentences to
confirm his doctrine, that if they were true and infallible, all the knowledge
we have of God would become obscure, all the authority of Scripture would be
called in question.

3. Concerning the instability of his doctrine.
Concerning the instability and fluctuation of his doctrine, notwithstanding
that whatever he held for the present of that he was most certainly assured,
thus Hospinian Histor. Sacram. part altera fol. 4. -- Per totam vitam tam
varius, and sibi dissimilis fuit in Articulo de persona Christi, praesertim
autem de sacra ejus Coena, ut minimum quinque sententiae de illa in scriptis
ipsiusreperiantur: through his whole life he was so various, and contrary to
himself in that Article concerning the person of Christ, especially touching
his last Supper, that you may see in his writings at least five different
opinions about it. And so. 12. Eadem varietas, and inconstantia, and crebra
tanquam tempestatum, sic sententiarum commutatio, in aliis quoque de Sacramento
Eucharistiae articulis, apud Lutherum, in suis scriptis invenitur: The same
variety and inconstancy, and change of doctrines, as of the winds, may be found
in Luther's other writings, concerning other articles of the Sacrament of the
Eucharist. So fol. 8, 9. he observes, that he persecutes those Expositions of
our Lord's words, Jo. 6. -- Caro non prodest quidquam, 'the flesh avails
nothing; and of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 10. -- Panis quem frangimus, the bread which
we break; when these brought against him by his Reformed adversaries,
Carlostade, and Zuinglius, which himself formerly gave against the Papists: --
and so he observes fo. 12. -- that when he was in contention with the
Sacramentaries, -- tanto impetu ab illis, quibus indignabatur, deflexit;
ut^rursus, ad ipsam usque Transubstantiationem, quam sub Papatu approbarat,
postea de ea dubitarat, tandem abjecerat, tanquam fluctus marinus ad scopulos
allisus, revolveretur. Cum autem urgebatur etc. Corporis Christi, tum demum,
potius quam se victum fateretur, in mediam paludem ubiquitariam se praecipitem
dabat: from those he was incensed against, he flung away with that violence,
that he even cast himself again upon Transubstantiation; which, when a Papist,
he had approved, afterward called in question, and lastly thrown away, tossed
thus to and fro, like the waves of the Sea, rolling to, and dashed from the
rocks. And again, when he was urged with Christ's body etc. rather than seem
overcome he would cast himself headlong into the abyss of the Ubiquitarians. --
The same thing Zuinglius complains of in his Preface to his answer to Luther's
Confession. -- Contentionis aestu eo se abripi patitur; ut ea, quae ante pie
simul, and been tradita ab ipso sunt, potius subvertere velit and negare, quam
ab instituto suo vel latum unguem cedere: He suffers himself to be so carried
away with the spirit of contention, that rather than yield a hairs breadth, he
would deny and subvert what he had well and piously established before. This
from. 21. of Luther's great confidence or certainty in his own opinions,
attempting upon it such bold Reformations; and of his violent condemning of all
Adversaries and Anti-doctrines whatever; and of the small reason which his own
fellow-Reformers conceived he had for either of these.

9th. His fi^rce contentious, ^rd railing spirit discovered in all his
controversy-writings.
From this Self-presumption of his also is discovered in all his writings that
-- amaritudo, ira, indignatio, clamor, mentioned by the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.31. a
most strange, quarrelsom, reviling style, fierce and impatient of any coercion,
or contradiction; not sparing his Spiritu^l Mother the Church that brought him
forth; nor his Spiritual Fathers that made him a Christian, a Priest. He the
first that so openly pronounced the present Catholic Church the Whore of
Babylon; and the Bishop of Rome the prime Patriarch therein, Antichrist; the
Bishops, Antichrist's Apostles; the Universities, Stews. See the railings of
his Book entitled, -- Contra falso-nominatum Ordinem Episcoporum. Not sparing
the Supreme Civil Magistrates; not Kings. See the Railings of his book written
against Hen. 8th not sparing his younger brethren of the Reformation, and his
own disciples, when they modestly taking that liberty in some things to dissent
again from him, which himself formerly had taken to dissent from the whole
Church-Catholick; and excepting their difference in judgment as to some points,
otherwise by all possible means courting his friendship. See the Railings of
his Confessio magna, and parva, written against them. -- Above all not sparing
his brethren the Religious, into whose bosom and education very pious (if we
may believe himself) he was so charitably received in his youth. In whom
notwithstanding he censures, and every where declames against, actions and
works externally good, as their fastjngs, watchings, Single life, strict
obedience to their Superiors commands, often reiterated prayers, etc. as done
out of hypocrisy, with much inward -- diffidentia, dubitatione, pavore, odio,
and blasphemia Dei, [to use his own words, and this because they wanted his new
faith]; done with an intention of meriting their salvation by them, and not
expecting, as the Remission of their other sins, so of the imperfections of
these very works through Christ's passion, and merits: their Celibacy, as
lived-in with all uncleanness of spirit, (tho he confessed his own, when a
Monk, void of any such stain); their prayers, as said or repeated by rote
without any inward attention of mind accompanying them: things, of which he
could have no knowledge, and out of charity ought to have judged the contrary;
or if by some outward circumstances he might discover the intentions of some,
yet from this could have no sufficient ground to charge all, and to inveigh, as
he does at a Monastic life in general upon this score, that their good works
yet were not well or rightly done by them.

an adulterous generation, a generation of vipers, children of the Devil; and
of St. Paul calling his Adversaries, Dogs, foolish talkers, seducers,
unlearned; imo qui (says he) Act. 13.9, 10. sic invehatur in Pseudoprophetam,
ut videri possit insanus: So sharply enveighs he against the false Prophet,
Act. 13.9, 10. that one would think him mad. vid. Melch. Adams vit. Luther. p.
191. and -- opera Luth. tom. 1. Ep. p. 291. [That is, a private Presbyter, when
reproaching all his Superiors and Governors, the Bishops and Fathers of the
Church, justifying it by the Lord of heaven and earth, and who sees hearts,
his reproving his rebellious subjects, the incorrigible and blaspheming
Pharisees; and by the great Apostle full of the Holy Ghost (as it is in the
same verse he quotes) denouncing God's judgment against a Conjurer blaspheming
the Gospel of Christ; as if when only he can show that such words are used, it
mattered not, by, or to whom.] Sometimes again he lays the blame of his choler
on those who, he says, provoked him to it. Non negare possum (says he) me
esse vehementiorem quam oportuit, quod cum illi non ignorant, sane irritare non
debuerunt: That I am too passionate I cannot deny, and they know very well; and
so ought not to have provoked me. Sometimes also he pretends a profitable
design of such his passion; for (says he) -- quae quiet dicuntur, cito cadunt
in oblivionem, nemine illa curante. (See Adam. vit. Luth.) endeavoring, it
seems, to add weight to his words by personal Invectives, as others by Oaths.
Add to this, that the fault is not observed in his latter time to have
decreased in him, but to have grown with his age; and his last writings to have
bin most violent, and passionate, (as his Confessio parva, written but a little
before his death,) tho against those, whom his friends thought of all
dissenters from him the most innocent, that is Zuinglius, Buce's, and Calvin's
party. So when by the importunity of his friends he had written three or four
submissive letters; one to Henry the 8th, (after that his bitter book written
against him); and another to George Duke of Saxony; another to Cardinal
Cajetan; and a fourth to Erasmus; these only instead of his other contumelious
writings, he is said to have repented of, as doing some prejudice to a just
cause. Adam. vit. Luth. p. 132.

Some Instance^^ ^th r^o^.
If you would taste a little the maledicency and bitterness of this man's
spirit, (which those who do not examine can hardly believe) do but look into
those two books of his, which of all other one would think he should have
written with most respect; that Contra Henricum Regem Angliae; because a King;
and that against Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, and Bucer's party, his Confessio
parva; because these his brethren reformed: the latter also written when now
his blood was chill, and cold. In one single leaf of his former book, taken at
adventure, fol. 338. edit. Wirtenb, 1562. I find all this railing stuff against
that Learned Prince. -- Elinguis defensor, linguax in nugis. -- Rex pro suo
more satis fortiter mentitur. -- Rudis and indoctus Laicus. -- Cum obstinata,
and impudenti nequitia Henrici agendum. -- Non hic mentitur modo, sicut scurra
leviss mus; sed nunc audet, nunc fingit, etc. ut nequissimum nebulonem si non
superat, certe egregie aequat. -- Quod virulentum and nequam hunc Thomistam
sensisse hoc argumento quod etc. -- Nihil potest pro ingenio suo nisi perpetuo
mentiri, fallere, simulare, illudere. -- Revelemus sceleratam hanc, and Regiam
nequitiam. -- Larvatus Thomista Anglorum. -- Non in animo ejus scintilla boni
viri. -- Sophistica malitia, and impudentia, quae de industria adversus
cognitam veritatem insanit. -- Plane vas Electionis iste est Satanae. -- Totus
suus blasphemus and sacrilegus libellus. -- Cavendus ut sentina mortis. etc.
Jejune Defender of the Faith, copious upon a trifle. -- The King, as his manner
is, lies stoutly enough. -- A rude and ignorant Lai^. -- We have to do with
Henry's obstinate and impudent knavery. -- Here he not only lies like a
whiffling buffoon, but sometimes he is bold and daring; sometimes he feigns,
etc. insomuch as he fairly matches, if not outdoes the greatest villains. --
That this virulent rascal of a Thomist was of this opinion, I have this
argument for it etc. -- His only talent is in perpetual lying, deceit,
counterfeiting, buffoonery. -- Let us unmask this wicked and truly Princely
knavery. -- England's Thomist in disguise. -- Not one dram of an honest man in
him. -- Malicious Sophistry and impudence, thus to set himself to rave against
the known truth. -- Certainly this man is a chosen vessel of the Devil. -- His
little book top-full of sacrilege, and malice, -- To be shunned as the sink of
death. -- Not mistake but mere knavery, and inveterate malice, bent upon lying
and blasphemy. This is the extract of his raging choler in one leaf taken
casually. How much is there in the book? Now you may be pleased to call to mind
his Rule, -- Quae quiet tractantur etc. and join another with it, Calumniare
fortiter, aliquid haerebit.

Confessio parva, thus heavily complain the Tigurine Divines, in the Preface of
their Apology written upon it: Libellus hic tanta Diabolorum atque
selectissimorum, and a Christiana fide imprimis abhorrentium convitiorum copia
scatet, tant a verborum immodestia, faeditate, and impuritate turget, tanto
denique iracundiae, maledicentiae, furoris, and insaniae impetu furit, ut
quotquot illum legere dignantur, (modo non ipsi quoque cum illo insanire
coeperint,) non sine gravi animorum stupore, infelix hoc, and inauditum
hactenus exemplum admirari coguntur: etc. So fraught is this little book with
nicknames, as Devil etc. and other unchristian terms of reproach, picked out of
the choicest Authors; so crammed with lewd, nasty, ribaldry-stuff; nay so
ranting and thundering with anger, maledicency, fury, and madness; that none
(that is not as crazed as Luther himself) can read it without great admiration
and astonishment at so unfortunate and unheard of an example: To see so great a
man in his old age, after having been inured and taught by long experience, and
with many still in great esteem, yet so hurried away and transported with
unruly passions, and that in so unseemly manner, as to render himself vile and
contemptible to all sober men. Elsewhere thus they (respons. ad Luth. cont.
Zuingl.) censure his great Pride. Prophetae and Apostoli Dei gloriae, non
privato honori, non suae pertinaciae, and superbiae studebant: Lutherus autem
sua quaerit, pertinax est, insolentia nimia effertur; and in omnibus
correptionibus suis plurimum maligni spiritus etc. deprehenditur: The Prophets
and Apostles studied the glory of God, not their own honor, pride, and
obstinacy: but Luther seeks his own, is pertinacious, and too too insolent; and
in all his correptions there is much of the evil spirit, etc. And another
Zuinglian (Conradus Rheg. contra Hessum, de coena Domini,) says, that -- Deus
propter peccatum superbiae, qua sese Lutherus extulit, quemadmodum pleraque
ejus scripta testificantur, verum illi spiritum abstulit, ut Prophetis illis 3
Reg. 22. atque ejus loco iracundum, fastuosum, atque mendacem spiritum dedit:
God for Luther's pride, and vaunting himself in most of his writings, has
taken from him as from the Prophets (3 Kings 22.) the good spirit, and given
him a waspish, haughty, lying one in its stead.

Calvin (who liked well, and himself to some degree imitated Luther's reviling
spirit, when he wrote against the Church, yet censures, and condemns it, when
turned upon his own party) in an Epistle to Bullinger: ( Calv. Ep. p. 325.) --
Audio (says he) Lutherum tandem cum atroci invectiva non tam in vos, quam in
nos omnes prorupisse; I hear that Luther has wrote a bitter invective, not so
much against you, as us all. Then counselling the Tigurines to forbear him: Ne
invicem se mordendo and lacerando consumerentur: least biting and eating one
another, they should be consumed one of another. Sepe dicere solitus sum (says
he) etiam si me Diabolum vocaret, me tamen hoc illi honoris habiturum, ut
insignem Dei servum agnoscam: qui tamen, ut pollet insignibus virtutibus, it a
magnis vitiis laborat. Hanc intemperiem, qua ubique ebullit, utinam magis
fraenare studuisset; vehementiam autem, quae illi est ingenita, utinam in
hosts veritatis semper contulisset; non etiam vibrasset in servos Domini.
Vtinam recognoscendis suis vitiis plus operae dedisset. Plurimum illi obfuerunt
adulatores, cum ipse quoque natura ad sibi indulgendum nimis propensus esset: I
have often said, that should he call me Devil, [ an usual reproach with
Luther,] yet I would honor him as an eminent servant of God; one, who has, tho
great virtues, yet no less vices. That over-boyling heat and passion in all his
writings I wish he had studied more to assuage, and moderate^ and always
employed against the enemies of the truth, that vehemence which is natural to
him; and not have turned it also against the servants of the Lord. Would to God
he had been more vigilant in looking to his own faults. He met with flatterers
that did him harm, being withal by nature over-apt to follow his own fancy.
Vehementia ingenita, -- and -- Ad sibi indulgendum propensus natura. Thus the
evil habits of an unmortified Will are charged upon Nature: And thus tenderly
his friend handles those sores, which he could not cover.

Erasmus thus schooling him in a letter, ( Ep. p. 828.) after he had bin
formerly too much a cherisher of his Novelties, and also a pattern to him of
scoffing at Religious persons, and other sacred things: thus, I say, he in his
wiser old age, when he had felt the smart of Luther's virulent pen in his servo
Arbitrio; -- Cujus ingenii sis, jamorbis novit; stilum vero sic temperasti, ut
hactenus in neminem scripseris rabiosius, imo, quod est detestabilius,
malitiosius. Hic videlicet tibi succurrit, te peccatorem infirmum esse, quum
alias postules tantum non pro Deo haberi. -- Quid faciunt ad argumentum tot
scurrilia convitia, tot criminosa mendacia, me (...) esse, me Epicureum, me
Scepticum in his quae sunt Christianae professionis, me blasphemum esse, and
quid non? plusquam tertiam voluminis partem his occupare libuit, dum tuo morem
geris animo. -- Illud mecum optiseditioso, totum orbem exitiabili dissidio
concutis. -- Breviter sic tractas Evangelii causam, ut sacra profanaque omnia
commisceas, etc. What disposition you are of, the world now sees; and to show
your moderation you have hitherto writ against none more outragiously, and,
which is worse, more maliciously, than against me. Here you remember your self
to be a poor sinful creature, when at anther time you look to be worshipped as a
God. To the matter in in hand what are so many scurrilous reproaches, so many
slanderous lies, of my being an Atheist, Skeptical in Religion, a blasphemer,
and what not? -- Above a third part of your Book is taken up with such stuff as
this, I suppose, to please your own capricious humor. -- To see the world rent
and torn with dissension by your arrogant, saucy, and turbulent wit, is that
which grieves me, and every good man. -- Your way of handling things of the
Gospel, is to turn all topsy turvey; as if afraid the storm should blow over.
-- That which torments me is the public calamity, disorder and confusion
irremediable; and all caused by your unruly wit; stubborn and deaf to the good
advice of your friends, but flexible to the suggestions of certain knaves, that
carry you whither they list. He concludes: -- Optarem tibi meliorem mentem,
nisi tibi tua tam valde placeret. Mihi optabis quod voles, modo ne tuam mentem,
nisi tibi Dominus istam mutaverit: Were you not so much pleased with the mind
you are in, I should wish you a better; and till God make it so, may you wish
me any thing rather than it. Thus he, A. D. 1526. But also when more indulgent,
and not yet stung with Luther's bad language, he familiarly complains in an
Epistle to Melancthon on this manner. ( Erasm. Ep. p. 630.) -- In doctrina
Lutheri multa me offendunt; illud imprimis, quod quicquid suscepit defendendum,
ibi impendio vehemens est; nee unquam facit finem, donec perferatur ad
hyperbolen. Eam admonitus adeo non mitigat, ut omnia reddat (...). I am
displeased with many things in Luther's way of writing, but chiefly in this,
That whatever he has once undertaken to defend, he does it with too much
vehemence; nor ever stops, till he comes to an hyperbole; and when told
thereof, so little does he mitigate, that he makes things still more
extravagant.

This discovery Christians have of Luther's spirit. And it is not to be omitted
here, (tho I step a little out of my way to show it,) that much-what the same
may be observed in the either Co-founder of Protestancy, Calvin, that we may see
they both learnt of one Master:) As may appear to any, that will only cast his
eye upon two little discourses of his Tractatus Theologici; first, his
Antidotum Concil^^ Tridentini; and 2ly, his Scholia on the Epistle of Pope Paul
3. to the Emperor. In the former of which he frequently styles the Reverend
Fathers of that Council, -- Impudentes, Stultos, Nebulones, Bestias, Cornutas
bestias, Asinos, Porcos, Simias; Impudent, fools, knaves, beasts,
horned-beasts, asses, swine, apes, and such like; vilifies their persons,
learning, manners, decrees, in such terms as these: -- Ne quidem unciam sidei
Tridentinam Synodum obtinuisse. -- Vix unum esse versum -- qui non aliquo
notabili errore conspersus sit. -- Nullum esse tam nugatorium figmentum, quod
inter fidei dogmata ab istis asinis non censeatur. -- Non unquam vel
crassissimi subulci judicio permitere ausos fuisse suas insulsitates, nisi
Concilii larvam sperassent oppositam fore omnium oculis. -- Istos nebulones ex
suo capite fabricare ausos esse, quod nullum habet in verbo Dei fundamentum. --
Nec tamen pudere istos Porcos territandis simplicibus denuntiationem saevam
intonare. etc. That the Council of Trent had not one dram of faith, not one
line [ spoken of the 6th. Sess.] without some considerable error: No fiction so
trifling but is reckoned by these asses amongst articles of faith. -- Had they
not hoped for the vizard of a Council as a blind to men's eyes, they durst never
have ventured their senseless fooleries to the judgment of the meanest
Swine-herd. -- That these rascals should dare to frame things of their own
heads, without any ground in Scripture: and yet these Swine are not ashamed to
thunder out their Anathema's to fright the simple. -- A good many of the Popes
scarce ever learned their Grammar. -- Hardly one of an hundred ever read over
one of the Prophets, Epistle of the Apostles, or an Evangelist. -- Certain
prating, impudent Monks, whereof some look for Miters, others for Cardinals
caps, first taught the Reverend Fathers their lesson, that so they might chaunt
it out to us afterward. -- After a noise and brawling together, like the
croaking of Aristophanes's frogs, out come their goodly Decrees, forsooth,
which henceforth must be vaunted for mere dictates of the Spirit. And
Blateronem quempiam ex Monachis, qui Concilium regunt, commentum suum
recitasse; Patres ad sesquipedem usque auritos, annuisse: Upstarts one of those
prating Monks, that lead the Council by the nose, and tells a tale of a tub; to
which the Fathers, with their ears a foot and half long, give their assent.
That the former Councils, whose Decrees they pretended to follow, were held,
Post extinctam sanae doctrinae lucem, quibus meri asini, and crassi boves
interfuerunt, qui nihil prae se ferebant antiquae dignitatis: After the
extinguishing the light of sound doctrine; and made up of mere asses and dull
blockheads, not the least shadow of the dignity of ancient Councils appearing
among 'em. And -- Innocentium tertium cum pauculis cornutis bestiis lacqucum
hunc populo Christiano induisse, quem Patres Tridentini astringunt: Innocent
the 3d. with a few more as very beasts as himself, brought this snare upon
Christians; and the Council of Trent ties the knot faster. As for their piety
and manners, -- Nihil mirum tam esse audaces, qui nullo unquam serio divini
Judicii affectu tacti sunt: no wonder of their impudence, that were never
touched with a true sense of God's judgments. -- Facile esse Patribus Diabolica
securitate ebriis temporales vocare poenas; quibus peccatum fere nullum est,
nisi quis hominem occiderit; quibus scortatio vix leviculumest peccatum, quibus
foedissimae libidines virtutis sunt exercitia, quae in laud ponunt; qui nullum
occultum conscientiae vulnus pilo aestimant. Hanc sententiam abominantur
Cornuti Patres. -- Porci isti in contrariam partem detorquent. -- Non attendant
stulti homines., Well may the Fathers [ speaking of degrees of Punishment for
sin] drunk with a divelish security, talk of temporal punishments, who scarce
count any thing a sin under murder, with whom fornication is a mere peccadillo;
and the filthiest lusts virtuous exercises, and praiseworthy; who make no
account of the hidden wounds of a guilty conscience. -- These Fathers with
horns on their heads abominate this doctrine. These nasty Swine wrest it to a
contrary sense. -- These Block-heads do not consider:

This is enough. Such his language of so many Reverend Bishops, his Canonical
Superiors assembled from several parts and nations, sitting in Council. It is
an hard matter that a person so proud should not also be erroneous. Neither
uses he (in his other writings mentioned before) his Patriarch and the
chiefest Governor in the Church any whit more civilly: -- Quis (says he) non
fustibus magis and lapidibus compescendum hunc impuri Canis latratum dicat: Who
would not think sticks and stones the fittest to quiet this filthy barking
Curr? And -- Quid tibi cum hac S. Apostoli voce sceleste Apostata, imo omnis
Apostas^^e Princeps; qui cum dies in machinandis perditionibus, in fraudibus
excudendis, in moliendo innocentium exilio, in destruenda Ecclesia, etc.
consumis; reliquum tempus vel cum Epicureis suaviter te oblectas, vel in medio
scortorum grege te volutas, inst^r Porci: etc. What are the Apostles words (
upon the Pope's saying, That he was afraid with St. Paul, lest evil
Communications should corrupt good manners,] to thee, thou wicked Apostate, nay
Prince of all Apostates? for your daily employment is only plotting and
contriving murders, inventing some or other new frauds, proscription of
innocent persons, ruin of the Church, etc. the rest of your time is sweetly
spent, either in merriment with Epicures, or wallowing like a swine amidst a
heard of impure ^urtizans, where you neither hear nor discourse of any thing
but what savours either of some execrable impiety, or rank obscenity, thereby
to provoke that thy shameful leachery; which tho outworn and grown impotent
with age, yet itches still. To speak this with any truth one would think he
must be one of the Pope's Bedchamber, and Privy Council; and to speak it with
any piety, or good conscience, -- that he must never have heard of St. Paul's
-- Brethren, I wist not that he was God's High Priest etc. Mean while by this
let sober Protestants judge, how well this spirit of their two chief
forefathers; Luther, and Calvin, agrees with the character of the Holy Spirit,
let down before. 1. And whether so great Pride is likely to discover to the
world any great store of Truth, or rather to betray inch persons to strong
delusions? To leave this second, and return again to our Prime-Founder.

Io^y, His frequent communications with the Devil acknowledged by himself.
Hitherto I have showed you, out of his own, and the writings of other Reformed,
the spirit and temper of this man, and the several steps of his bold march
against the Governors, common Doctrines, and Laws of the present and former
Church. In all which he seems to have suffered most strong Delusions from
Satan; and as he deceived many others, so to have bin first by him miserably
deceived himself. Which the better to discover, it is necessary that I premise
the extraordinary negotiations, the familiar Disputes and Conferences, the
several Temptations and Skirmishes, which he relates himself to have had with,
and to have suffered from, this Enemy of Mankind; and the manner of his
behavior in them.

This then in his de Missa Privata, and Sacerdotum Unction, speaks of the
Devil, as of one whose Arts and Practices by long experience were very well
known to him. A me ipso (says he) exordiri, and confessiunculam aliquam facere
institui -- Quondam intempesta nocte e somno evigilavi, and mox Satan
hujusmodi disputationem in animo meo (quemadmodum scilicet multas noctes mihi
satis amarulentas, and acerbas reddere ille novit) mecum instituit: Audisne
Excellentissime Doctor? I am resolved to begin with my self, and make a piece
of a Confession. Once about midnight I awaked, and presently Satan (as he
knows very well how to make me many a sad and bitter might) thus began a
Disputation with me in my own mind: Do you hear (says he) most Noble Doctor?
-- And afterward -- Haec illo dicente, sudor subortus est, and cor mihi
tremere, subsultare coepit. Diabolus sua argumenta fortiter figere, and urgere
novit. Voce quoque gravi, and forti utitur. Nec longis and multis
disputatationes ejusmodi transiguntur, sed momento uno and quaestio, and
responsio absolvitur. Sensi quidem, and probe expertus sum, quam ob causam
illud nonnunquam evenire soleat, ut sub auroram quidam mortui in stratis suis
inveniantur. Corpus ille perimere vel jugulare potest: nec id modo, verum, and
animam quoque disputationibus suis ita urgere, and in angustum coarctare novit,
ut in momento quoque illi excedendum est; quo sane me quoque non semel, tantum
non perpulit. -- Credo equidem quod Emserus, and Oecolampadius, etc. At these
words I began to sweat; and my heart fell a beating and panting. The Devil
knows where to fix, and how to urge home his arguments. He has also a grave and
strong voice. Nor do these Disputations take up much time or talk; both
question and answer last but a minute. I now find by experience how it comes to
pass sometimes, that some have been found dead in their beds. He can kill and
destroy the body; and not only so, but with his disputations also he can so
press and straiten the soul, that it must instantly expire; as he has been very
near serving me oftener than once. I am persuaded that Emserus [ one of his
Adversaries] and Oecolampadius, were struck with these fiery darts of Satan,
that they died suddenly: for no mortal man, without the singular help and
assistance of God, is able to undergo and endure them. He is pleasant at
disputation; he makes quick work on it, nor dodges, if so be he find a man at
home all alone. Add to this what Melch. Adams says in his life (p. 162.168.)
That he had very frequent temptations and buffetings from the Devil, some in
that extremity, as they made him lie as one dead. (Which Melancthon also
attesteth in his Preface to the 2d. Tom. of Luther's Works.) But (says he) by
reading of Scripture, particularly the Epistle to the Galatians, and singing of
Psalms, which he requested of those about him, he was recovered, and eased of
those affrights. In horto (says he) domi suae apparuit ei Diabolus Apri nigri
forma: In his own garden the Devil appeared to him in the shape of a black
Bore. -- And -- apparuerunt ipsi aliquoties faces ardentes, quarum conspectu
pessime habu^t. Ib. 'Oft-times upon the apparition of fiery torches, he has
been taken very ill. Melancthon also faith of him in his Preface in 2. Tom. --
Saepe eum cogitantem de ira Dei, aut de mirandis Poenarum exemplis, subito
tanti terrores concutiebant, ut paene exanimaretur: that when he has been
thinking of God's anger, and wonderful examples of his judgment, such terrors
have shook him, that he has been almost dead. And himself in his Epistle to his
Father, preceding his railing Book de Votis Monasticis, speaks thus of his
younger years. -- Videtur mihi Satanas a Pueritia mea aliquid in me praevidisse
^orum, quae nunc patitur. Ideo ad perdendum impediendumque me insanivit
incredibilibus machinis; ut saepius fuerim admiratus, ego n^ solus essem inter
mortales, quem peteret: It seems as if Satan had foreseen in me from a child
those things, which to his sorrow he now feels; so mad is he with me, and by
such incredible stratagems does he seek to hinder and destroy me. Insomuch as I
have often wondered whether I am the only mortal that he thus assaults. These
words also in the same letter seem to imply strange troubles and frights in his
mind, and suspicions of Satan's intermedlings. -- Memini (says he to his
Father) nimis praesente memoria, cum implacatus mecum loquereris, and ego de
coelo terroribus me vocatum [ad Monachismum] assererem. (Neque enim libens and
cupiens siebam Monachus, sed terrore and agone mortis subitae circumvallatus
vovi coactum and necessarium votum.) Vtinam, aiebas, non sit illusio, and
praestigium. Id verbum (says he) quasi Deus per os tuum sonaret, penetravit
and insedit in intimis meis. Sed obfirmaham ego cor. etc. I remember too well,
when you was angry with me, and to appease you I alleged a call [ to
Monachism] from heaven by terrors, (for indeed neither was I desirous nor
willing to become a Monk, but being frighted by the sudden death of my friend I
made a forced and necessitated Vow:) I pray God (said you) it be not some
illusion and cheat. Which words, as if God had spoken them by your mouth,
pierced and sunk deep into me; but I plucked up a good heart, etc. [ Here seems
he not to attribute these terrors to Satan?] Such things I find also in his
Colloquies Chapter 35. p. 381. English translation. -- There he says, That after
his return from Worms, when he was in his Patmos, (as he called it,) the
Castle of Wartburg, lying in his chamber remote from company, the Devil much
molested him; cracked some nuts he had in a box upon his bed-poll; tumbled, as
it were, empty barrels down stairs, etc. That when he could not be rid of him
with uttering sentences out of the Holy Scriptures, then he made him often My
with jeering and ridiculous words; yet that he did put him into a bitter sweat,
Ib. p. 389. -- In my age (says be) I am vexed and tormented with nothing, but
only with the tribulations and temptations of the Devil; who walks with me in
my bedchamber; he strongly scowleth upon me; he oftentimes afflicts me
touching prayer; he strikes cogitations into my breast, as if I did neglect to
pray diligently: [ I suppose he means his discharging himself of that long
office of the Canonical Hours, daily recited by all Catholic Priests; which at
the first he diminished, and deferred till Saturdays; then at Melancthon's
advice totally laid aside:] although I know, that in one day I pray more than
all the Popish Priests and Friars; but I babble not so much. -- Again, ( c. 37.
p. 391.) The Devil (says he) oftentimes assaulteth me, and objecteth; That
out of my doctrine great offenses, and much evil has proceeded; wherewith many
a time he vehemently perplexeth me. And tho I make him this answer; That much
good is also raised thereby, which by God's grace is true); yet,
notwithstanding, he is so nimble a Spirit, and so crafty a rhetorician, that
Master-like he can pervert the same merely into Sin. (See. 13.) What I teach,
write, or preach, I direct and square all the same by the Gospel, -- upon the
Gospel do I ground my cause; yet notwithstanding all this, [i.e. his sense
thereof, and this sense, as his conscience must needs tell him, contrary to
that of the former Church,] the Devil brings it so near unto me with his
crafty disputing, [ would not one think it were his conscience rather,] that
the sweat of anguish droppeth from me: insomuch as many times I feel, and
understand, that he sleeps nearer unto me than my wife Kate does; that is, he
disquieteth me more, than she comfort, or pleases me. Ib. c. 14. p. 234. I
(says he,) can never be rid of these cogitations, in wishing I had never begun
this business with the Pope. And p. 396. he says, That evil cogitations
plagued him more than all his labors, which had been innumerable. --
Oftentimes (says he) I took business in hand, -- thereby intending to drive
away the Devil; but all would not do; he would neither depart, nor surcease.
Therefore he that feels such devilish cogitations, and spiritual temptations,
him I truly advise, that soon, and quickly he expel them. Let him think on
somewhat else that is pleasant; let him take a merry cup; let him jest, or
play; or let him take in hand some other honest and civil matter, and seriously
meditate thereon. But above all things let him steadfastly believe in Christ
Jesus; for he came to comfort, and to revive, and will destroy the works of the
Devil Adams also in his Life, p. 168. mentions this complaint of Luther in his
Epistle to a friend, ( Tom. 2. Epist. 361.) -- Valemus omnes praeter Lutherum
ipsum, qui corpore sanus, foris a toto mundo, intus a Diabolo patitur, and
omnibus Angelis ejus: We are all well except Luther, who sound in body, yet is
persecuted from without by the whole world, and inwardly by the Devil and all
his Angels. -- And in an Epistle to Melancthon, ( vid. Adams vita Lutheri,
1529.) he professes, as his strength in public conflicts with men, so his
weakness in private ones with Satan.

deliquium, and fainting away; as Adams and Melancthon relate of him, which he
endeavored to remove sometimes with singing or repeating Psalms, he and
others with him -- Venite, inquit, in contemptum Diaboli Psalmum de profundis
quatuor vicibus cantemus: Come, says he, in defiance of the Devil let us sing
four times the Psalm De Profundis: as Adams reports of him, vit. Luth. p. 162.
(which puts me in mind of Readiness Spirit removed with David's Music:) Sometimes
with reading the Epistle to the Galatians, (out of which chiefly he solaced
himself with Justification by our Faith alone without our Works;) sometimes
with wine, and going into company, and using other divertisements. Also see
Colloq. p. 404.

Secondly, that he most readily discharged all the storms, anguishes, and
pinches that he had within him, on the Devil, as he also advised others to do;
telling them that the chiefest Physic for the cure of anxiety concerning faith
and salvation, was firmly to hold such cogitations not to be theirs, but to
come of the Devil. See before. 11. n. 1. -- And the remedy he used for things
that troubled him within, he applied also to the things that afflicted him
abroad; any Doctrines contrary to his own, tho of his Fellow-Reformists, he
pronounced them all Doctrines of the Devil; and was pleased to fancy the
authors of them no better than persons possessed, Sathanizati, as he called
them, which has bin hinted before, (. 25. -- 31. n. 1.) his Polemical writings
being everywhere full of this terrible name, Devil, as St. Paul's Epistles are
noted for the frequency of the saving name, Jesus. Now this indeed, viz. that
that which troubles us comes from the Devil, were it true, affords a man the
greatest consolation that can be: for he presently stops his cars, makes
resistance, believes nothing hereof, as being spoken by the Father of Lies; the
stronglier he is opposed, the greater Saint he takes himself to be; the more he
is charged, the more innocent; and finally the friend, and beloved of God,
because the Devil is his enemy, and impugnes him. And the Devil spreads no net,
with which he catches so many, as this; to make men mistake the chastisement
or the justice of God, for the malice and persecutions of the Devil; the truth
of God, for the illusions and lies of the Devil; the motions and admonitions of
the Spirit of God, or of their own conscience, or also of their friends to
amend and reform them, for the external, or internal suggestions of the Devil
to pervert and discourage them. Therefore perhaps it will not be amiss here to
sift this matter a little more narrowly; wherein I am afraid this poor man was
most miserably couzened, and deceived by that most subtle adversary.

Where, Of the great variety, and subtilty of Sat^n's temptations.
We must know then, that there are three Agents that work very intimately in us;
our own Conscience, the good Spirit of God, and this evil Spirit; and did we
know exactly concerning our internal motions, from which of these three they
sprung; who would not be a Saint? For who, when he knew the Holy Spirit of God
motions any thing to him, would neglect to defer it; or, when he knows the evil
one does so, would not resist it? but it is very hard, in every stirring, or
suggestion of the mind, or fancy, to discern these three without error. So when
our own Conscience, not yet quite seared, and hardened, or also God's Holy
Spirit, brings our former life, or our present practices before us to produce
our amendment, and to cast us into a wholesome sadness, or melancholy, and
grief, not to be grieved for; we may father this on the Devil, (since all these
things are acted only in the Soul,) as endeavoring to reduce us to despair, and
to dishearten our faith in Christ's Redemption, when as the Devil's temptation
at the very same time is another quite contrary; and not the sadness, but the
apprehension that this sadness is wrought by him; and the haste that they are
prompted to, to dispatch it away, and shake their hands of it, as coming from
him, is the only thing that comes from him; only the apprehension, I say, that
it is from the Devil, is from the Devil. And there being two things, which he
labors to effect, the one to reduce us by any means into an evil condition;
and the other to breed in us a security in such condition: this way he takes,
in our flying from the net of despair, which we think is spread before us, to
drive us into another snare of presumption, in our thinking that our life is
righteous, and holy, when it is not; or Christ's merits applied to us by faith
without such holiness, and performing the Covenant of the Gospel, when they are
not; and when Godly sorrow and compunction comes to work in us what is
defective, and reform what is amiss, the Devil begets this fancy in us, that it
is the Devil, that by this sadness would plunge us into melancholy, and
despair; and so straight we labor to divert our thoughts, and to encourage our
selves in our former courses; and we borrow of the Devil these wings to fly
from him, which carry us just the contrary way.

When this Tempter is undiscovered.
Indeed the Devil's temptations are very various, and contrary one to another;
and to catch those who think themselves wary, he often changes his snares, and
his colors. 1. Often he transforms himself into an Angel of light, and is not
discovered by us to be the Devil; and then he tempts us by delivering lies to
us for truths, and consequently evil for good, (whilst our wills do follow our
judgments,) and so misguides us accordingly in our practices. Again, thus
undiscovered, he not unfrequently, on the contrary also, represents truths to
us as lies; and so good as evil, virtue as vice, (his property being to work
evil out of good, as God's to work good out of evil.) Truths, I say, he
represents as lies, inspirations as temptations; and in a dissembled holiness
none so zealously as he, in God's name, persecutes these truths as coming from
the Devil. None is so ready to discover all his stratagems, and subtileties as
himself is; nor none commonly more strongly possessed with him, than those that
most rail at, and abuse, (if I may so say,) and defy him; when as Saints
usually are more modest in their behavior, and go no^ beyond an, Imperet tibi
Dominus: for he is a cursed creature, that stands little upon his credit, when
it is for his gain. So amongst other false persuasions, which he insinuated
into the Pharisees, this was one of the most perilous, ( Jo. 8.41, 44, 48.)
That they believed that our Lord acted all by the power of the Devil; and the
Devil made them hate him chiefly on that account, as dealing with the Devil;
and they having a Devil, and being children of the Devil, did by his
suggestions rail at our Lord, that he had a Devil, and did cast out other
Devils by him, and frighted the people from him on this account. So he
represents and owns the works of God's grace within us, and the dictates of
right reason, and of our conscience, that has as yet some sense of faults, as
his works, and as temptations that come from him: and on that score of being
his, procures us to reject, cast off, and avoid them.

etc. and when these things struck him into very great affrights and
pensiveness, here he betook himself to the remedy which also he prescribed to
others, charged all on the Tempter of mankind, presumed for a great enemy of
his Reformation; sought to divert himself from such sad thoughts, as Satan's
suggestions; when as this only was Satan's suggestion, that he should think
them so, and so divert himself from them.

A temptation of the same kind with the former, and a very perilous one it is,
when the Devil urges a known truth, as the Scriptures, in a wrong sense, and
so makes it a lie; whereby he drives the tempted, casting their eye chiefly
upon the text, and not suspecting the comment, unawares into evil practices. In
this manner he urged it to our Lord; and ever since does great mischief in the
Christian world even with the word's of God; and from this art also of the
Devil, Luther in his mis-interpretation of the Scriptures, especially to the
great prejudice of works of Piety, and Penance, seems to have suffered much
delusion.

^^en this T^mpter is ^^^vered.
Thus for Satan's temptations when he sees himself undiscovered by the tempted;
by which he ordinarily endeavors to keep sinners in security: But when he is
discovered, he takes another way. Here then he often speaks to them the plain
truth, and which they know to be so, thereby to discompose, and dishearten, and
drive them into despair. So he urges the Scriptures to us against past sins,
but always with some false gloss annexed. Such was the temptation that Luther
(but mistaken) apprehended in the Devil's disputation with him about the Mass.
Here also sometimes he urges truth to us, as truth; by this to continue us
more firm, whilst we give no credit to him in a contary error: for since we
know him for the Father of lies, and know it also to be his voice, who would
not embrace the contrary still to what he persuades, or argues for, and do just
the opposite to what he counsels? As if the Devil known and discovered should
tell Luther, that his Reformation was a most wicked act, and that infinite of
Souls should be eternally ruined thereby, who can think but that Luther from
hence would remain much confirmed, that his act was good, because the Devil
disparaged it; and so the Devil, to overshoot him, accordingly tells him, that
his Reformation was evil, and the many mischiefs it had done etc. i. e. tells
him a truth, so to make him think it good, and more fix him in his error. This
stratagem Mr. Chillingworth is willing to acknowledge in the Devil, in his
opposing so strongly the Mass, as he thus imagining to keep Luther the closer
to it; but then that Luther was here too hard from him, and outwitted him,
yiedling to his arguments, and the truths he proposed; and prosecuting them,
for this, the more eagerly. Sometime again here he urges our own present
errors to us as truths, because we already take them to be so; or he also
further confirms them to us, if need be, with arguments of his own; hereby to
drive us into despair, when we are conscious that our former actions have bin
contrary to our present persuasions. Nay yet further (for who can discover all
the subtle windings of that old Serpent?) he insinuates, and confirms such an
error to us for truth, and pretends thereby to cast us into despair, when as he
intends only by such proofs and arguments the more to establish us in such
errors, and in our prosecution of them, that so we may expiate our former
actions against them. Thus the Devil seems indeed to have ministered arguments
to Luther, in that famous conference of his against the Mass; such as he saw
also would sway him, the more to mis-perswade Luther, that the Mass was
unlawful; whilst Luther apprehended, that the Devil did this only to persuade
him, seeing the Mass was clearly unlawful, that he had formerly for many years
in using it, incurred a most horrid sin, for which God's Justice would never
pardon him. Thus the Devil uses to represent to us the former good we have
done, as evil; the former faith and truth we have held, and maintained, as
error, or idolatry, or blasphemy, etc. seeking many times thereby to beget, in
good people also as well as bad, a diffidence in God. Here therefore all ought
to be suspected that he says, all his proofs well weighed; and tho when God,
and our own conscience, or our friends accuse us of our sins, it is a
commendable humility in us to be most ready to confess them; yet when the Devil
will make us a roll of them, it is no such virtue here to confess them such,
because he calls them so, or trust him with such an office; for if we do, he
will throw into the account all our virtues too, and require repentance and
reformation for our good works. Therefore in the assaults of this enemy, as we
are to fence our selves, for things ill done, from despair by God's mercy and
Christ's merits: so are we very warily to examine, whether the actions he
blames have incurred God's displeasure, and be really faulty.

And that Lu^her had no secure ground that he was not by him most miserably
deluded*
These several ways and subtleties of the Devil well considered, I see no sure
ground, or motive that Luther had (in such frequent negotiations as he pretends
with him,) whereby he can secured that he was not miserably deluded, and
deceived by him. Neither the great plerophory, and confidence he had in his
opinions, and in his singular interpretations of Scripture; of which confidence
see more below (. 47.) that it is many times an operation of the evil spirit in
us. Neither the strong imagination he had touching the regrets he felt within
himself touching his Reformation, that these were Satan's suggestions, and
temptations, only thereby to make him despair, or desert truth. For why might
not this imagination rather be from Satan, and this regret from a relenting
Conscience, or God's Holy Spirit? And strange it is, how he makes the Devil
here blow both hot, and cold; for, when he was as yet in the bosom of the
Church, then the Devil objected gross errors to him, and by his Arguments
disputed him into a Reformation: and when gone out of the Church, and having so
Reformed, it must be the Devil again, that, with terrifying his conscience, and
telling him, that his new Doctrines had undone the world, endeavors to drive
him back again, and make him undo his former work. But if he gathered from the
later of these attempts of Satan, that because this Fiend would persuade him
his Reformation was full of guilt, therefore it was just and right; why in his
former attempts concluded he not, That because the Devil opposed his saying
Mass, and such other things, therefore he rightly performed them?

Neither is this any sure argument of Luther's not being deceived by him, viz.
his frequent railing, and inveighing against the Devil; his discovering, and
slighting of his arts and wiles; his vilifying and triumphing over him, as a
routed and vanquished enemy. (See. 32.) (Whose subtleties holy men use to speak
of with much more modesty, and fear of being deceived.) For (as I have said
before. 35.) none rail more at the Devil, than the Devil will do for his own
advantages; nor profess a greater hatred of him, or be more ready (but this is
a greater plot) to discover his plots. In fine then, in the great uncertainty
of the Author of the several thoughts and scruples that do arise within us, and
in such variety and disagreeing shapes of Satan's suggestions and temptations,
I know no safe-gard for Luther, or any other, to stand upon, but this; to be
sure not to be gotten out of the Circle (which incloseth all Catholics) of
their obedience to their Superiors; and to subject their own private holy
Spirit (if I or they may so call it) to the public Holy Spirit, that dwells in
God's Church; and to entertain no private senses, and expositions of God's
Word, contrary to the general one of the Church, from whomsoever these singular
senses come; much less when they know they come from Satan. As Luther relates
in his Disputation with him, ( de Missa private. and Sacerd. unctione,) many of
those to have done; according to which he regulated his Reformation.

11. In particular concerning Satan's famous Disputation with him, touching the
Mass, nullity of the present Clergy, Justifying Faith, etc. and Luther's
behavior therein.
Which famous disputation of Satan with him I think not amiss to view more
particularly; because several things appear from it very prejudicial to
Luther's new doctrine, which it concerns Christians to take notice of. For
whatever Satan's design in that disputation might be; whether by his defending
and proving such things for truth, to drive Luther into despair, for having so
long practiced contrary to them, (the thing which Luther imagined); or, whether
by the strength of his reasons, tho not by the credit of his authority, to
confirm Luther the more in his new opinions; which indeed was the issue of this
disputation, (he having yielded the field to the Devil in this combat as
Conqueror), 1. There seems great evidence from this disputation, that the
whole platform of the Reformation (be Satan's design therein what it will, He
deceiving Luther, or deceived himself) proceeded originally from the Devil. For
many of these very arguments against the former Church-doctrine, and Faith,
which the Devil now openly owned, and urged to Luther in this disputation, held
A.D. 1522. ( i.e. as he says, fifteen years after he was made Priest, and said
Mass, which was in 1507, ( Melch. Adam. vit. p. 104.) were the very same that
had bin urged by Luther some years before; who began to publish them to the
world about A.D. 1518. And who was, as he says of himself, ( Prefat. 1. Tom.)
Concionator, and Doctor Theology, 'a Preacher and Doctor of Divinity, in 1517.
Was made Doctor 1513; writ a Book de abroganda Missa privata, 'of the
abrogating private Mass, in 1521. using such arguments against it then, as
Satan brought afterward, (as also then his Book against Monastic Vows:) and
begins thus another Treatise, De Abominatione Missae privatae; quam Canonem
vocant, 'Of the Abomination of private Mass commonly called the Canon, written
in 1523. Toties hactenus, cum pro concionibus, tum editis libellis docui, de
ratione abrogandae horribilis istius profanationis Missae Papisticae etc.
Oftentimes heretofore, both in Sermons and printed books, have I shown, why
that horrible Profanation, the Popish Mass, was to be abrogated etc. Such
Arguments then we see he used before this Disputation; and by it it appears
from whose suggestion he used them. And tho this Disputation was not made known
by him to the world till ten or eleven years after it happened, (when he had
some experience of many being swayed by them,) viz. in his book de Missa
privata and Sacerdotum unctione, 'Of private Mass and Priests unction, writ in
1533: yet the Reasonings of this evil Fiend were urged by him against the
Church as Truth, both before and after his Colloquy through his whole ensuing
life; the strength of these arguments, with him overpoising the mendacity of
the Author. And therefore this disputation of the Devils against the Mass and
former religion has had with many a contrary effect to what it had with
Luther, either causing them to return to the Church, (as amongst others it had
once such an operation upon Mr. Chillingworth; one of the motives of his
reconcilement to the Roman Catholic Religion being set down by him thus, (in
his Preface sin.) -- Because (says he) Luther to preach against the Mass
(which contains the most material points now in controversy) was persuaded by
reasons suggested to him by the Devil, himself disputing with him, as himself
professes in his book de Miss. private. that all men (says he) might take heed
of following him, who professes himself to follow the Devil); or causing them
more firmly to persevere therein. Tho Luther, whether out of vainglory to show
his more intimate acquaintance, and negotiation with the inhabitants of the
incorporeal world, and his defeat of their designs; or out of a conceit, that
by the unanswerableness of the arguments, tho taken from a prohibited Author,
he should promote his cause; or rather out of the merciful providence of God,
to show to all the world, by Luther's own Confession, the Original Founder, and
Abetter of the Reformation, the more to deter all from believing such a lie,
was forced (to the great regret of many of his followers, for the scandal given
thereby) to publish to the world this his Confession, as he calls it, of the
things that secretly passed between him and the wicked Fiend. 2ly. For the
disputation it self, the Devil's arguments are vain, and of no weight to
persuade what he pretends, and Luther's weakness very great in yiedling to
them, and in afterward using them, especially known to come from the Father of
lies; which to clear to you, I will give you the story with some animadversions
upon it.

Luther's own relation of it, after his telling us how vigorously, and
convincingly, and in short periods the Devil disputes, is this. -- Quondam
intempesta nocte e somno evigilavi, and mox Satan hujusmodi disputationem in
animo meo (quemadmodum scilicet multas noctes mihi satis amarulentas and
acerbas reddere ille novit) mecum instituit. Audisne, dixit, Excellentissime
Doctor? Number ignoras te quoque per annos quindecim privatas Missas quotidie fere
celebrasse? Quid vero si Missis hujusmodi meram Idololatriam exercuisses, and
non Christi corpus and sanguinem, sed nudum panem; and vinum illic, and tu
adoravisses and aliis quoque exhibuisses adorandum? Respondebam sic. Atque
Sacerdos sum ad istud muneris consecratus, qui and Christma, and
Consecractionem ab Episcopo olim habui; praeterea omne hoc ex meorum Superiorum
jussu, and obedientiae debito per me factum est. Cur ergo non Consecravissem,
sum verba ipsa diligenti studio pronunciaverim, and summa qua potui devotione
in Missis celebrandis usus sim. Vere equidem hoc dicis (Respondit Satan,) sed
and Turcae, and Ethnici omnes quaecunque in templis suis agunt, exjussa and
studiosa devotione facere solent. Sacerdotes Jeroboam faciebant etiam omnia
certo zelo and studio contra veros sacerdotes in Jerusalem. Quid si tua
Ordinatio and Consecratio falsa esset; sicut Turcarum and Samaritanorum falsi
Sacerdotes, falsus and impius cultus est? Some time since, about midnight I
chanced to awake out of sleep, and behold the Devil (as he had known well
enough how to occasion me many troublesome and restless nights) began a
disputation with me in my interior soul. Do thou hear, said he, most
Excellent Doctor? Can you be ignorant, that you also for fifteen years together
have almost daily celebrated Private Masses? what if in those Masses you have
practiced downright Idolatry in adoring there, and exhibiting to others to be
adored, not the body and blood of Christ, but the naked bread and wine? I made
answer after this manner. I am certainly a Priest consecrated to that holy
function [ of offering the body of Christ,] having long ago received both
Chrism and Consecration from a true Bishop. Besides, all this I did by the
command of my Superiors in due obedience to them. Why might not I therefore in
celebrating those Masses be said truly to consecrate, when with all possible
care I pronounced the very words [ of Consecration] in the greatest devotion I
was able? -- You say very true, (answered the Devil), but even Turks and all
Heathens perform what they do in their Temples as by command, and with a
sedulous devotion. So Jeroboam's Priests acted all things with a constant zeal
and fervor, tho contrary to the true Priests at Jerusalem. What if your
Ordination and Consecration also should be false, as amongst the Turks and
Samaritans false Priests, false and impious worship? [ As yet Luther 's
Ordination is questioned by Satan as false, but not proved.] Satan then
proceeds to give these Reasons thereof.

Primum nosti, inquit, nullam tunc habuisti cognitionem Christi, nec veram
fidem: First, you know, said he, you had then no knowledge of Christ, nor true
faith. [ Nosti: This Colloquy, then, was after Luther's reforming the former
Doctrine concerning Faith, and his holding it the sole Instrument or Condition
of our Justification; which Truth Satan (contrary to his custom surely)
confirms to Luther. Should he not rather have bin jealous here of this his new
Doctrine concerning true Faith, from Satan's recommending it? And might he not
here have replied, That, doubtless, when a Roman Catholic, he had veram
cognitionem Christi and veram fidem, 'true knowledge of Christ and true faith,
or else God's Church then had none; and then how could any salvation be had in
it; or how have not the Gates of Hell prevailed against it? Lastly Satan's and
Luther's vera fides, the Solifidian doctrine, is now exploded by the
better-understanding Protestants; Satan discovered a lier in it, and his
Disciple Luther deceived.] -- Et quod ad fidem attinet, nihilo melior fuisti
quovis Turca. Nam Turca, adeoque omnes diaboli etiam credunt historiam de
Christo, ipsum esse natum, crucifixum, mortuum, etc. Sed Turca and nos Spiritus
rejecti non fidimus illius misericordiae, neque habemus eum pro Mediatore aut
Salvatore, sed exhorrescimus ut saevum Judicem: And as to matters of Faith you
are no better than a Turk. For the Turks, and so the Devils themselves also
believe the history concerning Christ, that He was born, crucified, dead etc.
But neither Turks, nor we Damned Spirits do confide in his mercy, or so much as
own him as a Mediator or Savior, but dread him as a severe Judge. [Here alto
Luther might easily have replied, that there is a medium between an historical,
or the devil's faith, and his new belief of Justification by faith alone; and
that if his former faith was such, as did not fidere misericordiae Christi, nec
habuit eum pro-Mediatore, sed exhorruit ut saevum Judicem, confide in the mercy
of Christ, nor acknowledge him for a Mediator, but tremble at him as a severe
Judge; yet such was not the faith of the Church which he deserted.] -- Ejusmodi
fidem, non aliam, and tu habebas, cum ab Episcopo unctionem acciperes, and
omnes alii ungentes simul and uncti sic sentiebant, and non aliter, de Christo:
This kind of faith, and no other, had you, when you received Holy Orders from a
Bishop: and all others likewise, Ordaining and Ordained, did so believe
concerning Christ. [This indeed, if true, would make one sweat; but might he
not here have told Satan, he lied, if not concerning his own, yet concerning
the Churches faith; and have required a further proof of his word?] -- Ideo a
Christo tanquam crudeli Judice, confugiebatis ad S. Mariam, and Sanctos; illi
erant Mediatores inter vos and Christum; sic erepta est gloria Christo. Hoc
neque tu neque ullus alius Papista poterit inficiari: Therefore flying Christ
as a cruel Judge you address your selves to St. Mary, and other Saints, making
them Mediators between you and Christ. So was Christ robbed of his Glory* This
neither you, nor any other Papist can deny* [Here also Luther might truly have
told Satan, that he belied and misrepresented the Doctrine and practice of the
Church; which desires the Intercessions of the Blessed Virgin, or Saints
deceased, to God, or Christ, in no other manner, than she does the
intercessions of Saints living; the desiring of which intercessions of Saints
living is granted lawful, without inferring Christ a cruel Judge, or these
Saints living, and not Him, our Mediators, etc. Nor do any make their
addresses so to Saints, but that the same do also to Christ himself. Meanwhile
here we may observe how zealous Satan is to rectify Luther concerning
Invocation of Saints, so prejudicial to our Lord's Mediatorship etc; and
accordingly Luther and his followers have endeavored to rectify the Christian
world herein.] -- Ergo uncti estis, consecrati and rasi, and sacrificastis in
Missa ut Gentiles, Ethnici, non ut Christiani. Quomodo ergo potuistis is in
Missa consecrare, aut veram Missam celebrare? Ibi deficit (quod secundum
vestram propriam doctrinam vitiat) personae habens potestatem consecrandi: --
Ye were Ordained therefore, Consecrated, and offered Sacrifice in the Mass like
to Gentiles, Heathens, not like Christians. How therefore could ye in the Mass
consecrate, or celebrate true Mass, when as there was wanting (what according
to your own doctrine destroys the whole) a person having the power of
consecrating. [ i.e. Without a true faith and knowledge of Christ no true
Priests, and so no true Ordination by them, and so no true Consecrating or
offering of Christ's true Body and Blood; and so the Adoration of that which is
taken for such Body is committing Idolatry. This seems the Sum of the Devils
arguing. But the contrary appears by what has been already said: viz. That
there was a true faith and knowledge of Christ retained in the Church before
Luther's times; and so a true Priesthood: and if there was not so before, how
can there be any since? for none may make himself a Priest, nor is there any
other to make him, if the former Priesthood perished. But whatever Satan might
persuade Luther, his followers are wiser, than to deny a true Priesthood in the
Roman Church; and so might he, had not Satan bin his Doctor.]

Vnctus es tunc in Sacerdotem, and Missa abusus es contra institutionem, contra
mentem and sententiam Christi instituentis. -- Nam Christus voluit Sacramentum
inter pios communicantes distribui; ad edendum and bibendum Ecclesia porrigi.
Sacerdos enim verus est Minister Ecclesiae, constitutus ad praedicandum verbum,
and porrigenda Sacramenta, sicut hoc habent verba Christi in Coena, and sicut
Paulus 1 Cor. 11. de Coena Domini loquitur. Vnde and a veteribus Communio
appellata est, quod non solus Sacerdos debeat uti Sacramento juxta
institutionem Christi, sed reliqui Christiani fratres una cum ipso. Nunc annos
quindecim totos semper solus privatim pro te in Missa usus es Sacramento, and
non communicasti aliis: You was then ordained a Priest, and have ever since
abused the Mass contrary to the Institution of it, contrary to the mind and
intent of Christ the Instituter. For Christ would have it as a Sacrament
distributed amongst the pious Communicants, given to the Church that all may
eat and drink of it. Because a true Priest is a Minister of the Church,
appointed to preach the Word, and administer the Sacraments, according to the
words of Christ in his last Supper, and according to St. Paul 1 Cor. 11. where
he speaks of the Supper of our Lord. From whence also by the Ancients it was
called the Communion, because according to Christ's Institution the Priest
ought not to celebrate this Sacrament alone, but other Christian brethren
together with him. Now for fifteen whole years together you have constantly
received this Sacrament by your self, and not communicated it to others. [Here
again he might have answered, that he in all his his Masses, wherein himself
received the Sacrament, was ready also to have administered it to oaths, nor
ever in any of them denied it to persons rightly prepared; much less held it
unlawful, or was prohibited, to exhibit it to them. That therefore his
partaking it alone was not his, but their, fault; if any other were obliged to
accompany him in it; but neither this their fault, who were no way engaged to
receive it so often, as he offered it; nor lastly, that he is obliged by any
precept of our Lord's to forbear offering to God the Father this Commemorative
Sacrifice of the Death of his Son, (from which Christianity obtains so many
benefits,) and consequently the partaking it himself, when others do not also
communicate with him. And lastly, concerning the sense of any Scriptures that
should be pressed by Satan to be such a precept, that he was to adhere not to
Satan's or his own, but the Churches judgment thereon.] He goes on, -- Ideoque
interdictum tibi erat, ne porrigeres totum Sacramentum aliis: And therefore was
you forbidden the giving this Sacrament in both kinds to the people. [Here
again Luther might have answered Satan, as the Church does other Adversaries;
That there is no precept of our Lord's commanding a necessary communicating or
receiving of the Sacrament in both kinds. And to Satan, if urging the words of
Institution for such a precept, might have rejoyned; That neither modern nor
ancient Church so understood the sense of it; as appears concerning the ancient
Church in their giving the Eucharist frequently to sick, and to Absents from
the Public Service, only in one kind; holding doubtless that they offended
herein against no Command or Precept of our Lords; and that (as has bin said)
Luther was obliged to prefer the Church's sense of our Lord's words before
Satan's. And if Luther (on whom Satan's words had so great an influence) should
think in this case Antiquity ought to be slighted; (for to this purpose sound
those words in this very Tract, -- Neque hic moror clamores quibus geminantur
Ecclesia, Ecclesia, Patres, Patres; S. Gregorius, Bernardus, tales Missas
celebrarunt, [i.e. Missas privatas.] -- Nam in vita aut operibus Patrum, in
certamine Conscientiae, nemo tuto innititur; sed tantum verbo Dei fidendum est:
-- Nor do I here regard those that cry out, the Church, the Church, the
Fathers, the Fathers, St. Gregory, St. Bernard, celebrated such [ i.e. private]
Masses. -- For in the conflicts of Conscience none are to rely on the lives or
works of the Fathers, but in the Word of God only put their confidence. urging
Matt. 24. Surgent Pseudo-prophetae etc. ita ut in errorem inducantur (si fieri
potest) etiam electi. Vbi clare ostendit Christus fore, ut in Ecclesia inter
Christianos Verbum and Sacramentum etc. in tantum abusum vertantur, ut vix
Electi salvandi sint: There shall rise false Prophets etc. so that the Elect
also (if it be possible) may be induced into error. Where Christ plainly
foretells, that the time would come, when in the Church amongst Christians
themselves, the Scriptures and Sacraments etc. would be turned into so great
abuse, that even the Elect should scarcely be saved:) It may again be replied;
-- That this Ecclesia and Patres are appointed our guides in the Exposition of
Scriptures in certamine Conscientiae; and that the Pseudoprophetae or
false-prophets, in all times are to be thus discovered, and convinced, viz. by
their opposing the sense of Scriptures given by the Fathers and by the Church.
Nor have we any other Basis or steadiness of the Catholic Religion, when Satan
and these Pseudoprophetae cite the letter of Scripture, as well as the Church.]
Satan goes on: -- Cujusmodi nunc hoc est Sacerdotium? cujusmodi unctio?
cujusmodi Missa and Consecratio? cujusmodi tues Sacerdos, qui non pro Ecclesia,
sed pro teipso ordinates es? De hoc Sacerdotio, de hac Unction, (certum est),
Christus nihil novit, nec eam agnoscit: -- Now what kind of Priesthood is this?
what kind of Unction? what kind of Mass and Consecration? what kind of Priest
are you, who was not ordained for the Church, but for your Self? [i.e.
receiving the Sacrament alone, and not distributing it to others? of which
before.] Such Priestbood, such Unction (it is certain) Christ neither
instituted, nor acknowledges. [Words.]

Men's and sententia Christi est, sicut verba clare habent, ut tractantes
Sacramentum mortem ejus annunciemus, and confiteamur; Hoc facite, inquit, in
mei commemorationem, etc. Et sicut Paulus inquit, donec veniat. Tu vero
Missator privatus in omnibus Missis tuis ne semel quidem praedicasti, aut
confessus es Christum: The mind and intention of Christ was, as his words
plainly signify, that we celebrating this Sacrament, should show forth and
confess his Death, ( Do this, says he, in commemoration of me, etc:) and as
St. Paul says till he come. But you a Private-Mass-Priest in all your Masses
never so much as once preached or openly confessed Christ. [Is not here also
Preaching at the celebration of the Eucharist made by Satan a Precept? If it be
made so, might not Dr. Luther have answered him, that an Annuntiation of
Christ's death is made in the very form of the Mass, and this not only in the
Commemoration and Representation of the Sacrifice on the Cross to God the
Father, but also to the persons that either are or may be present in such
private Masses; but that a Sermon is not required ex Praecepto.] Tu solus usus
es Sacramento, and apud teipsum demurmurasti sibilo quodam tibi soli verba
Coenae. Haeccine est Institutio Christi? Cum hisne tuis factis profitebere te
Sacerdotem Christi? An hoc Christianum est and pium agere Sacerdotem? Ad hoc ne
ordinatus es? You celebrated alone, and with a kind of murmuring muttered to
your self the words of the last Supper. Was this Christ's Institution? can you
approve your self a Priest of Christ by these your actions? Is it pious and
Christian-like thus to act the Priest? was you ordained to this purpose?
[Words.]

Men's, and sententia, and clara institutio Christi est, ut Sacramento
communicent and alii Christiani, verum tu unctus es non ad distribuendum
Sacramentum, sed ad sacrificandum: The mind, and intention, and manifest
institution of Christ was, that other Christians also should communicate in
this Sacrament: but you was ordained not to give this Sacrament to others, but
to offer sacrifice. [Here, if Satan had said truth, neither had the ordained
Priest any authority to give the Sacrament to himself. But sacrificare in the
Ordination, as the Church understands it, includes also the eating, and
communicating, and distribution of the Sacrifice. Nor is the Priest ordained in
the Church's Form of it, only celebrare Missam, to celebrate Mass, (which also
expresses a participation of the Eucharist,) or offerre sacrificium Deo pro
vivis and defunctis, offer sacrifice to God for the living and the dead; but in
totum Presbyteratus officium, remittere, and retinere peccata; benedicere,
praeesse, praedicare, baptizare, etc. but to the whole office of Priesthood,
[which besides, to offer sacrifice, is] to remit, and retain sins; to bless,
govern, preach, baptize, etc. Nor may we doubt, that Luther in that fifteen
years sometimes distributed the Eucharist to others, prepared, and desiring it
from him.] Et contra institutionem Christi Missa usus es pro Sacrificio: And
contrary to Christ's Institution you used the Mass as a Sacrifice. [But our
Lord's Institution is otherwise understood by Ecclesia and Patres, 'the Church
and Fathers, as making it to be a Representative or Commemorative Sacrifice and
Oblation to God the Father of that only Satisfactory one of the Cross, to be
continued in the Church till our Lord's second coming: which S. Paul seems also
to have indicated, and so expounded it clear enough in 1 Cor. 10.16. etc.
comparing and making it run parallel with the offering and eating the
Sacrifices of the Heathens offered to Devils. Nor ought Luther here to have
taken Satan's bare word against the Church and Fathers without more proof.
Meanwhile we see from what Author (zealous forsooth of the right understanding
of Christ's Institution, and of God's Truth, and vindicating it from former
errors) the Reformed have learned their Opposition to the Evangelical Sacrifice
of the Altar.] Sic enim verba ungentis suffraganei clare sonant. Cum enim juxta
traditam ceremoniam Calicem in manus dat jam uncto, Accipe, inquit, potestatem
consecrandi, and sacrificandi pro vivis and mortuis. Quae (malum) haec est
prorsus sinistra and perversa unctio and ordinatio, quod Christus instituit
adedendum and bibendum pro tot a Ecclesia, and porrigendum a Saderdote una
communicantibus etc. ex hoc tu facias Sacrificium propitiatorium coram Deo? So
indeed the words of the Suffragan [Bishop] ordaining plainly signify. For when
according to the traditional ceremony he delivers the Chalice into the hands of
the then Ordained, he says, Take thou power of Consecrating and Sacrificing
for the living and the dead. What a [mischief!] sinister and perverse Unction
and Ordination is this? what Christ has instituted, (and ordained to be eaten
and drunk) for the whole Church; and what ought to be given by the Priest to
other communicants etc. of this do you [in private] make a propitiatory
Sacrifice before God. [Here also Luther might have expounded to Satan the sense
of the Church, and so have expected his Reply; viz. The Church stiling the
Sacrifice of the Altar propitiatorium only in the application of the sole
satisfactory Sacrifice of our Lord offered on the Cross. As also there were
Sacrifices under the Law truly and properly styled Propitiatory; yet only so
with relation to our Lord's made at his death on the Cross.] O abominatio super
omnem abominationem, O abomination of abominations!

Men's and sententia Christi est (ut diximus) ut Sacramentum distribuatur
Ecclesiae and communicantibus ad erigendam and firmandam ipsorum fidem in
quovis agone variarum tentationum peccati, diaboli, etc. ad subinde renovandum
and praedicandum beneficium Christi. Tu autem ex hoc fecisti proprium opus quod
tuum sit, quod tu facias sine aliis, quod possis impartiri gratis, vel pro
pecunia aliis: The mind and intention of Christ was (as I said), that this
Sacrament should be given to the whole Church, even all those that should
communicate, to raise and strengthen their faith in every agony of the various
temptations of sin, of the Devil, etc. thereby to renovate and set forth this
benefit of Christ. But you have made it your own work, in that you celebrate
alone, without any others there present; whether gratis, or for money. --
[Spoken-to before; the Church repels none, denies the Sacrament to none worthy
at any time; sells it to none. If Luther did, the Church must not answer for
his guilt.] What follows next, is a Recapitulation, designed as it were only to
fasten and rivet these truths better into Luther's mind, in which he was
afterward to instruct the world; and the matter of it replied to before. -- Hic
forsan dices, etiamsi aliis in Ecclesia non porrigam sacramentum, tamen ipse
sumo, ipse mihi porrigo. Et multi in coetu etiam Sacramentum aut etiam Baptisma
accip^unt, qui tamen increduli sunt; and tamen ibi est verus Baptismus, and
verum Sacramentum; quare tunc in mea Missa non esset verum Sacramentum? Sed hoc
non est simile (says Satan), quia in Baptismo sunt ut minimum duae personae,
baptizans and baptizandus, and saepe multi alii de Ecclesia. Et Baptizantis
officium ejusmodi est, quod aliis de Ecclesia quid communicate ut membris; non
aliis subtrahens sibi soli sumit, sicut tu facis in Missa. Et omnia alia quae
ibi geruntur, tum opus ipsum fit secundum jussum and modum institutionis
Christi; tua autem Missa contra institutionem Christi: 'Here perhaps you will
say, [in defense that it is verum Sacramentum, a true Sacrament, and verum
corpus Christi, true Body of Christ, tho the Consecrator does not rightly
administer it, or is incredulous, and has no right faith] although I do not
administer this Sacrament to others in the Church, yet I my self take it, I
give it also to my self. -- There are many also in the Church receive this
Sacrament, as that also of Baptism, which yet do not believe, nevertheless it
is true Baptism, and a true Sacrament; why then in my private Masses may there
not be a true Sacrament? But the case is not the same ( says the Devil,)
because in Baptism there are two persons at the least, the baptizer and the
baptized, and often others also of the Church. And the office of the baptizer
is such, that he communicates something to others of the Church, not takes any
thing from them to himself, as you do in the Mass. And all other things that
belong to that Sacrament, even the whole action is according to the command and
manner of Christ's institution, but your Mass is contrary to the Institution of
Christ.

Quare non docetis quod quis possit baptizare seipsum? etc. Quare rejicitis
Confirmationem, si quis more vestro confirmaret seipsum? Quare non est
Absolutio, siquis absolveret seipsum? Quod si nunc nullum ex Sacramentis
vestris aliquis ipse pro seipso facere potest, aut tractare; qui fit ut tibi
soli hoc sacrum sacrificium facere velis etc? Scio (says Satan) quilibet
Minister aliis porrigens etiam pro se sumit; sed ipse non consecrat sacramentum
pro se, sed sumit cum aliis and Ecclesia: Why then do you not teach, that any
one may baptize himself? etc. Why do you deny Confirmation to be good, if
according to your practice [in the Eucharist] any one should confirm himself?
Why not Absolution valid, if any one should absolve himself? But now if no one
can consecrate or celebrate any of the [other] Sacraments for himself, how
comes it to pass that you offer sacrifice for and by your self alone? I know
(says the Devil) that every Priest communicating others, receives also
himself; but he consecrates not the Sacrament only for himself, but receives it
together with others and the Church. [First, here if Satan proves any thing by
his instances, it is this; that if no man may baptize, or absolve, or confirm,
therefore neither may he communicate, himself. But all Sacraments must not be
made in every thing alike. 2ly, Neither in the Sacrament of the Eucharist does
any Priest consecrate or offer only for himself, nor take this Sacrament only
to or for himself, if others be present, and prepared to communicate with him:
but yet 1. he may give it to himself, as well as to others; and, 2. again, to
himself, when not to others, if none offer themselves to receive it with him.
For himself has a share therein, and benefit therefrom, as well as others; nor
does their foregoing this benefit, infer or necessitate his.]

-- In his angustiis (says Luther,) in hoc agone,. (...). n. ^*
contra Diabolum volebam retundere hostem armis, quibus assuetus eram sub
P^patu: objici^bamque intentionem and fidem Ecclesia, scil. Quod Missas
privatas in (...) and intention Ecclesiae celebrassem. Etiamsiego, inquam, non
recte e^^didi, aut sensi, tamen hoc recte credidit Ecclesia. Verum Satan e
contrae, Age, inquit, prome, ubi scriptum est, Quod homo impius, incredulus,
possit assistere Altari Christi, and consecrare, and conficere in fide
Ecclesiae, etc. ubi jussit, aut praecepit hoc Deus? Si nunc verbum Dei non
habes, sed homines hoc docuerunt sine verbo, tunc tota Doctrina haec est
mendacium. Intentio Ecclesiae non est contra clara verba and intentionem
Christi. -- Ergo (says Satan non consecrasti, sed solum panem and vinum, ut
Ethnici, obtulisti: In these streights, in this agony, ( says Luther,) as I
was contending with the Devil, I thought to have vanquished this great enemy
with those weapons I was wont to make use of whilst a Papist. I urged therefore
to him the Intentention and Faith of the Church; viz. That in virtue of the
Church's Faith and Intention, I had celebrated private Masses. If I did not
(said I) rightly believe, and intend, yet the Church always rightly believes.
But the Devil on the contrary said; Show me, if you can, in Scripture where it
is written, that a wicked, faithless man may assist at Christ's Altar, and
consecrate, and make the Sacraments in virtue of the Church's faith, etc. where
has God commanded or enjoined any such thing? If now you have not the word of
God for it, but men have [traditionally] taught you this without God's word,
then this whole doctrine is a Lie. The Intention of the Church [if the true
Church] cannot be contrary to the plain words and intention of Christ.
Therefore (says Satan you did not consecrate, but only offer, as Heathens
might do, the naked bread and wine. [There is more such like stuff. Here for
what the Devil would persuade Luther, that, Nullus impius aut incredulus potest
consecrare, etc. no impious or unbelieving person can consecrate etc. it has
bin an opinion always exploded by the Church, and affirmed, that Gratiae gratis
datae 'extraordinary gifts and graces are communicable to wicked persons; and
the Augustane Confession, made before Luther writ this book, Art. 8. grants,
-- Licere uti Sacramentis quae per malos administrantur, That it is lawful to
communicate of those Sacraments which are administered by evil men; (quoting
Matt. 23.2, 3. Sedent Scribae and Pharisaei in Cathedra Moysi, etc. 'In the
chair of Moses have sat the Scribes and Pharisees etc.) And -- Sacramenta and
Verbum propter ordinationem and mandatum Christi esse efficacia, etiamsi per
malos exhibeantur: 'the Sacraments and Word of God are efficacious, although by
evil men dispensed. As for any intention of the Church, it is only to confer
the Sacrament according to what it believes to be the Ordination and
Institution of our Lord. And that its intention and faith is contrary to the
Word of God and Institution of Christ, is a thing said here by Satan, but not
proved to Luther; nor ought he to have yielded the matter till a further
evidence of it; nor ought he to prefer Satan's, or his own sense of Scripture,
before the Church's; nor to account his sense clearer, where so many against
him think another so. Meanwhile here again we see from whom the first Reformer
learnt such language, Vbi scriptum est? ubi jussit aut pr^cepit Deus? Where is
it written? where has God commanded, or enjoined it? And to plead Verbum Dei
against the Church; i.e. their own sense thereof against the Church's; (for
what the word's of Scripture be, both are agreed;) and this with an addition of
clara verba Scripturae, 'plain words of Scripture on their side, when a
thousand men to one think the contrary; when as no words of Scripture, how
clear soever, are interpretable so, as to contradict any other Scripture; and
the Clarum Verbum, 'plain Text, must comprehend not one sentence affirming what
we would have, but the whole word of God as no where gainsaying it. And then
who so fit to judge of the whole, as the Church?

Satan discovering, as he imagined, so much new Truth to him, and so many of
his former Errors, but with this ill design, as he imagined, the intending
thereby to cast him into despair, (for no man can think Satan to treat with him
on any other terms than to deceive, and do him mischief: only his frauds are
very various; and we may fancy, he proposes one, when he does another,) put
him, as he says, into a great sweat and anguish of spirit, as has bin related
before,. 32. According therefore to this suspicion of his, but quite mistaken
in Satan's design, after the relation of this Colloquy in his Book de Privata
Missa, he goes on thus: -- Hic respondebunt mihi sanctissimi Patres, An ignoras
Diabolum esse mendacem? 'Here the Holy Fathers [the Popish Bishops] will answer
me, Who does not know that the Devil's a Liar? To which he answers, -- Verum
quidem hoc est, quod mendax sit; sed ejus mendacia non sunt simplicis
artificii, sed long callidiora and instructiora ad fallend^m. Ille sic
adoritur ut apprehendat aliquam and solidam veritatem, qu^ negart non potest;
atque eam adeo callide and versute urget, and acuit, and adeo speciose fucat
suum mendacium, ut fallat vel cautissimos. Vti cogitatio illa, quae Judae cor
perc^ssit, vera erat, Tradidi fanguinem innocentem; hoc Judas negare non
poterat. Sed hoc erat Mendacium, Ergo est desperandum de gratia Dei. Non
mentitur Satan, quando accusat aut urget magnitudinem peccati etc. sed ibi
mentitur Satan, quando ultra urget ut desperem de Gratia. In summa (says he)
nos ab ipsorum privatis Missis, ab unctione Episcoporum liberati sumus. --
Viderint ipsi quomodo sua Pergama defendant: It is true that the Devil's a
Liar, but then his Lies are not of the common make, but far more subtle, and
abler to deceive. He so accosts, as to gain some solid and undeniable truth on
his side; and that he so craftily and acutely urges, and so speciously colors
over his lies, as almost to deceive even the most cautious. As when Judas's
heart smote him, that Thought of his was true, I have betrayed the just blood;
this Judas could not deny: but that was a Lie, I must therefore despair of the
grace of God. The Devil does not lie, when he accuses or presses the
greatness of a sin etc; but he then lies, when he farther presses, that I must
despair of forgiveness. In sum (says he) we are delivered [ by this
discovery of their faultiness to him by Satan] from private Masses, from the
Ordination of Bishops; how they can defend their Church see they to it. [
Against Satan's Arguments.] And from the time of this Disputation for ever
after he desisted from saying Mass. See Adam. vit. p. 104.

Luther apprehended to be in Satan's discourse, was this; That since Luther had
lived so long in so gross errors, and committed such great faults, amongst
which Satan (as the Reformed after him do still) reckons his Idolatry in
Adoration of the Eucharist, therefore his present condition was desperate. But
Luther presently avoided this rock of Despair, and instead thereof, cozening
the Devil, made haste to Reform his Practice and Doctrine for the future, and
persuade the same to others; according to the truths discovered to him by
Satan, and confirmed by him (as he thought) by plain Scripture, quite contrary
to the Devil's purpose and intention. Thus Luther conceited. But on the other
side, the Devil's design seems to be, (in seeing a young man bold and given to
novelties, and already, in the opposing of Indulgences, quarrelling with his
Superiors, of whom Mellerstadius said (see Adam. vit. p. 104.) when he yet
taught Philosophy, -- tantam esse vim ingenii in hoc viro, ut plane praesagiat,
mutaturum esse vulgar doctrinae genus, quod tunc in Scholis tradebatur,) under
a show of driving him into despair, to make him swallow those things for
truths, which, with the best arguments and art he could, he set forth unto him,
and so to become the miserable Author, of a pretended Reformer, of the former
corrupt Church-doctrines, and practices.

cautiously exercised by him, lest it should have another effect than he
approves of, viz. our repentance, and amending what he has showed to be amiss.
Therefore this is a sort of temptation he uses not to men as yet young and
vigorous, and beginning the world, as it were; but when we are come to an end
of it, and now have no more time allowed us for a Reformation. Nor can we
imagine that old Serpent so silly, as not to consider, in the discovering so
much new truth to Luther, and giving him such unanswerable arguments for it,
what might happen, if, instead of Despair, he should prove a Reformer. Nor
could he but discern, that the gain he sought or hoped by Luther's distrusting
the Divine mercy, was no valuable in comparison of the damage he hazarded by
Luther's being his Convert. The most obvious interpretation therefore of such a
Temptation is, that the Devil with his best skill meant to persuade him lies;
that he might, according to the bold and fiery temper he saw in him, already
inflamed against his Superiors, propagate and disseminate them all abroad.

Luther to conceal the first Author. As for Chillingworth's answer, as touching
this Conference of Luther with the Devil, (in his returning to Protestantisme,)
to his motive for relinquishing it, that is recited before. 39. -- That (if
this Conference were real) the Devil might persuade Luther from the Mass etc.
hoping by doing so to keep him constant to it; or that others would make his
disswasion from it an argument for it, (as we see Papists do,) and be afraid of
following Luther, as confessing himself to have bin persuaded by the Devil. --
To the first excuse; we see that Luther had no such thought, but that Satan's
design was to make him despair. Again; it concerned the Devil, if having such a
design, to have urged either no arguments, or such as in Luther's account
should have bin very weak, to leave him less shaken or doubtful of those
opinions wherein he found him; and not to have so much over-acted his part. To
the second excuse; Luther's revealing his Author seems to have bin none of
Satan's design (which Author, as I said, for ten years Luther thought best to
conceal, till he had seen many others swayed with these arguments, as well as
himself; and so thought such a story of the black Author would not prejudice
them,) but God's special Providence in behalf of his Church: of which the
Christian world does well to make that good use Mr. Chillingworth speaks of; to
dehort men from such, at the first, Satanical Inventions.

Satan's wiles and works, a not-unlike accident to this of Luther happened also
to Zuinglius, the 2d. Innovator in, and Reformer of, the former Doctrine of the
Eucharist; and contending for a virtual only, not real, Presence; and, Hoc est,
'this is, to mean only, Hoc significat, Corpus meum, 'This signifies my Body;
He then being on a certain day to confirm his new doctrine in a Sermon to the
people, and very cogitative and solicitous to find out some new place, and to
clear all exceptions, ( Coepimus, says he, omnia cogitare, omnia evolvere,
etc. some former instances of his being rejected, because extracted out of
Parables, as that Luke 8.11. The seed is the Word of God,) the night before in
his sleep had, as he says, an extraordinary Monitor (...) from the sky, but
ater an albus he knew not, who suggested a text of Scripture to him; which
being the next day urged and dilated on, fully satisfied his Audience, so that
they afterward wholly acquiesced in his opinion. Upon which good success, he
afterward writing a Tract De subsidio Eucharistiae, of the succor he received
concerning the Eucharist, thought himself obliged to acknowledge the favor
done him by such an extraordinary Messenger. And his Relation (to give it you
in his own words) is this. Cum vero tredecimus dies [Aprilis] adpeteret, vera
narro, ad^oque vera, ut celare volent^m conscientia cogat effundere, quod
Dominus impertiit; non ignorans quantis me contumeliis risibusque exponam; Cum,
inquam, 13. Aprilis lux adpeteret, visus sum mihi in somnio multo cum taedio
contendere cum Adversario scriba, sicque obmutescere, ut quod verum scirem,
negante lingua benesicium suum, proloqui non possem. Qui me angor (ut solent
nonnunquam somnia fallaci ludere nocte, nihil enim ^ltius quam somnium
narramus, quod ad nos attinet, tamet si leve non sit quod per somnium
didicerimus gratia Deo, in cujus, solius gloriam ista prodimus) vehementer
turbare videbatur. Ibi (...) visus est Monitor adesse; Ater fuerit, an Albus,
nihil memini; somnia enim narro; qui diceret, Quin ignave, respondeas ei, quod
Exodus 12. scribitur; Est enim Phase, hoc est Transitus Domini. Protinus ut hoc
phantasma visum est, simul expergefio, and e lecto exilio, locum apud
Septuaginta primum undique circumspicio, ac de eo coram tota Concione pro
viribus dissero, qui Sermo, ubi acceptus est, omnibus sacrarum literarum
Candidatis, qui adhuc nonnihil propter Parabol^ obstaculum haerebant, omnem
nebulam dicussit. When the 13th. of April drew near, (what I tell you is true,
nay so true, that tho I would willingly have concealed it, yet my Conscience
forced me to utter what the Lord has imparted to me, notwithstanding the many
scoffs and jeers to which I know I shall expose my self thereby:) the night, I
say, before the 13th. day, I dreamed that I had a hard tug with the Scribe my
Adversary, [one that had disputed before in the Assembly against his new
Opinion,] and was so struck dumb, that, my tongue refusing to do its duty, I
was not able to speak what I knew to be true. At which me thought (as in ones
dreams such thoughts are not unusual, for also what I relate, for my own part I
take it to be no better than a dream; though what I leaned by it is no small
matter, thanks be to God, for whose glory alone I now declare this,) I was
exceedingly troubled and perplexed; when lo a Monitor (whether black or white I
now remember not) as it were sent from above to assist me, seemed to say to me,
Why, Dullard, do not answer him what is written Exodus 12. It is the Lords
Passover? As soon as this Phantasm appeared to me, I awoke, leap't out of bed,
looked out the place in the Septuagint; and the next day discoursed thereon
before the whole Assembly, to the great satisfaction of all the young Students
in Divinity, who before stuck a little by reason of the Parable. Here
Zuinglius, the Head of the Sacramentarians, we see, had a spiritual Monitor to
instruct him, as well as Luther; and in the same manner, after he saw his
Opinion take, he confessed it; and if we may believe, of this Monitor, Luther,
who writ an Answer to Zuinglius, (called Defensio Verborum Domini in Coena,)
and among other Texts gives one to this of Exodus, he says, It was no better
than the Devil deluded him. -- Luce meridiana clarius est, hanc Haeresin nihil
aliud esse, quam acerbam and effraenem Diaboli petulentiam, and ludibrium; qui
prae nimia securitate studio id sibi habeat, ut nos suis frigidis and versutis
glossematis, and interpretationibus indignis modis irrideat: It is as clear as
the Sun at Noonday, that this Heresy [so he calls that of Zuinglius,] is
nothing else but the bitter and unruly petulancy and mockery of the Devil, who
by reason of too much security [our not being cautious enough to observe his
frauds,] makes it his business basely and unworthily to shamm us with his
sorry, but crafty, glosses and interpretations. This Account I thought fit to
give the Reader of Luther's Relation of his Colloquy and Disputation with the
Devil; who therein delivered to him the seeming truths of the Reformation.

Nullity of Luther's faith, whilst yet a Roman Catholic, urged by Satan in
order to the verity of the Solifidian Tenent, now by learned Protestants much
exploded. 2. The Nullity of his Holy Orders, and Priesthood; whereby his
Consecration of the Eucharist is argued defective. But the Reformed grant the
Holy Orders conferred in the Roman Church, and such as Luther received, valid
and good; and from these would secure their own. 3ly, His using the Eucharist
not only as a Sacrament, but Sacrifice, and his Ordination thereto. But this
use of the Eucharist, as such, as it occurs every where in the Fathers; so is
justified by learned Protestants. Of which Mr. Mede his Sermon on Malachy 1.11.
has treated copiously. Where p. 475. he says, -- That as Praise and Prayer
may be called the sacrificium quod, the sacrifice which is offered by
Christians, so the Commemoration of Christ's sacrifice on the Cross is the
sacrificium quo, the sacrifice whereby the other is accepted. And p. 495.
says, -- That our Blessed Savior ordained this Sacrament of his Body and
Blood as a Rite to bless and invocate his Father by; instead of the manifold
and bloody Sacrifices of the Law. And afterward, that -- Instead of the slaying
of Beasts, and burning of Incense, whereby they called upon the name of God in
the Old Testament, the Fathers, I say, believed our Savior ordained this
Sacrament of Bread and Wine, as a Rite whereby to give thanks and make
supplication to his Father in his Name. The mystery of which Rite they took to
be this; That, as Christ by presenting his death, and satisfaction to his
Father, continually intercedes for us in Heaven; so the Church on Earth
semblably approaches the Throne of Grace, by representing Christ unto his
Father in these holy Mysteries of his Death and Passion. Quoting also Perkins
in his Demonstratio Problematis de Sacrificio Missae, where he says, -- '
Veteres Coenam Domini, seu totam Coen^e actionem and formulam vocarunt
Sacrificium; tum aliis de causis, tum quia est Commemoratio, adeoque
Repraesentatio Deo Patri sacrificii Christi in Cruce immolati. The Ancients
called the Supper of our Lord, or the whole Action and Canon of the Mass a
Sacrifice; as for other reasons, so also because it is a Commemoration, and
consequently Representation, to God the Father, of the sacrifice of Christ
offered upon the Cross. Lastly, p. 504. contends, -- That there may be a
Sacrifice, which is a representation of another; and yet a Sacrifice too: And
such is this of the New Testament; a sacrifice, wherein another sacrifice, that
of Christ's Death upon the Cross; is commemorated. And whereas the same Mede
would relieve himself and the Reformed in denying the Eucharist to be a
Sacrifice really and properly so called, (for something must be said to free
themselves from Popery,) yet he sticks not to grant the former Sacrifices under
the Law, proper and real, notwithstanding that they were commemorative of
another, that on the Cross; and this Sacrifice of the Eucharist to be ordained
in their stead: whilst the Caholicks on the other side do also make this
Sacrifice on the Altar a commemoration of that of the Cross. I have set down
this to show, how different the Sons are to their first Father, as to this
point of the Christian sacrifice of the Altar; and how false in this Satan was
to Luther.

12. That probably Luther discovered not these wiles of Satan, but served him
ignorantly.
In all this said of Luther's communication with the Devil, I do not make Luther
any confederate with him, but only a person miserably deceived by him. I do
believe, that he in persecuting the Church of God, and its former truth, as the
Jews in persecuting our Lord, and his Doctrine, thought he did God good
service, and therefore the Devil great disservice; and that he really took God
for his friend, and the Devil for his enemy, as they also did: of whom
nevertheless our Lord declared, that they were the Devil's Children, and he
their Father; and that they did the works of this their Father, and spoke his
words. ( Jo. 8.41, 44.) But neither do I apprehend this gross misperswasion of
his to have excused him any more than theirs did; since he wanted not
sufficient testimony, and evidence on every side, especially from the voice of
the whole Church Catholic, that he was deceived; and the merciful God, without
his own first shutting his eyes and hardening his heart, would not have given
him up to such a blindness, and strong delusion.

And theref^re was a more dangerous instrument of his.
Meanwhile, a great advantage this is to Satan, (and therefore he labors it
much,) when they that do his business do not know so much. For such persons do
it much more zealously, resolutely, and without all remorse, whilst they fancy
themselves Saints, and Martyrs; and not them, but their adversaries the
instruments of the Devil: whereas he acts but timorously, whose Conscience
meanwhile trembles, and is continually questioning his endeavors, and
recalling him from his work. And the Devil well sees, that Hypocrites, and
dissemblers, tho these are a higher sort of his servants, yet do not do his
business half so well: For, in some thing, or other, these flag at length, and
detect themselves, at least they will hardly be Martyrs for him. As therefore
this evil spirit in other things emulates and strives to resemble the Good, so
in this; that, as the Holy Ghost inspires into God's Ministers a very great
boldness, ( Act. 4.29, 31.) and confidence, and full persuasion in delivering
of divine truths, and undergoing any sufferings in testimony thereof; even so
this evil spirit instills also a strange plerophory of blindness, and delusive
credulity, into his Ministers, in the believing, and teaching a lie, not to be
discerned from the other many times, even when it comes to laying down of
lives. Which we may be certain of, as often as we see (truth being but one)
some dye at Smithfield by fire, and others at Tiburne by suspension, with an
externally appearing equal resolution and courage, for two contradictories; one
therefore dying for a lie. And this is the more remarkable, in that even in
defense of Atheism, some (doubtless strongly deceived by the Devil) have
sacrificed their life, (as that desperate person Vaninus in France,) merely out
of love to this doctrine, as a truth; for he, who held no God, looked for no
future reward of his Martyrdom; nor feared any future punishment for his
disavowing such Atheism, and so saving of his life. And this strange confidence
Luther himself meeting with, and admiring in some Protestant sects that opposed
him, readily acknowledged it in them a bewitchment of the evil spirit; yet in
himself he (as also his followers) took this confidence for a signal operation
of the good.

Luther bin a much worse man than he was, he had done less mischief, and Satan
less service; and had this Fiend handled him so roughly at his death, as some
tell us; perhaps his Reformation, by the world's being frighted thereat, would
have bin strangled, and deserted in its birth: whereas now the show of some
Christian virtues lest in him, his inveighing every where against Satan as his
sworn enemy, his protestation of all sincerity and conscientiousness in his
discourses and dealing, his confidence, or, as he calls it, certainty, that his
doctrine came from above, his justly blaming (as also did the Catholic
Doctors) several corruptions of manners in the Church, etc. drew many aster him
unawares into the same nets of the Tempter, and propagated his errors to
posterity.

And that there wanted not specious pretenses for several things in his
Reformation.
Very speciously therefore, I grant, this man began to rail at the Pharisaical
humor of many Religious, (and perhaps some such Religious there were), who
relied on the purity and merits of their own works, and holiness; against whom
he preached Christ's Merits, and our Justification in remission of our sins.
Speciously afterward he preached, and writ against Indulgences; and perhaps
rightly, as to several abuses wherein they were by some misunderstood, and
practiced; and this perhaps done by him not out of any emulation, or envy of
some benefit thereof accruing to another Religious order, the Dominicans, but
out of conscience: tho this his action, free from envy or avarice, might be
stained with some tickling of vainglory, fed by the popular applause that
followed him. So at the first he did not cast off all obedience to his
Superiors, or intended it, (as himself often professes,) nor yet intended at
the first a Reformation of the Church's doctrines in so many points as he
invaded afterward, but some amendment in manners rather; and afterward, when
time and company had emboldened him to do this, yet he still supported such
fact with this pious intention, that he did it for defending the truth; and
that he only disobeyed his other Superiors to obey God the Supreme. Neither is
it likely, that he ever intended by his preaching down he Evangelical Counsels
of perfection, the three vows of Religion, Sacramental Confession, Penances,
etc. to introduce such a licentiousness of life as he saw afterward followed
upon it: nor by his throwing off the yoke of authority, to lay the open for so
many Sects, as he saw crowded in suddenly after it, besides his own. Such might
be the Devil's designs from the first, but not Luther's; and had Satan pulled
off his Mask, and discovered to Luther at the beginning all the evil he meant
to make of him, or introduce by him; doubtless this man would have startled,
and recoiled; and this subtle enemies plots are sooften spoiled and frustrated,
as they are fully discovered.

Nor some personal qualities that tendered him acceptable to his sect.
And as I esteem Luther from the beginning not abandoned of all good
intentions, so neither deprived of all moral virtues; these seem to me two very
faulty extremities, to represent any man's life so wicked, as to have nothing
good in it; or so holy, as to have no faults. For any thing I can find, this
man was very free from the vice of Covetousness; but then it is true, that some
men are freed from this only on this score, that it cannot thrive near, or
cohabit with the vice of Ambition, or Vainglory. He is reported by his friends
to have bin very charitable to the poor; but this also may be done (tho I
cannot say his was so) with an eye in our charity to humane praise, as well as
to our neighbor's necessities. So Melancthon notes of him, that he exceedingly
opposed taking up arms in defense, or for propagation, of Religion; which yet
might ground it self on no better foundation, but only a consciousness in his
time of the weakness of the Protestants power in comparison of their
Adversaries; and he might be averse from it, more because he thought it not
expedient, than not just. He seems likewise to have bin a man of great and
indefatigable industry; of a resolute, and undauntable courage; of which see
what is said before. 47. But these are reckoned amongst good or bad things
according to their effect; and so far as they tend to God's service, or to any
others benefit, men may hope for a just recompense from God in accession of
glory, or diminution of punishment; so far as they tend to God's dishonor, or
another harm, they must needs proceed from an evil root; and from him they may
expect their wages, whose work they do, and whose cause they promote.

Whore of Babylon, and the Spouse of Antichrist, and that for many ages before
his own time,) and against the spiritual Fathers thereof ancient and modern,
Prelates and Councils, (pronouncing even of the first Council of Nice, -- Se
non intelligere Spiritum sanctam in hoc Concilio (see before. 19.); against the
Grace and Spirit of God, as it inhabits in his Saints, and brings forth fruits
in them of a most sweet smelling savor to God; of which he said for his
advancing of Justification by Faith alone, that -- Opus bonum opt^me factum was
peccatum mortale secundum judicium Dei: -- and that -- Ae^^ocertus se non
semper peccare mortaliter; against Chastity and Abstinency, against Solitude
and Watching, against Fasting and Hair-cloth, against the diurnal and nocturnal
Offices of the Church, and the Canonical hours of Prayer; against hard
treatment of the Body, poverty and lowness of Spirit, and preferring our
Superiors reason and will, for the conduct of our life, before our own? What
are some good things found in this person (as none is every way bad) to
counterpoise those vices (so opposite to the fundamental virtues of
Self-abnegation, Humility, and Charity,) which do appear in this former
discourse to have so fully possessed, and reigned in this man; pride, anger,
contention, disobedience, sensuality, breach of lawful and sacred vows, etc?
Who is there, that will absolve a Traitor arraigned for murdering his Prince,
because his neighbors come in, and witness, that he was charitable to the
poor, or a good housekeeper? Or who will absolve the Pharisee for blaspheming
our Lord's Spirit and Doctrine, because he paid Tithe meanwhile of his Mint,
and Cummin? Whereas therefore those, who have bin sent by God in several ages,
since our Lord's departure, for the reforming of Christian manners, and
advancing of piety, and religion, have appeared to be persons of extraordinary
sanctity, and strictness, and austerity of life, of great humility, and
meekness, and punctual obedience to their Ecclesiastical Superiors; and their
Reformations, and new Institutions still licensed by the Same: so it is that
this person appeared in an opposite to all the former, in casting down their
works; and in magnifying himself as a discoverer of new truth; in throwing off
all obedience to his spiritual Superiors; in calling Christians to more
liberty, (not strictness,) and casting the work of their salvation wholly upon
Christ's shoulders; yet how much he magnified the works of God the Son for the
faithful, so much depressing and vilifying the operations of God the Holy Ghost
within the faithful.

13. The refe^^ blance of Luther's change of Rel gion, in several particulars,
to the f^rmero^ Mahomet.
Where feeing that there have bin, since our Lord's time, only two most famous
Innovations made in Religion against Church Authority, that have drawn many
Nations after them, and divided them one from another in the worship of God;
the first of Mahomet, the second of Luther; this second Innovator may be
observed to have resembled the former in several particulars.

1. In his overthrowing and rejecting the Sense and exposition of the Scripture
received in former times. This later Innovator urging, That the true sense and
meaning of God's word was falsified for many ages, as the other did, that the
words and writings thereof. [Of which see before. 20. -- Quanti errores in
omnium Patrum scriptis. -- Quisest, qui non saepius Scripturas torserit, etc.
And -- Scire cos volo me nullius Patris authoritate cogi velle etc. And -- Si
nihil habetur quod dicatur, satius est omnia negasse [i. e. in Patribus,] quam
concedere Missam etc. -- And -- Eruditis gratum erat (says Melancthon) quasi
ex tenebris educi Christum, Prophetas, Apostolos, etc. Sec before. 5. And of
these his new Doctrines and Expositions Luther says. 24. -- Illum se aut suam
doctrinam Episcoporum, aut ullius Angeli de Coelo subjicere judicio non
dignari; satis nunc datum esse stultae huic humilitati. See before 16. And --
Si nos ruimus, ruit Christus und. And Zuinglius observes of him, --
Clandestinum effugium sibi hoc modo praeparat, Si seductus aut falsus sum, Deus
me seduxit, and fefellit. (See before. 26.) Such language this as never any
Doctor, or Reformer used before him, unless Mahomet.]

Secondly, In his coming not with the power of the Spirit, and Miracles; nor
with the spirit of temperance, meekness, and patience, in worldly affronts; but
instead of these, with the spirit of fury, defiance, and railing; as the other
said that he was sent not with Miracles, but a Sword. [Hence that observation
of the Tigurine Reformed Divines concerning his writings, -- Tanta
selectissimorum convitiorum copia scatere, tanta verborum immodestia,
foeditate, and impuritate turgere, tanto denique iracundiae, maledicentiae,
furoris, and insaniae impetu furere, ut quotquot illum legere dignantur, non
sine gravi animorum stupore, infelix hoc, and inauditum hactenus exemplum
admirari coguntur. (See. 31.) And. 26. -- In omnibus correptionibus suis
plurimum maligni spiritus, quam minimum vero amici, and Paterni animi
deprehendi. -- And Erasmus tells him in a letter, (. 31.) Se suo isto ingenio
tam arroganti, procaci, seditioso, totum orbem exitiabili dissidio concussisse.
And from such fierceness observed in him to all dissenters, it was, that
Melancthon, tho his intimate friend, writes from Wirtenberg in this complaining
manner to Mr. Calvin, (see. 25.) -- Totos jam annos viginti expecto exilia. And
a spirit this was that never left him, but rather more and more possessed him;
his last writings being observed to be the most violent.]

Thirdly, In his indulging Sensuality, and the natural appetites of the flesh,
much pleading for the necessity of Marriage, holding an equ^lity of grace and
glory in all justified; and generally opposing those formerly esteemed Counsels
of Perfection, and of a stricter life, (from which many imagine Protestanism,
as well as Mahometanis^n, to have gained so great an acceptance in the world,)
as Celibacy, Monastical Poverty, Abstinence, Solitude, Obedience, leng Prayers,
etc. [Concerning Marriage urging frequently Genesis 2.18. -- Non est bonum esse
hominem solum; and God's command also for it, Genesis 1.28. -- Crescite, and
multiplicamini. And. 12. Adae filii sunt, and manebunt homines; hanc ob causam
debent, and coguntur, iterum ex se relicto semine procreare homines. -- And --
concerning other mortifications of the flesh he ordinarily slights them on this
manner, (. 3.) -- Ejusmodi sanctos diligit Satan, qui sua ipsorum corpora, and
animas perdunt; qui defraudant, and privant se omnibus benedictionibus bonorum
Dei. And contends (. 10.) That no man ought to lay a Cross upon himself, or to
make choice of a tribulation. -- And -- Illi insani (says he) ignarique fidei
prorsus, and spiritus, imperiti prorsus rerum spiritualium, conantur iis rebus,
per opuscula sua frigida, jejumis, vestibus, preculis, statis Monasteriorum
carceribus, consulere. Elsewhere -- Creed fortiter (says he. 3.) te absolutum,
and absolutus vere eris, quicquid sit de contritione. And -- Baptizatus, etiam
volens, non potest perdere salutem suam quantiscunque peccatis; nisi nolit
credere.]

Mahomet did, the Head thereof in Heaven; pronouncing him Antichrist, and the
Church of God his Spouse; and so far befriending that his Predecessor, as to
apply all those things to the chief Pastor of Christ's flock, which properly
belong to that great false Prophet, whose steps himself follows. In his
degrading also the former Clergy of God; declaring them (convinced herein by
the Devil's Arguments) to have bin no true Priests, (see before. 18); and
setting up a new Church-Ministry of his own; and composing a new Ordination of
Bishops, and Ministers descending from himself, (see. 23.) And himself
exercising the Episcopal function in Excommunications, etc. tho only a
Presbyter: Abrogating the former public Liturgy of the Church, and himself
ordering a new one as he thought meet, to be used by all his followers, (a
thing never attempted by any Reformer before him, except Mahomet); and lastly
burning in public the former Ecclesiastical Canons, as well those of Councils,
as Popes; by all this, as it were, making himself the Founder of a new
Religion, and an independent Supreme; and, as Erasmus told him, (which suits
also well in this comparison with Mahomet,) postulans tantum non pro Deo
haberi, (see before. 31. n. 3.) suitable to which he authoritatively
pronounces of the other Reformists dissenting from him, (see before. 25.) --
se nee little consortium recipere, nec literas, libros, salutationes,
benedictiones, scriptiones, aut nominationem, intra animi sui penetralia
admittere, nec visu, vel auditu dignari decrevisse. Concerning which former
bold undertakings his Conscience often checked, and thus replied upon him,
(see. 24. n. 2.) Impossible est, quod Christus tot seculis Ecclesiam suam
errare sinat. Tu certe solus non sapis plus, quam tot sancti viri, and tota
Ecclesia. -- Sic senserunt and docuer^nt omnes primitivae Ecclesiae Doctores,
viri sanctissimi, multo majores, and doctiores te. Quis tu es qui ausus ab
omnibus his dissentire, and nobis diversum dogma obtrudere? To which he
answers, -- Si sanctus Petrus etc. aliter doceant, tamen hoc certe scio, quod
humana non suadeo, sed divina. -- And -- Quisque videat, ut certissimus sit de
sua vocations, and doctrina. (and. 24. n. 2.) So elsewhere about his changing
the Mass, his Conscience thus suggests: -- Rem arduam (. 16.) and quam forte
sit impossible convelli, aggredior; ut quae tanto saeculorum usu firmata,
omniumque consensu probata sic insederit, ut necesse sit majorem partem
librorum, qui hodie regnant, and paene universam Ecclesiarum faciem tolli, and
mutari, penitusque aliud genus caeremoniarum induci, seu potius reduci. To
which his Answer is: -- Majori cura Verbum Dei oportet observare, quam omnium
hominum and Angelorum intelligentias; as if he had received some new
illumination from heaven concerning a new sense of the Scriptures.

5ly. If I had a mind to extend this parallel any further, I might say; he
resembled also the former Changer of Religion, in that he had his deliquium's,
and swounding fitts [see before. 32. what Adams says, and what himself, -- Quo
sane me quoque non semel tantum non perpulit] as the other had; tho not
ascribed by both of them to the same cause; one imputing them to the
temptations of a bad Angel; the other to the visitations of a good; but yet of
this Angel of Mahomet's no Christian doubts, that he was also a bad one.

14. The trial (...) ^^ther's spirit (is b^^^re descr^^^) ^^^ther this (...)
good, (...) bid, (...) the pro^^^^^ (...) in the b^^^ (...)
If you please then, after all this, to review the two contrary Spirits
described by the Apostle, and mentioned before,. 1. you may from the precedents
in this Discourse, discern this person not to have bin possessed with the first,
but the latter. Now the Rule or Mark that our Lord has left to his sheep,
thereby for ever to know, and avoid false teachers, is the fruits which they
see them bear. Beware (says he) of false Prophets, that come to you in sheeps
clothing, [like true members of Christ's flock and fold;] ye shall know them
by their fruits: Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs from thistles? The
meaning of which surely cannot be this ( Matt. 7.15.) only by their fruits,
i.e. their doctrines ye shall know the persons, whether they be true, or false
prophets or teachers; or by their doctrines ye shall know whether they teach
false doctrines; for so still I have no direction lest me whereby to know their
doctrines to be false; yet for which their false doctrines ^am warned chiefly
to be aware of these false teachers. But the meaning thereof in reason must be,
that by their fruits of an holy, or bad life, by the fruits of the Spirit, or
of the flesh which they bear, which fruits the sheep do see, and can judge of,
when they cannot so well of the doctrines; by these both the good or bad Spirit
of the Doctor, and the truth or falsity of his doctrines, may be known.

Gal. 5.22.) that the fruits thereof are love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, continency, or temperance: if of the
flesh, and Satan; the works or fruits are fornication, uncleanness,
lasciviousness, drunkenness, revellings, hatred, variance, emulation, wrath,
strife, sedition, envyings, etc. Now Christians, having once discerned thus by
these fruits the Spirit of the Teachers, where they have ground of presumption
that it is a bad one, have all reason to suspect his doctrine, and his reasons,
and arguments, and his expositions of God's word in confirmation thereof to be
so too. To be so too, I say, where ever the Church does not authorize and
secure such doctrine to them; for the Scriptures are of no private
interpretation, i. e. not of every private man's interpretation out of his own
brain; because they are dictated by the Holy Ghost; and by the Holy Ghost, the
meaning of the Holy Ghost in them can only be expounded. By the Holy Ghost, I
say, either in the private Expositor, or the Church; in which the Spirit of God
for ever resides, and guides it into all truth; from which Church he must learn
such Exposition, or with which Church he will concur in it; if he learn it from
God's Spirit. But this man's new Doctrine entered into the world neither with
Miracles, nor (if we consider all said) with the signs of a good Spirit; nor
yet owned, or defended (nay also rejected, and condemned) by the Church.

Where, 1. That truth and holiness, error and vice, have a necessary cenrex^^n.
2ly. By their fruits of a strict, and holy, or of a corrupt, and dissolute
life, are the truth and falsity also of Doctrines discovered. For first, as
truth, and goodness, so error, and vice, have a most intimate, and natural
connection; so that I may say, if there be any doctrine, that really and
naturally tends to produce in us more sanctity and purity of life than the
contrary; that most certainly is truth, and the contrary error; and therefore
is an orthodox faith so much labored for, because it is the foundation of a
good life; and therefore Satan becomes the Father of all evil in us, because he
is first the Father of lies to us. Tho then it be not here denied, but that a
teacher of something that is false, may bring forth the fruits of a good life;
and contrary, the teacher of truth, the fruits of a bad: yet 1. here the fruit
of good life can never proceed from the false doctrine taught by the one; nor
the fruit of a bad life, from the truth that is taught by the other. But the
teacher of truth brings forth bad fruit from his lusts carrying him against the
truth known by him: and again, the teacher of some errors brings forth good
fruit from the truth which he possesses; mingled indeed with error, but yet
predominative thereof. But if he be such a Teacher of errors, as that the
truths he holds (as none err in every thing) are, in the operation which they
might have upon his manners, mastered, and seduced by them; here his life also
must needs be corrupt; whether he be supposed to practice according to his
errors, (as if he indulged some forbidden lusts because conceived lawful), or
whether he practice contrary to them; for so he does what is right indeed, but
against his conscience; all acting against which, tho when it errs, becomes
evil. Again, if he be a teacher of such errors as are expressly condemned by the
Church, or, at Jest, as he knows to be so, whatever truths he may hold, or
some kind of virtues practice according to those truths, yet his life in
general can never be styled holy, or himself good, because he wants the two
fundamental and cardinal virtues of Obedience and Humility. Lastly, neither can
a good man, teaching some errors, be so good, as if rectified in these, he
might have bin; but that he must also be so far faulty, and defective in his
manners, as his false opinion any way tends to the depraving and leavening
thereof. This of the natural connection of error and vice, as of truth and
goodness.

(...); That where more corrupt doctrines ^re believed, and taught, there for
the general are ^ound more dissolute (...).
2ly. Hence it will follow; That tho (as has bin said) it may not be affirmed,
that where ever a dissolute and bad life is seen in a teacher or others, there
it arises from their false opinions, or doctrines; because many times our life
is evil, where our tenants are generally orthodox; and true Catholics are
sometimes bad men, from our lusts warring, and carrying us headlong against our
knowledge, and our faith; yet in any Sect, wherein more erroneous and corrupt
doctrines are believed, and maintained, especially such as give more manifest
liberty to the flesh, there for the general must needs be more carnal, corrupt,
and dissolute lives; seeing that there are here both the same lusts warring
against the Soul, which are also tempting the Catholic and Orthodox to an evil
life; and moreover many gross mis-perswasions and pernicious doctrines, siding
with, and countenancing such lusts, or at least not curbing them. For if our
lusts, even against knowledge, are so powerful over us; how swiftly will they
move us, when our errors go along with them, and blow these Sails? This I say
for the general. For as to particulars I do not deny, but that the life of some
persons, laboring under many erroneous principles, yet may be very regular,
both by reason of other truths believed; which, tho this not observed by them,
do contradict the other false ones, and may suspend the bad influences of them
upon their practice; as also by reason of an extraordinary good inclination of
their nature, and helps also of God's restraining grace; for even amongst the
Heathen-errors have bin some persons of an external virtuous, and
unreproachable conversation, and therefore much more may they be so amongst any
Sect of Christians, who cannot but have many Catholic truths mingled with
their errors; and yet much more may they be so amongst such reformed, as have
since cast off, and renounced many of Luther's more malignant doctrines, and
especially his Solifidian error. Which Reformed methinks should have a great
jealousy of the rest that were taught by him, whom they have found miscarrying
in so fundamental a point, and that which was the first stone that he laid of
the Reformation: (See before. 3. etc.) yet so far may their other errors be
rationally conceived to retard, and hinder even the very best amongst them, as
never to equal in sanctity the lives of those holy men, that enjoy the light
and guidance of the Catholic Faith.

The several bad fruits springing from Luther's doctrine, that presently
appeared, and were confessed ^n his own time.
According to these positions, if we examine concerning Luther's Doctrine, what
fruit it brought forth, and that in his own time, (for it becomes not me to
make a scrutiny further, when it spread over Kingdoms; or to compare, and
decide the holiness of Nations according to their present various professions
of Religion:) if we enquire, I say, in his own time, what fruit it bare;
especially in respect of the four main heads thereof, in his gross way of
delivering of them; 1. The Nullity, and Antichristianism of the former
Ecclesiastical Prelacy, and Clergy, and the non-obligation of their
Constitutions and Laws. 2. The inutility of Works, of Penance, Mortifications,
etc. 3. The Servitude of man's Will, and inability to good even in the
Regenerate. 4. The sole Sufficiency of Faith in us for our Justification; and
this Faith an assurance that Christ's merits are applied to us in particular,
and that we in particular are justified by them; and that every one by
believing he is justified, truly becomes so. To which may be annexed his
holding a parity of future glory to all justified, and one in Heaven as great
as another, without consideration of their own different good works, or
sufferings in this present life. We shall find in the effect, (as in reason it
could not be otherwise,) That out of the first of these (the band of
Ecclesiastical Authority being dissolved) sprang immediately a multitude of
Sects invading one another, as well as all of them the Church, many gross
Heresies, and grievous Schisms, and Seditions, even sober Protestants being the
judges here of; all which must needs be accompanied with a strange spiritual or
intellectual pride, in thinking themselves wiser men, and better interpreters
of the Scriptures than their spiritual Superiors, than the Doctors, Fathers,
and Councils of the Church, both of the present, and many former ages. And that
out of the three latter, (people from them discovering no great utility, or
necessity of our own, either penal or pious works) grew a great dissoluteness
of life on one hand, and great worldliness, and covetousness, and its daughter
oppression on the other; as not believing, that the laying out of their goods
here could purchase for them a treasure in another place; but rather such works
of their own diminish their confidence in Christ's works, and so ruin their
Justification, and cast them our of the Evangelical, into the Legal Covenant.

Luther himself; the thing he confessed, but the cause thereof he made to be
the peoples, or their Reformed teachers ignorance, and mistaking of his
Doctrines; how truly this latter, let the indifferent judge by what has bin
here before produced out of him writings; for which review his propositions
before. 3. And see Dr. Hammond's description of the natural fruits and effects,
that must needs grow out of one of his tenants, the Solifidian error. ( Of
Fundamentals. (...), 13.) The sum of which is; That, such a one by his full
assurance, as it excludes all fear and doubting of his estate, and also asserts
the priority of such an assurance and faith before his repentance or amendment
of life, is fortified and secured by this one deceit from all obligation to
superstruct Christian practice, or holy living, upon such his faith. For if
assurance of his good estate be the one thing necessary, then nothing else that
is distinct from it (as a good life is affirmed to be) is so. And if his estate
be already safe, (and if it be not, then his believing it so is believing a
lie) then it needs no supply from a good life at all to make it a safe estate,
or to give him grounds to believe it such. Nor if he be justified before he
amends his life, can this hinder the continuing of his Justification, or
intercept his Salvation, if he shall never amend it, especially, when it is
said by them, that the once justified can never be unjustified. Nor will this
amendment and good life be necessary, tho not to his Justification, yet to the
approving of it, or of his faith to himself, or others; because his faith being
a full assurance includes this approbation of his Justification to himself: and
the approbation of it to others must needs be a thing extrinsecal and
impertinent to his Justification, nor can man's disapproving it any way annull
it. etc. See the Author. Again, For the mustiplying of Sects, by throwing off
the yoke of Ecclesiastical Government, (without casting off which Luther could
not have made way for his own Sect; nor could he find any reason, he doing no
miracles, whereby to stop this gap made by him to all men besides himself,)
Luther acknowledged no less than twenty sprung up in his own days, (see. 22.)
One of them concerning the ten Commandments; that they ought to be taken out
of the Church, (and indeed all the use of the observance of them that Luther
taught, was only for signs and testimonies of a true faith: Ex operibus te Deus
judicabit (says he,) id est, si credideris. See before. 3.) And another of
them concerning a fained faith: of which new doctrine he says, that it was --
pejor omni errore, qui ante hoc tempus unquam fuit. (See before. 7.) And by
reason of these Sects following his Reformation so close at the heels, and in
some piece or other thereof supplanting it, he often foretold that the true
Religion [i. e. his] should not continue long after his death; [but if so, it
cannot be the true Religion, for against this we are certain the Gates of Hell
shall never prevail, or Sects abolish it.] See his Colloquies c. 44. of
Seducers. -- Who would have thought (says he) of that mischievous Sect, the
Antinomians? I have outlived and endured three abominable tempests, Munster,
the Antinomians, and the Anabaptists. Now seeing they are stilled, and gone,
[no such matter,] others do approach, insomuch that there will be no end in
writing,) [how should there, where no Judge to decide matters?] I desire no
longer to live, for there is no more hope of peace. Ancient Bernard said well:
We should preach of four particulars; of Virtues, of Vices, of Rewards, and
Punishments. [ And lay the preaching of sola sides aside.] And in his Comment
on Genesis published not long before his death; (See. 12.) Quantum Sectarum (says
he) excitavit Satan nobis viventibus? Quid futurum est nobis mortuis? -- And
again -- Muncerus etc. nihil aliud nisi spiritum sonant, idque nobis
viventibus, docentibus, and repugnantibus; quid futurum est, cum conticuerit
nostra doctrina? And not unlike Suspicions of Posterity has Calvin upon the
like experience of the multiplying of Subsects, where no restraint by
Authority. (Praefat. Catechism. Geneven.) -- De posteritate (says he) ego sic
sum anxius, ut tamen vix cogitare audeam: nisi enim mirabiliter Deus de coelo
succurrerit, videre mihi videor extremam barbariem impendere orbi. Atque utinam
non paulo post sentiant filii nostri fuisse hoc verum potius vaticinium, quam
conjecturam: Concerning Posterity I have such anxious thoughts, as indeed to
dread the very thoughts thereof. For unless Almighty God from Heaven
wonderfully prevent, I seem to forsee extreme barbarity [as to a Christian and
Orthodox faith] hanging over the world. And I wish our children, when we are
gone, may not find this to have bin rather a Prophecy than Conjecture. Thus he.
And who is there, that has not observed the Reformation still dividing into
more and more subdivisions, and fractions to this day; and the stating of the
points in controversy in their descent to posterity, varying much from the
former, (I say not whether to the better;) and by often handling spun much
finer than the first gross thread thereof, that was drawn out by Luther? As if
the reforming were running still more and more backwards toward the Church.

The manner of his death.
Thus much concerning the doctrines of Luther, and the fruits thereof; and in
general concerning his Life, Spirit, and Manner of Reformation.

If in the last place you should long to know, what his Death was, after such a
Life, and in what manner he went off the Stage, who had filled the world with
so many new Opinions, and Tumults; as I find the story of it related by a
Protestant, and a Friend, extant in Cocleus his Acta and Scripta Lutheri,
(where also is exhibited another story written by a Catholic much different;)
It has indeed some circumstances in it which one would not wish for himself,
tho yet which may also happen to a good man. For it surprised him at a time of
much mirth, and feasting, when aged now 63. years he was in great state sent
for, and attended with above 100 horsemen to Islebium, the place of his Birth,
and habitation of his Kindred, for compounding some differences, not in
Ecclesiastical, (unless it were about sharing some former Church-revenues,) but
rather some Secular matters between the Counts of Mansfield then at variance.
Here after some three weeks stay, and having preached several Sermons very
invective, as some of them against the Pope, Roman Clergy, and Monks, and the
Church he had fallen away from, (as also one of the last books he writ a little
before this journey bears this title, -- Contra Papatum a Diabolo institutum,
'Against the Papacy instituted by the Devil. See Melch. Adam. vit. Luther. p.
153.) so others against the newer Sects fain away from him, and his
Reformation; (calling them Tares sown altogether without his knowledge,) one
day in the beginning of February 1546, after he had dined with much cheer,
company, and mirth, non in suo hypocausto, sed inferne in amplo triclinio, not
in his private Stove, but below in a large Dining Room, (says his friend in
his relation,) before supper he complained of a great pain in his breast; but
this afterward being a bated again, he supped in the same place, saying, --
Solitarium esse non adfert gaudium [i.e. hujus seculi,] and, as his disciple
says, omnem excutiens tristitiam jocis and facetiis. But after Supper his
pains returned, and after some rest about one in the morning he fell mortally
sick, and was dead before three, and before the Physician and Apothecary came
to afford him their help. He is said formerly to have bin subject to some Fits,
or swoundings, wherein he lay without sense or motion, and these sometimes to
have bin caused by some molestations from the Devil. (See before. 32.) The
Catholic story of his death (but I know not with what truth, being an enemy)
reports that -- visa est tortura oris, and dextrum latus totum infuscatum, 'his
mouth distorted, and his right side turned all of a duskish color. Some of his
dying speeches, related by the Lutheran, seem to have a greater relish of the
Pharisee than of the Publican. -- Mi Pater coelestis (says he) tu mihi Filium
tuum dilectum Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum revelasti; hunc docui, hunc
professus sum, hunc amo, etc. Quem impii persequuntur, calumniantur,
criminanturque: or, as Justus Jonas, -- quem abominabilis Papa, and omnes
impii, vituperant, persequuntur, and blasphemant, suscipe jam ad te animam
meam: My Heavenly Father, thou have revealed to me thy beloved Son our Lord
Jesus Christ; him have I preached, him have I professed; him I love, etc. --
whom the wicked persecute, calumniate, and falsely accuse; or, -- whom the
abominable Pope, and all the wicked revile, persecute and blaspheme, receive my
soul. Whereas we meet with never a -- Miserere mei, nor humble Confession of,
or act of Contrition for, his sins. That Epitaph also, if composed by himself,
as it is said, ( Pomeranus orat. Funeb. -- Pestis eram vivens, moriens ero mors
tua Papa. savours much of his, but not of a sober spirit; nor his Prophecy
therein of much truth. Thus much of the circumstances of Luther's death in Feb.
1546.

Now, as I said, we all wish a long preparation for our last end, nor
especially to be suprized therewith in a time of jollity and feasting, we wish
some sequestration also then from Secular affairs, in which he was at that time
much involved, and that not his own but others. But on the other side it is
dangerous to censure any man for such accidents which happen also many times to
very good Christians; and these also at their death have frequently discovered
an holy confidence in God. Not unfrequently also the chief Authors of Sects and
Heresies have nothing in their life or death exorbitant, or monstrous, or much
differing from other sorts of men. Of which perhaps one reason of the Divine
Providence so disposing things may be, because seeing that it is meet that
Heresies be, so also that these receive no check or blasting in their first
growth by any extraordinary disasters, or judgments showed upon the Founders;
when as God has otherwise left evidences and arguments (such as, I supose, are
some of those forementioned in this Discourse) sufficient to deter the
considerative and sober from embracing such new Doctrines, or following such
Leaders.

FINIS.
A DISCOURSE CONCERNING THE CELIBACY OF THE CLERGY.

At OXFORD Printed, Anno 1687.

CONTENTS.
1. CElibacy a better state than Marriage.. 1. A holiness of the Body, as well
as of the Soul.. 2. As a holiness of it, that is opposite to fornication; so
that is opposite to Marriage.. 2. To the married, on pious occasions,
forbearance of the acts of marriage advised.. 3. Forbearance of second
marriages commended; in some cases, enjoined.. 4.
2. Having a greater reward in the world to come.. 5. Continency especially
necessary for the Clergy.. 6. That it is the gift of God.. 7. Given to very
many.. 8. For some space of time, at least, to all.

That none, from not exercising the act of continency, can say, he has not the
power.. 9. That he, who, having this gift, does not exercise it, in living
unmarried, sins not.. 10. Whether the gift of Continency (supposing it to be
given only to some) may by them be certainly known. That tho all have not, yet
all may have, the gift of continency. And that God denies it none, at no time,
they using the means.. 12. That it may be vowed.. 15. Yet it more difficult,
than the matter of any other vow.. 25. Therefore not hastily to be vowed.. 26.
Yet not unlawful for the Church, and very beneficial to restrain the sacred
function of the Ministry to single persons.. 27.

Ambros. de Viduis. -- Scit Creator omnium affectus esse varios singulorum; and
ideo praemiis virtutem provocavit, non infirmitatem vinculis alligavit. -- Sunt
spadones, qui se castraverunt etc: sed hoc non omnibus imperatur, sed ab
omnibus stagitatur. -- De Virginibus 3. l. -- Dominus, qui sciret praedicandam
omnibus integritatem, imitandam paucis, Non omnes (inquit) capiunt verbum istud.

Hierom contra Vigilantium 2. Ep. -- F xortus est subito Vigilantius, qui
damnandas dicat esse vigilias, etc. continentiam haeresin; pudicitiam,
libidinis seminarium dicat etc. (dicat) -- proh nefas! Episcopos sui dicitur
sceleris hahere consortes etc. qui nisi praegnantes uxores viderint Clericorum,
etc. Christi Sacramenta non tribuunt. Quid facient Orientis Ecclesiae? Quid
Aegypti, and Sedis Aposcolicae? Quae aut virgins Clericos accipiunt, aut
continentes: aut, si uxores habuerint, mariti esse desistunt. --

Conc. Trident. Sess. 24.9. Can. -- Si quis dixerit, Clericos in sacris
Ordinibus constitutos posse ma^rimonium contrahere, non obstante lege
Ecclesiastica vel voto, -- anathema sit. cum Deus id [donum castitatis] recte
petentibus non deneget, nec patiatur nos suprae id quod possumus, tentari.

Bellarmin. de Clericis. 1.18. c. -- B. Thomas d^serte docet, votum
continentiae esse annexum Ordinibus sacris ex solo Ecclesiae decreto, ac
proinde dispensabile esse, -- quod ego verissimum puto. Again, ibid. -- In tota
Scriptura nullum tale extat praeceptum, viz. ut Sacerdotes non ducant uxores.]
-- Ib. -- Ecclesia Romana multis jam saeculis permisit Graecis sacerdotibus
usum uxorum, ^^as ante Ordinationem duxerant, ut pat^t ex c. Cum olim de
Clericis conjugatis.

CONCERNING CELIBACY.
Celibacy a better state than Marriage.
I. IT must be granted, concerning Celibacy; That it is a better condition of
life than Marriage, for prayer and fasting, and all other service of God
without distraction, and so for gaining the Kingdom of Heaven ( Matt. 19.12.);
for works of charity to our neighbor; for avoiding covetousness, worldly cares
and impediments, (and this in all, not only in afflicted, times;) for enjoying
our liberty, (1 Cor. 7.4.) which, when we can have, we are rather to use it. 1
Cor. 7.21. See for these 1 Cor. 1, 8, 26, 32. to the 37, 38. -- Lu. 14.20. -- 1
Cor. 7.5.

As there is a purity and holiness of the body, as well as of the soul, (see 2
Cor. 7.1. -- 1 These. 4.4. -- Jud. 23. compared with 8. and 2 Pet. 2.10, 14.)
opposite to fornication and uncleanness, A hol^nes of the body as well as of
the soul.
[which uncleanness is more especially opposed to holiness than other vices,
(see Romans 6.19. 1 These. 4.7. -- Ephesians. 5.3.) and has a natural shame and guilt
upon it, which makes it seek privacy beyond any other sin whatsoever; (see the
shame of our First Parents upon the first appearance of concupiscence, Genesis
2.25. compared with Genesis 3.10.)] and enjoined to be observed in reference to
Christ, he being now the husband of the body, and it his spouse, (see 1 Cor.
6.20. compared with 13, 18, etc.): As a hol^nes of it that is opposite to
f^rnication; so, that is opposite to marriage
so there seems to be a greater degree of this purity of the body opposite to
Matrimony. See 1 Cor. 7.34. and Rev. 14.4. where defilement with women is
opposed to virginity, as another defilement is opposed to matrimony; Heb.
13.14. the marriage bed is undefiled, that is, with sin; (for this was
appointed, as for a means of propagation to Adam innocent, so for a remedy
against fornication (1 Cor. 7.2.) to man fallen, and troubled with
concupiscence): yet the virgin's-bed, it seems, is more undefiled, more
Angel-like in respect of corporeal purity: [undefiled] being opposed to an
imperfection of chastity virginal, as well as to the sin of lust; to the act of
concupiscence, as well as to prohibited copulations: therefore (hereafter) not
to marry, nor be given in marriage, but to be like the Angels of God, is
reckoned as a thing more honorable for the body. Lu. 20.35. And concupiscence,
one cause now of marriage, and which, could it be remedied, the Apostle would
not advise so many to marriage, was not known by Adam when perfect; and was a
thing, when appearing upon his fall, which he was ashamed of, and sought to
hide, as his posterity ever since do, those acts, even of the lawful bed. To a
higher degree (then* of this primogeneal virginal purity of the body I suppose
that expression relates, 1 Cor. 7.34. The virgin cares etc. that she may be
holy both in body, and in spirit.

To the mared, on pious occasions, forbearance of the acts of marriage advised.
or in times of humiliation etc.) even to those, who are in the state of
marriage, (as doubtless conjugal chastity also has many degrees in it, and in
some men is far more pure than in others, and the permissions of matrimonial
privileges very easily transgressed). See Exodus 19.15. -- three days
sanctification, and not coming at their wives; -- 1 Samuel 21.4. -- women kept
from them about three days, and the vessels of the young men holy, i.e. from
their wives; -- Zech. 7.3. where we see, that, in times of more earnest
addresses to God, this separation from carnality was continued. Neither is this
only Old-Testament-ceremonial holiness: but see 1 Cor. 7.5. a place parallel to
these; Defraud ye not one the other except it be with consent for a time, that
ye may give your selves to fasting and prayer. Where it may be noted, that as
fasting has no good correspondence with the acts of the conjugal bed, (sine
Cerere etc.) so these also are as prejudicial to fasting, and its companions.
And suitable to these Scriptures were the Decrees of the ancient Church: --
Diebus orationis, and jejuniorum, and praeparationis ad Eucharistiam a conjuge
abstinendum. And this, because carnal pleasures are some way or other always
enemies to spiritual exercises; either proceeding to excess, and so rendering us
faulty; or too much either heightening, or also debilitating our temper, and so
making us undisposed; or dividing, and diverting some portion of that love, and
of those intentions to things inferior, which are always all incomparably best
spent upon, and consecrated to, God the supreme good.

Lu. 2.36.) and, to some persons, to wit, Forbearance of second marriages
commended; in some cases enjoined.
those entertained in the pious or holy Services of God, or the Church,
enjoined: as appears in the widows of the Church, 1 Timothy 5.9. of whom it is
there required, that such widow have bin the wife of one man; which words
being capable of several senses, either that she have not had two husbands at
once, or not two successively; again, not two successively, either by a divorce
from the former, or upon the death of the former: seeing that no woman might
have two husbands at one time, nor any women at all were allowed remarrying
upon divorce; (see 1 Cor. 7.11.) it follows, that the Apostle's widow must be
understood to be such, as had not had a second husband after the first dead.
For this injunction seems to have something singular in it, the same caution
being given no where to any, but only to Church Officers, and servants. Nor is
it probable (as some against the current of Antiquity interpret it) that the
Apostle here restrained only the admission of such a widow as had causlesly
turned away her husband, and unlawfully married another man, (which is granted
was done sometimes, but seldom and without any permission of Moses law; (see
Mar. 10.12.) or, as had many husbands at the same time, (of which there are
some rare examples amongst the heathen,) because such things cannot well be
imagined (tho possible) to have happened in the Church; or when they happened, not
to have bin severely punished with excommunication; as we see the incestuous
Corinthian was. And the Apostle seems here rather to require something of
extraordinary example and goodness above others, in such as were thus to be
devoted to the Churches Service, and maintained by her Charity, than only to
caution, that they should not be of the worst wicked amongst Christians. Which
is further confirmed by St. Paul's displeasure against those Church-widdows
that remarryed, ver. 11. And if this interpretation be admitted for the
widows, much more may it, upon the like expression [a husband of one wife] for
the Bishops of the Church, 1 Timothy 3.2. and for the Deacons, 1 Timothy 3.12.

Celibacy, as it occasions larger fruits of righteousness to many, yet if a
married condition also produces the same, Having a greater reward in the world
to come.
it has no pre-eminence in this beyond wedlock: yet, as in it self, it is a
stronger resistance of the lusting of the flesh, and a greater subduer of the
natural concupiscence, which all have less or more; whose importunities it
heroically repelleth, whilst the married only lawfully satisfies them; thus, it
seems worthy of, and so to have promised to it, a higher reward and crown in
the world to come, and is one of the eminentest of all the virtues; as not
moderating, but subduing the most violent of passions. See Esai. 56.4, 5. where
Eunuchs, who as dry trees under the law were much disparaged, ( Deuteronomy. 23.1.)
yet under the Gospel have ample promises beyond those who beget children. --
See Matt. 19.12. where the Kingdom of heaven being inheritable without it, the
using of this means seems to be for something singular in that Kingdom, as well
as for the more easy or certain attaining it. But however this be, those who
grant there several degrees of glory, proportioned to those here of sanctity,
must give the highest to Virgins; because if supposed only equal with the rest
in all other graces, they are granted in one to be superior. See Act. 21.9.
where Virgin seems to be a term of honor.

Single life, being so advantageous for having our liberty (freed from any
other conjugal fetters) to bestow our selves wholly on Christ, Conti^^ncy of
e^^^lly nec ss^^y or the Clergy.
and to wait upon him without distraction, freed from cares, and holy in body
and spirit; seems, tho worthy to be sought for by all, yet so necessary to none
as to those of the Clergy, so far as they find themselves capable of it: that
perfection, which others, as it were unnecessitated thereto, attain by it,
being their constant duty and profession as it were; especially, that; to give
themselves unto prayer, [1 Cor. 7.5. -- Act. 6.4.] and to wait upon the Lord
without distraction, [v. 35.] and to take a special care of the poor. Act. 6.3.

this Continency, and the power of living a single life, That it is the gift of
God.
is the gift of God; both 1. such a cool and moderate temper, and calm passions
as do not so eagerly provoke and kindle the fire of lust in us; and 2ly. the
grace to be able to abstain and quench these fires, when we are provoked, if we
will use the means; and 3ly. the actions or means, which we use, by them to
procure the grace to abstain, (as prayer, mortifications of the body, avoiding
all temptations, constant and diligent employment,) are the gift of God. For so
also are all other good things said to be, both natural, and moral, and
spiritual; even all those things which we have most in our power, and which our
industry most procures; and the powers themselves, and every action of them.
So, to be rich, to be honorable; the condition of a freeman, or of a servant,
etc. are the gift of God. See 1 Cor. 7.17. -- Deuteronomy. 8.17, 18. -- Jo. 3.27. And
if we cannot, of our selves think a good thought, much less refrain the most
violent of our lusts, except from the gift of the Almighty.

Given to very many.
not for a power of being freed from all concupiscence, and from the first
motions of lust; (for so none at all have this power,) but for a power to
suppress these first motions, and quench these lesser sparks, before they break
out into a flame, 1. either into fornication, therefore [ v. 2.] marriage is
opposed to fornication, as it is [ ver. 9.] to burning; or, 2ly. into
uncleanness, [ which uncleanness, contradistinct from fornication, is no small
guilt, but every where marches along with it as its fellow in the catalogue of
those sins that exclude us from heaven, ( see Gal. 5.19. Ephesians. 5.3. Col. 3.5. 2
Cor. 12.21. etc. some kinds of this uncleanness being advanced above any other
sin, except that in Spiritum Sanctum; see 2 Pet. 2.10. Romans 1.24. Ephesians. 4.18,
19. Rev. 22.15.] or 3ly. into morose delectation, fomenting first, and heating
our selves by it, before we put it out, [see 1 Cor. 7.9. expounded by the 2.]
in respect of which, virginal continency in several persons is less or more
pure: This power, I say, thus understood, ( i.e. of being able to contain, if
they be not wanting to themselves, is given to very many; nay, for some time at
least, to every one. For this I suppose granted; that whenever marriage, or the
use of it, is unavoidably hindered, or by God himself also prohibited, there
also is given by him the power to contain. And this happens in very many
instances; before, in, and after, marriage.

For some space o^ time at least, to Al^
there being many ceremonies to be observed in it, many surprizals of lust
seize upon youth that are more liable to it, when in an unripe age (of 12, 13,
14, years old perhaps), which for the present, that way, cannot be remedied,
who many times may not marry without the license of their Superiors; as it
happens to youth yet under the power of their parents, (to whom the Apostle
allows a power in disposing of them, 1 Cor. 7.36. etc. and it is there to be
noted, that he considers much more the father's inclinations, toward her
single life, or marriage, than the virgins); and to servants, not yet made free
from their Masters. Besides that, many other causes of delaying marriage may
intervene, as when it is not permitted to any at certain times of the year set
aside for humiliation; Lent, etc: So, when external impediments occur; as being
in a journey, or imprisoned, or upon the Sea, etc, and in many other cases; and
these happening most-what in the age too wherein concupiscence is in its
greatest st^ength; here, if some have not the power of continency, nor yet of
the remedy, marriage, how will incontinency become a guilt?

i. e. his wife; and toward all absolutely, when any sickness happens to that
one party, to which we are confined; or when any casual debility, tho never
recoverable; so also, in all necessary absence about the affairs of life, in
journeys, in being taken captive by the Turks, or others, etc, we must allow
this gift. Else how can husbands, when busied abroad by employments, embassies,
warfares, etc, be secure of the honesty of their wives? or how can the State,
who many times permit not their wives to follow them, lawfully make such a
separation, by which they shall necessitate them to sin? So, when the woman is
menstruous, and after childbirth, before she is churched, at least to those
that were under Moses his law. See Lev. 18.19. -- 20.18. Ezec. 18.6. which
abstinence in the birth of a maid-child was enjoined for eighty days, almost a
quarter of the year. See Lev. 12.5. etc.



That none ^^^m not exercising the act of continency, can say, he h^th not the
p^w^r.
VII. Since many that certainly have from God the power to contain, (as the
divorced, the one party when the other is debilitated, etc.) yet do not, or
with some difficulty (yea more than the never-married have, because otherwise
accustomed,) and not without temptations to the contrary, do, contain; none can
gather (neither the delinquent, or others) from not containing, or from some
difficulty therein, that he has not power from God to contain, unless also he
use the means; nor, in using the means, can he certainly know it yet, unles
certain that he has used all the means, and in that manner these as he ought;
(hence none can say, that any of those, who, vowing chastity, proved afterward
incontinent, had not power to contain;) or if he perceives that as yet he has
not the power, yet knows he not, whether for the future he may receive it; as
many do, that of debauched, without marriage, at length become chaste. Therefore
can none gather from an act of uncleanness or fornication committed by him,
that he cannot have the gift of continency for the future; or that absolutely
from one such experience of himself he is obliged to marry. But it remains
still true concerning him, as well as others; that, as it is melius nubere,
quam uri; so it is melius continere, quam nubere; if then at length he shall
seriously attempt to quench such burning with prayers, solitude, fasting, etc,
the prime and more noble, rather than by wedlock, the second, and much
inferior, remedy.

that he that has, and yet does not exercise, That he who having this gift
does not exercise it in living unmarried, sins not.
the gift of Continency, nor practice our Saviors precept or advice of
Celibacy, Matt. 19.12. does not sin in so doing. For then marrying, to some
persons, would be a sin. Which 1. the Apostle says, it is not, even to those,
whom, upon the gift of continency, he advises to Celibacy. See 1 Cor. 7.27,
28, 36, 38. -- and Heb. 13.4. 2. If it were; it would follow, (since there is
no divorcement upon any such title,) that there would be a sin which a man was
bound to live in, and having committed it once, to commit it always; and
whether would not the children here also be illegitimate, where the marrying is
unlawful. 3. Then Celibacy can be recommended to no persons in respect of any
times of distress, (as yet we find it was by the Apostle 1 Cor. 7.26.) since,
after puberty, all men sin, either in marrying, or else in abstaining: for those
who have not the gift of continency in the most afflicted times, ought to
marry; and the other, in the most prosperous, to forbear. 4. Those, Whether the
gift of contin^ncy (supposing it to be g ven only to some) can by them by certa
nly know.
whom such supposed precept of Celibacy should oblige, must someway certainly
know it; else how can they either forbear, or repent of, a sin, which they know
not when they commit. And, as soon as they know it, they are bound, either
presently to marry, if they find they have not the gift of continency; or for
ever to abstain, if they have: so that those who marry not, as soon as capable
of marriage, and marry afterward, either sin in marrying then; or sinned in not
marrying before. 5. But how any one can certainly know this gift in him, I see
not. First, by what signs shall he know if he has it? In being free from
temptation? So none is. In overcoming them? But who foreknows the success of
future conflicts? May not he marry then, if much tempted, to prevent sinning?
May he not marry, unles he first burn? But then in marrying before burning,
perhaps he has the gift; and so sins in marrying. But if by the effect only of
resisting, or yiedling to, a temptation, we know the gift; it follows, that
none can know he wants the gift, but by (at least once) sinning, yet, to
prevent which sin none may, first, marry. 2. Again, how shall he know if he
have not this gift? by burning or any one act of any uncleanness? 1. None can
argue from not exercising the act of continency, that he has not the power,
(as is showed before. 9.) till he knows whether this failing proceeds from the
absence, or from his own ill managing, of God's gift. For that it often proceeds
from our ill husbandry of grace, is manifest in many of those mentioned before.
7. who having certainly from God the power to contain, yet are many times very
incontinent. If in this case therefore he should go and marry, having the gift,
but abusing it, what thus would this be, but a multiplying of sins, the sin of
lust begetting the sin of wedlock? 2. If thus, after any such uncleanness, all
(as being denied the gift of continency) were obliged to marry, then all, who
remain not in a pure virginity, would be sinners in a single life.

etc, of recovering this gift: neither indeed is every one by the Apostle,
after burning, bound to marry, (unless he find himself refractory, and
unwilling to use the means to quench such burning, as well as to remove all
occasions of this flame, apt from his temper, temptations, etc, continually to
break our again*) because he is not by this certain, that for the future he may
not by the grace, and other means used, be freed from ever falling again into
this fire. Since many, after such burning, have attained, without marrying, to
the highest degree of Continency. As S. Austin, after long incontinency,
received this gift, so soon as (...) humbly, and earnestly, and mortifiedly
sought it.

Matt. 19.12. is not a precept or command of absolute duty to any, under pain
of sinning if he not observe it; but only a Counsel of greater perfection,
under the penalty (if I may so say) hereafter of a less reward if he not
practice it. (See 2 Cor. 9.6.) Note, that by counsel or precept of perfection,
(wherever this expression is found referring to celibacy, abandoning of
riches, etc,) I mean this: The advising us of, and to, a means, whereby we may,
more easily, and free from impediments) attain the diminishing of sin, and the
increase of virtue and grace in us; in which greater purity from sin, and
greater practice of holy duties and habits of grace, and not in the means
prescribed, consists that degree of perfection, to which we by this means
attain: which perfection also may, possibly, but not so easily, be acquired
without it.

counsel or precept of greater perfection, not only to some particular persons,
That tho al. h^ve no^, vet all may have, the gift of continency: and that God
denies it to n^ne, a^ n^ time, they using the means.
(as some others in the next place would limit it,) but to all; and that, tho
every one has not, ( Matt. 19.11.) yet every one may have this gift of
Continency (and so may practice the precept or counsel of celibacy) if he
please to use those means and endeavors, upon which God gives it; and that
every one may make himself an Eunuch, if he please, for the kingdom of heaven.
(1). For, first, were it a singular gift gratuitally given only to some men;
then, as we have showed before, that it is necessary for those, to whom we hold
it is given as a precept of duty, by some signs certainly to discern it, for
their avoiding of sin; so it is necessary also to these to whom we hold it is
given as a counsel of perfection, to know it, for their endeavoring to do that
which may more please God; that such gracious gifts may not be bestowed in
vain, and their salvation suffer much impediment; if men endeavor not, or
their endeavor be not only in vain, but displeasing to God, ne quis
incontinentia laborans, dum coelibatum appetit, cum Deo luctetur, says Calvin;
and exposing them to sin, if God give not.

Now the difficulties of discerning any such thing, see before: yet without
discerning which (unless all be capable of this gift) there can be no alacrity
in our endeavors; nor will any labor to make themselves Eunuchs. Especially,
when one sees any evident signs, or also has once felt the effects of
incontinency, none should dare any further to defer marriage, or any further
entertain any endeavor of attaining this gift contrary to such indications of
God's denial of it to him; yet is this much contrary to the practice of many
holy men. (2.) There seems no sufficient reason, to make this grace, which is
conversant about the strongest of all passions, and the very root of sin; upon
which depend so many excellent advantages in serving God etc, (confessed by
all,) and granted also to be given to all, at all times, when the remedy of
marriage cannot (as often it can not) be had; to make this grace, I say, when
there is opportunity of marrying, then only, a gratuital grace given to some;
others being denied it, tho never so earnest after it. And thus to restrain
this grace, only upon such a pretense, because tho denied the gift of
continency, they have a sinless way of satisfying their concupiscence: when as
indeed this appointed remedy of marriage (as it refers to incontinency, not to
progeny) may argue only the difficulty in some, not the impossibility in any,
of attaining this gift; and, being instituted for a help of our weakness, ought
not to be made an argument of the restraint of God's goodness and bounty.
Again; no reason, to make this grace only particular to some few; when as all
other graces whatsoever, conversant about the like object, i. e. the moderating
and subduing of our passions, are proclaimed to be general; and all men capable
of them, who are not wanting to God and themselves. So we do not say that any
are necessitated to be immoderate in meat, or drink, or sleep, in the love of
riches, or honor, but, upon doing their endeavor, grace sufficient to be given
to all, to bridle the appetite, and master the affections; only the extremities
of concupiscence it is that we affirm some men are dis-enabled upon any means
whatsoever to suppress. When as meanwhile it must be granted, that to those
singular favorites, to whom God pleases to give it, it is, both gotten by
means; else why are any said to make themselves Eunuchs? and preserved by
means: for none that have the gift (as those who in marriage have their
bedfellows sick or absent) are free from temptations, and do only by means and
resistance overcome them; which means experience shows to be powerful, not only
for subduing lust in men, but in the brute beasts also. Whereas therefore there
are two sorts of God's gifts to us; 1. some to the obtaining of which is
required our endeavor joined or subservient to God's both preventing and
assisting grace, or aid; such as are Faith, Hope, Charity, Patience, etc.
which, tho always Gods gifts, yet may be said in some sense to be in our power
also, in as much as we are to presume, that God denies them to none, by his aid
rightly first seeking and laboring for them. 2. Others given gratis by him
without any cooperation of ours, (tho we may also desire and pray for them. 1
Cor. 14.1.) Note that there is not any other of those usually called gratiae
gratis datae, (which are divided to every man as the Spirit pleases, mentioned
1 Cor. 12.) any way like unto this of continency. 1. They being not conversant
about passions, or bettering our selves, but edifying and profiting others. 1
Cor. 12. ver. 7. -- 2. Not by our means procured, or conserved, but conferred
without our cooperation or endeavor; therefore we find no exhortations to the
practice of them, as if they were in our power, as we find to continency: 1
Cor. 7. We find it not said concerning them, There be Prophets that have made
themselves Prophets, or, -- He that can receive them, let him receive them. 3.
Those who have them sinning, if they be not used: the contrary of which is
proved in continency. 4. Lastly, neither is there any thing said of continency,
as restraining it to some particular person; which is not said of those other
gifts, and graces of God of the first kind, as particularly of that of Faith.
See 23.. (3). Concerning the other great precepts or counsels for attaining
perfection, as that in particular by quitting superfluous riches (and so by
this, all the cares and temptations of them,) (of which may be said, what is
said of marrying, 1 Cor. 7.34. and v. 30, 31. compared with 29. -- 2 Timothy 2.4)
so often recommended, See Matt. 19.21. presently after the recommending of
continency, v. 12. and both of them to be done for the Kingdom of Heaven. See
likewise Lu. 12.33. Lu. 3.11. -- 6.35. -- Matt. 5.42. -- Lu. 16.9.11. -- Matt.
19.29. compared 27. (where, as we must grant, that, tho marriage be lawful, yet
the continent does better; so, tho possession of riches is lawful, yet he that
parts with, and bestows, most of wealth superfluous upon the poor, does better,
than he that keeps or spends more or it upon himself:) Concerning this counsel,
I say, we do not contend, but that all are capable of receiving it: and yet our
Savior, upon occasion of the young man's not receiving so hard a saying, and
so difficult a lesson, seems to put the same difficulty in it, as in
continency: for when he breaks out upon it, [ verily I say a rich man shall
hardly enter into the kingdometc. and again, Camels shall as easily be threaded
through Needles, ver. 23, 24. see 1 Cor. 1.26.] he says only, (if we well
observe,) It is hard for rich men to receive this saying, [go and sell,] i. e.
of parting with their superfluous wealth. For, be this hardness of rich men's
entering into heaven, from their trusting in their riches, or from having
continual temptations of excels, and fuel for all their lusts ministered by
wealth; or from continual cares* and distractions from* them, Matt. 13.22.
(which also he names, from marriage, 1 Cor. 7.35): all is presently remedied in
receiving this saying, (yet foolish men take no notice of it,) sell that ye
have, [i. e. superfluous,] and give it away in alms, (where the charity is not
so much to others, as to our selves.) For in parting with his riches, he is
sure at once to part with his trust in them, cares, temptations of them, etc;
for no man trusts in, or is tempted with, what he has not. I have stayed the
longer upon this general offer of the gift of continency on God's part; because
the conceit of it as of a private gift is very discouraging (as we see by their
practices, where this doctrine is taught,) for the attempting that heavenly
condition of life (so much recommended by our Savior, and St. Paul) after they
first believe, that for some men no means can procure it; and then, by the
strong assaults of their lusts (from which none are free) believe that
themselves are such. And hence, whilst we are in suspense, whether there be a
possibility of it, or no, in respect of us, (as there is to none a possibility,
who are destitute of the gift) we cast all our care, not upon mortifying and
refraining our lust; but upon the observance of the Symptoms of this gift, and
the several risings and heights of our lusts, accordingly to shape to our
selves that future condition of life, to which our present seems to lead us.
And all this without cause, whereas we may make our selves what we are not; and
God's providing a remedy for an innocent satisfying of that concupiscence,
which cannot (by our deficiency) otherwise be allayed, was by reason of our
ordinary weakness, not of our absolute necessity; to whom he (in some times)
indulged a facile changing also of those to whom men were joined: but it
likewise not for their necessity, but for the hardness of their hearts. Matt.
19.8. -- Whereas now it is a fruit of the Evangelical perfection, that husbands
(by mutual consent) do separate from their wives (without taking others) for
the Kingdom of God, ( Lu. 18.29. compared 28.) always secure of the gift of
continency from God, (if resolute in their endeavors of preserving it): Else
this would be an act most unlawful, which our Savior makes so heroical, and
promises to it so great a reward.

parag. 1. and so common, (see par. 7.) not denied upon repentance and prayer
etc to many grievous sinners, after long contrary habits, without their using
the remedy of marriage; that God, I say, denies not this power to any at all,
who first have power over their own will; decree and stand steadfast in their
heart; 1 Cor. 7.37. resolutely undertake and offer this their singleness to God
for such an end, as is so much approved by him; and then practice also the
means conducing to it, which are observed (as abstinency, for example,)
naturally to cure the burnings of lust, even in brute beasts.

Paul could not justly have blamed the widows, when some of them young, for
remarrying; whose marriage, he says, was out of wantonness, and that they had
damnation, for having cast off their first faith and promise, ( i.e. of living
single, and attending wholly to those charitable duties etc.) which they had
made to Christ, and the Church: but if God had not given them the power of
observing their vow, the Apostle should have allowed their remarrying, and
blamed their vowing; who ordered also for the future, that such young women
should no more be admitted to such vows or duties, for public service of the
Church; not because they could not, but ordinarily would not, abstain.

made themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven, Matt. 19.12. if he would
not also be assistant to them with his grace; as he approved their purpose, and
design; to which also they were allured by his Encomiums of that happier
condition. Nor would he have (and that in the general) commended those, who
leave the pleasures of marriage for the Kingdom of God's sake, that is, for the
better serving God in any way, (see 1 Cor. 7.34, 35.) or, those who have
forsaken their wives, ( i.e. by mutual consent, 1 Cor. 7.4, 5.) see Lu. 18.29.
compared with Matt. 19.29. There is none that has left, (or, every one, that
has forsaken,) wife etc. who shall not receive etc. Forsaken, i.e. as the
Apostles did, in local separation from them, (see Matt. 19.27.) unless
continency were a gift; which all pious purposes, using the means for
conserving it, and intending God's glory in it, may presume upon. Tho, where we
do not subdue our lust, S. Paul as much prohibits any long separation, as our
Savior here encourages it. See 1 Cor. 7.5.

Paul have approved the same resolution in those, who could master so far their
own will: 1 Cor. 7.37. who doubtless, what he praises in the father, (who yet
might be necessitated to go against his will, by the virgin's
incontinacibility) he would much more have approved in the virgin. Neither is
that need ( ver. 36.) necessity absolute, as appears by what follows, [do what
be will,] the other doing better.

etc; or else, that, it being a special gift only to some, every one, before
taking Orders, or making a Vow, might certainly know, not only, whether he had
the gift for the present, but whether he might also persevere therein to his
death, (forasmuch as concerned God the Doner thereof.) But here it is
unintelligible, how such assurance can arise, only to some particular persons;
nor can any direct, how such a special gift, not only for the present, but the
future also, may be discerned. Meanwhile concerning the prohibitions and
practice of Antiquity, see and compare together Can. Apostol. 27. -- Conc.
Chalcedon. can. 13.15. -- Constantinop. in Trullo. can. 6.12, 13, compared Can.
Apost. 6. In brief, you will find the issue to be much-what to this purpose:
That no Presbyter may marry after his taking Orders, nor Bishop after his
Consecration: That of those who, being before married, are admitted afterward
into holy Orders, some Churches required that they should ever after (by mutual
consent, [which was known before Orders conferr'd]) abstain from their wives;
as the Roman Church: Some, that Bishops only should abstain universally; and
simple Presbyters, only abstain then when they were to officiate; as the Greek
Church. -- See likewise Provincial Councils celebrated about the time of the
Nicene Council, and approved afterward by the Constant. Conc. in Trullo. can.
2. -- Ancyran. Conc. can. 10. -- Neoc^sar. can. 1. -- etc.

Apostol. Canon. 27. In nuptiis autem qui ad Clerum evecti sunt, Praecipimus
ut, si voluerint, uxores accipiant, sed lectores cantoresque tantummodo; not
the higher Orders of Bishop Presbyter, Deacon, etc. -- Conc. Ancyranum (before
the first Council of Nice) Can. 10. -- Diaconi quicunque cum ordinantur, si in
ipsa ordinatione protestati sunt, dicentes, velle se habere uxores, n^c posse
se continere, (where posse is taken as expounded. 24.) hi postea si ad nuptias
venerint, maneant in ministerio, propterea quod his Ep scopus licentiam
dederit. Quicunque sane tacuerunt and susceperunt manus impositionem, professi
continentiam, si postea ad nuptias venerint, a ministerio cessare debebunt.
[But note, that, si protestati sunt, is here said of Deacons only.] -- Conc.
Naeocaesar. (before Nice) c^n. 1. -- Presbyter si uxorem duxerit, ab ordine suo
illum depom debere. -- Conc. Nicaenum can. 3. -- Omnibus modis interdixit
sancta Synods; neque Episcopo, neque Presbytero, etc. omnino licere habere
secum mulicrem extraneam, nisi forte sit matter, aut soror, aut avia, aut amita,
vel matertera. In his namque solis personts, and harum similibus omnis, quae ex
mulieribus est, suspicio declinatur. Whereas might they have entertained a
wife, neither would there have bin cause of such suspicion; nor would it have
bin reasonable, nor safe, to deprive their wives of all Women-attendance or
Society. As for the story of Paphnutius in this Council, [which makes so great
a noise amongst us; so that this instance stands for a bulwark against all the
other evidence, in this point, of Antiquity, (see Calvin Institut. 4. l. 12. c.
26. and generally all our writers,)] this is the All of it: That, motion being
made by some in the Council, that the married Presbytery, ( i.e. such as were
married before made Presbyters,) should after their Ordination be separated
from their wives: [which separation the Greek Church allows not to this day;
and of which the 6th of those called Canons Apostolical, says thus,
(notwithstanding that the same Canons prohibit marriage after Ordination except
to Lectores and Cantores:) Episcopus aut Presbyter uxorem propriam nequaquam
sub obtentu religionis abjiciant: (Some conceive this to be meant, * without
her consent; others, * not for cohabitation, but for maintenance only:) Si vero
rejecerit, exeommunicetur. -- And Council. Gangrense, because some held it
unlawful to receive the Communion from a Presbyter formerly married, was
necessitated to make this Canon. 4. -- Quicunque discernit, a Presbytero, qui
uxorem habuit, (here it is habuit, not habet,) quod non oporteat eo ministra^te
de oblatione percipere, Anathema sit.] That, such a motion being made, I say,
Paphnutius, a Reverend Bishop, and a Confessor, tho never married, withstood
it, saying, Grave jugum, etc. neque a singulorum uxoribus fort ass eam
castimonioe normam posse servari. But now mark what follows: -- Illud satis
esse, ut qui i^^ Clerum ante ascripti erant quam duxissent uxores, hi secundum
veterem Ecclesiae Traditionem deinceps a nuptiis se abstinerent; non tamen
quenquam ab illa quam jampridem, cum laicus erat, uxorem duxisset, sejungi
deb^re. The story is in Socrates Eccl. Histor. 1. l. 8. c. and in others from
him. Sozomen. 1. l. 22. c. Judge now what cause there is, to urge Paphnutius for
the marrying of the Clergy, after H. Orders received by them when as single. I
go on. -- Conc. Romanum under Silvester, in the time also of Constantine the
Great, Can. 7. -- Nullum autem Subdiaconorum ad nuptias transire praecipimus,
ne aliquam praevaricationem sumpserit. -- Elibertin. Council. about the same
time in Spain; Can. 33. Placuit in totum prohibere Episcopis, Presbyteris,
Diaconis, ac Subdiaconis, positis in ministerio, abstinere se a conjugibus
suis, and non generare filios. Quod quicunque fecerit, ab honor Clericatus
exterminetur. Which Canon plainly shows; That at that time in the Western, tho
not in the Eastern, Churches, not only marriage after Holy Orders was forborne,
but abstinence from their wives, by those who were married before, was commonly
practiced; since he, who should do the contrary, was so highly punished. --
Conc. Arelatense secundum under the same Silvester, Can. 2. -- Assumi aliquem
in Sacerdotium in vinculo conjugii constitucum, nisi fu^rit praemissa
conversio, non oportet. Two Councils, in which S. Austin was present, * 1.
Conc. Carthag. 2. Can. 2. -- Placuit and condecet sacro-sanctos Antistites and
Dei Sacerdotes, necnon and Levitas) ( i.e. Deacons etc, continentes esse in
omnibus etc. ut quod Apostoli docuerunt, and ipsa servavit antiquitas, nos
quoque custodiamus. Ab universis Episcopis dictum est, omnibus placet, ut
Episcopi, Presbyteri, etc, pudicitiae custodes etiam ab uxoribus se abstimeant.
Hence S. Austin, ( Confess. 10. l. 30. c.) speaking of his continency, before
obliged by Priesthood to it, says, -- Et quoniam dedisti factum ^st, and
antequam dispensator Sacramenti tui fierem. And * 2. Conc. Africanum cap. 37.
-- Praeterea cum de quorundam Clericorum quamvis erga uxores proprias
incontinentia referretur; placuit Episcopos, and Presbyteros, and Diaconos,
secundum prior a statuta etiam ab uxoribus continere. Quod nisi fecerint, ab
Ecclesiastico removeantur officio. Caeteros autem Cleri os ad hoc non cogi, sed
secundum uniuscujusque Ecclesiae consuetudin m observari debere. -- These were
before the third General Council. -- Add to these the fourth General Council of
Chalcedon. Can. 13. -- Quoniam in quibusdam provinciis concessum est Psalmistis
and Lectoribus, (se Apost. Can. 27. quoted before,) uxores ducere, constituit
sancta Synodus prorsus cuiquam ex his non licere alterius sectae accipere
uxorem, etc. Where it is plain, that other Clergy besides Psalmiste and Readers
might not marry at all.

these a Canon or two in Constantinopol. Conc. in Trulio, reckoned by the
Eastern Church for a part of the sixth General Council, tho it was not
consented to by the Roman Patriarch; Can. 6. -- Quoniam in Apostolicis
Canonibus dictum e^t, eor^m qui non duct a uxore in Clerum promoventur, solum
lectores and cantores uxorem posse ducere, and nos hoc servantes decernimus, ut
deinceps nulli penitus Hypodiacono, vel Diacono, vel Presbytero, post sui
Ordinationem, conjugium centrahere liceat. etc. Canon. 12. Jubet omnino
Antistites, ( i. e. Bishops,) postquam sunt ordinati, a propriis uxoribus
secedere: and here they take notice of the 6th. Apostol. Canon, quoted before
in the last, and yet advance beyond it: quoniam Apostoli (say they,) cum sides
incip^ret, ad sidelium imbecillitatem se magis demittebant etc. andCan. 13. --
decernunt, Presbyteros a prioribus suis legitimis uxoribus non separari, sed eo
tempore quo sacrificant; and expellentes suas uxores pietatis praetextu,
excommunicandos. And this (say they) notwithstanding the contrary customs of
the Roman church. Thus the Council in Trullo. And ever since have the same laws
and customs bin preserved in the Eastern Churches, as we may see in the Answer
of Jeremias Patriarch of Constantinople, in Epilogo to the Reformed, soliciting
his approbation of their innovation in this matter, and remembering him of the
Apostle's rule, Melius est nubere quam uri, -- and his order, -- Oportet
Episcopum esse unius uxoris virum: to which he replies this; -- Proinde and nos
illis sacerdotibus, qui in virginitate persistere non possunt, priusquam tamen
consecrentur, and Sacerdotes [ i.e. futuri] fiant etc. Ille autem [ Sacerdos,
entering into Orders, or others vowing Virginity] qui semel virginitatem
professus est, virgo permaneat, nec jam illi ullam amplius licentiam post votum
susceptum nubendi damus. Nemo enim mittens manum ad aratrum, and respiciens
retro, idoneus est consequendo coelesti regno. [Here is Priests, after their
consecration, or others vowing Virginity, for ever after denied marriage.] --
This the modern law of the Greek Church; and if the prohibiting them afterward,
makes them the more, who intend Priesthood, to take wives before, and so many
of the Greek Clergy de facto are married, to enjoy this liberty more than for
necessity; yet this is an abuse no ways countenanced by their Ecclesiastical
Canons. Much less may we imagine that they are obliged by any such law ( ne
periculo for^icandi se exponant) to take wives before they may enter into this
Holy profession, so contrary both to the Apostle's Counsel, 1 Cor. 7. and the
Church'es former Injunctions, when as even all secular employments have at
least the liberty of a single life; and the Reformed themselves, so great
friends to marriage, yet impose no such yoke upon their Clergy, nor has any
that I know of entertained such a fancy save Vigilantius.

Out of the Canons then recited above you may observe, 1. That the Greek
Church, who acknowledge and practice these Canons in this point to this day,
allow indeed the use of their wives, except when they officiate, (but what if
they officiate every day, as many Priests do?) to Priests married before
Ordination, but not so to Bishops; but permit not that any Ordained unmarried
may afterward marry at all. 2ly. Again, That those married persons, who were to
be made Presbyters in the Roman Church, and Bishops in the Oriental, might not
separate from their wives without consent, received from the wives before such
Ordination or Consecration of them. 3ly. That such continency was annexed to
Holy Orders only by Ecclesiastical Constitution, and was rather Lex
Continentiae, than Votum. which therefore has bin capable of many
dispensations, and the Conons about it somewhat differing; and the Clergy more
restrained by some of them than by others. But this seems to be a received
ground amongst them all in those primitive times, that Continency is a general
gift, at least in potentia remota, i.e. which is by God denied to none using
the means, and rightly preparing himself for it, etc. Else how could they
prudently make such laws, strictly prohibiting marriage for such a number of
men, involving also the Deacons, and Subdeacons, upon penalty of degradation
from their office, (which laws you see, the Reformed, because they hold
continency a particular gift, only possible to some, generally decry.) How
could they allow of a separation (by consent once given) of a man and his wife
for ever, required, in the Roman Church, of all; in the Eastern, of Bishops;
notwithstanding what the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 7.5? unless you will say, that
the Church Officers in time of Ordination could discern who had this gift, who
not. Or, that there was no party coming to be ordained, or contenting to such a
separation, but was able to discern it in himself, and that not only for the
present, but always for the future; and likewise that none would present
himself, that knew he had it not.

Tim. 4.1. etc. that in the latter times there should arise Apostates etc,
forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, any way prejudice
these injunctions and practices of ancient Church, (nor consequently of the
latter times, herein following only her example.) 1. Because the Apostle, by
opposing to such error, that every ^^eature and ordinance of God is good,
(according to Genesis 1.31. and 2.23, 24.) and therefore being sanctified first,
by the lord of God and prayer, may lawfully be used, (see 1 Timothy 4.3, 4, 5.)
shows, that he means such Apostates, as abstain from, or prohibit, marriage
and meats, as in themselves unlawful, and unclean, and contaminating. Which
thing can neither be objected to the ancient, not modern Church-practice, using
abstinence from some meats for the chastisement of the body, not for any
uncleaness in the food; and not forbidding marriage to any single person
absolutely, but only upon his voluntary undertaking such an employment, with
which they imagine a married condition not so well to suit. In which case if
necessary abstinence from marriage be a fault, the Apostle himself may seem to
comply with it in those expressions of his 1 Timothy 5.11.12. -- 2ly. Because
experience has manifested the Apostle's prophecy to have bin most eminently
fulfilled in other persons of these latter times, (whom these Fathers even in
these points most vehemently resisted,) affirming downright all marriage,
especially with reference to procreation of children [therefore the married
were advised by them, in such manner to use their wives, as to avoid this, (see
S. Aust. de moribus. Manich. 18. c.)] to be unlawful, and the work or design of
the Devil, as likewise flesh-diet to be unclean and defiling. Animata
abominantes interdicunt (says Epiphanius haer. 47.) non continentiae gratia,
neque honestae vitae, sed ob timorem, and imaginationem ut non contaminentur ab
animatorum esu. Vino vero omnino non utuntur, Diabolicum esse dientes. -- And
S. Austin contra Faust. 30. l. 5. c. Ipsam creaturam immundam dicitis, quod
carnes Diabolus operetur faeculentio^e materia, mali. -- And de haeres. 46. c.
Non vescuntur carnibus, tanquam de mortuis vel occisis fugerit divina
substantia. -- Vinum non bibunt, dicentes, fell esse principum tenebrarum. Such
were some of the Gnostics, Encratites, Montanists, Marcionites, and in the
last place the Munichees, being as it were the last extract and quintessence of
all those former gross errors, not a little potent even in S. Austin's times;
who, not holding all things to have bin created by the same good God, but this
lower world by an evil principle, or by the Prince of darkness, as they call
him, affirm, in the begetting of a man, that the Soul, which they account to be
a part of the substance of God himself, becomes fettered and-imprisoned in the
walls or handiwork of the devil, i.e. the body, from which it is again
released only by death; (therefore was marriage, occasioning such imprisonment,
forborne by all their elect; and tho this permitted to their auditors, yet
(says Austin) it was, non dicentes non esse peccatum, sed peccantibus veniam
largientes, propterea quod illis necessaria ministrabant. con. Faust. Man. 30.
l.) Likewise that the same part of God was continually more defiled, and
enclosed by such and such gross nourishments of the body. And when of such
errors they were accused by the Fathers, it was ordinary with them to
recriminate the Orthodox with the same things; both for their frequent
abstinencies from flesh, and some other fruits; and for their (to some persons
at least) recommending virginity; who in this matter were answered by them
after the same manner, as the Protestants, objecting the same things, are now
by the Church of Rome. See concerning this the contest between Faustus the
Manichee and S. Austin, ( cont. Faust. Manich. 30. l.) and see concerning such
Heretics in the Church before the Manichees, Irenaeus adv. Haers. l. l. 22. c.
there, of Saturninus and Basilides, he says, Nubere autem and generate, a
Satana dicunt esse. Multi autem ex iis and ab animalibus ebstinent etc. -- See
Clem. Alexand. Strom. 3. near the beginning. Marcionistae quidem dicunt malam
esse naturam ex mala materia etc. -- qua quidem ratione nolentes implere
mundum, qui factus est a Creatore, volunt abstinere a nuptiis, resistentes suo
Creatori etc. -- See much what the same relation with that of Irenae^s, in
Epiphan. Haeres. 23. and 46. and 47. Continentiam hic (i.e. Tatianus)
praedicat, asserens nihil differ matrimonium a scortatione, sed idem esse.
Her. 46. And the judgment of the Fathers commenting on this place of Timothy,
applies it to the same men. See S. Ambrose, or the Author of those Comments in
his works. Doctrina, says he, quae nunc in Marcionistis, (quamvis pene
defecerint, vel Patricianis, aut maxinee in Mamchaeis denotatur. Hi enim and
Christum natum negant, and nuptias prohibent, and abstinendum a cibis tradunt.
-- Chrysostom. de Manichaeis, and Encratistis, and Marcionistis, omnique
illorum officina hic loquitur etc. -- After whom see Dr. Hammond on 1 Timothy 4.
note b. and the authorities there cited by him. And in the last place consider
what Mr. Mede himself ( Apostasy of the latter times, p. 113) grants; namely,
That errors about marriages and meats were no novelties in the Apostles own
times, as the diligent Reader may easily collect out of their own Epistles:
which makes it improbable, that he would specify the apostasy of latter times
in these alone. Thus much Mr. Mede. Neither will that expression [in latter
times] (the like expressions to which are found in many other places; see 2 Timothy 3.1. -- 4.3. -- 2 Pet. 3.3. -- 1 Jo. 2.18. -- Jude. -- 2 These. 2.3.) carry
the purpose of this prophecy beyond the days, of these ancient Herericks. For
first, this expression does not seem in the Apostle's drift so to indicate the
future times, as altogether to exclude the present; they reckoning even their
own times also a part of the last times, (see 1 Pet. 1.20. Heb. 1.2. Act. 2.17.
1 Jo. 2.18. 1 Cor. 10.11.) and therefore, when they describe such wicked
persons, advising those they writ to for the present to beware of them, to
resist them, to teach contrary doctrine, etc. See 1 Timothy 4.6. etc. 2 Timothy 3.14.
-- 4.2. 2 Pet. 3.2. 1 Jo. 4.1. Or, 2ly. if they do; yet thus, either we must
free the Father's times from any such imputation, as living before these latter
times here prophesied of, (and consequently in all future times we must absolve
all those, who in these matters affirm no more than the Fathers did,) or, if
these latter times involve the days of the Fathers also, (as Mr. Mede fancies
them to begin about 360, or 410, ( Apostasy p. 84.) yet in the same times we
find also these heretics contemporaries with, and much combated by, the
Fathers. And therefore whether the prophecy (eying those times) is likely to
mean them, [i. e. the asserters of marriage and meats to be in themselves
utterly unlawful and unclean,] or to mean the Fathers rather, their Antagonists
in these points, I leave to the Readers judgment.

[5ly.] The same persuasion, in Antiquity, of the universality of this gift to
all seeking it, may be gathered from the vowing 1. of virginity, much used,
allowed, recommended by them. Of which also we find something in the ancient
Councils. See Conc. Ancyran. before that of Nice, Can. 19. Quot quot
virginitatem pollicitam praevaricati sunt, professione contempt a inter digamos
haberi debebunt. Here the practice thereof appears. -- Conc. Elibertin. about
the same time with that of the Nicene, Can. 13. Virgins quae se Deo
dedicaverunt, si pactum perdiderint virginitatis, atque libidini servierint,
non intelligentes quid amiserint, placuit nec in fine dandam eis esse
Communionem etc. -- Conc. Romanum at the same time under Silvester, Can. 10.
Nullus Episcoporum virginem sacratam maritali consortio ( i.e. to receive the
veil, and the solemnity of her marriage unto Christ) expetierit benedicere,
nisi eam probaverit 72 annorum esse constitutam, ubi probabitur judicium verae
pridicitiae, ut in 72 annis requirens Virum Christum pudicitia custodita, uncta
vertice introducatur ad nuptias Christi, velamen capitis ferens, non cordis,
(alluding, I suppose, to 2 Cor. 3.) This admission was not, of her to vow at 72
years, who was sacrata before, but of her, having so long faithfully kept her
vow, to such an honor as this ceremony imports. In this same time, namely of
the Emperor Constantine, were some former Roman-laws, prejudicial to Celibacy,
abrogated by him for their sakes, who had vowed to keep their virgin-chastity
inviolate. Eusebius. de vita Constant. 4. l. 26. c. -- Council. Carthaginense 3.
Can. 33. Vt virgins sacrae, si privatae fuerint parentibus, a quibus
custodiebantur, providentia Episcopi, vel Presbyteri, ubi Episcopus absens est,
in Monasterio virginum vel gravioribus foeminis commendentur, ut simul
habitantes invicem se custodiant, ne passim vagantes Ecclesiae laedant
aestimationem. -- And Carthag. 4. Can. 104. Si quae vidue quantumlibet adhuc in
minoribus annis positae, and matura aetate a viro relictae, se devoverunt
Domino, and vest Laicali abject a, sub testimonio Episcopi and Eeelesiae
religioso habitu apparuerint, postea vero ad nuptias saeculares transierint,
secundum Apostolum, damnationem habebunt, quoniam fidem castitatis, quam Domino
voverunt, irritam facere ausae sunt. Tales ergo personae sine Christianorum
communione maneant, etc. And afterward. De talibus ait Apostolus: Quum
luxuriatae fuerint nubere volant, habentes damnationem etc. These two Councils
were before the fourth General Council of Chalcedon, and both subscribed by St.
Austin. Lastly, see Conc. Chalced. with which I will conclude; Can. 14.
Diaconissam non debere ante annos 40 ordinari statuimus, and hoc cum diligenti
prohatione, si vero -- positea se nuptiis tradiderit, injuriam faciens gratie
Dei, haec Anathema sit cum eo qui in nuptiis illius convenerit. -- And Can. 15.
Siqua virgo se dedicaverit Deo, similiter Monachus, non licet as nuptiis jungi.
Si vero inventi fuerint hoc facientes, moneant exeommunicati.

Ignatius in Ep. ad Tharsenses, and ad Antiochenses, making mention of Virgins
Deo sacrae in his time. In the first, after Viri diligite sponsas vestras, etc.
he says, Eas, quae in virginitate, honorate ut sacras Christi; eas, quae in
honestate viduas, ut altar Dei, etc. In the second, -- Populus subjiciatur
Presbyteris and Diaconis, Virgins cognoscant, cui consecraveruntseipsas. This
in the copies approved by Archbishop Vsber, and Dr. Hammond. Tertullian and S.
Cyprian before A. D. 300, writ Tracts; one de velandis virginibus (i.e.
sacris,). That they should cover their faces with veils, etc: where he mentions
votum continentiae -- viderit ipsum continentiae votum, p. 200. -- and
distinguishes between virgins hominum, and virgins Dei, -- Ambiunt virgins
hominum adversus virgins Dei, etc. p. 193. -- and near the end he says to
such Non mentiris nuptam. Napsisti enim Christo; illi tradidisti carnem tuam:
illi sponsasti maturitatem tuam, etc. And of those who should offer to pull off
this veil, he says; O sacrilegae manus, quae dicatum Deo habit um dehabere
potuerunt! etc. -- The other, de disciplina and habitu virginum (i.e.
sacrarum,) of whom he says there: -- Quaese Christo dicaverunt, and a carnali
concupiscentia recedentes tam carne quam mente se Deo voverunt, -- and that
they were flos Ecclesiastici geminis etc gaudere per illas, atque in illis
largiter florere Eeelesiae matris gloriosam foecunditatem; and that those of
them who afterward yield to lust, are adulterae Christi. -- And see his Epistle
to Pomponius, about some that lived unchastly, after that ex fide se Christo
dicaverant, sanctitati suaese destinarant, propter regna coedorum se
castraverant, etc. To these, that you may know that anciently also those who
lived Monastic lives made vows thereof, (the contrary of which some endeavor
to persuade us,) I will add only two other testimonies: one out of S. Basil,
praefat. constitut. Monast. Nuptias velut compedes fugit; vitam suam Deo
consecrat, and castitatem prositetur, ut neque facultas ipsi sit conversionis
ad nuptias: the other out of S. Austin, in Psalm. 75. upon [Vovete and reddite
Domino Deo nostro.] -- Alii virginitatem ipsam ab ineunte aetate vovent etc.
isti voverunt plurimum. -- Alius vovet relinquere omnia sua distribuendo
pauperibus, and ire in communem vitam, in societatem sanctorum; magnum votum
vovit. -- Nescio quae castimonialis nubere voluit. Aliquid mali voluit? mali
plane. Quare? Quia jam voverat Domino. Quid enim dixit de talibus Apostolus
Paulus? ( Cum dicat, viduas adolescentulas nubere si velint,) Quid autem ait de
quibusdam, quae voverunt, and non reddiderunt? habentes, inquit, damnationem,
quia jam fidem irritam fecerunt. Nemo ergo positus in Monasterio Frater dicat;
Recedo de Monasterio. Neque enim soli, qui sunt in Monasterio perventuri sunt
in regnum coelorum. -- Respondetur ei; sed illi non voverunt, tu vovisti. And
concerning the married, by consent vowing continency, and obligation afterward
for ever to observe it, see S. Anstin's 199 Epistle to Ecdicia. The argument of
which Epistle I will transcribe you. -- Mulier quaedam [ i.e. this Ecdicia]
inscio marito susceperat votum Continentiae. Post tamen maritus assensus est,
and continenter cum ea vixit, non sinens tamen ut Monachae vestem sumeret.
Tandem inscio marito facultates omnes duobus [Monachis] veluti pauperibus
erogavit, cum haberet filium puerum ex eodem viro. Maritus suspicans eos
Monachos esse ex eorum numero, qui penetrant and praedantur domos alienas,
resiliit a proposito, and coepit maechari. -- Now in this Epistle St. Austin
blames Ecdicia indeed, for all the things above named, which she had done
without the consent of her husband, commanding her to submit, and ask his
pardon, etc. but as to the vow of Continency, to which they had once both
consented (not withstanding his fornicating,) he holds them both for ever
obliged to it, and exhorts her, at seast, to perseverance therein. -- Quod enim
(says he) Deo puri consensu ambo voveratis, perseveranter usque in finem
reddere ambe debuistis; a quo proposito si lapsus est ille, tu saltem
constantissime persevera. Thus He. As tor other quotations of Fathers, I refer
you to the Controvertists: instead of which I will set you down the confessions
concerning them of Calvin, Instit, 4. l. 12. c. 27. s. -- Secuta sunt deinde
tempora, (he means after the Conc. Nicen.) quibus invalait nimis superstitiosa
coelibatus admiratio, etc. Haec, quia videbantur reverentiam Socerdotio
coneciliare, magno plausu etiam antiquitus recepta esse fateor. Now the reason,
why he censures not the times till after Nice, is the story of Paphnutius, from
which he gathers, those former times Conjugium in Sacerdotio tolerasse, not
observing, or concealing, that it was only Conjugium contracted before
Ordination. Himself meanwhile condemning the Canons which these times
approved; quibus vetitum est, ne matrimonium contraherent, qui pervenissent ad
sacerdotii gradum. (Sect. 27. and Sect. 29.28.) Nulla omnino condition dandum
esse locum iis Canonibus cenfeo, qui vinculum Caelibatus Ecclesiastico ordini
injiciunt. Concerning vows of fingle life, (13. c. 17..) Hoc, inquiunt, ab
ultima memoria fuit observatum, at se alligarent continent^ae voto, qui totos
se Domino dicare vellent. His Answer. Fateor certe antiquitus quoque receptum
fuisse hunc morem: sed came aetatem sic ab omni vitio liberam fuisse non
concedo, ut pro regula habendum sit quicquid tunc factum est. -- And the
conlession of Pet. Marty^ de Coelibatu and Votis. -- Vt quod verum est
fateamur, eos in hac causa habemus iniquiores. Statim enim ab Apostolorum
temporibus nimium tribui coeptum est Coelibatui. And of St. Austin he says;
Ist^ vir Dei scribit (speaking of Vows) ut homo deceptus. Now the objections
which are made, by the opposers of the law of Celibacy, for those entering into
Holy Orders; or of vows of Celibacy, for other persons, out of the Canons of
Councils, or the writings of the Fathers, are not against any thing here
affirmed: but either, concerning some, who, having wives before Ordination,
were noi obliged afterward to abstain from them, (allowed still by the G^^^k
Church, except to Bishops only,), *or concerning marriages contracted after
Ordination or Vows, that such are not irrita; of which opinion S. Ausbin is
clearly, De bono Viduitatis, c. 8, 9, etc. a thing granted by all after only
simple vows; and after solemn, disputed still;; whether such persons, who have
so solemnly delivered, and made over themselves in a particular espousal to
God, arc made illegitimate for any Secular marriage afterward jure Divino, or
only jure Ecclesiastico. (See Bell. de Monach. 2. l. 34. c. sect. Respond:
convenit. --) For the Church has always claimed much power (as being not
retrained by the Levitical law, qua talis, but only by that of Nature, nor
prescribed any thing by Christ) in ordering the matters of marriage; and in
hindering some persons from marrying, (even not to making the marriage
illieitum to be done, but irritum when done,) who are not restrained there from
by the Divine law, or the law of Nature. See if you please the discourses of
this in Estius 4. sent. 40. d. 3. s. etc. -- 28. d. sect. 4, 8, 9. * or,
concerning those, who, after vowing continency, live in fornication and
uncleanness, that such, notwithstanding their vow formerly made, had better
marry than thus offend. Which is granted by all, after a simple vow: (hear what
Bellarm. says, ( de Monach. 2. l. 34. c. sect. Est autem. --) -- Licet sine
peccato contrahi nequeunt, tamen verae nuptiae sunt: and ideo aliqito modo
minus malum est nubere post votum ejusmodi, quam assidue fornicari, tum ob
fidem conjugii, tum ob prolem legitimam, tum ob alia bona, etc.) * But let it
be granted them after a solemn also: but if from hence they would prove the
lawfulness of marriage after vowing continency, the places they produce will no
way bear it. They are three, much pressed: one of S. Cyprian, Epistola ad
Pomponium 62. Quod si ex fide se Christo die averunt, pudice and cast sine
ulla fabula persevent; it a fortes and stabiles praemium viginitatis expectent:
si autem persever are nolunt, aut non possint, melius est ut nub ant, quam in
ignem delictis stuis cadant. The second of S. Hierom, Ep. ad Demetriadem 8.
Sanctum Virginum propositum and calestis Angelorumque familiae gloriam
quarundam non benese agentium nomen infamat; quibus aperte dicendum est, ut ant
nubant, sie non possint tontinere; ant contineant, si nolunt nubere. The third
of S. Austin, de sancta Virginitate, 34. c. upon that of the Apostles, 1 Timothy
5. Nubere volunt. -- Hae igitur (he speaks of those who have vowed chastity)
qua nubere volunt, and ideo non nubunt, quia impune non possunt, (quae melius
nuberent, quam urerentur) quas poenitet professionis, and piget confessionis,
nisi correctum cor dirigant, and Dei ti more rursus libidinem vincant, in
mortuis deputande sunt. etc. 1 Timothy 5.6. -- But in these places the Fathers,
only of two evils, if one of them they will do, wish rather the less to be
done; and prefer marriage, being in it self, tho not to them after a vow,
lawful, before living in fornication, and other uncleannes, neither to them
after vows, nor before in it self, lawful: therefore they say, si nolunt
continere, or perseverare, nubant. Which marriage yet none at all allow lawful;
namely to none who can keep their vows. As for the non possunt, they speak it
not of them as no way able to keep their vow, (for then indeed I grant,
marriage would he lawful, if the vow of virginity were impossible to be kept,)
but of them as, by their own fault (which they may redress [therefore S. Austin
says, nisi correctum cor dirigant, etc,]) impotent. Which may clearly appear
(to any who delight not rather to make the Fathers to contradict themselves,
even where their speeches are most casily reconciled) both by the same Fathers
allowing these perpetual vows, and their holding in all the possibility of
continency; showed before. Of which also hear S. Hierom, (comment. in Matt, 19.
c.) upon [Non omnes capiunt.] Nemo putet sub hoc verbo vel fatum vel fortunam
introduci: quod hi sunt virgins, quibus a Deo datum sit, aut quos quidam casus
ad hoc adduxerit: sed his datum est, qui petierunt, qui voluerunt; qui ut
acciperent laboraverunt. Omni enim petenti dabitur, and pulsanti aperietur,
etc. -- Qui potest capere, capiat; qui potest pugnare, pugnet; superet, ac
triumphet. -- And adversus Jovinianum 2. l. 19. c. to this Apostate Monk, who
equalled a virginal and conjugal state, he says: Virgins tuae, quas
prudentissimo consilio quod nemo unquam legerat nec audierat, de Apostolo
docuisti [melius est nubere, quam uri] occultos adulteros in apertos verterunt
maritos. Non suasit hoc Apostolus, non electionis vas; Virgilianum consilium
est,

Conjugium vocat, hoc praetexit nomine culpam.

See S. Austin (Confess. 6. l. 11. c.) -- Putabam me miserum fore nimis, si
foeminae privarer amplexibus: and medicinam misericordiae tuae ad eandem
infirmitatem sanandam non cogitabam, quia expertus non eram: and propriarum
virium credebam esse continentiam, quarum mihi non eram conscius; cum tam
stultus essem, ut nescirem, sicut scriptum est, (Wisdom, seu Sapient. 8. c.
21.) Neminem esse posse continentem, nisi tu dederis. Vtique dares, sigemitu
interno pulsarem aures tuas, and fide solida in te jactarem curam meam. and( De
adulterinis Conjugiis 2. l. 20. c.) Solemus eis [qui propter adulterium
dimissis conjugibus suis, alias volunt ducere, and quum prohibentur,
infirmitatem nobis carnis opponunt] proponere etiam continentiam Clericorum;
qui plerumque ad eandem sareinam subeundam capiuntur inviti, eamque susceptam
usque ad debitum finem, Domino adjuvante, perducunt. Dicimus ergo eis; Quid si
and vos ad hoc subeundum populorum violentia caperemini, nonne susceptum cast
( i.e. in celibacy) custodiretis officium, repent conversi ad impetrandas
vires a Domino, de quibus nunquam antea cogitastis? See the like in Psalm; 137.
Nemo praesumat viribus suis reddere quod voverit: Qui te hortatur, ut voveas;
ipse adjuvat, ut reddas. So other Fathers also. Chrysostom. Comment, in Matt. 19.
His datum est qui sponte id eligunt: Quod ideo dixit, ut ostenderet; superiore
nobis auxilio opus esse; quod quidem omnibus paratum est, si volumus in hae
lucta evadere superiores. Add to this that place of S. Austin in Psalm. 75.
quoted before. 22. and that 104. Can. of Conc. Carthag. 4. subscribed by him,
quoted before. 21. with some others there to the same purpose, where they deny
marriage lawful to Votaries, and Anathematize them, To which I will add that of
S. Ambrose ad Virginem lapsam, 5. c. Quae se spopondit Christo, and sacrum
velamen acc^pit, jam nupsit; jam immortali; juncta est viro, and jam si
voluerit nubere communi lege conjugii adulterium perpetrat. -- And that of S.
Chrysostom, spoken by way of caution to young Theodorus deserting his Monastic
life. Paraen. 2. -- Honorabile, inquit, connubium, and cubile immaculatum. Sed
tibi jam non est integrum jura connubii servare; coelesti enim sponso semel
junctum illum relinquere, and uxoris laqueis implicari, adulterii crimen
incurrere est. Quamvis millies hoc ipsum nuptias voces, ego tamen and adulterio
(that is, the adultery of another man who has not vowed, not his, as I
conceive him) illud tanto pejus affirmo, quanto major ac welior mortalibus
Deus. Nunc autem nihil in te penitus tui juris est. -- Nam si mulier proprii
corporis non habet potestatem, sed vir: multo magis hi, qui Christo potius,
quam sibi vivunt, ditionem corporis sui habere non possunt. So S. Austin, who
holds not the marriages of Votaries to be null, or no true marriages, (see de
bono Viduitatis, c. 8, 9, 10, 11.) yet says in the same place, c. 11. Non
possum quidem dicere foeminas a proposito meliore lapsas si nupserint adulteria
esse, non conjugia: sed plane non dubitaverim dicere lapsus and ruinas a
castitate sanctiore, quae vovetur Deo, adulteriis esse pejores. Si enim ad
offensionem Christi pertinet, cum membrum ejus fidem non servat marito, quanto
gravius offenditur, cum illi ipsi non servatur fides in eo, quod oblatum
exigit, qui non exegerat offerendum? This in answer to those places, wherein
it is pretended, the Fathers held marriage lawful after vows; or continency to
seem not possible. But the Apostle sufficiently decides this business (at least
as the Fathers understood him) in 1 Timothy 5. who affirms his young votaries to
have damnation, ( i.e. great guilt upon them,) for breaking their former faith
or vow by marrying. Now this denying of marriage, the remedy of incontinency,
to all such as have passed a vow, argues that the Fathers held the gift of
continency denied to none such. Which if it be true, the only considerable
objection (that I know of) against a Monastic life is here also removed. For
as concerning the other two vows, * That (commonly called) of Poverty,
provided, that one remain still either possessed of what in humane probability
is enough to supply him with necessaries, or have a trade or a profession
(amongst which I reckon preaching of the Gospel one) wherewith from time to
time to get his living, (for the labourer is worthy of his hire, as our Savior
told his disciples, when he sent them abroad to preach without any provision),
and may in reason presume he shall receive it; and *That of Obedience,
provided, it be engaged only for things lawful, about which lawfulness, when
any doubt happens, he is to be guided by the Church'es, not his private
Superiors judgment: (Which I think, in no Monastical institution that ever was,
can be showed to be peremptorily denied to any, for the ordinary plea of many
of the Roman Doctors is contrary; namely, that no Authority less than
infallible (which Superiors are not) can oblige to absolute obedience and
submission to their judgment in matters credible or practicable in order to our
salvation (See Notes of Infallibity;) Tho those who are under Authority are
prudentially advised, rather to submit in all things to their Superiors (most
likely) better judgments, than (with very little sign of humility) indulge
their own; and caussesly afflict their Society with appeals and contests:)
These two vows, I say, thus qualified, are not liable to any just exceptions.
And indeed the former we see done frequently amongst us, in many parting for
ever with their estates (only what is necessary reserved) to their Son: why not
then to the poor? and the latter in Servants promising, or also swearing
obedience to their Masters; why not to a Spirtual Superior?

Ananias his vow, Act. 5. whose fault, so much aggravated by S. Peter, seems to
be more in his keeping back part, after his devoting it to God, than in
pretending, by a lie, to bring it all: see the inference ver. 3 But Peter etc.)
* of using every day two or three times of prayer extraordinary; * of not
drinking wine, because of many former temptations by it to excess. And 2ly, is
not the performance of all these only by the power God gives us, (who cannot
think a good thought, much less curb the least appetite, without him,) and
therefore we give him thanks also for the performance of them? 3. And again,
make we not in baptism a vow of things necessary to salvation, i.e. of
repentance, and of says? but the expressions concerning which in Scripture are
the same as those concerning continency. to wit, that they are not given to
all: [See Jo. 6.37, 39.64, 65. -- 2 Timothy 2.2^. -- Matt. 13.11. It is given unto
you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not
given.] Not as if God absolutely denied such a gift to them, but only upon
their non-preparation, and other obstacles, which by their own fault hindered
them from receiving it; for so our Savior expounds himself in the next words,
ver. 12. For whosoever has, to him shall be given. In the same manner may it
be said of continency; non omnibus datur; but habenti (i.e. to men using those
endeavors and preparations toward it, which God has given them, power to use)
dabitur. ( Jo. 12.39. -- Ephesians. 2.8. compared 2 These. 3.2. Act. 13.48.) For which
expressions if we make the vow of continency unlawful, why not the other? Now
who is there that may not lawfully vow, to repent of his sins, to believe in
God to his lives end, to observe God's commands, etc? (118. Ps. 106.108. v.)
yet as S. Austin says, Nemo praesumat viribus suis reddere quod voverit. Qui
te hortatur ut voveas, ipse adjuvat ut reddas. [In Psalm. 137.] Here it is
said; there is not the same reason: because Faith is a thing necessary to
salvation, not so Virginal Continency, therefore we cannot justly have the same
confidence, that God, surely not wanting to us in necessaries, must needs
supply us also in superfluities. Resp. Doubtless, since God, as he has
commanded duty, so also has advised perfection, as not in the one, so neither
in the other, is he wanting in his gift, to those that seek it; especially the
latter undertaking (as higher) deserving more encouragement. Else why is not
[petenti dabitur] restrained also to necessaries? and why may a man lawfully
make vows in other things, that he conceives profitable, but acknowledges are
not absolutely necessary to his salvation, (as in the things mentioned before,
as also in other rules of perfection, 1 Cor. 9. Luke 12.33. Matt. 19.29.) if he
may not presume on God's assistance in such things only profitable, without
which he is able of himself to do nothing profitable. 4. Again, I know not why,
if we may safely vow the keeping of any of God's commandments, and may make a
covenant with our eyes, not to look upon a woman to lust after her, why, I say,
we may not also, to guard our passion from being set on fire, and from burning;
since the former seems to be the more difficult.

Ps. 76.11. Jon. 1.16. Is. 19.21. etc. And very expedient doubtless it is
(after some trial and experience of our having a reasonable command over our
selves, and of our not suffering a very tyrannical mastery of our passions) to
pass a vow in such matters to fortify our selves against temptations, and the
mutability of our inclinations; by which the less former tie we have of our
selves, the easilier we are seduced. Faelix necessitas, quae ad meliora
compellit, says S. Austin of Vows.

As for those places of the Apostle which are urged, against vowing, at least
before sixty, or for leave given to marry, tho it be after vows, upon
incontnency; [as 1 Timothy 5.9. Let not a widow be taken into the number under 60
years old: -- and 14. I will therefore, that the younger women marry etc. and 1
Cor. 7.9. If they cannot contain let them marry: and v. 35. I speak not that I
may cast a snare upon you.] In answer to them, I take this first for granted;
that all those (young or old) who have the power to be continent, may safely
vow it; since the reason given by the Reformed, why it may not be vowed, is,
because it is a thing not in our power. Again, I say, that if these places
prove, either that continency before 60. may not be vowed, or marrying after a
vow may be lawful, upon this reason, because some persons before sixty, and
after vowing, cannot contain; then the Apostle will be made to contradict
himself. For according to this he could not say of the Juniors, (whose
particular gift of continency he could not know, but had rather reason to
presume, from the miscarriage he saw in them, that they had it not,) that they
had damnation, for marrying; or for not keeping their vow or promise to Christ,
which they could not keep; but damnation, for making such a vow, which they
must necessarily break* For, Non est peccatum violare, quod servare impossible
est; and it was as lawful to break such a vow, as unlawful to make it. But yet
notwithstanding this, the Apostle plainly says, damnation they had for
marrying, and for breaking this promise, not for making it. I conclude
therefore, that the Apostle's advice here of marriage is not * to Votaries, nor
absolutely to all other younger women: for so his volo juniores nubere here
would be contrary to his volo omnes esse sicut meipsum, 1 Cor. 7.7. and would
lay an obligation on all young folks to marry: But * to those that are in such
a manner qualified, as those were that miscarried: so qualified; not from want
of power from God to contain, but want of will, and of a steadfast purpose to
make use of that power, (as S. Paul describes it 1 Cor. 7.37.) which
instability of the will, and pronenes to incontinency (that is in some much
more than in others) every one ought well to examine before they vow; that so
they may make use of the lawful remedy, which in the second place God has
provided for it, namely marriage; if they do not aspire to the higher cure
thereof by prayer, and mortifications. See Dr. Hammond in his Paraphrase,
expounding it thus, [That those who have not attained to such gravity of mind,
and command over themselves, do, in that case, betake themselves to a married
life:] -- So, in that text, [if they cannot contain, let them marry.] (Where
note, that our Translation renders (...) If they cannot contain; and so Matt.
19.11. (...), All men cannot receive this saying etc. without rule or
precedent, that I know of: for the Vulgar has it, omnes non capiunt: and si
non se continent.) The advice is not, to any that have an obligation to
contain, (tho actually perchance they do not so), as it is not to the married;
tho one party be sick, absent, or impotent; nor to those who have vowed, it
being proved, that such may contain, from the Apostle's saying, they have
damnation in marrying, who yet actually non se continebant: But the advice is
to those only, that are free from any obligation against marriage; that if they
perceive themselves so affected, as that they have much temptation, and no
steadfast purpose to contain, if they have gotten (which yet is by their own
defect) so little power and mastery over their will, (which mastery is acquired
by some pains and practice) as that they cannot (not cannot possibly but cannot
without much difficulty) contain, (for we say we cannot do a thing, tho in our
power, which we can hardly do): that then they should make use of the common
remedy allowed by God for it. All which weaknesses, since they are by industry
remediable, excuse none from continency, who have already made any engagement
to it. To the 3d. place, 1 Cor. 7.35. I grant a vow rashly undertaken to be a
dangerous snare: rashly, I say, i.e. without well proving before it what
mastery we have over our carnal inclinations. Lastly, for the admission of none
under sixty, the Apostle seems to prescribe this age with respect: to their
impotency then to get their living, and liableness to want, (see ver. 4, and
16.) and to their staydness and gravity, [see v. 13, 14.] as much or more than
to their continency, in which a lesser age would have rendered them secure. But
suppose the Apostle chiefly to have reference to this, yet was it not done as
if any lesser age has not a power of continency; or experiencing their ability
to live single, might not also resolve it: but because the Church had not the
same means to be assured of their inclinations, and was much concerned in her
first growth, after the experience too of some miscarriages, thus to prevent
all scandal. But later Church, upon experience of the chaste behavior of such
persons from the power of more discipline, due restraint, etc. thought not her
self obliged by this rule fitted for the Apostles days. But as S. Paul, from
the lapsibility of younger women, admitted them at 60: so the 4th. General
Council of Chalcedon, Can. 14. cum diligenti probatione admitted them at forty.

Yet it more difficult, than the m^tter of any other Vow.
X. As God has encouraged us to single life by recommending it; and denies the
power to none at all, taking the pains, and using the means, that are necessary
to procure it; So I grant, that the act and exercise of Continency, and purity,
is much more difficultly attained, than any other matter of a Vow whatever; and
the sin, which the undiscreet attempters thereof fall into, if they miscarry,
very abominable. Therefore is there nothing in all the Scripture recommended
with so much caution, and putting men in mind of their own abilities, as this:
which appears both in our Savior's limitations, Matt. 19.11, 12. and in the
Apostle's proceeding so tenderly in this point, and with such cautious and
suspended steps, (see 1 Cor. 7.2, 6, 7, 25, 28, 55, 36.) tho much commending
it, yet warily recommending it: looking doubtless as on one side at the heavenly
perfection of this virtue, so on the other at the hainousnes and fil^hines of
those crimes, and the great peril of those snares, that men, avoiding, and
obstinate against, the common merciful remedy of marriage, were endangered to
fall into, in an unmortified pursuit of this grace. More difficultly, I say, is
this grace attained, both by reason of this strong impression made in our
nature by the most wise providence, for the necessary use of propagation; and
by reason of the concupiscence of the flesh; which, as it was the first
exorbitancy appearing in Adam, ( They saw that they were naked, Genesis 3.7. being
only a modest expression of the rising of concupiscence; compared with Genesis
2.25. therefore followed by shame); so retains it its strength in all his sons,
beyond any other passion whatsoever: to which likewise one person (and in him
one age of his life) may have yet a far greater pronity than another, by the
greater heat of their constitution; natural impetuosity of their passion; more
liberal diet; much rest and vacancy from employment; conversation amongst
tempting objects, etc. so that such, without extreme difficulty, cannot
contain, as it also many times happens even to them after divorce, etc, (who,
all grant, have from God the power of containing, if they will use their best
endeavors). And in respect of the great strength of the temtations of lust,
beyond all other, and of these great impediments in some, more than in others,
( i.e. the natural temper, age, condition of life, former habits, etc, and of
most men's averseness to undergo those rigors and mortifications, which procure
and preserve continency, etc,) I conceive it is; that our Savior answered his
forward disciples voting, upon his discourse, that none should marry; * that to
all this was not given, and that some only could receive it; and so the Apostle
by the same spirit, * that every one has his proper gift of God, one after
this manner, and another after that, 1 Cor. 7.7. and * that there was a
necessity to some parents of giving their virgin in marriage, (ver. 36, 37.)
therefore he says, it is not given to all, i. e. without such pains-taking as
some other gifts are; Nor do all receive it:] For tho power to contain is given
to any who use the means, subdue their passions, etc. yet few there are, who
can without much difficulty and resolution so master their will, subdue their
passions; few, who have a temper naturally so calm, or artificially so rebated,
that they can arrive to such a power. And so, every one has his proper gift of
God, etc.] i. e. First, in respect of gifts of nature; men are of several
tempers and abilities, some inclined more to one passion, as enamour'dnes, some
to another, [as continency,] some more, some less, subject to be tempted; some
fitted for one sort of life, some another; which all yet are the distributions
of God, (see 1 Cor. 7.17.) So that some can more easily, some not without
almost insuperable difficulty, contain; for we say, we cannot do, tho a thing
in our power, what we can hardly do, or which is very troublesome to us to
effect. See Luke 14.20. 2 Cor. 8.3. -- Such phrases are not unfrequent in
Scripture, Jo. 13.36. Luke 14.26, etc, to 34. Jo. 6.65. spoken in things, of
which we do not deny an absolute possibility, whilst by prayer etc may be
attained stronger inclinations; but yet in them we suppose to some a present
impotency, and impromptitude of their will, and waywardness of their
inclinations; especially where the thing requires a strong conatus, and a stout
spirit, as Peter's dying for Christ; their forsaking friends, and all they had,
for Christ. Luke 14.26. and 33. Their believing in Christ, especially at that
time, when appearing to them in such weakness of our flesh; none of these
things (tho) being absolutely impossible to them. 2ly, in respect of gifts of
grace every man has his proper gift of God; some, superior; some, inferior,
graces; some, Virginal, some only conjugal, chastity, (1 Cor. 7.9.) according
to every man's capacity, ( Matt. 25.15.) or endeavors: which not premised, the
grace is not bestowed. For we must know, that God always gives not his habitual
graces at first, but excites and assists our endeavors for them; and afterward
crowns these endeavors with them. And hence, because most do not well employ
God's former grace, (in which he is not wanting to those, whom he questions for
want of the latter) the other happen to be given but to a very few. See Matt.
13, 11. concerning that necessary grace of Spiritual illumination, [To you it
is given; to them it is not given;] and Jo. 12.39. concerning faith; [Therefore
they could not believe.] See. ^ and so Mar. 6.5. concerning the favors of God,
that he is ready to do for us, but we are incapable of receiving; [And he could
there do no mighty work.] In all which the deficiency is not to be understood
to proceed from the want of will in God to give, but from the want of
preparation in them to receive. (See Matt. 13.11. compared with 12. -- Mar.
6.5. compared with 6.) If they receive not, because God gives not; Matt. 19.11.
and if God gives not, because they do not by prayer, and other means, prepare
themselves for it; it follows, the prime reason, why they receive not, is
because they are unmortified, or unprepared. Now the exhortation ver. 12. He
that is able to receive it, let him etc. See Mat. 20.22. plainly supposes, *
that God gives it to those that are able; and the instance in some that make
themselves Eunuchs, proves, * that men also make themselves able; able, by
God's concurrence, and preventing and assisting aid, or grace, from whom is all
ability. Which ability also supposes that he gives to some, not others, only in
the same sense as he gives faith, and other graces; (see Ephesians. 2.8. compared
with 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.) yet notwithstanding, as all may both pray for faith, and
upon their endeavor presume they shall receive it; and may promise and vow unto
God to be faithful; so notwithstanding the former expressions (if no other
reason be alleged) we may say the same of Continency; That it is a gift
attainable by all, as it is a gift by few attained. Thus much concerning the
grace. But 3ly, in respect of the faculty it self, and the using of it well, in
our endeavors to attain such a grace, it is true also, that our being willing to
do a thing is frequently called God's gift; and there is nothing, of which we
can say, it is our fault or infirmity that we do it not, but that we may as truly
say, it is God's gift, if we do it. (See Phil. 2.13. Jer. 10.23. Prove. 16.1.
Ex. 4.11. 2 Chronicles. 18.31. -- 10.15. -- Ezr. 6.22. Matt. 13.11.) Therefore also
this our desiring such a grace to be given us, or our entertaining such a grace
offered us, is also in some sense another gift or grace of God to us, without
which we should not have possessed his other grace; and so, our own endeavor,
as well as the grace we seek for, is all gift and grace, tho we should go in
infinitum; till we also find (as the most ordinary doctrine of the School is)
that the first motion of the will to embrace God's grace is also the grace,
gift, or work of God in us: else if this motion of the will were from it self,
in any sense contradistinct to that of being from God, then there would be some
good in us, not from God; then something, which we had not received; and so,
place for merit, and boasting; contrary to Romans 4.2, 4. -- 3.17. But I
conceive, it is not said of these first gifts of God, ( i.e. of his first
excitings of the will; his both preventing and assisting aids and helps of the
will, in its using the means to attain his further, and richer, habitual, and
inherent graces,) that non omnibus data sunt; but of those other second graces,
which are given but to few, because the means, and his former commoner aids are
used by few: of which it is said, that, only to him that has, shall be given.
Of those first aids therefore we may safely say, that they are so far common to
all, (to whom is come the sound of the Gospel, and who shall be judged at the
last day by the Gospel) that it is their fault, in any duties, which are
absolutely commanded them, and their defect, in any counsels of perfection, if
they, by not making use of them, come short of such duty or perfection; and,
that any thing being thus said to be God's gift hinders not, but that it
likewise may be said also to be in man's power, (meaning a power, in man, but,
from God,) as long as the tender of such a gift is made to him, and ability
also to acquire it given to him. But of this more in my Notes of Grace. Yet
since, there are some that allow not the means to attain faith, or other duties
commanded, common to all to whom the Gospel is preached, (therefore P. Martyr,
3. class. 7. c. Commun. locorum. argues thus: Magis videretur debere commune
esse omnibus hominibus donum efficacis vocaticnis ad sidem in Christum, quam
donum ad Coelibatum. -- Sed inter illos qui eandem praedicationem audiunt, non
omnes a Deo trahuntur. Where he quotes Jo. 6.44. Nemo venit ad me:) Let but so
much be granted from them, of the means to attain continency, as is, to attain
faith; and this will serve our turn, without reasoning the point any further in
this place; for then fee what will follow. 23. In granting therefore, that the
using of the means also to obtain graces from God is the gift of God; yet we
affirm, that it is only by their own default (for which see Luke 12.57. Matt.
11.21. Mar. 12.34. Matt. 23.37. Jer. 18.4. -- 8.10.) if in things absolutely
commanded, and their own defect, if in things recommended for their greater
perfection, that such do not use the means, and that they may use them if they
will. Because these must consist together, i.e. * that we can do no good (small
or great) but from God; and * that we have free will to do good, and if we do
not good, it is by our own default; and * that when we do any good, it is not
without our own endeavor. Else we should be free from sin in not observing the
divine exhortations; and there would be no vice, nor virtue; and consequently
no (just) punishment, or reward. See concerning this S. Austin, De Gratia and
libero Arbitrio 4. cap. Nunquid non liberum arbitrium Timothei est exhortatus
Apostolus, dicens, Contine teipsum? 1 Timothy 5.23. -- Et in hac re potestatem
voluntatis ostendit, ubi ait, Non habens necessitatem; potestatem autem habens
suae voluntatis, ut servet virginem suam. 1 Cor. 7.37. Et tamen non omnes
capiunt verbum hoc, sed quibus datum est, etc. -- Itaque ut hoc verbum, quod
non ab omnibus capitur, ab aliquibus capiatur, and Dei donum est, and liberum
arbitrium etc. Neither will this be sufficient to hinder a vow, because it is
only of God's gift (that we are willing to use the means) to keep and fulfill
it. For also we cannot do any thing he commands, unles he gives us the will;
and yet may we vow to do any thing he commands.

T^^^fore (...) st^^y to be^^^wed.
XI. And in respect of these considerations, as all ought to endeavor and
covet this the most happy condition of life, and many men are much wanting to
their own perfection, the Service of God, and of the Church, etc. who, out of
neglect to this gift, and not out of, or from, any strength of temptation cast
themselves into the impediments of marriage, and might receive it, and do not:
so I conceive it is not so safe for any, who are not very well practiced first
in mortification, and experience in much piety and devotion, to vow it. Not
safe; not out of any diffidence in God, as if he would be wanting in his
assistance proportionable to our endeavor; but in reference to the flesh, lest
it should happen, in this chiefest piece of its strength, if we do not find
that we have a strong command over our selves, to overmaster us; and our good
resolution become a snare to us, 1 Cor. 7.35. beginning to build, and not able
to finish. In which S. Paul's wariness may be a sufficient precedent to ours;
who, * finding the young widows after such purposes (by their own fault indeed)
remarrying, and * considering the greatness of internal and external
temptations incident to youth, (through the indulgent discipline the infancy of
the Church was then capable of, not so restrained as latter times have since
provided,) ordered that none under sixty should be admitted into public
service upon such strict bonds and obligations. And indeed in the business of
continency, in which some degree of burning is in the most pure, it is very
hard, till long experience has as it were assured us, at any one time exactly
to measure our own strength, constancy, and stedfastness, whether we shall be
able to contain for the time to come; and, by the intervening of new
temptations etc. (unless we resolve wholly to shut up our selves from them) our
future, is not easily judged by our present, complexion. And as, when I look at
the heavenliness of a single life, I would advise all men to abstain; so when
at the great difficulty of such a purity, as shall not be contaminated with one
uncleanness, than which the Apostle advises rather to marry, I would counsel
all men to marry; [See Conf. 2. l. 3. c. how S. Austin complains of his parents
not preventing by marriage the many exorbitancies of his wanton youth:] seeing
the single person much hazards a great sin, whilst he attempts as great a
glory. But yet the zealous Servant of God can do all through Christ that
strengthens him. Nor shall he in this be tempted above his power, 1 Cor.
10.13. if he first tempt not himself; and the reward is well worthy the pains.

yet not unlawful for the Church, and very beneficial, to restrain the sacred
function of the Ministry to single persons.
XII. It Is not only lawful, but of singular benefit, that those offices more
nearly conversant about the public service of God, or the Church, should be
discharged only by single persons, wholly sequestered from the world. Which if
the Apostle saw fitting in the ministering widows, the Deaconesses, (Romans 16.1.)
how much more is it in the Clergy? Tho he, loath to lay such a hard burden on
the tender shoulders of the Infancy of the Church, therefore nourished by him
with milk, rather than strong meat: * when there was not so much choice of
Pastors, and they of necessity to be admitted to such functions much sooner
than the widows; and * when single life and Eunuchism was as yet, especially to
the Jew, a strange proposal, (which may partly be the reason, why he, who
became all things to all men, in the 1 Cor. 7. recommends single life so
modestly, and after the way of delivering only his advice and judgment, (a
phrase unusual in his other doctrines,) see 1 Cor. 7.6, 8. compared with the
10, 25, 40,) restrained then the Clergy only to one wife. Yet (where there is
sufficient plenty of single persons that are worthy, and not else) it seems no
way unlawful or unjust, if the Church (which is * in this left to her liberty
(for S. Paul, restraining the Clergy only to one wife, obliges them not by
this, to have a wife) and * has power to establish what the H. Scriptures no
way prohibit) shall ordain (which is a means to make many more zealous of this
excellent gift) * that single persons only shall be admitted into such
employments, or at least into those functions amongst these of the more
eminency and moment; and if these persons should afterward engage in marriage,
* that they shall no longer stay in the same office. Which wisdom, since the
world frequently shows in many other places of less consequence, they cannot be
excused for omitting it in the Church Affairs, to which it is most proper.

Neither do I see what hurt or scandal can come thereof; if only the
Ecclesiastical Canons were strictly executed: 1. If none, but after long
probation of their temperance, continency, gravity, mortification, were
admitted into such sacred employments, (see what trial the Apostle requires
before such admission, 1 Timothy 3. and elsewhere, [ not a novice, lest he fall
into the temptation of the Devil; one of a good report, and found blameless;
even the Deacons to be proved, before they use that office, 1 Timothy 3.10.]) 2.
if all necessary restraints from the ordinary occasions and temptations of
incontinency were used to such persons after admitted. 3. If the Church'es
censures were vigorously executed against the offenders.

Else, as Celibacy is better than Marriage, so Marriage is always honorable;
but unchaste celibacy, especially in the Ministers of Christ, most abominable,
and for ever void of excuse. And even after such vows, (in which petenti
dabitur, nec patietur Deus nos supra id quod possumus tentari,) yet if such a
one will not contain, I conceive (supposing no Ecclesiastical law to intervene,
which may render marriage to such, when contracted, invalid, or not to be a
marriage) he sins much less in marrying, i. e. in doing a thing in it self
lawful, but against his vow, than in fornication, i.e. in (...) a thing
eternally unlawful, being against God's command^ (...) one fault is against
God's law, the other only against his own* And if some, in comparing marriage
with some one act of fornication or uncleaness, may affirm the first to be more
opposite to a (...) than the latter; as rendering one incapable of observing his
vow at all for the future, which the latter does not: yet in this all will
agree, that even to a Votary the living in Marriage, than living in continual
Fornication, or other uncleaness, is a life to God less offensive. S. Austin de
Bono Viduitatis, 9. c. -- Non quia ipsae nuptiae vel talium, i.e. voventium,
damnandae judicantur, sed damnatur propositi fraus, damnatur fracta voti fides,
etc. -- Postremo damnantur tales, non quia conjugalem fidem posterius inierant,
sed quia continentia primam fidem irritam fecerunt.

FINIS.

