A LITTLE STONE, Pretended to be out of the MOUNTAIN, Tried, and found to be a
Counterfeit. OR AN EXAMINATION and REFVTATION OF Mr. LOCKYERS LECTURE, Preached
at Edinburgh, ANNO 1651. Concerning the MATTER of the VISIBLE CHURCH. And
afterward Printed with an APPENDIX for Popular Government of single
CONGREGATIONS. Together with an EXAMINATION, in two APPENDICES, Of what is said
on these same purposes in a LETTER of some in Aberdene, who lately have
departed from the Communion and Government of this CHURCH.

By JAMES WOOD, Professor of Theol. in S. Andrews.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by ANDRO ANDERSON, for George Suintoun, and Robert Broun,
and are to be sold at their Shops, 1654.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, JOHN EARL of CASSILS* LORD KENNEDY*
My Lord
WHat the wise observing King uttered long ago, that of making of Books there
is no end, was never more verified in any then it is in the present age,
wherein, scribunt docti indoctique, every smatterer and every fancie-full head
must have the Press travel to bring forth their froathy conceptions: And
Presses by many are made use of as engines to discharge revylings, reproaches,
and blasphemies against the God of Heaven, his blessed Truths, ways and
Ordinances. For my self, I can say in truth, it has not hitherto been my
ambition to increase weariness of the flesh by much Reading: And that now I
come this way to the worlds view, it is not of mine own mere choice, but because
a necessity was laid upon me. The Author with whom I have to do in this
ensueing debate, having not only opened his mouth to Preach in the most
eminent-place in this Land, but also adventured to Write and Print against the
Orthodox Doctrine touching the constitution and Government of the Visible
Church of Christ, revileing in special the Church in this Land (yet through
its side also stricking at all the Orthodox Churches in Europe) as no Church,
but a dead carcass having neither matter nor form of a true Church; a nest of
unclean birds, idolatrous, etc. And thereupon charging with a great deal of
confidence and big words, all truly Godly to come out of it and to separate
from it. It was by some Reverend and Godly men thought expedient, that (although
there appear little or nothing in what is said by him, which may brangle the
mind of any judicious Reader: Yet because it is a thing usual to adversaries
of the Truth, if what they say, be it never so weak, get not an Answer, to brag
of it as unanswerable; And unsettled minds that have not their senses exercised
to discern good and evil, are ready to be taken with any thing busked up with
gay words, and so to be carried about, like weather-Cocks with every wind of
Doctrine, as many sad examples of this time prove,) an Answer should be
returned to him, lest truth should so much as seem to suffer prejudice any way.
And this task they were pleased to lay upon me. Who albeit I do, and cannot
but ingenuously acknowledge my self one of the least and weakest Servants of
Christ, and that many others there are in this Church, who might far more
worthily acquit themselves in this service: Yet durst not withstand the motion,
having so clear a Calling, and considering withal how I stand oblidged, in my
station, to maintain the true Religion, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, by the mercy of God established amongst us, in common with the rest
of the Lords people in the Land, by Solemn Vow and Covenant, and more
particularly by the Lords bringing me, who had been in my younger years
educated, as to many things, in a contrary way, to the acknowledgment of ^he
truth, in a very gracious manner, with a strong hand, and in much
long-suffering patience, whereby he waited to be gracious, that he might be
exalted in showing mercy on me.

Happily it will be matter of talking to some, that this of mine has been so long
in coming forth after Mr. Lockier published his. But it is not unknown to many
who have been witnesses to my diligence, that my Answer was in readiness
within a few Months after his Piece came to my hands, and the task was laid
upon me. And had come abroad if several difficulties had not interveened,

Now when it is to be published, I desire humbly to present it to your Lordship
first, and under your Honorable name to the view of the world. I must spare to
express all the great causes oblidging me so to do: Because to express them
would not only be, happily inexpedient; But also would be, I know, unsavory to
your self, whom I have always found desirous to aprove your self in reality of
well doing, but never liking well to hear of other men's euges. Only this much I
cannot forbear and must beg your Lordships leave to say. The personal
obligations which you have laid upon me by a continued tract of undeserved
respects, ever since the first time I was known to your Lordship, would require
a worthier testimony of acknowledgment, then is this mean present, or any thing
else my small store of abilities can afford. But to speak truth, it is not so
much any personal concernment that has engaged my heart to your Lordship, as
that which has endeared you to all who know the truth and you: That grace
which God has vouchsafed upon you to walk in tenderness and closeness with
himself in your private course and with constant zeal to improve your public
station wherein ye have stood, for promoving the interest of Religion and
righteousness and the good of Gods people without byasse or wavering in any
revolution of times (wherewith many turning upon the axletree of their own
self-interests, have whirled about) the sweet fruit whereof, I doubt not but
you find in these glowmie days, and trust shall abide with you to the end,
through the mercy of the Lord whose gifts and graces are without repentance.

I will not adventure upon such severe self-denyednesse to speak more of what I
have had the happiness to be acquainted with, in your Lordship. I hope this
testimony of my sense of the obligation I ly under to honor your Lordship shall
find favorable acceptance at your hands. I will not presume (for indeed it
were presumption) to commend my work in it: I pretend to nothing therein, but
that, through the Grace of God, I have ingenuously and in simplicity, tho in
much weakness, spoken for truth: But the matter it self is precious and of
great weight, consisting of two great interests of Christ Jesus his Visible
Church, which is his Visible Kingdom on earth. The one touching the
qualifications of the persons that are to be acknowledged members of his
Visible Church, and so, in effect, comes to be a Question de sinibus, of the
marches of his Visible Kingdom: The other touching the matter and way of the
external Visible Government thereof.

As to the former, my Author has so straightened the bounds of Christ's Visible
Church, that by his sentence none are to be acknowledged as members thereof,
and consequently to be under the Ministerial dispensation of the public
Ordinances of Christ, the ordinary means of saving souls, but such as are
already and antecedently found to be savingly converted, regenerated and sealed
of God for his by the Holy Spirit, if not in the truth of the object (which yet
most part of his reasoning and discourse pleads for) yet in the positive
judgment of very spiritual and discerning men: And that as some others of his
way further lay out the matter, upon trial and proof thereof given, by a
conversation led without the omission of any known duty, or commission of any
known sin: A public declaration of their knowledge in the fundamentalls and of
other points of Religion necessary to lead a life without scandal, together
with a narration of the experimental work of their Effectual Calling unto
Repentance and faith: And all Churches that are not constituted of only such
matter as this, are, to our Author, wrong constitute. In the former part of
this Examination, my labor is to discover the unwarrantablnesse and
contrariety of this Tenent, to the Word of God; And to show that all who being
of years does seriously profess the Christian faith, and subjection to be
disciplined and governed by the Ordinances of Christ, ought to be admitted into
the fellowship of his Visible Church, without any necessity of putting them to a
trial touching their inward spiritual estate, and judging upon the same
whether regenerat or not, as to that effect: And are to be dealt with, by
Pastors and private Christians in their respective ways as these that are
(...) within, 1 Cor. 5. 12. Upon this point I have insisted the more largely,
because not so fully and of purpose handled by others before. And it is, of a
truth, of greater importance then many are awarre of. It Is far from my thoughts
to charge our Independent Brethren with any perverse design in taking up and
following that opinion which I dispute against. Many of them, known to me by
their writings, especially these worthy Ministers in New England, Cotton,
Hooker, Shepherd, Norton, etc. I do from my heart reverence as godly and
faithful Servants of Christ, and as burning and shining lights in the Reformed
Church: But I think verily, the specious notion of a pure Visible Church has
duzled their eyes, and led them upon a way which in it self, beside that it
has no warrant in the Word of God, should it get footing in the world, tends
to the ruin and loss of many souls, and to the bringing of the greatest
prejudice to the present Cause and Churches, that any thing ever yet did since
the first Reformation from Popery: And I am persuaded that, albeit the
intention of those holy and reverend men abettors of it, be honest and from
simplicity of heart; Yet Satan is under-board (let no man offend at this I say,
Peter's example teaches us, that Satan may abuse good men's zeal and intentions
for Christ to wicked ends, contrair to his Cause) Satan, I say, is under-board
driving that wicked design. For if that be the the rule and model of
constituting the Visible Church, which they give us, are not all the Reformed
Churches by this means condemned of wrong constitution, and razed out of the
account of true Visible Churches, as not being conformed, nor ever having been
set up according to that model? And what could more gratify the Roman
Antichrist and his followers then to yield this? Again, is there not hereby a
ground laid to Question all Administration of Ordinances that has been in them,
and to justify the wild fancy of Seekers, denying that there is, or has been
for many ages any Church or Ordinances in the world? Moreover when as none of
the Reformed Churches at this day are thus constitute, if that model should
have place, must not either all of them be dissolved and cast down to the
ground, that new ones may be reared up of some few precious ones picked out of
their ruins, or to the effect they may consist only of persons regenerated and
sealed by the Spirit, all other persons who, albeit they profess the truth,
subject themselves to Ordinances, yet come not up so far as to obtain a
positive sentence, that they are regenerat, upon such (...), evidences, as
these men require, must be all cast out and banished the Church, put amongst
those that are (...), without, 1 Cor. 5. 12, left destitute of the custody of
spiritual Discipline, Pastoral instruction, inspection, and authority: And so
exposed to be a prey to Satan and his Emissaries, Jesuits, Heretics and
erroneous spirits whatsoever, to be led away unto what soever pernicious
soul-destroying errors, or to turn black Atheists? That this is no needless
fear, but a real consequent of this way, is too too clear, by the sad examples
of many in these times, who living without the pale of true Visible Churches
and not subject to the shepherds staff and vigilance, are run out into so
many wild errors in Religion as never age of the Christian Church saw the
like. Touching the other head, the Author in his Appendix pleads for two
things. 1. That the power and exercise of Church Government, should be in the
hands of the whole body, or community of Professors as well as of the Officers
appointed by Christ in the Church. A Tenent not heard of in the Christian
Church, until Morellius in France, Anabaptists, and Brownists fancied it, and,
as contrary to the Word of God (which to Ministers and other Officers appointed
by Christ in his Church as contradistinguished from common Professors,
attributes the name of Rulers, injoyns the work of Ruling, and prescribes the
rules of right governing, but never to the people) so cannot but unavoidably
draw after it much confusion and frequent schisms in the Church of God, whereof
experience affords plenty of examples. 2. That this power of Government
should be solely, entirely, and Independently in a single Congregation. A
Tenent that besides the contrariety thereof to the Word of God and the very
light of nature, carries with it a multitude of gross absurdities and
inconveniences. By this means let a particular Congregation of 30. or 20. or
fewer, 10. or 7. persons (for of so few may a Church, as our Brethren say, be
completely constitute) run into never so gross an error, as to Excommunicate
a person unjustly, to hold and maintain Heresy in Doctrine, to set up
idolatrous worship, there is no Ecclesiastic authoritative remedy left under
Heaven to rectify it: All Church Communion amongst the Churches of Christ is
taken away: The unity of Christ's sheepfold, the Visible Church upon earth is
dissolved, and Christ should have as many visible bodies as there are
particular Congregations: A Minister could not perform any Ministerial act out
of his own Congregation: Not Preach but as a private gifted Brother: Not
Administer the Sacraments out of his own Congregation, nor give the Sacrament
to a member of another Congregation (as Mr. Hooker ingenuously acknowledges,
Surv. Part. 2.) admission and ejection of members should only be into, and from
a particular Congregation: A child should be Baptized into a particular
Congregation only, and not into the Universal Church: And one Excommunicated,
cast out only of a particular Congregation, because the power extends no
further: Way is made to let in all errors and heresies, and as many Religions
as there are particular Congregations, and none can hinder it in an
Ecclesiastic way, and many more absurdities should follow, as Learned and
Godly men have judiciously observed. Contrair to those Assertions, is my second
Part employed for vindication of the true way of Government which Christ has
instituted in his Word, and in great mercy set up in this Church, to wit, by
his Ministers and Officers, not Lording over the people of God in a Papal or
Prelaticall way (as this Author either mistakes or calumniats) but
Ministerially under Christ the only Lord of his Church, Ruling them according
to the Rule of his Word, in a way of rational obedience: And that in a way of
communion and association of Churches, and subordination of lesser associations
unto greater and larger, as the Lord grants by his providence convenience. On
this I have not insisted so largly as the matter it self might afforded
occasion of discourse. Because it has been by learned and reverend men already
so fully debated, the proofs of the truth so clearly made out, and all contrary
Objections so abundantly discussed and satisfied, that I had little or nothing
to add: Yet I trust I have through the Lords help, in some measure, discovered
the insufficiency and invalidity of what is brought by this Author, who, I
wonder much should have adventured to present the world with such a discourse
upon the matter after so learned labors of others, as are extant upon the same.

I have also in two Appendices taken into consideration what is said upon these
same points by some in Aberdene lately turned aside from the truth, in a Letter
of theirs directed to some Godly men in the South, May 1652. The reasons moving
me hereto were 1. Because of their correspondence with Mr. Lockiers Piece, and
it seems they have been in a manner his proselytes. Then having some time had
more particular and intimat acquaintance with some of them, it would be to me
matter of much rejoicing in the Lord, if I could be isntrumental to discover to
them the we knesse of the grounds whereupon they have fallen from their
steadfastness, that so, if possible, which I wish from my heart, they might be
moved to remember whence they have fallen, to repent and to do their first
works: And finally t^ what ever should be the effect as to them, the
irrelevancy (...) the causes of their departure, being laid open, others might
see no cause why any should be shaken with their fall. And blessed be God there
are not yet many in this Land, that have followed them in this. What may be
afterward, the Lord who sees the thoughts of men's hearts afar off knows.
Times indeed are sifting: And the ignorance of many, the base earthly time
serving minds of others, unadvised principles in some, who, may be sees not yet
the far end of their consequences, may prove an advantage to seducements and
produce more defection from the profession of the truth, if temptations
continue, then as yet we have seen. But let temptations and trialls be what
they will, the Cause of Christ, even that part of it which I stand for here,
the order and Government of this Church, which he has appointed in his Word,
and thereby made known to this Church, shall stand firm. It has been a cup of
trembling to all that have hitherto laid siege against it, and a burdensome
stone to all that have at any time burdened themselves w^h it, to cut them in
pieces: and it will yet prove so to all who will adventure to do the like. And
turn their back upon it who will, Christ will not want his witnesses to bear
witness unto it; Even if need be, by not loving their lives unto the death. And
O but that man might count himself highly favored of God, whom he should
honor with that dignity! as that eminent servant of Jesus Christ Mr. Welsch
spoke in relation to himself of suffering for some branches of the same cause,
w^ged in his time. But having detained your Lordship too (...), I present this
testimony, I have given to it according to my weak measure, to you, commending
it not only to your favorable acceptance but also to your judicious censure,
and your self unto the Grace of God who has called you unto the u^ained love of
the truth, and is able to preserve you therein ^lameable unto the end. I am

Your Lords^ most humble Servant in the Lord, James Wood.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
ALbeit it has pleased Mr. Lockier to prefixe unto his Book two Epistles of
his own, and a third of three of his friends, containing many sharp invectives
against this Church, and strange Commentaries upon the Lords dispensations
toward us, as striking against our Church constitution and Government: Yet I
shall not detain the Reader with scanning of the same, being confident that
upon the clearing and vindicating of the truth in the following Treatise, these
discourses will be found by the Godly and Judicious to be not only bitter
against Brethren in affliction (proving them to be Physicians of no value) but
injurious to God and his Truth, in ascribing our calamities to our adhering
thereto, and judging of the truth of our Religion by the Lords outward
dispensations toward us.

An Index of the Sections.
PART. I. Concerning the Matter of the Visible Kirk.
SECT. I. MR. Lockier his Analysis and explication of the Text, Act. 15. 3. for
laying a ground to his Doctrine concerning the Matter of the Visible Kirk,
considered. p. 1. SECT. II. His Doctrine pondered and the state of the
controversy between us and the Independent Brethren touching the necessary
qualification of Members of the Visible Kirk cleared. p. 16. SECT. III. His
first Class of Arguments from Act. 9. 26. and 2. 47. and Heb. 3. 5, 6. brought
as directly holding forth his Doctrine, Answered. p. 31. SECT. IV. The Authors
Texts which he calls hints and shadows of his Doctrine. p. 40. SECT. V.
Examination of the proof of his Doctrine by induction. p. 56, SECT. VI.
Examination of his proofs brought under the name of reason. p. 83 SECT. VII. A
short modest reply to the bitter use he makes of his Doctrine. p. 102. SECT.
VIII. The Objections he makes to himself and his Answers thereto, considered.
p. 107. SECT. IX. Some Arguments confirming our Doctrine and everting the
adverse opinion about the necessary qualification of Members of the Visible
Kirk. p. 127. APPEND. Wherein is Examined so much (...) that Letter, written by
these of Aberdene, who lately have sep^ted from this Kirk upon the Independent
grounds, as relates to the p^sent Question touching the necessary
qualification of Members of the Visible Kirk. p. 168.
PART. II. Concerning Kirk Government.
SECT. I. MR. Lockier his first Assertion. That the Eldership within a
particular Congregation is not in most weighty things to exert power without
the consent and approbation of the Kirk whereof they are, considered. p. 194.
SECT. II. Examination of his 1, 2, 3, 4. Argument. p. 203. SECT. III. His 5,
Argument discussed. p. 226. SECT. IV. His Argument from common testimony
considered and Answered. p. 251. SECT. V. His Answers to some Objections made
against his Assertion from some Passages of Scripture, examined. p. 255. SECT.
VI. His Answers to some other Objections made by way of reason, examined. p.
263. SECT. VII. His second Assertion touching Presbyteries of many particular
Congregations combined, and the true state of the controversy touching this
matter betweeen Presbyterians and Independents laid forth. p. 283. SECT. VIII.
His first ground against a Presbytery having authoritative juridicall power
over more Congregations, that it is without foundation in the Word, examined.
p. 288. SECT. IX. Examination of his 2. medium, that what power of ruling an
Eldership has, it has it in the same extent with its Pastoral power. p. 311.
SECT. X. Examination of his 3. medium, that it destroys the end for which Kirk
power is. p. 317. SECT. XI. Examination of his 4. medium, that a particular
Congregation is complete and sufficient in it self without an associate
Presbytery over more Congregations. p. 325. SECT. XII. A reply to his Answers
to some Objections wherein separation from, not only the Kirk of Scotland, but
all the Protestant Presbyterian Kirks, as Idolatrous, is driven at. p. 340.
APPEND. Wherein is Examined what is said in the forementioned Letter of the new
Independents of Aberdene, for the Independent Congregationall, and against the
Presbyteriall way of Kirk-Government. p. 360.
AN INDEX Of the places of SCRIPTURE Vindicated or Explained.
page NUmb. 11. 17. 227. Deuteronomy. 29. 2, 3, 4. 10, 11, 12, 13. 133. Prove. 9. 3, 4.
155. Isa. 66. 16. to the end. 97. Jerem. 12. 9. 101. 31. 33. 53, 56. Dan. 12.
1. 101. Mal. 1. 11. 93. Mat. 3. 5. 6. 134. 7. 181. 13. 24. 47. 163. 16, 17, 18,
19. 40. 235. 18. 15, 16, 17, 18. 227. 364. Luke 7. 30. 181. John 3. 26. 137.
Acts 1. 15. 23. 289. 26. 244. 2. 38. 119. 136. 47. 34. 4. 35. 292. 6. 3, 4, 5,
6. 294. 8. 13. 118. 9. 26. 31. 11. 20, 21, 23. 9. 25. 11. 13. 2, 3. 259. 41.
44. 104. 14. 23. 246. 27, 28. 12. 15. 8. 11. 16, 17, 18, 19. 14. 22, 23. 239.
371. 27. 285. 28. 297. 16. 4. 242. 20. 28. 32. 66. 276. 296. 312. 21. 25. 242.
Romans 1. 6, 7, 8, 9. 60. 173. 10. 14. 17. 156. 1 Cor. 1. 2. to 8. 68. 3. 10. to
17. 86. 22. 216. 4. 4, 5. 62. 5. 4. 237. 6. 18, 19, 20. 173. 12, 13, 14. 179. 2
Cor. 1. 24. 27^ 2. 6. 236. 5, 18, 19, 20. 156. 6. 16. 91. Gal. 1. 22. 74. 4. 9.
64. 6. 1. ib. Ephesians. 1. 13. ib. 2. 20, 22. 84. 3. 21. 92. Phil. 1. 6, 72. 1 These.
2. 13, 14. 74. 108. 5. 12. 324. 2 These. 3. 15. 178. 1 Timothy 2. 20. 125. 3. 5.
90. 4. 14. 255. 309. 5. 22. 260. 17. 314. 2 Timothy 1. 6. 258. 2. 10. 159. 20.
124. 21. 163. 24, 25. 156. Tit. 1. 5. 260. Heb. 3. 5, 6. 37. 7. 7. 258. 8. 10.
53, 54. 13. 7. 273. 1 Pet. 1, 2, 3. 74. 5. 3. 212. 273. 13. 74. Rev. 3. 10.
100. 4. 53. 11. 1, 2. 44. 76. 13. 6. 104. 19. 11. ib. 21. 101.

EXAMINATION OF Mr. LOCKYERS LECTURE on ACTS 15. Verse. 3. Concerning the MATTER
of the VISIBLE CHURCH.
SECTION I. Wherein is examined his Analysis and Explication of the Text, for
laying a Ground to his Doctrine, concerning the Matter of the VISIBLE CHURCH.
Lockyer, for grounding his Doctrine he intended, pitch upon this Passage of
Scripture; which I am ready to think few else would have dreamed much
appearance of weight could been laid on for that purpose. Sure, a man that
would in Preaching hold forth to the People of God Doctrine as truth and
received from the Lords mouth, and would convince people that it is such, had
need be sure that the Scripture he presents for it, does indeed carry it,
either expressly, or by necessary and evident consequence. Otherwise, as he
does much wrong his own cause, giving his hearers that are judicious occasion
to suspect the Doctrine, can have little or no ground at all in Scripture, when
they see that which is presented to them as the very seat of i^* gives it no
light: so he does notably abuse the Word of God, and I may say, in a kind,
take his Name in vain, before his people, by alleging the Lord to speak and
give a testimony to a point, by a Scripture wherein it is not at all intended.
Yea let a point of Doctrine be most true and never so certain in it self (such
as that maintained in this Lecture is not, as we trust, through the Lords
assistance, to make evident) yet to Preach it from a Text that speaks it not,
is an abuse of the Word of God. If there be not just cause of charging this
upon Mr. Lockier here, I leave it to be judged by all discerning and unpartiall
Readers from what follows in this Section.

Lockiers purpose intended in this Lecture is, to treat of the proper and
allowed matter of a visible Church; which he will have to be such persons only,
as are truly converted, sanctified, and sealed by the Spirit of God as his; at
least so far as men truly converted and very spiritual can discern, (of which
additionall qualification afterward) and his Text for this Doctrine is, Acts
15. v. 3 And being brought on their way by the Church, they passed through
Phenice and Samaria, declaring the conversion of the Gentiles: and they caused
great joy unto all the brethren. Now let us see what the Author brings for
evidencing his point, or any thing like it, to ly in, this Text.

The principal things (says he) in this verse. are these, viz. a Church of the
New Test. described by its proper matter, and by a proper effect and operation,
which this has upon such who are indeed turned unto the Lord, and able to
discern spiritual beauty. and glory: it causes great joy to all such. [And
being brought on by the Church] what the matter of this Church is, read the
next words and they will tell you, -- they declared the conversion of the
Gentiles, page 2. and 3. begin. Ans. That the Holy Ghost here intends as the
principal purpose, to describe a visible. Church of the New Test. by the
proper constituent matter thereof, is but the mere conceit of the Author forced
upon the Text, and no ways deduceable from the words themselves; the genuine
purpose of the words being simply to note some circumstances of Paul and
Barnabas and the other Commissioners joined with them, their journey from
Antioch to Jerusalem, whether they were sent for resolution upon the Question
then in controversy at Antioch. As 1. The Christian courteous respect that the
Church at Antioch put upon them, they were brought on their way. 2. What these
commissioners did as they were on their journey: that they declared to the
Christians that lay in their way, that same thing that they had declared before
at Antioch, Chap. 14. v. 27. viz. that God had been mightily with the Preaching
of the Gospel even amongst the Gentiles, so that many of them (as the Story
relates the particular countries and places, Chap. 13, and 14.) were converted
to the Christian Religion. 3. What effect this produced amongst the Christians
to whom it was declared: that they had great joy at these tidings, that the
Kingdom of Christ was so spreading, and that even the Gentiles were brought in
to it. Here indeed are grounds of useful points of Doctrine: but what is all
to that which Mr. Lockier intends, the description of a visible Church by its
proper matter? A Church visible to Mr. Lockier is a particular Congregation
participating together the Ordinances of Christ. Does it any ways appear that
the Spirits intention in these words, is to describe unto us what sort of
persons were admitted into the constitution of such a Congregation? viz. as he
would have it, not any professors whosoever, but such only as were tried and
found, by truly converted, and very spiritual men, able to discern and judge,
to be truly regenerate. What evidence is brought to show that this is intended
in the Text? This, to wit, that first it is said, being brought on by the
Church, and then, says he, what the matter of this Church is, the next words
tells, they declared the conversion of the Gentiles. Answer. What? must these
latter words be a description of that thing which is mentioned in the first, i.
e. the Church, viz. of Antioch (for that is the Church spoken of there)
because, forsooth, the one follows immediately after the other in the series
of the narration? I must say this is strange Logic, and interpreting of
Scripture. I am not here to deny but the Church of Antioch did consist of such
as are here mentioned, i. e. converted Gentiles: but my purpose is to show how
impertinently the Author has chosen and made use of this Scripture to be his
Text for his Doctrine concerning the matter of a visible Church.

Luke is not in these two Clauses of this Verse, pitched upon by Mr. Lockier as
a ground of his Doctrine, relating the words of one man's continued discourse;
so as the one part of them might be taken as exegetick of the other; or as
intended to express a description of the thing contained in the other; but is
relating two diverse actions of two distinct p^rties, as circumstances of Paul
and Barnabas journey: one, real, of the Church of Antioch their Christian
courtesy in bringing them on a part of their way: The other (so to call it)
verbal, viz. the discourse that Paul and Barnabas themselves had amongst the
Christians by whom they passed, viz. that the Gentiles were converted to the
Christian Faith: so that any man, that has but half an eye, may easily
perceive that these terms Church and converted Gentiles, stands not in the
words in relation one to another as a definitum and a definitio, or as a
compound and the matter of which it is compounded. Therefore it is but a
forcing of the Text, to make up of these two this Doctrine as intended in the
words [A visible Church consists of converted ones as its proper matter] what
ever truth may be in it of it self. This, I said before, I am not questioning
now: but would discover the inconsideratnes of choosing and making use of this
Text for that purpose, and adds but this: seeing in preaching the Word of GOD
aright, any enunciative Doctrine which is propounded from a Text, if it ly not
in the Text, in express and formal, or equivalent terms, yet should be
deduceable by good consequence from it: I humbly desire that Mr. Lockier would
build a clear Syllogism upon any enunciation in this Text, inferring this
Conclusion, [the proper matter of a visible Church is converted ones] for in
this Text it is not said expressly and immediately, as he would seem to say in
the next progress in these words: The complexion of a visible Church under the
Gospel is here said to be conversion: the constituting matter, converted ones.
This much might suffice for answer to this Text, as it is alleged by Mr.
Lockier for to be a proof of the Doctrine intended in this Lecture: for,
unless it be first supposed that conversion of the Gentiles is here mentioned
and set down as a description of the visible Church mentioned before; all the
pains taken by him afterward to clear what is meant by conversion, is to little
purpose, for proof of the point intended, as from this Text. Yet we shall be at
the pains to take into consideration what follows in the opening up of the
Text, lest we seem purposely to pass over any thing which may be alleged to
speak for the point maintained by the Author. I confess it had been fitter
that the controversy had been first stated: but I am resolved to follow the
tract of Mr. Lockiers discourse, that I may shun the smallest appearance of
wronging him. Go we on then.

They declared the conversion of the Gentiles: what conversion was this? A mere
outside conversion, page 3. Nay, would the Author say, an inside truly
gracious, heart-conversion. Ans. 1. Do we, any of us, whom the Author takes for
his Adversaries, say that no more at all is meant here but a mere outside
conversion? He but fains an Adversary and wrongeth us, by intimating so much.
We conceive thus, that by Conversion here is meant a forsaking and
relinquishing of the Heathnish, and a turning unto and embracing the Christian
Religion (as the Nether Dutch Notes on the place expound) De Bekeeringe] ^el,
tot de Christilick Religie. i. e. Conversion] viz. to the Christian Relion.
no ways excluding, but comprehending under it also the inward heart-turning
by true faith to Christ: but withal we think it cannot be warrantably said,
that when Paul and Barnabas made this declaration of the conversion of the
Gentiles, they meant that all and every one of these Gentiles turned from
Heathenism to the Christian Religion, had also the inward work of gracious
conversion and faith in their heart. This had been contrary to truth; for some
of the converted Heathens, no doubt, had no more but the profession of
Christianity, the preaching of the Gospel being as a draw net that catches good
fishes and bad together, and the outward Kingdom of GOD, as a field wherein are
tares and wheat growing together. Nor yet can it be said that Paul and Barnabas
in that declaration meant, that all and every one of these Gentiles they spoke
of, were such, viz. true heartconverts to their positive judgment, and so far
as men truly converted and very spiritual were able to discern. This appears
not out of the words of the Text: for first, I think the Apostle speaks of
Conversion as including gracious heart-conversion, in the verity of the thing
or Object: and not only in the charitative judgment of discerning men; tho not
restrictively. Mr. Lockiers additament, viz. [ According to what a Christian
can discern of a Christian, or in so far as men, etc.] is his own and not the
Texts; yea I conceive it is contrary to the intention of the Text: because I no
ways doubt but the Apostles meant positively that there was amongst these
Gentiles heart-conversion in the verity of the thing. But that which Mr.
Lockier says by his additament may be contradictorily opposite to that: men
may be accounted heart-converts in the charitable judgment of very discerning
Christians, and yet not be heart-converts indeed. 2. Granting that to be the
meaning which Mr. Lockier says to be, in his additament; yet can any thing be
alleged from the words, that will import, it must be understood universaliter
de omnibus and singulis, i. e. universally of all and every one of these
Gentiles: and may not be understood as spoken only de multitudine communiter
and indefi^ite, i. e. of the multitude of them? yet forasmuch as Mr. Lockier
has not alleged, much less proved the former hitherto; he has alleged
nothing to his purpose in hand. And yet, although he has both alleged and
proven this much, he had said but little to his purpose; unless he could also
prove that the Apostles, in that declaration, were speaking of these converted
Gentiles with relation to stating in visible Church Membership: which thing he
only supposes, but does not so much as hint at a proof thereof from this Text.

Conversion here spoken of (which yet he needed not prove, for we have granted
more of it then he craves) that we may see if there be any thing therein making
for his main purpose. The 1. lies in these words: Surely if the Brethren had
apprehended no more in them (i. e. the Gentiles, of whom Paul and Barnabas
spoke) viz. then a mere outside conversion, they would have had little matter
of great joy. Answ. 1. We say not that the apprehending of no more, was the
matter of this their great joy: but will the Author say, that, unless they had
apprehended more then outside conversion in all and every one of them (which is
a thing he must of necessity take along with him, if he will say any thing to
his purpose For his mind is that these Gentiles are spoken of in relation, and
as matter of a visible Church, and his doctrine is, that none other, not one
other, no not in a whole Church, are fit matter of a visible Church but such as
are, etc.
) they would had little matter for great joy? I think he will be advised before
he say so. 2. Nor am I of the mind that outside conversion, i. e. embracing of
the Profession of the Gospel and Christian Religion, is so little a matter of
joy to the people of God, as the Author seems to make account. Sure, it could
not but be matter of right great joy to the LORDS true people of the Jews* for
to see Japhet persuaded to dwell in the tents of Shem, (i. e.) the Gentiles by
embracing the profession of the Gospel added to the Commonwealth of Israel,
and fellowship of the Church of God. And it shall be no small matter of joy to
Gentile-Christians when they shall see the body of the Jews ingraffed again
into the Church. Even outward professing of, and submitting to the Gospel, is
honorable to Christ in the world, and so is spoken of in Scripture: though it
alone be not the full duty of men, nor sufficient to save them.

let us take terms as they ly, and see how other Scriptures do explain them)
yet in the following discourse, I find all runs upon one term, viz.
conversion, or, converted ones: But to insist upon every such small thing, is
not worth the while. Let us see what is said further upon that, what these
converted ones (says he) were according to what Christian can discern of
Christian is the thing to be inquired into page 3. Ans. Nay, not this only, but
two other things also, ought to have been inquired into and made out. 1.
Supposing that true heart-conversion is understood here; that the Apostles in
their declaration affirmed this universally of all and every one of these
Gentiles. 2. That in declaring and affirming this, they did speak with relation
to their stating in Church Membership: at least that the Historian Luke reports
it in that relation. Neither of which the Author proves, or so much as once
undertaketh to prove: so that, what follows, tho granted, makes little for
the point he drives at. But we go on.

Paul and Barnabas who were master builders, and surely very seeing men, that
they might not make a mere report, took of those converted ones with them, were
brought on by the Church. We tell you (as if they had said) of such glad
tidings touching the Gentiles: but what they are, see your selves: here they
are: discourse with them: see if they have not the same soul-complexion with
your selves, whether they have not received the same spirit of Adoption, owning
and experiencing the same grace of God which ye do. Ans. Here Is a pretty
fiction or Poesy, but nothing of Lukes Text: yea but something quite contrair
to it. 1. The Author says Paul and Barnabas, that they might not make a mere
report (viz. touching the Gentiles conversion, but might show living present
instances thereof) took of those converted ones with them. What hint can he
give us from the Text for this? it says a far other thing, viz. first that
they ( i. e. the Church of Antioch) ordained some in joint commission for to go
to Jerusalem about the question then in controversy: and then, that these
Commisioners were brought on their way by the Church. i. e. (as Grotius
exponeth it will, aliquousque deducti a fidelium quibusdam, i. e.) they were
convoyed on a part of their journey by some of the Church. This was a
Christian, affectionat courtesy, and respect put upon them by the Church: So
Mr. Lockier himself exponeth it, page 2. l. 1, 2, 3. forgetting himself in so
short bounds. 2. What hint or ground of the least conjecture can he point us at
in the Text, that these Commissioners, when they told the Conversion of the
Gentiles, did set up some of those Gentiles, before the Churches by which they
passed, to be discoursed with, tried, and examined concerning their
soul-complexion, the Spirit of Adoption, their experiences in the work of
grace? nugae. 3. He will have those Gentiles whom he thinks the Commissioners
brought thus upon the stage, to be the same by whom they were brought on their
way. But first, how shall we know that those that brought them on their way
were Gentiles and not Jews? for sure, the Church at Antioch did not consist of
Gentiles only, and it is not like that the whole Church of Antioch went along
with them, and was thus set up. Again, how will it be made out, that those who
brought them on their way, went so far on with them as Phenice and Samaria,
where the Declaration was made? Hug. Grot. a man well skilled in the Greek
Language, tho little to be respected in Dogmaticks of Divinity, gives us to
understand the contrary, from the genuine signification of the word; for says
he (...) i. e. alioquousque deducti a quibusdam fidelium: nam (...) non est se
comitem dare itineri, sed honoris causa aliquousque prosequi: much more might
be noted in this passage, but enough. I leave it to all indifferent Readers, if
this be not to do violence to the Word of God, and to make the Scripture speak
what a man himself fancies: if not, I know not what is. Yet when all is done,
one thing is omitted by Mr. Lockier in this pretty fiction, which, as is the
old Scottish Proverb, is the tongue of the Trump. For to all that he makes to
have been the substance of the Commissioners Declaration, he should have added
this also as spoken by them, And we assure you that all and every one of the
Gentiles converted to Christian Religion, at least all of them that are
admitted to the fellowship of Visible Churches, not one of them excepted, no,
not one, in a whole Church, are just such as these you see, of that same
soul-complexion, etc. Without this, the rest will not give a certain sound to
his purpose. And there is as much ground for this as for the rest in the Text,
and that is nec vola, nec vestigium.

That there was an effectual work (viz. of true saving Grace) wrought in the
hearts of those my Text speaks of, I judge will sufficiently appear, by
comparing with my Text these Scriptures, Act. 11. 20, 21, 23. Ans. 1. Mr.
Lockier supposes, at least ought suppose, if he would have his Argument here
hold good, that these spoken of in his Text, and these spoken of, Act. 11. 20.
the Grecians, are the same persons. But first, some judicious Interpreters,
namely the Nether-Dutches, understand by these, the Jews that used the Greek
tongue, and the Greek version of the Bible. And indeed the name is (...),
ordinarily used for those, and not (...) used for the Gentiles: though I know
Beza and others judge otherwise. But however, understand we Gentiles; yet
these were but a small part of them spoken of in Mr. Lockiers Text, whom Hugo
Grotius, on the word (...) in the Text, reckons up thus, n. Cornelii,
Antiochensium, Cypriorum, Pisidarum, Pamphiliorum, Lycaniorum, Lyciorum. 2.
What ever they be, that are spoken of there, Act. 11. yet it can not be proven
from any thing in these verses cited, that all and every one of them, had an
effectual work of saving Grace wrought in their hearts. Nay, nor will the
Author himself abide by so much; but will come presently in with this
qualification, according to what Christian can discern of Christian: which may
be no effectual saving work at the heart at all. I deny not absolutely that
there was such effectual work wrought in hearts amongst them: But I deny that
the Text imports that there was such a work in the hearts of all and every one
of them. Ye will say, what then mean these expressions? 1. the hand (i. e. the
mighty power of the Lord) was with them, viz. that Preached the Gospel, ver.
21. 2. A great number believed and turned to the Lord, ibidem. 3. When he came
and had seen the Grace of God, v. 23. Ans. 1. It was no small work of the hand
of God to bring these men to embrace the Profession of the Christian Religion.
Yet I doubt not but the hand of God was effectual to more. Only I say, it
appears not from the Text that it was effectual to both in a like extension.
2. We know that men are said in Scripture to believe, and to be converted in
respect of serious profession: yet I deny not but there was here also, saving
heart-believing and Conversion. But it cannot be demonstrate out of the Text,
that all of them believed and were converted in this sense. 3 By the grace of
God, that Barnabas is said to have seen, is meant the effectual working
thereof in bringing so many to embrace the Doctrine of the Gospel; as also, I
make no doubt, captivating hearts to the obedience of it: but whether all and
every one of their hearts, is not said. Nay, the very words of Barnabas
exhortation may seem to give an hint that he spoke as supposing it might be
otherwise with some of them, he exhorted them all with purpose of heart to
cleave unto the Lord. With purpose of heart, i. e. (says Beza) Non frigide nec
simulate, sed syncero and ardenti studio, quod Hebraei totius cordis
appellatione significant, ut ve^runt Syrus and Arabs Interpretes. As if he had
said, ye profess now the faith of Jesus Christ: see that ye content not your
selves with profession alone, which may evanish: but adhere to him with a
sincere, fervent, constant, heart-resolution.

The next verse (viz. Acts 11. 25.) tells us that he found out Saul and brought
him to this Church of Antioch, where they abode a whole year: and these
Converts were first called Christians. Barnabas is here said to be a man full
of the Holy Ghost, and therefore able to taste his communion, -- and he and
Paul together, might be competently able to give a judgment what they found
amongst these first Christians; and I think it is very dangerous to say, that as
far as they could apprehend, these first Christians had not both name and
thing, for which commended, and in which by these worthies joyed in, page 5.
Answ. Here is, I may say, much sand without lyme. 1. The Gentiles of whose
Conversion, Act. 15. 3. speaks, were of many more places besides Antioch. Now
suppose all here alleged were granted; what evidence can Mr. Lockier give us,
that Paul and Barnabas, or any such other persons competentlie able to judge,
had stayed as long in every one of these other places? 2. But to hold our
selves to this Church of Antioch: I confess indeed it were dangerous
universally to say, that these first Christians at Antioch had not (I say not
only, as Mr. Lockier has it, as far as able men could apprehend, but) in very
deed, both name and thing, i. e. gracious heart-Christianity: But I see it not
so very dangerous to say that not all and every one of them had so much. Nay, I
think it very dangerous positively to say they had: for it is clearly contrary
to what the Scripture speaks of the effect and success of the Preaching of
the Gospel. and to many passages of this very Story of the Acts. 3. True, Paul
and Barnabas were discerning men, able to give a good judgment in so much
time, what they found amongst those Christians. But what evidence can the
Author give us from the Text, that this was their intended work during that
space, to examine and try what heart was in every one of these Professors, and
that in relation to constituting them a Visible Church after that trial, and
judgment passed thereupon? The only work we find mentioned in the Text, ver.
26. is their teaching, they taught much people. And there is nothing in it so
much as hinting at this, that they were not in state of a Visible Church,
until, after that whole years trial, Paul and Barnabas had given judgment
what they did find amongst them as to their inward spiritual estate. Nay,
there is a right apparent intimation that all along that years space, they were
a Visible Church and so esteemed: a whole year they assembled themselves with
the Church, or, in the Church, (...). 4. I will note but another thing here.
The Author intimates that Barnabas, his being full of the Holy Ghost, is
spoken of in that Text in relation to, and as the Principle of tasting, trying,
and judging these Christians soul-complexion for Church communion with them,
this is a ^eer forgerie: It being clear as day light, that it is mentioned as
the reason and Principle of the zealous exhorting them to sincere and constant
continuing in the faith.

In particular Churches some competent judgment may be made of every
particular member, by able men in a long tract of time: And so are these
worthies else where said with this Church to have had intimat communion, Act.
14. 27, 28. -- And there they abode a long time with the Disciples, page 5, 6.
Answ. I wonder how M^. Lockier, speaking of the judgment touching Church
members, their qualification as members, talks of it as given by some that are
able men: when as the way, maintained by his side, of judging and admitting
Church members, requires this to be done by the decisive votes of all and
every one in the Church: all which cannot be supposed to be such able men as he
speaks of. But to the purpose in hand: true, able men in a long tract of time,
having conversed with every particular member of a Church, may be able to give
a good judgment of them: but the matter in question is, in thesi, whether such
a judgment grounded upon a trial of so long a time, must be antecedent to
their stateing in Church Membership. And in the hypothesis of the particular
now in hand, whether Paul and Barnabas, had so long a time intimat communion
with the Antiochian professors, and thereby gave a judgment upon them
concerning their spiritual estate, before they were constitute in a Visible
Church. This Mr. Lockier should have alleged and made good, if he would had a
solid ground for his Doctrine intended. But does the Passage cited, Acts 14.
27, 28. say any thing for this purpose? Now I report my self for judgment upon
this, to any Reader of ordinary common capacity; let him but take this to
consideration: that before the time of this abode at Antioch, mentioned Acts
14. 28. Barnabas, after the work of the Gospel begun at Antioch, had come
thither sent from Jerusalem: he and Paul had Preached there together a whole
year, they had gone in commission sent by the Antiochian Christians, with a
relief to the distressed Brethren at Jerusalem, Chap. 11. and had returned
again, Chap. 12. 25. And having stayed there some time, by special Divine
appointment they are sent abroad through the Nations about to Preach the
Gospel: and having after a long peregrination returned again to Antioch, then
is said that Chap. 14. 28. and there they abode a long time with the Disciples.
Now were not the Antiochians stated in a Visible Church, until judgment was
given upon them after intimat communion in this time of abode? I might bring a
multitude of Arguments to prove the contrary from several passages of the
Story going before: But I need go no further then the immediate preceding
Verse, v. 27. When they were come and had gathered the Church. But it may happily
be said that the Author brings this Passage to show, not what trial and
knowledge Paul and Barnabas had of them before they were stated Members in a
Church Visible; but what they might had of them to be a warrantable ground of
their report made touching them, Chap. 15. 3. Answer. If so, then say I he
alleges it to no purpose as to his scope in this Lecture: for his intention is
to have Paul and Barnabas, Chap. 15. 3. speaking of the qualification of these
Gentiles in relation to their stating in a Visible Church, and accordingly
thereupon to build a general Doctrine touching the proper matter of a Visible
Church.

Add (says he) to this, Acts 15. where you shall see further what is solemnly
asserted of these Converts in several verses, as v. 8. And God which knows
the hearts bears them witness, giving them the Holy Ghost, even as he did
unto us, and put no difference between us and them, purifying their hearts by
faith. Here is a Text to some purpose: God which knows the hearts bears
them witness, etc. That they have the like powerful spiritual receptions
with the best of them at Jerusalem: And indeed I think it dangerous for any to
affirm that all these expressions might not mean effectual grace, or else be
spoken of some only, but not of the whole. Compare with this, v. 11. 16, 17,
18, 19. what he concludes, Wherefore my sentence is, etc. page 6, 7. Ans. Here
is indeed a Text to some; yea to a very great purpose, viz. for the end for
which it was spoken by the Apostle Peter, that is, to prove that Circumcision
and the rest of the yoke of the Ceremonial Law, ought not to be imposed upon
the Gentiles converted to the Faith. The Argument is clear and undeniable. GOD
the Searcher of hearts has born witness to the Gentiles by giving to them the
Holy Ghost, as well as to the Circumcised Jews, and without putting difference,
purifying their hearts through faith in JESUS CHRIST Preached by the Gospel
alone, without Circumcision and other Ceremonial Performances. Therefore it is
his will, that Circumcision, etc. be not imposed upon them, as not being
necessary to Justification and Salvation. This is the plain and sole intention
and drift of that Passage of Scripture. But sure I am it is to little or no
purpose, for Mr. Lockiers purpose: For howsoever it be true that it is clear
from this Text, that there was a work of effectual saving grace amongst these
Gentiles spoken of, and I do agree with him this far; that it were dangerous,
yea most clearly false and contradictory to the words of the Text, to affirm
that these expressions might not mean effectual saving grace; yet I say first,
that the Apostle Peter was not here speaking of this work of saving grace, as
the necessary qualification for constituting persons capable of Visible
Church Membership. 2. Albeit, in these expressions spoken of the Gentiles,
there be not definitely a restriction to some only (as M^. Lockier would seem
to insinuate that we say) yet the expressions are such as may be verified being
understood of some only, and not of all and every one: because they are
indefinite. Any Boy that hes learned the Rudiments of Logic knows that there
are enunciations particular, which speaks of some of a kind, definitely: and
enunciations universal, which speaks of all and every one of a kind,
definitely: and enunciations indefinite which in their form, speaks neither of
some only, nor of all and every one of a kind definitely, but indefinitely of
the kind: and that such indefinite enunciations, may be truly exponed, either
particularly of some only, or universally, of all and every one, proratione
materiae contingentis vel necessariae, according as the nature of the things,
contingent or necessary, leads us. But now, will the Author, upon serious
deliberation, say that which he hes uttered here, viz. that what the Apostle
speaks in the Text of the Gentiles, indefinitly, viz. that God had purified
their hearts by believing, must be understood universally of all and every one
of them that were turned to Christianity? Nay, I know he will salve the matter
with his qualification, according to what Christian can discern of Christian,
and so far as men, etc. But 1. This is an addition to the Text, whereof there
is not the least insinuation in the Text. 2. Yea, the Text speaks clearly of
such a purifying of hearts, as is in veritate rei, seu objecti, i. e. indeed:
because it speaks of it in relation to the knowledge and Judgment of GOD the
searcher of hearts, whose Judgment is always according to Truth. But men
esteemed to have hearts purified, in the charitative judgment of men, let them
be the most discerning men, may notwithstanding not have purifyed hearts indeed.

Having thus painfully and plainly laid the foundation by the Word, and by a
simple and sincere judgment thereupon, without the least respect to any party,
or self-interest in the world, as he knows to whom in this, as in all my
ways, I desire humbly to refer my self, I build thereupon this doctrine, etc.
page 7. To which. It may be humbly conceived that the Author might have spared
to speak of his painfulnesse and plainness, etc. and suffered the deed to
speak alone for it self, and other men to judge thereupon, remembering that, Let
another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth. But to pass this, grant that
there has been some painfulnesse in the preceding Discourse: yet if therein
there has been plainly, or at all by the Word of God, a foundation laid for the
ensuing Doctrine, I submit to be judged by any impartial discerning man, upon
consideration of what has been answered.

Thus I have done with the first Section, wherein if I have been somewhat
large, yet I desire and hope the Reader will pardon it, considering that the
Discourse I have been examining is laid down as the foundation of the Doctrine
following: and that, besides the Text, sundry other Scriptures brought in to
make the Text speak for it, were to be considered.

SECTION II. Mr. Lockyers Doctrine pondered, and the State of the Controversy
between Us and the INDEPENDENT BRETHREN, touching the necessary Qualification
of Members of the VISIBLE CHURCH, cleared.
Lockiers determination, touching the matter of a Visible Church, is page 7.
fine and page 8. propounded in these words: The proper and allowed matter of a
Visible Church, now in the days of the Gospel, is persons truly converted,
such as God, who knows the hearts of all men, can bear witness of, as indeed
sealed for his, by his Holy Spirit. (thus far he has in a different Character,
and then adds, it would seem, by way of some explication) I say, this is the
matter we ought now to take, to raise again the Tabernacle of David, and none
other, not one other, no not in a whole Church, so far as men truly converted,
and very spiritual, are able to discern and judge.

i. e. of persons not truly converted, etc. then, to borrow his Arguments
brought afterward. 1. Either Christ was not the Rock and foundation of that
Church, and that Church not a building being and bearing upon him, as a
superstruction: or else then there might have been no Symmetrie, but Antilogie
and Antistasie; no agreement, but a fighting of the materials of the building
with the foundation, and one with another: and yet the building might stand
well enough, such incongruous superstructions, and unsuiteable to the
foundation, were good enough then. 2. Either that Church was not the Church of
the living God, such as in which God lives, dwells and walks: or then God did
live and dwell in dead persons, who only make a Profession of Religion: and
then, either the Church was not a pillar and ground to bear up truth unto the
world: or dead persons, who only made a Profession of Religion, might have done
that office well enough. 3. Then either in the Church of God there was none, at
least there might have been a true Church offering, and yet no pure offering,
no offering spiritualor then a pure offering, i. e. service spiritual, holy
and acceptable unto God, might have been offered by persons who only did
profess Religion, were dead stones, having nothing of spirituality in them,
but mere formality: and so hypocritical, and amongst the number of them that
are most abominable. Let the Author, if he hold that difference, intimated in
his restriction, between the Churches of the Old and New Testam. extricate
himself of these things: which, I am much deceived, if he shall be able to do,
unless either he retract his restriction, or otherwise shore upon some
Socinian and Anabaptistick Fancy concerning the ancient Church.

Lockier clearly asserteth that the necessary and essential qualification,
absolutely requisite to constitute persons, matter, or in a capacity to be
Members of a Visible Church, is true saving Grace known to God the searcher of
hearts: and that is such grace in the verity of the thing, and not only in the
judgment of charity. Others in the Independent way, have spoken more warily in
this matter; though indeed I confess I do not see how, considering their
prosecution of the point and the Arguments they use in it, they do not run into
this same in the issue. However, it may hence appear, it was not for naught
that the Author said in his Epistle to the Reader, That he has spoken with more
plain dealing then some other of his Brethren who have wrote of this Subject.

viz. so far as men converted are able to discern and judge. Which seems to
import a resolving of the matter into the judgment of charity. Ans. This
seems not sufficiently to salve the matter, for this additament seems to be
brought in rather to express the mean whereby persons so qualified as is said
before ( viz. truly converted, etc.) are to be found out; then to express any
thing in the objective qualification of the matter of a visible Church. And
certainly the Arguments brought afterward by the Author to confirm his Thesis,
speak all for men godly in the truth of the thing, as will appear when we come
at them.

men truly converted and very spiritual. All Writers of the Independent way,
have not, I confess, come to my hand: but of these I have seen, I remember of
none that says this much: so that it seems to be a new conception of his
own, touching which I humbly desire satisfaction in these particulars. 1. By
this, when a person desires to be admitted a member of a Church, it follows
that his qualification is to be judged, not by the estimation of the whole
Church, but of some special members thereof: which is point blank contrary to
the Independent way of Government. The consequence I prove. 1. thus: Either it
must be said that all and every one of the Church are truly converted de
facto: or if that be not said, this which we have said does unavoidably follow:
but the former will not be undertaken by the Author; because it is point blank
contrary to plain Scripture, telling us that many are called but few chosen:
and this is confessed by such as are most peremptory for his way of Church
constitution Barrow discov. false Church, p. ^0. Ainsworth.
. Objection. Ay, but all are true Converts in the judgment of charity. Answ.
Such explanation is not mentioned or hinted by the Author when he speaks to
this point of the Judges, by whose estimation Church-mater is to pass. 2. I
prove the consequence thus: Mr. Lockier speaks of such men to be Judges, as
are not only truly converted, but also very spiritual. Now very spiritual
imports, I conceive, in plain English, if not a superlative degree, yet
certainly somewhat above the mere positive; to be very spiritual, is more, yea
much more then simply to be really and truly spiritual: So that either he
must of necessity say that a Visible Church must consist of such only, who are
not only, simply true converts; but also much more, far advanced Christians;
and so new born Babes, bruised reeds, and smoking flax, must be held out,
crushed, and quenched; or that which we said must follow. Now I suppose yet
further that most part of the Congregation be spiritual, but in the positive
degree, and only two or three, or a few number in comparison, be very
spiritual (certainly this may be by our Brethrens way of constituting a Church:
for they grant such as have any thing, the least thing in truth of Christ
appearing in them, are not to be excluded) then the resolution and judging of
the whole business, must be devolved upon these few. Nay I must press it yet
further: Albeit it may be granted that when a Church is now completely
constitute in its integrality, and organized with all its members, it cannot be
well supposed, but there will be therein some such men, very spiritual; at
least Rulers; whom if so be they had not of themselves, while they were yet a
gathering, yet it may well be supposed, that while they are yet but a
gathering, all of them are but spiritual in the positive degree. For what
hinders, but such a company of persons may come together to gather into a
Church? Now, I pray, what shall be done in this case, if Church-mater in point
of fitness must pass by the estimation of men, more then positive in
spiritualitie? Must it be said in such a case that though they be all satisfied
in conscience concerning the truth of one another conversion, Yet they are not
fit matter to make themselves a Church? I would see semblance or shadow of
reason for this. Yea it appears contrary to sound reason, because in
homogeneall bodies (such as a Church is, by the Doctrine of our Brethren, in
the instance and period we are now speaking to) what is sufficient to
constitute a part, is sufficient also to constitute the whole. Therefore if
Conversion and spiritualnesse in the positive degree, be sufficient for one
member of the Visible Church, its sufficient also for the whole, I mean,
considered yet as totum homogeneum. The Author would do well to assay a
clearing and extricating of these things upon his Principles.

subject of his thesis, not distinguishing nor showing in what sense he takes
it (which is not a little fault in determining contraverted points) while as he
speaks thus, allowed matter of the Visible Church: For matter of a Visible Church
may be said to be allowed in a double sense or relation, viz. either in regard
of what is incumbent to a man himself by way of duty before God: or in regard
of what is requisite in him by way of qualification in the outward
Ecclesiastic Court, whereupon the Church may and ought to proceed in admitting
him to the external communion of the Church. I confess that none are matter of
a Visible Church allowed in the former sense or relation, but such as are (not
only so far as men most spiritual can discern or judge, but also) in very deed
true converts and believers. Its a man's duty in professing Christianity and
adjoining himself to the Church of Christ, to believe with his heart as he
professes with his mouth; otherwise he is matter not approven, not allowed of
God. But I believe its another thing to enquire what is matter of the Visible
Church allowed in the latter sense: and thinks that advised men among our
Brethren of the Independent way will say the same in the general. Yet I trow
it shall be found afterward that the strength and stream of our Authors
Arguments, runs in the former; and so are little to the purpose of the
Controversy between us and our Brethren, touching the matter of the Visible
Church.

Andabatarum more, it is necessary before we proceed further to open up and
bound the state of the controversy, which Mr. Lockier hes not done, I cannot
tell upon what intention; or if upon any design at all, and not rather out of
pure neglect, or some other such thing. If he say he was Preaching to people,
and not Disputing in the School; and that therefore it was not needful, nor
becoming, Scholastically to state a controversy. I Answ. Whether in Pulpit or
School, his purpose was to draw his hearers of this Nation from a Doctrine
which they had learned and professed before the world, to a new way. Sure,
ingenuous dealing would have required that the Doctrine of this Church, which
he intended to refute, and to take them off, should been, once at least,
plainly and simply propounded and presented before them. This he does not all
along, but in effect speaks so indirectly, as if we allowed all mere
professors whatsoever, to be members of the Visible Church. Well, what he hes
not done, we shall endeavor according to our weakness to do: and shall deal
more liberally with his side, then he hes done with ours. Now then let these
considerations be premised.

as such; or of the Church according to its external state. The Church
Mystical, Invisible, or according to its inward state is the society of men
effectually called unto saving communion with Christ, to which does belong, in
the intention and purpose of God, all the promises of spiritual blessings
pertaining to life and salvation. The Church Visible and considered according
to its external state, is the society of men professing true Christian faith
and Religion, for communion in the outward exercises of the Worship and
Ordinances of God: Admission of members into the Church Invisible is the work
of God by the operation of the Spirit in Effectual Calling and ingraffing men
into Christ. Admission of members into the Church Visible, and according to its
external state is committed to the Pastors and Rulers of the Church, who being
men, and so not seeing the inward constitution and condition of hearts, must
look at things obvious to the senses, in their administration of this work.
Whence, one may be orderly and lawfully admitted a member of the Church
Visible, who is not a member of the Church Invisible. And about this our
adversaries, I conceive, at least such as are most sound and intelligent
amongst them, will make no controversy. Further, it is to be observed that the
question and controversy between us and the Independent Brethren, much differs
from that which is debated between the Papists and the orthodox concerning
Church Members. The state of the controversy with Papists, which they, and
namely Bellarmine, involve with many Sophismes, is truly and really this (as
the judicious Ames. hes well observed, Bellar. Enerv. lib. 2. de Ecclesia cap.
1. thesi. 10, others have not so well considered) whether the whole multitude
of professors, comprehending as well unregenerate hypocrites and reprobats, as
true elect believers, be that Church of Christ to which properly does belong
all these excellent things, spoken of the Church in Scripture, viz. that it is
redeemed by Christ, the Body of Christ, the Spouse of Christ, quickened, acted
and led by the Holy Spirit, partakers of all the spiritual blessings, so that
the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Albeit Papists dare not state
the question in these terms; yet the affirmative thereof is the thing they
intend, that they might obtain a Catholic Visible Church at all times
illustriously visible, infallible, and unfailable; and that there Roman is it.
But it is a far other matter that is debated between us and our present
adversaries, viz. what persons are to be admitted and accounted to belong to
the Church Visible, according to its outward state. So that these, who shall
make use of Arguments used by Orthodox Writers, in showing that not wicked,
hypocrites and reprobates, but only the elect true believers are members of
Christ's Church, against us for affirming that all who outwardly do seriously
profess the Christian faith are to be admitted, and accounted members of the
Visible Church: they are clearly in a great mistake and impertinency.

in actu primo, and in actu secundo. I must crave leave to use these terms, and
shall explain what I mean by them. By the actus primus of Church Membership, I
mean such a state and condition of a person as makes that now he is not to be
reckoned and looked upon by the Church, Pastors or Professors as (...) i. e.
without, but (...), not as a stranger and alien, but as a Brother, 1 Cor. 5.
11, 12. And consequently may and ought to be overseen, cared for, and fed by
the Pastors and Rulers of the Church, as a part of the flock, and by private
professors dealt with in duties of Christian fellowship according to their and
his capacity. The actus secundus of Visible Church Membership, is (...) and
fruitio, i. e. the fruition and actual use of Church privileges, ordinanc^*
and acts of outward Christian fellowship: This distinction is of necessary
consideration in this controversy. For it is certain, one may be actually a
member of the Visible Church in actu primo, and yet not actually enjoy the use
and exercise of all and every Church privilege and ordinance, whereunto
Church Membership gives him a right in habitu: Because unto the fruition of the
actual exercise of some privilege and ordinance there may be required an
especial condition, which may be a man wants through some physical
incapacitie, or some moral defect. As under the Old Testament, persons that
were undoubted members of the visible Church of Israel; yet might for some
legal pollution, as an issue of blood, touching of a dead body, etc. been
debarred from the public Assemblies of the Church and Sacrifices for a time,
until they were cleansed from the pollution according to order instituted by
God: So also one who is an acknowledged member of the Visible Church, being
overtaken with a scandalous fault, and not carrying himself obstinatly, but
submitting himself, may be kept from the actual exercise and use of some
Ordinances, until the scandal be sufficiently removed, yet still, as is
acknowledged on all hands, continue a Churchmember in actu primo; and it has
been constantly held by Orthodox Divines, until Anabaptists arose, that
Children under the Old Test* being born in the Church, were then, and now being
born in the Christian Church are, even while under the years of discretion,
members of the Visible Church. Although neither then they were, nor now are
capable of actual use and exercise of all Church Priviledges and Ordinances.
Therefore it is one thing to enquire what is requisite to constitute one
capable of Church Membership simpliciter and in actu primo; and another to
enquire what is requisite to make one immediately capable of actual use and
exercise of all and every Church-priviledge and Ordinance whereunto
Church Membership does entitle him.

duty in foro Dei, that he may adjoyn himself unto Church Communion, and
participate Ordinances in such a manner as is necessary for his own salvation,
and approving himself to God: and that which is required of him by way of
qualification in foro Ecclesiastico, that the Church may lawfully and orderly
admit him to their external communion, and thereafter respect, account, and
deal with him as (...) i. e. amongst these that are within. The reason of this
distinction is clear, because the duty of a man that will so adjoyn himself
into the communion of the Church as is requisite for salvation, and for
approving himself therein to God, does, no doubt, reach formally and directly
the inward man, the frame and acting thereof: But the qualification requisite
in the Ecclesiastic Court whereupon the Church is to proceed in admitting or
acknowledging men Church Members, does consist (formally and directly, at
least) only in somewhat outward and apparent to men: For it is a sure rule, de
occultis non iudicat Ecclesia, as is confessed by Hooker, Survey, Part. 1. c.
2. page 15. speaking of the same purpose, and by Mr. Lockier himself, page 55.

relative or adherent, and an holiness absolute and inherent. The holiness
relative and adherent consists in the separation of a thing from a common
use, and dedication of it unto some holy use or end. Holiness absolute or
inherent consists in qualities or actions of a person agreeable to the Law of
GOD. In the former way, the stones of which the Temple was built are called
stones of holiness, Lam. 4. 1. So the Temple it self, the Vessels consecrated
to the Worship of God, the City of Jerusalem, are called holy. In like manner
persons in a special way set apart for the Worship of God, as the Priests and
Levites, and especially the High Priest, are called holy. In like manner the
whole People of Israel are said to be holy, Deuteronomy. 33. and to be sanctified by
God, Exodus 31. 13. Lev. 8. 8. and 21. 8. and 22. 32. Because, to wit, God by
entering in Covenant with them, had separated them from other people, and
Adopted them to be a peculiar People for himself: in the same sense, 1 Cor. 7.
14. The Children born of one Parent at least a believer, i. e. a Professor of
Christian Religion are called holy, because they are comprehended in the
Covenant made with, and embraced by the Parents for themselves and theirs: and
so are to be esteemed as among Christians separated from profane people, and
dedicated to God.

Again, holiness is either inward and true, which consists in the inward
renovation of the soul, faith, hope, love and other supernatural habites and
their elicite acts: Or external, which consists in the Profession of the
true and Orthodox Religion, and a conversation, so far as comes under men's
knowledge, ordered according to the rule of Gods Commands, as is competent to
humane weakness, i. e. without scandal, at least, contumacy and obstinacy in
some given scandal, and comprehends also in it that holiness relative and
of dedication. Further it is worthy diligent observation here, that when it is
said the Church is a society of visible saints, this may be understood in a
double sense; for the Epithete [visible] may either be taken as a note
signifying not the nature of the form which gives the denomination of Saints or
holy: but an adjunct thereof, viz. the notoreitie and manifestation of it
before men. In which sense if it be taken in that description, visible Saints
are such as by outward, manifest and evident signs and tokens are perceived
and acknowledged to be endued with true inward holiness, and grace of
regeneration. Or it may be taken as a note signifying the very nature and kind
of the form, i. e. holiness which gives that denomination. In which sense if
it may be taken, then men are said to be visible Saints, in so far as they are
adorned with external holiness, although abstract from that internal and
true grace of regeneration.

Ecclesiastic Court, whereupon he is to be received or acknowledged as a
member of the Visible Church, and is to be accounted as not (...), i. e. among
these that are without, but (...), i. e. among those that are within, and so
over whom the Pastors and Rulers of the Church should watch, and care to feed
him by the Ordinances of Christ, according to his capacity, and to whom private
Christians ought to perform duties of Christian communion according to their
stations? viz. whether real, internal grace of regeneration, repentance
toward God, and faith in Jesus Christ: at least such evident signs thereof,
manifested and approven upon acurate examination and trial, as is a sufficient
ground whereupon the Church may and ought to esteem and judge the person truly
gracious, regenerate and endued with true saving faith and repentance; in a
word, a true inward Saint, or if somewhat else.

Hooker, Survey part. 1. c. 2. page 20, 21. confesses that the expressions of
some of his Brethren, as well as those of the Separation, are somewhat narrow
at the first sight, and seem to require exactness of the highest strain, and
so speaks for a candide interpretation of them, to wit, that when such Phrases
of theirs occur upon this Subject, as these: Only the Saints, faithful,
called and sanctified, are to be members of the Congregation: such a
construction as this be put upon these words: persons visibly, externally such
to the judgment of charity, not always really and internally such, by the
powerful impression of Gods free grace. Certainly some of them have so roundly
affirmed that none should be acknowledged members of the visible Church, but
such as are true internal Saints, that hardly can such a construction be put
upon their words. See D. Holmes and Mr. Barclets expressions set down by Daniel
Cawdry in his Schem of contradictions in the Independent way, n. 17. And Mr.
Lockiers expressions of this purpose along his Lecture can as hardly suffer
such a construction. Others of them indeed have spoken more warily and in a
lower strain, as Mr. Hooker himself, stating the Question, p. 1. page 15. tells
us persons who, may be, are hypocrites inwardly; yet if their conversations and
expressions be such, that we cannot but conclude in charity, there may be and
is some spiritual good in them, we say and hope, and are bound to conceive
they are Saints; these are fit matter of a Visible Church. Only it is to be
observed that it cannot be well discerned by his words, whether he means a By
a positive judgment, we mean the elicting of an act of the understanding,
whereby we affirm the man to be such: and by a negative judgment, the
abstaining from affirmation of the contrary.
negative judgment of charity, or a positive: his words, as to this, are so
wavering and fluctuating, and that very remarkably, page 14. end, and 15.
begin. he speaks of the matter thus: So far as rational charity directed by
rule from the Word, a man can not but conclude that there may be some seeds of
some spiritual work of grace in the heart. Here if we look at these words, A
man can not but conclude, one would think that a positive judgment were
intended: for that expression does import a necessity of elicting positively an
act of judgment affirming of the subject, that form touching which the
Question is. But the next word which is but a may be (nothing being more said
there, before he concludes the description of Visible Saints) seems to cast
down that and to import less. Then a little after he expresses clearly a
positive judgment: we say and hope, and are bound to conceive they are Saints.
Again in propounding the state of the Question, the matter is involved in a
cloud: We cannot conclude but in charity there may be and is some spiritual
good in them, etc. If we look at that, we cannot conclude but, etc. one would
think only a negative judgment were intended: for these words import no more
but a necessity of abstaining from an act of judgment, whereby the form in
Question is denied of the subject, or the contrair thereunto affirmed. But when
it is added, there may be and is, etc, this seems to speak for a positive.
Before it was, we cannot but conclude; and therewith, there may be, only. Now
it is, we cannot conclude but: and herewith there may be and is. I verily think
the godly man has been at a puzzle in his conceptions about the matter. Of all
the Brethren of the Independent way, whose Writings I have had occasion to see,
Mr. Nortoun in his Answer to Gulliel. Apoll. his Questions are most m^derate,
and come nearest to the truth. In many particulars he comes below that which
is required by most part of all others of that way, particularly in that
expressly he asserteth that it is not a positive judgment, but only negative,
that we are to have of the grace of Church Members, c. 1. that we are not
positively to judge ill of them.

Norton goes no further) but also without neglect of any known duty, and
commission of any known ill, concerning which they must be a good space tried
first in a way private: if the Church be a gathering, by one another mutually,
until they be mutually satisfied in the judgment of charity touching the
truth of the grace of each other. If it be in the admission of additionall
members, the trial is first by the Ruling Elder or Elders, both by way of
diligent enquiry, for information, from others, and by way of conference with,
and examination of the parties themselves. Then all things being clear and
satisfactory to the Elder, the person being propounded to the Church, the
people also must (as opportunity may serve them) try their spiritual
condition, and that both ways too. If these find no realitie of satisfaction,
they present their dissatisfaction to the Elder or Elders, which stays the
proceeding for the present. But if satisfaction has been gotten by Elders and
People in this private way, then the persons to be admitted must further (every
one after another, if it be at the first gathering of the Church) make, first a
public confession of their knowledge and faith in the grounds of Religion:
then a declaration of the experimental work of their effectual vocation. 1.
In Repentance from dead works. 2. In their unfeigned faith toward the Lord
Jesus: and then must produce, if required, a testimony of their blameless
conversation. For a testimony to my faithfulness in this representation of
their Doctrine, I refer the Reader to these on the Margent Hookers Survey, p.
1. c. 2. page 14, 15, 24, 25. p. 3. cap. 3. page 4, ^. Brief Narrat. of the
pract. of the Churches of N. E. pa. 1, 2, 8, 9. Mr. Cottons way, cap. 3. sect.
2. page 54, 55. sect. 3. page 56, 57, 58.
. So in a word their Doctrine in this point is, that none are to be received
members into external fellowship of the Visible Church, but such as are
already true heart-converts endued with saving grace, and having real
internal fellowship with Christ, in the judgment of charity grounded upon
such trial and evidences, as we have heard.

Scotland at which the adversaries, especially this with whom we have to do,
mainly has an eye. Albeit we know no Protestant Church in the world, differing
from us in this, but the Independents) scarcely shall you find any of our
adversaries directly make a proposal of it what it is: but for the most part,
as they give intimations thereof here and there, would bear men in hand that we
do allow any whosoever profess the Christian faith, although their lives and
conversations were never so wicked and profane, to be fit matter and members
of the Visible Church. Which is, I must say, much want of ingenuitie in them,
and great injury done to us, as will appear shortly. So Mr. Lockier along this
Piece intimating our Doctrine speaks always of persons merely professing the
things of God. But I wonder much how that did fall from the Pen of Reverend Mr.
Hooker, speaking of our judgment, Surv. p. 1. c. 2. page 20. The pinch of the
difference lies in this, whether such as walk in a way of profaneness, or
remain pertinaciously obstinate in some wickedness, though otherwise
professing and practicing the things of the Gospel, have any allowance from
Christ, or may be accounted fit matter to constitute a Church: this is that
which is controverted and should have been evicted by Argument, he is speaking
to Mr. Rutherfurd. Good Mr. Hooker, where did you ever read such an assertion
as this in Mr. Rutherfurd, or any of ours? I need not stay upon vindicating Mr.
Rutherfurd in this: he will do it ere long himself. I shall only plainly
propound our Judgment upon the Question, in these two Conclusions.

Conclus. True, heart conversion, regeneration, sanctificati^ inward saving
grace in reality of existence, or conceived at (...) to be in the judgment of
charity, is not requisite as the qualification necessary, in the Ecclesiastic
Court, in order to admitting persons to be members of the Visible Church. Or
thus, to the same purpose, it is not necessary nor requisite, to the effect
that persons be accounted fit matter of the Visible Church, that they be such as
upon trial and approven evidences, may and ought to be conceived, in the
judgment of charity, by the Church, already inwardly regenerate, sanctified,
taken into real fellowship with Christ. And therefore we judge it altogether
unwarrantable to put such as are desirous of the external fellowship of the
Visible Church, to such trials touching the work of saving grace in their
hearts, in order to admitting into Church Fellowship, and as antecedently
necessary thereunto, as is tanght and practiced by Independents, and set down
summarly here a little before.

Conclus. A serious, sober outward profession of the faith and true Christian
Religion, together with a serious profession of forsaking former sinful
courses, (if the person be one coming out of heathenisme or some false
Religion) or an outward conversation free of scandal, at least, accompanied
with obstinacy (if he has been a Christian in Profession before) and a serious
Profession of subjection unto the Ordinances of Christ: A serious profession of
these things, I say, as such, considered abstractly (abstractione simplici)
from the work of inward saving grace and heart-conversion by true Repentance
and Faith, is sufficient qualification in the Ecclesiastic Court to constitute
a person fit matter to be received as a member of the Visible Church, and
accounted (...) i. e. amongst these that are within. If it be asked what I mean
by a serious profession? I Ans. Such a profession as has in it at least a
moral sincerity (as practick Divines are wont to distinguish) tho happily not
always a supernatural sincerity, i. e. (that I may speak more plainly) which
is not openly and discernably simulate, histrionick, scenicall, and
hypocritical in that hypocrisy which is gross: but all circumstances being
considered, by which ingenuity is estimate amongst men, giving credit one to
another, there appears no reason why the man may not and ought not to be
esteemed, as to the matter, to think and purpose as he speaks from whatsoever
habitual principle it proceeds, whether, viz. of saving grace and faith, or
of faith historical, and conviction wro^ by some common operation of the
Spirit. A man that has such a profession as this and desires
Church Communion, I say, the Church ought to receive him as a member. And
albeit I deny not but where there is just or probable ground of suspicion that
the profession has simulation and fraudulent dealing under it, as in one new
come from a heretical Re^igion, or who has been before a persecutor of the
faith and professors thereof; there may be a delay in prudencie and time taken
to try and prove if he deals seriously and ingenuously: but that trial must
not be to cognosce upon the truth of the work of saving grace in the heart.
Pastors indeed ought wisely and diligently try and acquaint themselves, as far
as they can, with the spiritual state of all the members of their flock, that
they may the better know to divide the Word of God aright, giving to every one
their suitable portion, that beginners may be promoved in the grace of Christ,
and such as are yet in a natural state may be awakened to slay from the wrath
to come. But I utterly deny that such a trial of persons touching the truth of
the work of grace in their hearts is antecedently and in order to their
admission necessary, and in duty incumbent to the Church that is to admit them.



SECTION III. Mr. Lockyers first Class of Arguments, viz. Texts of SCRIPTURE,
Act. 9. 26. Act. 2. 47. Heb. 3. 5, 6. brought as directly holding forth his
Doctrine, answered.


That ye may know how richly the Scripture consents to this: To which we say no
more but that, it is most suitable to sound a triumph after the victory: And so
comes to his first Text, Acts 9. 26. And when Saul was come to Jerusalem he
assayes to join himself to the Disciples, but they were all afraid of him, and
believed not that he was a Disciple. On which place, he, for effecting his
purpose from it, commenteth thus: First in a parenthesis, he supposes that the
Disciples carriage here toward Paul proceeded from light and conscience, and
tenderness in this matter, viz. of admitting members into their Visible
Church Communion: and makes a note upon that particle all, that they were a
homogeneall body under the same light, etc. in the matter. Then adds, What did
they fear? That he did not make profession of Christianity? Why, now he
tendered himself to do it: wHY should they have denied him now if bare
profession had been enough? It is evident they feared that he did but merely
profess, and that they should take in an heterogenerall piece; one that had
but the outside of that qualification which this new building should have; and
therefore Barnabas took him to the Apostles, and declared to them how he had
seen the Lord in the way, and used all means to satisfy them of the reality of
Gods work upon his heart. And upon this he was received as fit matter for this
new house, and as suitable matter to that which was already in the building.

Answ. It Is a wonder to me, and I profess I cannot wonder enough that any
judicious and learned of the Independent Brethren should ever alleged this
place for their Tenet in this Question: yet not only our Author here, but
others also before him, have brought it to that purpose. But I have observed it
a thing incident even to good men, and in other things discerning, that when
they have once taken up an opinion in matter of Religion, and it has gotten
rooting in them, they become so fond in love with their own conception, that
either readily they will even bend their wits to strain and force Scripture to
speak for it; or else their judgment being somewhat vitiate, as to that
particular, with affection, trowes any word almost speaks clear for it. How
others of them have improven this place, I stay not to consider: but to what
Mr. Lockier hes on it. 1. He supposes that the matter between Paul and the
Disciples at Jerusalem, was about admission of him to be stated a member of
that Visible Church. Now where appears that in the Text? You Will say there he
essayed to join himself to the Disciples: good enough, forsooth, to please
credulous and unstable minds. The simple meaning of the words is no other thing
but that he assayed to be familiarly with them. So the word (...)
is used afterward, c. 10. v. 28. Ye know that it is unlawful for a man that
is a Jew (...) i. e. to keep company or familiarly converse with, or come unto
one of another nation. It Is of the same sense with (...) Joh. 4. 9. But besides
this, I think upon this supposition made by Mr. Lockier, and other Principles
of his was concerning the Visible Church, he may be put to a puzling question.
For when as it is held by our Brethren, that the is no Visible Church existing,
but a particular Congregation; I would ask whether Paul had been a Visible
Churchmember before this time any other where? And if so, whether he did now
cease to be a Visible member of that former Church, and so of all Churches, by
suiting to be a member of the Church at Jerusalem, until he was received in
there? Then when he removed again from Jerusalem, whether he laid down his
membership in that Church? Or if he continued standing in it, when he was
traveling through the world? Then if he laid it down, whether he behoved to be
stated a member in another Visible Church, and then in another, according as he
removed from one place to another? 2. Whereas the Author says that the
Disciples at Jerusalem their carriage toward Paul was from light, and
conscience, and tenderness in the matter of the constitution of the Visible
Church, and that they did fear they should take in a heterogeneal piece, is
evidently a bold fiction beside the Text: And he must give me leave to doubt if
he spoke that in good sad-earnest, can any man conceive any other thing to be
meant by these words they all feared him, but this: that when as he had before
been a violent persecutor of Christians, they apprehended he was still such an
one, and might be now only seeking to insinuate himself amongst them as a Wolf
to destroy them* That they feared him the same way that Ananias did, v. 13, 14*
of this same Chap. Will any man, I say, that reads the Story, when he comes to
this Passage, conceive otherwise of the meaning thereof? Nay, I appeal to the
Authors own conscience, if upon serious looking again upon the words and the
series of the Story, himself can conceive otherwise of it. Now such a fear as
this, and that light, conscience, and tenderness in the matter of Church
constitution are very different things. As for his Argumentative questioning,
What did they fear? That he did not make a Profession of Christianity? Why, now
he tendered himself to do it, -- but it is evident that they feared he did but
merely profess, etc. I Ans. It Is very poor and unbeseeming a man of
understanding pretending to speak seriously: I say, that was not it they
feared, that he did not make Profession of Christianity: nor yet that, that he
did but merely profess, taking mere Profession only in opposition to
Profession from a Principle of saving grace: but the thing they feared was his
cruelty, which they had seen before, not knowing but he was still on that same
way: and they feared his professing himself a Disciple, and essaying to
converse familiarly with them, was but fraudulent counterfeiting to get
advantage to execute his cruelty. And Barnabas his bringing him to the
Apostles, and his discourse touching the Lords dealing with him (wherein I
confess there is so much, as might sway their judgments to account him not
only one seriously and sine dolo malo Professing Christianity: but also a
truly gracious convert, yea, and an Apostle of Jesus Christ too) was to take
this fear out of their hearts, that they might without apprehension of danger
converse with him. And accordingly when the effect of Barnabas discourse and
information is set down, v. 28. we find not a word nor a hint of an
Ecclesiastic admission, or stating him into Church Membership: But this is
said, he was with them coming in and going out at Jerusalem, i. e. he was daily
conversing familiarly with them. I need say no more to this Passage, but shall
only add this: Godly men would be more tender of Scripture then to use or
rather to abuse it thus; by shaping conceptions of their own, and then driving
them into it by force. Come we to the next Text.

Act. 2. 47. And the Lord added to the Church daily (...) the saved, eos qui
salvi fiebant (so he translateth it) but what hence to his purpose? He added to
the Church the saved, those which were out of harms-way, as we say, in a safe
and sure state, and so are no persons, but such who have received the sure
mercies of David. A sinner is not safe nor out of Gunshot till indeed in
Christ. And this is the matter accepted and taken in to build withal, and none
else so far as they could make judgment between things that differed. After
this he concluds by a dilemma thus: Either they were thus strict upon their own
will and so not to be followed: Or else by divine and infallible warrant; and
so as a precedent which has the force of a precept. And then takes occasion to
anticipate an Objection thus: And this is over and above a plain demonstration
of the possibility of the precept to be obeyed, which takes off that
Objection, 'twere well, Sir, if (...) so: But how can it be? How shall we do
it? Why, it has been (...), therefore may be; therefore should be, and no
otherwise.

Answ. Here are involved a number of things, some gratis affirmed, some
evidently false. 1. He supposes all these (...), were already and antecedently
to their addition to the Church, inwardly delivered and translated from the
state of nature and sin into the state of grace, and begun real union by faith
in Christ, and this he grounds upon the Greek participle, which he will have
translated the saved, as noting a thing then already done. But this is a very
weak ground to bear up that supposition. Why, who knows not that oftentimes
in the Greek Language, passive participles of the present tense are used in the
signification of gerundive names: So that [(...)] may be well rendered
servandi, such as were to be saved. And so has Beza and the old Latin
Interpreters rendered it, qui salvi sierent, and the English Translation, such
as should be saved; and so the word does not necessarily import, as the Author
would have it, that these added were, antecedently to their addition, saved by
the begun work of grace in them (tho we are not denying but it might been so
with them) and that under that consideration, and upon that account they were
added. But this it does import, that they were such as God by the decree of
Election had appointed to be saved, and that he added them to the Church as the
means whereby they were to be actually made partakers of Salvation, as Calvine
well takes it up. It Is true, the Syriack Interpreter, as expounded by Tremel.
has it, qui salvi fiebant, but withal he has the whole place thus, addebat
quotidie eos qui salvi fiebant in Ecclesia, i. e. such as were saved in the
Church. 2. He supposes that this Text speaks of Ecclesiastic addition of
members, in foro exteriori, in the outward Court; by the Church Rulers, or
them, and the Congregation together (to which of these belongs this Act, we
discuss not now) upon outward trial and discerning. This again is besides the
Text, which speaks not one word of this, I mean, the Churches adding or
admitting; but of Gods adding, which Interpreter^ expound of the work of saving
grace upon their hearts, co^ng and drawing them effectually to Christ: and
distinguishes ^om the acts of the outward Ministry upon them. See Calvin. in
locum: most plainare the words of Eras Sarcerius in Marlorat. dicit Dominum eos
addidisse Ecclesiae qui salvi fierent; perinde enim est ac si diceret Lucas,
quos non addebat Deus, etiamsi se ipsi adderent Ecclesiae, non tamen fiebant
salvi. So Mr. Lockiers dilemma falls to the ground, having no ground in the
Text to subsist on. It supposes the Text to be speaking of an Ecclesiastic
procedure with persons, upon outward trial and discerning; when as the Text is
speaking of no such thing, but of a divine efficiency upon persons. 3. He
supposes that all and every one that were then visibly added to the Church,
and none else were added but such as were translated to the state of grace,
partakers of the sure mercies of David, really in Christ, at least so far as
they could make judgment between things that differed: But first, I ask where
does he find, or how will he make out of the Text that interpretation, so far
as they could make judgment, etc. and that the word (...), must not be
understood without any such qualification, to import such as were really saved.
I think this, in divine destination, is that indeed is meant, and he shall
never instruct from the Text that which he says. 2. How will he make out from
the Text, that all and every one that were by Ecclesiastic admission added to
the Church, and none else? The Text indeed says, the Lord added such as were
to be saved, (...). Does it hence follow, none else were by Ecclesiastic
admission added to the Church? The Author must give us leave not to believe
every thing upon his bare Assertion, and must find out new Logic ere he prove
that consequence; so then we see not how this Scripture consents to this
point of Doctrine: the simple meaning of the wods being thus much, that daily
the Lord was by his effectual assisting the Ministry of the Gospel, and
working upon the hearts of men, bringing such as he had a purpose to save unto
the fellowship of the Church: that therein, as the ordinary way instituted by
himself, they might be led on to the participation of eternal salvation. But
this no ways imports, but many others not so destinate to salvation, might
adjoin themselves, and be by Ecclesiastic admission received into the outward
fellowship of the Church.

Heb, 3. 5, 6. And Moses verily was faithful in all his house, as a servant,
for a testimony of th^se things that were to be spoken after: but Christ as a
Son over his own house whose house are we, if we hold fast our confidence,
and rejoicing of hope firm unto the end. Hereupon the Author commenteth thus:
To a Church of the Jews this is spoken, who did apostatize much, and so forsook
their assemblings, and so their exhorting one another with all these means of
grace and life, which God has instituted in this new house: and so indeed grew
worse and worse, till at last they came as the rest of the Jewish Churches, to
nothing. As long, says the Apostle, as ye hold fast the practice and power of
what you profess, so long you are a Church: but when you let go this, you
unchurch your selves, and should it be persued upon you, you should be thrown
out as unhallowed matter: but if others, which should do it, will not do it, the
Master himself, who is faithful, will do it, He will cast such a Church wholly
off, which thus suffer his institution to be corrupted: and so indeed he did
write Loammi upon the first Churches, quickly after the Apostles time, for this
thing.

Ans. If this be not to force Scripture and make it speak what men please, I
know not what else is. Let Us first mark some groundless Assertions, and then
we shall come to the main point of our Answer. 1. I wonder at that rash
assertion in the close of this, and so indeed did he write Loammi upon the
first Churches, quickly after the Apostles time, for this thing. What? and were
the first Churches so soon casten off by Go^, as no Churches? What divine
warrant is brought for this Assertion? Sir, produce the Bill of Divorcement
given to them from the Lord. And was there never a Church since, until they
were erected of the new Independent frame and model? Were all the Christian
Churches in Asia, Africa and Europe, in the times of the four famous General
Counsels (the first whereof was about three hundred years after the Apostles
time) now no Churches at all? Here indeed look out the Donatists, ubi cubas in
meridie, especially if we'll consider upon what account the Author unchurches
them, because forsooth they admitted members into their fellowship which were
not true Converts, partakers of the sure mercies of David, etc. this is very
Donatism in grain. 2. The Author supposes that the Apostle here is speaking to
a Church of the Jews, i. e. to one particular Congregation, distinct from all
the rest of the Jewish Churches. This is but a bare Assertion without any proof
or semblance of proof joined with it. We know that some of the Learned
Interpreters take this Epistle to have been written not to any particular
Church or Congregation, but to the whole multitude of the Jews professing
Christian Religion, scattered abroad through the world, as were the Epistles of
James and Peter; and have for them an argument not improbable from that 2.
Epist. of Peter, c. 3. v. 15. It Is true that others think otherwise upon
consideration of what we read, Heb. 13. 19. where the divine Author desires
them he writes to, to pray for him, that he might be restored the sooner to
them, which seems to import a more limited compass then the whole
dispersion. But granting this that it was not written to all the Jews, why
might it not be written to all the Christian Jews that were in Palestina and
Judaea. Most part Interpreters take it so, but that it was written to one
single Congregation of the Jews, as Mr. Lockier would have it, who will believe
upon his bare word? 3. He seems to suppose a clear untruth of these to whom the
Apostle speaks, viz. that they did apostatize much, forsook their Assemblies,
their mutual exhorting with all the means of grace and life: Indeed the
Apostle warns them to take heed of these things, and speaks of some that did
so; but as for them he writes unto, he lays no such thing to their charge as
done by them, but gives testimony to the contrair, c. 6. v. 9, 10. cap. 10. v.
32, 33, 34, 39. 4. The maine mistake and groundless supposition here is this,
that when the Apostle says, whose house ye are if ye hold fast, etc. he
means this of an outward Visible Church State. So long says he, as ye hold
fast, etc. so long ye are a Church (he means a stated Visible Church) but
when you let go, etc. you un-Church your selves, etc. And so, as we see, will
have the words to involve a threatening of losing that visible Church State,
upon failing of performance of that which is urged, viz. holding fast the
confidence, etc. contrary to the current of all Orthodox Interpreters See
Pareus, Hyper. and others in Morlor^t. Excellent is Mr. Dav. Dickson (a man of
exercised senses in the Word of God) his opening of these words N. 3. He (the
Apostle) adds a condition if we hold fast. etc. i. e. If we continue
steadfast, inward ly gripping the promised glory by hop^; and outwardly avowing,
by confession, CHRIST'S Truth. Whereby he neither imports the possibility of
final apostasy of the Saints, nor minds to weaken the confidence of
Believers, more then he doubts of his own perseverance, or minds to weaken
his own faith, -- but writing to the number of the visible Church, he puts a
difference between true believers who do indeed persevere: and time-servers,
who do not persev^re, to whom he does not grant for the present, the privilege
of being the house of God. And then he has this 2d. Doct. such as shall make
defection final are not a part of Gods house for the present; howsoever they
be esteemed. I believe any judicious Reader will see this Interpretation
somewhat more genuine then that of Mr. Lockiers.
, who expone that whose house ye are, of the state of grace and spiritual
communion with Christ, proper to the Mystical Invisible Church, in regard of
which Christ dwells in the heart by faith: and consequently conceive not the
context of the verse to import a turning of them out of one state which now
they were in, into another estate, upon nonperformance of that duty which is
required: But to intimate that the nonperformance thereof would discover that
they were not in that state which they professed themselves, and seemed to
others to be in. And I prove that it is to be Interpreted thus, and not as Mr.
Lockier will have it. The Apostle means the same here, whose house ye are,
etc. which he says v. 14. We are partakers of Christ if we hold fast the
beginning of our confidence, etc. So Interpreters agree that one and the same
thing is said in both verses, and the very purpose it self evidenceth so much.
But now is partaking of Christ nothing else but to be in a Visible Church
state? Yea for confirmation let it be observed that the Apostle says not whose
house ye are, but we are, so that he speaks of some what under the metaphor of
house which he supposes common to him and them together. What was this?
Visible Church-member-ship of a certain (we are not told where residing)
particular congregation of Jews? Mr. Lockier hes not heeded this, or has
purposely passed it over. 5. There seems to me in Mr. Lockiers words here
somewhat very like the Arminian apostasy of Saints, while you hold fast (says
he) the practice and power of what you profess, and when you let it go, etc.
is he indeed of this judgment, that men may have the practice and power of
godliness, and afterward let it go? If he say, he means of such as have had
it, so far as men could judge, etc. well, this qualification, if in any place,
should have been mentioned here, where without it, there might be so readily an
apprehension of apostasy from true grace. But tell me, does the Apostle when he
says, if ye hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of hope firm unto the
end, mean thus; if ye have and hold fast these things so far as men can judge?
What vestigium of this appears in the Text? Nay is not the Apostle in that
whole Chapter speaking of grace to be performed and held fast in veritati rei
Which if he will have to be the requisite qualification of the matter of of the
visible Church, in the Ecclesiastic Court, he may as soon get a Visible
Church, as a new World in the Moon, or Mr Mores Vtopia.
, in very deed? Was there ever any Interpreter that expounds him otherwise.

SECTION IV. The Authors Texts which he calls hints and shadows of his Doctrine.
Mat. 16. on which place the Author, thus: note these things. 1. That Christ
does not speak here of the Invisible Church: For he speaks of the power of the
keys, binding and loosing on earth; the Invisible Church is the greatest part
in heaven; and they which are in earth, considered as one with them, as one
entire universal Body whereof Christ is the Head, are not capable of Visible,
and limited Discipline; therefore I judge we are to gather from Christ's Words,
that he speaks, by way of anticipation, of that visible order which he did
purpose to institute, after his departure, by his Apostles, whereof Peter was
one. 2. Observe of what matter he says this building should be, viz. of such as
have a faith which flesh and blood cannot reveal, and to a body thus constitute
is the power of the keys, and both these represented and personated to us in
Peter. I do not find the learned and Orthodox of latter times apply this place
to the Invisible Church, and I think I am not then a forcer of the Scripture in
the sense I gave of it.

Answer. I wonder much how this has fallen from the Authors mouth, and Pen,
that he says he does not find the learned and Orthodox of latter times to
apply this place to the Invisible Church. Do not all the learned and Orthodox
Writing against the Papists on the Controversy of the Church, refute the
Papists expounding it of the Visible Church, and prove it to be understood of
the Invisible Church and every member thereof, and do not the learned Orthodox
commonly Writing against the Arminians upon the controversy of perseverance,
apply it to the Invisible Church, and use it as one of the prime Arguments for
proving the certain final perseverance of true Believers. See these noted on
the Margin. Whittaker de Ecclesia, centies, notentur praesertim illa loca, q 1.
c 1. Ecclesia aliquando totum corpus electorum fidelium and sanctorum
significat ut cum in Symbolo dicitur, Credo Ecclesiam Catholicam; sic in hoc
loco Math. 16. 18. and c. 13. par. 1. per tot. and q. 2. c. 1. he propounds
the Question with the Papists thus: De Ecclesia in Petra aedificata quaeritur
inter adversarios and nos, sitne visibilis an invisibilis? And part. 3. he
determines according to the Protestant Doctrine that it is invisibilis. etc. 2.
Bellarminus dicit Calvinum non potuisse unum Scripturae locum proferre ubi
nomen Ecclesiae invisibili Congregationi tribueretur. Resp. (inquit) falsum hoc
esse -- nam Ecclesia aliquan^o invisibilem Congregationem significat, -- ut in
hoc ipso loco quem tractamus, Super hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam. and
q. 3. c. 2.. 2. 2^. Adversargumentum sumitur ex iis locis in quibus nomen
Ecclesiae expersse ponitur, ut Math. 16. 18. 1 Timothy 3. 15. in utroque loco
(inquit Adversarius) agitari de Ecclesia visibili, and tamen ipsam veritatem
audivimus asserentem portas inferorum non praevalituras. -- Resp. ( inquit
Whitt.) illam quidem Ecclesiam de qua loquitur Christus -- nunquam posse
deficere, -- sed quod assumit illam Ecclesiam, de qua loquitur Christus, esse
visibilem, illud affirmo esse falsissimum. Here is a plain and round
contradiction to M^. Lockiers note upon this place. Joan. Alsted. suppl.
Chamier. de Eccles. not. l. 1. c. 17. par. 2. Resp. 2. Duo ista loca (N. Math.
16. 18. 1 Timothy 3. 15.) agunt de Ecclesia Catholica and invisibili seu interna
quae constat ex solis bonis, neque enim Ecclesia visibilis quae constat ex
bonis and malis est fundata super Petram Anton. Wall. Loc. Com. de Ecclesia
militant on the question, An Ecclesia possit errare, in Ans. to the 2d. Obj. of
Papists upon this place, Math 16. 18. Negamus (inquit) hunc locum esse
intelligendum de Ecclesia visibili sed universali and invisibili cui proprie
competit haec firmitas insuperabilis. The Orthodox in Colloq. Hagien. and
Amesius in his Coron. press it as a prime place for the perseverance of
Saints. We might instance very many more, but we need not; the thing is known to
all acquainted in Orthodox Writers.
Nay some eminent Papists themselves have acknowledged that is spoken not of
the Visible Church, but of the Invisible. Ferus. non loquitur de Ecclesia ut
communiter sumitur pro his qui Christiani dicuntur, sive boni sint sive mali,
sed de Ecclesia secundum Spiritum quae solos electos complectitur. So Cajetan
on the same place, Adversus Ecclesiam quae constat ex Congregatione fidelium
una side, spe and charitate, etc.

Mr. Lockiers reason brought to prove that it is not spoken of the Church
Invisible, is but weak: which will appear the better if it be put into form
(for it is somewhat confusedly propounded by himself) as I conceive it may be
thus: That Church is understood here which is capable of visible and limited
Discipline; but the Church Invisible is not capable of this: Therefore, etc.
Ans. 1. How is the Major or first Proposition proven? By insinuation thus: He
speaks of the power of the keys, binding and loosing on earth. What thence?
Ergo, he speaks before of such a Church as is capable of visible limited
Discipline. If I deny the Consequence; how will he prove it? I do not see it,
nor think he shall ever be able to make it out. 2. But to pass the
Proposition, let us see the proof of the Assumption. The Invisible Church is the
greatest part in Heaven, and they which are in earth as one with them, as one
entire universal body whereof Christ is the Head, are not capable of, etc.
Ans. 1. That part of the universal Church which is in Heaven is impertinently
brought on the stage here: Christ is speaking of those that are yet to be
built, or are a building; therefore we say He is speaking of such as are on
earth. 2. Albeit that part of the Invisible Church that is on earth be not
capable of visible and limited Discipline, formally considered as such, i. e.
as the Invisible Church: nor yet collectively considered, as one entire body:
yet the Invisible Church materially, i. e. these that are the Invisible Church,
being also a part of the Church visible, and considered distributively in
parrs, may be capable of visible Discipline. David, Peter, John, and the rest
who make up the Church Invisible, as they are also outward Professors with
others, are capable of visible Discipline. O! then you will say, why? Are they
not spoken of here, I will build my Church, as they are a visible Church. Ans.
It does not necessarly follow: for to persons standing under diverse
considerations, one thing may be attributed, according to one consideration,
and another according to another.

fidem qua creditur, or taken subjective: for we shall grant it of faith quae
creditur, or taken objective) which flesh and blood cannot reveal, i. e. true
saving faith. The Church may consist of such as have not that faith: and the
Author adds not here his qualification of so far as men can judge: neither
can it be admitted here. 2. Qualify it as he will, it is a mere violenting of
the Text, sundry Interpretations by diverse have been given on these words:
Upon this Rock will I build my Church: but I think few or none ever before our
Author gave such an interpretation as this: The visible Church shall be
constitute only of such as have true saving faith in them, so far as men can
judge Certainly whether we take the Church Invisible or the Church Visible to
be meant here under the name of the Church, Mr. Lockiers sense cannot have
place; For, 1. Understanding by the name of Church, the Church Invisible in
that sentence, Upon this Rock will I build my Church, Christ is not speaking of
gathering and constituting a certain incorporation or society, in the state and
condition of such an incorporation or society, and how persons, of whom it is
to be made up, must be antecedently qualified, that they may be capable of
admission to be constituent members thereof: but speaking of his own act of
efficacious grace (put forth in deed with the Ministry of the Gospel) upon the
hearts of some persons (whom he calls his Church, because they are called out
from amongst the rest of the world to himself) which does not suppose them
antecedently having faith, and, taking them as such, state them in a society:
But indeed is the very giving to them that faith, and stating them in an
impregnable condition of grace and salvation. Whether by, this Rock, we
understand that faith which Peter confessed, or Christ the object of that
faith; or Peter himself considered in regard of his Ministry of the Gospel: or
the Gospel Preached by him (as some of the Orthodox do) certainly this is the
meaning of building the Church upon the Rock, supposing (that which I do
incline most to, with the most part of Reformed Divines) that by the Church is
meant the Church Invisible 2. If by the name of the Church here be understood
the Church Visible, as some later Orthodox Divines have expounded it, namely
judicious and learned Hudson in his acurate and elaborate Vindication of the
Essence and Unity of the Catholic Visible Church: Yet it will little avail Mr.
Lockiers purpose. 1. Because it is a particular Congregation, and the
qualification of members, to be admitted thereunto, that he is speaking of all
along under the name of a visible Church. But supposing this place to speak of
the visible Church, it cannot be understood of a particular visible Church or
Congregation, but must of necessity be understood of the Catholic visible
Church, because it is such a Church as is to stand firm and impregnable that
the gates of hell cannot prevail against it: but any particular Church may be
prevailed against. 2. Taking the name of the Church so, here the meaning of the
whole sentence upon this Rock I will build my Church, is nothing else but this
(as the learned Author, but now cited, well observes) that the Profession and
Doctrine of this Truth, that the Messiah is already come, and that this Jesus
is the Messiah, and this Jesus the Messiah is the Son of God, the Doctrine and
confession that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, 1 John 4. 2, 3. and the
believing that I am he (says Christ) Joh. 8. 24. is the foundation whereon the
Church of the New Test. is to be built; out of all which nothing more can
follow, as to the qualification of members of the visible Church, of the New
Test. then this; that when as the Jews under the Old Test. believed in an
indefinite Messiah to come: now under the New Test. none can be of the
Christian Church, but such as believes and confesses that the Messiah is come,
etc. Now I appeal to all the Orthodox World, if Mr. Lockier his commenting upon
this place be not a forcing of the Text. As for what he adds, that to a body
thus constitute (i. e. a Visible Church so constitute as he hes been saying) is
the power of the keys given, and both these represented, and personated to us
in Peter. To pass, I cannot well understand how it can be said that the power
of the keys could be represented and personated in Peter (possibly the Church
might be represented and personated in him) This belongs not to our present
Question, and therefore we pass it now, trusting with the Lords assistance
afterward to evidence that both assertions, viz. that the power of the keys
were given to a Church Visible, I mean the collective Church, and so to it is
as the subject, and that Peter in receiving them here did represent and
personat the Church; are groundless.

Rev. 11. 1, 2. And there was given me a Reed, etc. Hereupon the Author makes
much ado. 1. He lays down grounds by Interpreting particulars in the words.
1. Says he, by the Temple is meant the Visible Church, the state and welfare
of which, though most infested of any public condition, shall not be left and
ruined, but be carefully looked to and raised from its corruptions, intrusions,
and ruins made by unsound men. This is confirmed by a Testimony of Marlorat,
hunc in modum jubet ut Ecclesiam, etc. 2. By altar is meant, per synecdochen,
the whole Worship of God, this is confirmed by the Testimony of the same
Author. 3. What is meant by worshippers is plain of it self. 4. The state of
worship and worshippers now under the Gospel is to be measured, kept regulated
to an exact rule. What is that ( viz. rule) by the Word of God? To confirm
this is brought the testimony of the same Author. 5. By the Court which is
without the Temple is meant men which have only outside Religion and devotion,
but are destitute of the power thereof. 6. What is meant by the not measuring
of these? That same Author (says he) tells us ne complectaris eos in
spirituali aedificio Domini, do not embrace them to be matter of the spiritual
house, they are without, and let them be cast out. Why? must not such be
received nor abide in the Church seeing they have a profession? Because, first,
says that Author (Marlorat) the house is spiritual, holy, they are not
congruous matter. Secondly, says John, these are given to the Gentiles, i. e.
(says Marlorat) ipsi sunt facti conformes gentibus incredulis, immo deteriores
sunt illis quantalibet sanctitatis specie polleant, nam traditi sunt in
reprohum sensum, etc. And says Mr. Lockier himself such kind of Professors
and outside Christians will soon in times of temptations conform themselves to
the worst of men, yea and be worse then they, and will strike in with the
vilest to tread down the holy city, i. e. the true worshippers in Gods Visible
Church, that have name and thing, form and power of Godliness. Then he tells
that he cites Marlorat not as finding him fully of his judgment, but to see
how he and other good men of the reformed Churches, speak unawars his
judgment, and cannot tell how else to give any life to places of Scripture.
Neither can a man tell how to make themselves agree with themselves in their
commentaries without taking them with a grain of salt in this manner. After all
these grounds laid down, he infers upon the whole this conclusion, that
persons professing merely the things of God are not approved and allowed matter
by the Lord in a Visible Church, they are such as he does not measure, embrace
for his building; they are such as are fit to destroy, not to build the holy
City. And these Christ not allowing of them, nor measuring of them: but casting
them by, and will do if we do not; how then we can, but at our peril, both in
order to God, and order to such men, embrace them I know not. Thus he upon this
place.

Ans. 1. Here a word or two in the general. First, I say, Mr. Lockier does
confidently enough (to say no more) but very poorly, with bare assertions
without the least proof triumph over these good men (as he calls them, hinting
as it seems, that tho good, yet they were not very deep nor discerning, at
least in this matter) of the reformed Churches, as speaking his opinion
unawars, and not able to expound Scriptures else, and as contradicting and
clashing against themselves, unless a grain of his Interpretation be allowed
them; Parcius ista viris. Who are these good men in the Reformed Churches that
have spoken unawars his opinion concerning the constitution of the Visible
Church? I wish he had named the men and designed the place where they say it;
Nay were it not we are unwilling this piece should grow too big, we could
produce of these good men, who have directly and solidely refuted Mr. Lockiers
Tenet, as he has it, in ancient Anab^ptists. He would have done well also to
have pointed us to some of these places of Scripture which they could not tell
how to give life to, without compliance with his Tenet, and some of those
seeming contradictions in their commentaries, which cannot be agreed without
that grain he speaks of; until he do this, we must account what is spoken
by him here, but groundless and empty boasting.

2. That in the whole discourse upon this place Mr. Lockier speaks so, as that
he cannot be Interpret, but to hold none to be members of the Visible Church,
but such as are endued with true saving grace and the power of Godliness in
veritate rei: He never once in it mentions that qualification, so far as men
can judge: Yea, his expressions are such as cannot possibly admit it, as will
appear in following the particulars; To which now we come.

mere professing the things of God? Whether such professing, as is opposite to,
and destitute of, even moral and ordinary seriousness, which may sometimes be
without an inward saving work of grace; yea or outward convincing positive
evidences of it: Or as it is opposite unto an inward saving work? If he meant
the former, he shall not have us to contradict his conclusion; we shall grant
him that such as have not so much as an ordinary morally serious profession,
such as evidently profess the things of God histrionically, mockingly,
manifestly purposing to deceive, are neither allowed of Christ, nor to be
admitted by men as matter of the Visible Church. If he say the other, and so
that none are to be admitted into the Visible Church, but such as beside
profession, have also really true, inward, saving grace, he puts the Church
upon an impossibility; and in this will be disclaimed by all the judicious of
his way. If it shall be said, it may be he means neither, but such a
profession as is opposite to positive convincing evidences of grace to the
judgment of discerning men, and so far as they can judge. I say, 1. This is
not said by himself there, nay, he cannot say it and hold to all what he says
here. Why? because some may be such, as far as men can judge, and yet such as
Christ will cast out, yea, and has casten out: and men may be such and yet fit
to destroy the holy City. 2. Persons may be such as are not approved and
allowed matter by the Lord in the Visible Church, and yet the Church may admit
them into the Church, without any peril in order to God, i. e. without sinning
by admitting them: as for instance, Simon Magus. If he say he means not here
the Lords not approving and not allowing persons simpliciter and in point of
their duty, but in relation to Ecclesiastic proceeding with them, in foro
exteriore; he shall not have us dissentient from him about this in the
general. But himself has never this distinction of the Lords approving or not
approving, when from it at any time he reasons to the admitting or not
admitting of such persons. Yea for ought that can be perceived along this
Piece, he seems always to speak of Gods approbation or not-approbation of
persons in point of their own duty and simpliciter. But now to put the most
candid construction and Interpretation upon his conclusion, let it be so, that
by matter not approven and not-allowed of the Lord in the Visible Church is
meant not-approved and not-allowed (no simpliciter) but in relation to
Ecclesiastic proceeding, in foro exteriore: and by persons merely professing,
be meant persons not truly gracious (not of necessity in truth of existence,
but) at least so far as men can discern and judge. Come we now to see what
shadow of this point is in the Scripture alleged here: I shall go through the
grounds laid down from it in order.

the state and welfare of the Visible Church shall not be left and ruined, can
consist with that said, page 11. that the institution of Christ was so
corrupted in the first Churches, that Christ did write Loammi upon them, and
that quickly after the Apostles days. But I would ask here the Author, what he
means by the Visible Church, that shall not be left and ruined? Whether any one
particular Congregation or the Catholic Visible Church? If the Catholic
Visible Church, I shall grant that the state and welfare thereof though never
so much infested shall not be left and ruined utterly: But I doubt much if Mr.
Lockier will acknowledge such a Visible Church: sure I am, these of his way,
are very averse from acknowledging it, (though it be a thing most certain and
clear in the Word of God) because indeed the granting of it undermines all the
frame of their Independent way: Yea and he himself all along his Piece,
treating of the matter of the Visible Church, speaks of a Visible Church, which
is nothing else but a particular Congregation. If he mean any one particular
Congregation (which is most suitable to his way) I see not how it can be truly
said that it shall not be left and ruined; sure, we find no promise in the Word
for this, and the experience of many particular Churches that have been ruined
utterly and never raised again, proves the contrary. 2. He says, that by the
Temple in that place Rev. 11. is meant the Visible Church, and does no more but
say it* that which is alleged from Marlorat Note the passages cited out of
Marlo. here, by Mr. Lockier, and to be cited by us, are not all Marlorats own
words: yet because they are by him gathered from others, they may be accounted
his by approbatio^ and so be conveniently cited under his name.
makes nothing for this. This Author only says, hunc in modum jubet ut
Ecclesiam Joannes metiatur, etc. but says not, Ecclesiam Visibilem. Nay, it
may appear evidently to any attentive Reader, that this Author all along his
comentary upon the place in hand, understands by the name of the Church, the
Church Invisible, the society of the Elect true Believers, who are Christ's
Mystical body. See especially these passages ^. On these words and datus est
mihi] he calls them pios Dei cultores, item electos. 2. On these atrium quod,
etc.] calls them Ecclesiam de qua non sunt haeretici and hypocritae, quanquam
in ea versari vidcantur, and cites for clearing thereof, 1 John 2. 19. which
all Orthodox against Arminians, on the point of perseverance, expounds of the
elect and truly gracious, i. e. the Church invisible. 3. On these and ne
metiaris illud] calls it spirituale aedificium quod nunquam corruere poterit,
and distinguishes such from these that are casten out, as elect from
reprobates.
noted in the Margin. But let it be so, that by the Temple is meant the Visible
Church, we conceive this may well be meant, and the differencing and
distinguishing thereof from the Antichristian Synagogue falsely arrogating to
themselves the title and privileges of the Church. Go we on then to see what
the Author out of this, and what follows, will make out for his point.

Altar some learned and Godly commentators, as namely Paraeus, understand
Christ: Yet let it be, as the Author says, that thereby is meant by a
Synecdoche the whole Worship of God, and passing the third. As to the fourth, I
would first inquire why the Author says by way of restriction that the worship
and worshippers now under the Gospel are to be measured, and kept regulated to
an exact rule, viz. the Word of God? What, were not the worship and worshippers
under the Old Test. also to be measured, and kept regulated to the Word of God?
Were these things then left loose to be disposed on and ordered at men's
pleasure? I wot not well what this restriction means; but sure I am it looks
ill-favouredly: The Author will do well to clear himself in it. 2. But how will
he prove, that which he only takes here for granted, that the intention of the
Spirit of God in this Scripture is to hold forth a general rule concerning the
outward constitution of the Visible Church, as to the matter thereof, and how
members ought to be qualified for admission to it, and not rather in a
Prophetical vision, to fortell what was to come to pass de facto concerning
the Church-worship, and adherers to the true worship; sundry learned
Interpreters conceive that this latter is the intention and purpose of this
vision, that the true Church, the true worship of God, and the worshippers
after that true manner of worship of God instituted by himself, was to be
brought to great straits, obscurity, and paucitie, in comparison of the false
and Antichristian Church, worship, and worshippers; and that this is meant by
the measuring with the Rod, and not the regulating of the state of the Church,
and qualification of members. See both Brightman and Merhiston upon the place.
But 3. Grant the meaning of the place to be, as if the Spirit had said to John,
hold forth dogmatically that the Church (as to its constitution) the worship,
and such as are to be acknowledged worshippers, are to be regulated by the rule
of the Word of God (which we deny not in the general) then I ask what is that
particular rule held forth in the Word by which persons are to be regulated,
and discerned in relation to their admission to fellowship of outward
worshipping?

viz. of Antichrists power and prevalency to be possessed by Antichristian and
idolatrous people, because of their following and practicing heathenish-like
ways and idolatry: So Merhiston. And certainly it is very likely that the
Court here cannot denotate persons, I mean professors to be casten out of the
Visible Church; because it is said to be given to the heathen, and these
heathen are these very persons, that are said to be casten out. The
Interpretation in Marlorat is exceeding harsh, and has no probability in
congruity of speech, to wit, to cast out hypocrites and idolaters, i. e. the
Court, because it is given to the heathen. 1. Because they are become like the
infidel heathens. Where shall we find the like speech, that persons are said
to be given unto such and such persons because they are become like unto them.
2. But grant, by this Court persons are meant, and that by not measuring of
them is meant not imbraceing of them, but casting them out. How does Mr.
Lockier prove, that these persons are all such as have but an outside of
worship, and are destitute of the power of Religion, even albeit their Religion
be true and right objectively, and in the nature and kind of it; and their
profession morally serious. This he must not only affirm, but prove, if he
would say any thing convincingly to the point he takes in hand to deduce. What
if I shall say, not such persons, but Antichristian, idolatrous persons are
understood hereby? What can he bring from the Text, or reason to prove what he
says? 3. Let Us see his reasons he brings to show that such as have only an
outside worship, Religion, and devotion, but are destitute of the power thereof
are not to be embraced as matter of the Visible Church, but held out or cast
out. The 1. is brought from Marlorat, because the house, says he, is
spiritual, and holy, they are not congruous matter, ne complectaris eos in
spirituali aedificio Domini. Ans. 1. That spiritual house or aedifice Marlorat
speaks of, is the true Church Invisible, spirituali aedificio Domini quod
nunquam corruere poterit: Mr. Lockier has slipped these words. 2. Marlorat
comprehends under these that are the Court, all the reprobate mixed with the
Elect, tho they were even as gilded hypocrites, as of whom it may be said
(which Mr. Lockier says) they are true converts as far as men can judge; as is
evident all along. 3. Marlorat speaks not of casting them out of visible
society with the spiritual house of the Elect, by Disciplinarie ejection of
singular persons distinctly, (but by Doctrinall conviction, and denunciation of
destruction against them) except in the case of evidently manifested rebellion
or obstinacy. So he upon these words, and adorantes in eo] quando hypocritarum
magna semper fuit copia in mundo, and reprobi electis nunquam non permixti
fuerunt, Pastoris munus est, quo ad fieri potest, inter utrosque discernere, ut
pios Dei cultores, verbi Dei pabulo pascat, exhortetur, consoletur, foveat;
reliquos ad Dei tribunal citet, and extremum illis exitium Dei nomine
pronunciet (all this is but Doctrinall not terminat ad signata individua, (as
they call them) i. e. to definite singular persons) atque etiamsi se prorsus
rebels prodiderint impii, publica autoritate coerceantur and a ^aetu
reliquorum ejiciantur. All this we grant willingly, yet without any advantage
to Mr. Lockier. 2. Reas. Why must these out-court-Christians not be taken in?
Why, John says, those are given to the Gentiles, i. e. says Marlorat, ipsi
facti sunt conformes gentibus incredulis, etc. Ans. 1. As we said before it is
altogether improbable that by the Court is meant persons, but a thing, and it
seems to be a most forced sense, and without example, given up to the
Gentiles, i. e. they are become like the Gentiles. Next we say it is most
evident from the end of this ver. that the Spirit speaks not these words as a
rule prescribing what he or others should do in governing the Church; but as a
prediction of somewhat that was to come to pass, this I say is evident by the
designation of the circumstance of the time or duration of that which is spoken
of in the end of the verse. But 2ly. Mr. Lockier supposes two things which he
mainly should have proven, that the outer-court-Christians are all that have
not the power of Godliness in their heart, though their profession and
practice in Religion be objectively right and true, and subjectively serious.
2. That casting them out and not measuring them must be understood of
Disciplinarie ejection, upon that very account that they have not the power of
Godliness. 3. As to that he adds himself such kind of Professors will soon
in times of temptations, etc. it is true, they may be ready to do so; but tell
me, will not even some such fine, well gilded Professors, who may seem as far
as men can judge to have the power of Godliness in their heart, be such as
will be ready soon to do the same? Yes; because when all is done they may be
but outside Professors. Simon Magus, Hymeneus, and Alexander must have been at
their reception into the Church, by Mr. Lockiers principles, such as were true
converts so far as men could judge; yet we see them ready soon to conform
themselves to the worst of men. Thus, I humbly conceive, we have made it clear
that Mr. Lockier has little ground for his doctrine from this Text, most part
of the pillars of his discourse being mere suppositions, taken for granted, but
having no light of proof from the words, as also that he had as little cause to
boast of Marlorats complying with it unawars.

Rev. 4. Which whole Chapter is taken up to show the state of the holy City
forementioned; and in the 1. verse. observe. John is taken up to Heaven to have
the frame of this new building given him. After this I looked, and behold a
door was opened in Heaven, and the first voice which I heard -- which said come
up hither, and I will show thee things which must be hereafter. And immediately
I was in the Spirit, and behold a Throne was set in Heaven, etc. Moses had his
pattern upon the Mount nigh Heaven, not in Heaven. And yet some very learned men
think that even that was teaching what that people should be which walked in
that first house, persons really very nigh Heaven, with which compare, Ezekiel.
44. 7. But John has his pattern given him in Heaven, to shadow that this
Temple, Altar, worshippers should all indeed be from above, and such as should
indeed have an internal consecration, and the Law given into the mind, as the
Author to the Hebrews says, and made Jews inwardly, a holy Nation, according
to inward call and choice, and so a spiritual Priesthood.

Answ. 1. Here again we are to mark the Conclusion that Mr. Lockier would be
at, touching the matter of the Visible Church, such as are all indeed from
above, as have indeed an internal consecration, the Law given into the mind,
made Jews inwardly, an holy Nation, according to inward choice and call. Here
indeed is an Anabaptisticall model of the Visible Church, all real saints, and
not in the judgment of charity only. Mr, Lockiers so far as spiritual men can
judge, as it is wholly left out by himself, so it cannot well be admitted to
have any place here. 1. Because he says they are all indeed from above, and
have indeed an internal consecration, that indeed I think to every man's
apprehension notes veritatem rei in se, or judicio veritatis (as they call it)
as contradistinguished a judicio charitatis of spiritual men. 2. Because that
place, Heb. 8. 10. cited from Jer. 31. 33. brought in by him for confirmation
of his purpose, he is speaking of, (of the impertinency whereof to the purpose
in hand, I mean, the constitution of the Visible Church, we shall speak
presently) speaks of truth and reality of grace in the heart, I may say, in
the very judgment of God himself under which there is no possibility of
mistake; But to the grounds he goes upon from this Text. 2. He takes for
granted, that this whole Chapter is taken up to show the state of the Visible
Church in its constitution, as such, and that it is the Spirits intention in
the vision set down in it, to give unto John a pattern thereof to be a rule to
him and others then, and succeeding ages, for regulating the constitution of
it, and particularly in the point of Church Members; but why did he not assay
some proof of this: Must we take every thing upon his bare assertion? It Is
true, Learned Brightman in his commentary conceives that this vision
contains a common Type of the holy Church in all ages. But 1. In all the
progress of his commentary on that Chapter, I find not any evident passage
pointing at any particular in the vision, as a pattern, type, or rule,
concerning the qualification of such as are to be admitted in the external
fellowship of the Visible Church, as the homogeneall parts of the outward
visible body. 2. Though I will not stay here to examine the intent of all the
particulars in that vision, and though I esteem much of the judgment of that
learned and pious man; yet in the general, I must say, I find no convincing
argument, nor much appearance of any argument at all brought by him to prove
that the intent of the vision was to give John a pattern, a certain portraicture
or resemblance of the Church, whereby we might know which is she. Yea albeit I
confess sundry particulars in the vision are things of the Church (in the
Interpretation whereof I would not much disagree from Brightman) yet I think he
is mistaken in taking that for the general intent and purpose of the vision:
and conceives that John being now to receive a new Prophetical Revelation
concerning these things that were to come to pass in and upon the Church from
that time to the end of the World, ver. 1. fin. The intention of the vision of
this Chapter is to describe and set forth the Glory and Majesty of God the
Father, the first Author of the Prophecy, as in the next Chapter is described
the Son the Mediator and subordinate Author thereof, as it is ordinary when
the Lord is to communicate to his Prophets, and by them to the Church,
Prophetical Revelations of great things to come to pass concerning the
Church, to present by way of preparation some glorious representation of
himself, as we may see, Esaias 6. and Ezekiel. 1. See these words of the learned and
judicious Gomarus upon that Chapter, on the Margin Sequitur (to wit from v. 2.)
descriptio Authoris Coelestis, partim ratione visaeillius Majestatis, partim
praeceptae honorationis ejusdem. Cujus descriptionis scopus est primum
commendatio apocalypseos ex Authore Caelesti, deinde Ecclesiae in fide and
timore Dei ac patientia confirmatio ex Majestate and honoratione illius
promanante. Quae describuntur opportune, nam revelandum est hoc libro mysterium
status Ecclesiae afflictissimae etc. so Gomar.
. And certainly had it been the purpose of the Spirit, by this vision to hold
forth a pattern, portraicture, and resemblance of the true Church common to all
ages, least because of troubles and disturbances, we should either think it
utterly extinguished, or at least through ignorance of her right form and
figure, we should be less able to know which is she (as Mr. Brightman says)
it seems the wisdom of the Spirit of God would have portraicted the figure
and form of the Church in these things that are most substantial in the
constitution of it, so as Christians of ordinary capacity might been able to
discern and take up the true Church by; but Mr. Brightman himself is even
troubled to find what things are meant by every particular in the vision. And
in some he brings but mere conjectures, yea and likely is mistaken, as, could
we stay, might be very probably shown; as for example, in his Exposition of the
sea of Glass like Crystal before the Throne. 3. But what is the particular
in the vision from which Mr. Lockier deduceth his conclusions? this, viz. that
it was in Heaven he saw it, a door was opened in Heaven and the Throne was set
in Heaven, this, says he, was to shadow that the -- worshippers should be
indeed from above, etc. and to make it the stronger, it is confirmed by a
comparison of what was done with Moses, Moses had his pattern upon the Mount
nigh Heaven, etc. Answ. 1. Here is a thing begged for a ground, that as Moses
was taken up to the Mount to get a pattern of these things, which he was to
appoint in the ancient Church, so John is here taken up to get a pattern of the
Visible Church, and the things to be ordered in it under the New Test. This, I
say, is groundlesly supposed: For these things that were to be done by Moses
were but now a instituting, and to be first set up: and therefore it was
necessary that he should have a pattern of them represented to him to regulate
him; but ere the time of this revelation, Christ had fully instituted all
particulars belonging to the Church of the New Testament, and many Churches
through the World, were already actually settled and ordered according to that
institution, and beside sundry of the Books of the New Test. written, wherein
the institution and rule was already plainly written down, and this indeed is
one reason which inclines me to think that the scope and intention of the
Spirit in this vision was not to give a pattern, and portraicture, or model of
the Visible Church for the time to come. 2. As to that alleged meaning of
Moses receiving his pattern near Heaven, viz. to show of what qualification the
people, i. e. the members of the ancient Visible Church should be, ( viz. in
foro exteriori, so must he understand it, if he speak to the purpose in hand) I
will not trouble my self to inquire who may be these very learned men that say
so. But the thing it self is but a conjecture: and I desire Mr. Lockier
concerning this, and the expounding of Heaven here, to remember the axiom
acknowledged by Schoolmen themselves, otherwise doting on allegories,
theologia symbolica non est Argumentativa, except where the Spirit of God
himself opens the signification. 3. I desire to know what Mr. Lockier means
by persons really living very near Heaven, if truly gracious, then what
difference between those, and these afterward brought in with an adversative
opposing them to the former, and why did he propound his Doctrine with a
restriction to the time of the Gospel? 4. That pattern which Moses had shown to
him in the Mount, according to which he was commanded to make, did not concern
the constitution of the body of the then Visible Church, of what, and how
qualified persons it was to be made up. But was a pattern of the Tabernacle and
the things pertaining to it, Exodus 25. 9. 40. S. The place, Ezekiel. 44. 7.
referred as speaking of the ordinary members of the then Visible Church is not
to the purpose, for it speaks of such as were admitted to the Priests Office.
See Junius and Paraeus in locum. 5. As impertinently, and much more
impertinently is the place of Heb. 8. 10. cited from Ier. 31. 33. brought into
this discourse concerning the Visible Church, and the matter thereof. I appeal
to all judicious Christians in the World, and to Mr. Lockier himself in second
serious thoughts, if that Scripture was intended to be a rule of constituting
Congregations: Or if it be not a declaration or revelation of Gods purpose and
Decree what he is to do himself by his efficacious grace; and if that Covenant
and the promises thereof belongs not in the fulfilling thereof only to the
Lords elect.

SECTION V. Examination of Mr. Lockyers proof of his Doctrine by induction.
But (says he) this is not the way which I most mind to make probation by, of
this point: I would prove it by induction, it seems then, that he hes not had
such confidence in that former way of probation, by testimonies alleged to
speak the point in thesi: And I humbly leave it to the judicious and impartial
Reader to judge, by what has been said in answer to these passages, if it be
not made clearer that he had little ground of confidence in them for proof of
his point, and comes now to that way of probation, wherein it seems he
conceives more strength to ly.

The Churches of the Romans, Corinthians, Ephesians, Galatians, Collossians,
Thessalonians, of the Jews which are mentioned by Peter, James, and the Author
to the Hebrews, and in the Acts, were all thus constitute of truly Godly, so
far as a Godly man can make judgment of one like himself, Ergo. if these be
denied as presidents, then I would ask our Brethren of the Presbytery by what
rule they walk? But if these be considered as presidents, I have only to show
that these Churches did all thus constitute, though I think they did not long
keep and maintain this pure constitution, for which they bore their judgment,
and yet bear. Ans. Where did Mr. Lockier read, that the judgment comed and yet
lying upon these Churches, came upon them for their admitting and permitting to
be in their visible society such as were not true converts, such as God the
searcher of the hearts of all men can bear witness of as indeed sealed for his
by his Holy Spirit, as far as men truly converted and very spiritual can
discern and judge? We find indeed laid to some of their charge that they
suffered scandalous persons, broatchers of errors, and seducers of others into
their errors, (such, I mean, maintainers of errors, I trow he and others of his
way are not averse from receiving and suffering into their Independent
Churches) and I doubt not but for this among other causes, judgment came upon
them: But that ever that which he says was laid to t^eir charge, or that the
judgment of God came upon them for that cause, we cannot believe his
assertion; we require it to be instanced by proof: but to the purpose; he
supposes that beside these particular Churches instanced, and what is said of
them in the Epistles written to them, there can be no where in Scripture found
any thing holden forth as a rule by which we may walk in the constitution of
the visible Church as to the matter or members t^ereof. So does his Question
(then I would ask our Brethren by what rule they walk) import: But we trust
ere we have done, to find a rule elsewhere; yet we shall not deny nor refuse
these Churches as presidents in this business, in whatsoever can be made clear
to have been their practice in this matter, I mean, the notion and consideration
under which persons were admitted unto, and reckoned in their external
Church Fellowship. Come we then to consider the antecedent of this Argument, or
what is affirmed in his induction of these Churches. First in the general, and
then his proof thereof particularly. The assertion of them all in general is,
that all of them were constitute of persons truly Godly so far as Godly men
could make judgment. Ans. 1. Mr. Lockier if he would have made the attributum
of this induction answerable to his conclusion intended, he should have said
they were constitute of persons all and every one of them truly Godly, and
none else. But he speaks only indefinitely, which might be granted: But let us
take him to mean so; this assertion as it lies, may be granted in some sense
which it may carry, and never a whit advantage redound thereby to his Doctrine;
for it may carry this sense, that these Churches were made up, or did consist
of persons all of them truly mat^ially Godly de facto, and quoad eventum; or
it may carry this sense, that they were constitute of persons all truly godly,
formally considered as such, in their taking them into the constitution and
external society of them. Now in the first sense it might be granted (as I
suppose some Congregation or Congregations may be such eventually, that all the
members may be truly godly) and yet no advantage come thereby to his Tenet,
unless he could prove that the enumeration which he makes is a perfect
enumeration of all the particular Churches in Scripture (which he cannot,
because it is clearly contrary to truth, and therefore his induction is
imperfect) Yea and this also, that there is no other Passage of Scripture, that
holds forth a rule or warrant of any larger latitude touching admitting of
members into the fellowship of the Visible Church then what is said of these
Churches. He must prove then the assertion in the latter sense, viz. that these
Churches were constitute of persons all truly godly as far, etc. formally
considered as such, and under no other consideration, in their in-taking and
being reckoned members in their outward visible society: If he could prove
this of any one of them we should go over to his side of the controversy: But
now see how he proves this, nay all that is brought or can be brought by him,
is only this, that the Apostle Writing to these Churches, calls them saints,
believers, sanctified in Christ Jesus, and the like, which should we grant to
mean inward true grace of regeneration, and to be spoken not of the whole body
collectively and confuse, only giving the denomination of the whole from the
better part; but distributively of all and every one of them; yet nothing else
could necessarily be concluded from this, but that they were such de facto and
quo ad eventum, and not that they were gathered and received into the external
fellowship of these Churches formally upon this and no other account: that they
were such real, internal, truly regenerate saints. The Apostles in the place
cited speaks not, nor intimates one word concerning the order of proceeding, or
account whereupon the proceeding was made in the visible external constituting
and setting up of these Churches, or admitting of members into them, neither
does Mr. Lockier so much as once assay to make a proof of this point; only
after he hes cited some passages concerning the Corinthians, he says, page 22.
end, and page 23. begin. that these expressions should import that they did
constitute and gather together upon any other account, but as there was the
true grace of God evident as far as men could judge, I cannot indeed see. Alas!
1. Is this to prove that which being the very main pinch of the Question, to
say no more for it, but you cannot see how it was not done so. 2. But I forbear
to exaggerat this way of reasoning. We are sure he might see in Scripture how
persons were gathered and received into the fellowship of the Visible Church
upon another account, and trust by the Lords assistance ere we have done to let
it be seen by such as will not shut their eyes upon the light of the Word. Thus
we have said already, does sufficiently discover the weakness and nullity of
the inductive Argument to the point in controversy. And I must say, I wonder
that Learned men (such as I do with all respect, acknowledge our Independent
Brethren to be) should have put such confidence in it.

de facto and quo ad eventum, constitute and made up of persons all truly
Godly so far as Godly and discerning men could make judgment, such as upon
trial would give evidence of the true grace of God in them as far as men could
judge. First then for the Romans is cited, chap. 1. verse. 6, 7, 8, 9. where
they are written to by Paul (who surely was able to discern in spiritual
matters, and durst not complement with persons in things of eternal
concernment) under the styles of the called of Jesus Christ, called Saints,
beloved of God, these whose faith is spoken of through all the World, and the
Apostle writes to all that are at Rome, and thanks God for them all, and made
mention of them all in his prayers, Well, what hence? I cannot think (says he)
that a faith of so high esteem with Paul, and of such renown through the
Christian World, and the matter of such servent Prayer should mean only a
temporary faith. Why? Some of these were such as laid down their neck for Paul,
Romans 16. 4. the rest surely in danger of their own necks every day by their
profession, living in the mouth of that Tyranne Nero, as Paul calls him (it
should be Lion) or Dragon, as John calls all Heathen Emperors of that place.
Answ. 1. We will not say it is a temporary faith he speaks of, we grant it to
be a saving persevering faith, and for confirmation of this he might added a
stronger ground from the Text then these he has chosen, that they are all
called beloved of God, and called Saints, where, as Estius notes well,
intelligitur vocatio non communis and externa, etc. i. e. is understood, not
common and outward calling, but that whereby men are effectually called to
faith, holiness, and salvation, which is the calling according to purpose and
Predestination: But now will Mr. Lockier or any man take upon them to say, that
Paul mean'd that all and every one in the Visible Church of Rome, were such as
had not a temporary faith only, but a true saving faith, and so were all and
every one such as were to be undoubtedly saved. I doubt he will hazard upon
this assertion: or if he will, I doubt much if he shall have any other to bear
him company in it. May be, he will say, he intends not that, but this, that
they were all and every one such, so far as in his judgment he could discern:
and he was a man very able to discern in spiritual matters, as he says a
little before. But, 1. This is an addition to the Text, and how will he prove
that it was Paul's mind to speak with such a qualification? 2. He supposes that
Paul had acquaintance and experience of every one of them sufficient to discern
what they were, so does that he says import, read Paul who surely was able to
discern in spiritual matters. But this behoved to have been by conversing with
them coram; and that he could not have, it seems; Aret Rp. 1. 7 Calvin 1 Cor.
1, 2. P. Mart. Romans 1. 7. Calv. Gal. 1. 2 Er. Sar. cer, Ephesians. 1. 1 Estius, Romans
1. 7. 1 Cor. 1, 2.
because he had not yet been at Rome to meet with every one of them there, nor
is it likely that every one of them had come from Rome and met with him
otherwhere, or he behoved to have it by communication by Letters from every one
of them: And what ground of conjecture have we for this? I think to say it,
would be accounted a Dream. As for report, of every one of them and their
several evidences of grace, by others. 1. We have as little ground of
conjecture for that, though we find that there hes been great fame of their
faith in common and in general, ver. 8. 2. Report may be a ground of
charitable belief (I take belief here in the general logical signification
of it, as it is contradistinguished from opinion and science) but it cannot be
a ground of a positive discretive judgment, such as Mr. Lockier attributes to
Paul touching the Romans faith, for it implies a man's own personal experience
of things. 2. We say the Apostle in these titles of beloved of God, Saints,
Believers, means true saving grace, truly existing, and not in the judgment
of charity only: But speaks there not of all the Romans universaliter and
distributive, as we say all men are sinners, but communiter and collective, and
confuse, i. e. in common, collectively, and confusedly; because undoubtedly
saving grace was amongst them, and he could not take upon him to determine,
whether more or fewer of them were endued with it, and as it seems knew nothing
to the contrary of any of them particularly, but they might be such. Thus
verily I think the Apostles writing to whole Churches, and calling them
generally by the name of Saints, faithful, etc. may well be understood; and no
other thing can be demonstrate of their meaning: Take herewith the judgment of
the Learned Commentators on the place, all of which do unanimously determine
that these titles of Saints, faithful, and the like, are given by the Apostles
to the Churches; partly in respect of the end of their calling, and the duty of
every one in the Church, viz. that the end of their calling, and their duty is
to be such; and partly by a denomination taken a part potiori, from the better
part, because there were true real Saints and believers amongst them. And I
think it is a worthy and solid consideration, which my worthy Colleague in the
Ministry and my Reverend Superior in the College I live in, has in his due
right of Presbytery, page 259. in answer to Mr. Cotton upon this same Question
and Argument, the styles given to the Church of Corinth are too high to be
given to hypocrites (such as many of Mr. Lockiers truly godly so far as men
can judge, may be and often are) but these styles are not given to that Church
precisely, as Visible, and as a professing Church, but as an Invisible, and
true Church of Believers: He Writes to a Visible Church, but he does not speak
of them always as a Visible Church, but as of an Invisible when he calls
them Temples of the Holy Ghost, etc.

Rome, is applicable to what is said to the most part of the rest: so that we
shall not insist much on them. Only a word or two of some of them. And 1. For
the Corinthians, after he has set down what is spoken to them, chap. 1. verse.
2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. and chap. 4. 15. he subjoyneth persons having such grace in
them, as shall be confirmed to the end, as keeps them waiting to the coming
of the Lord Jesus, as are the comfortable seals of a faithful Ministry, that
all this should signify but an outward Profession, or to say that this Church
should constitute, and Congregate together upon any other account, but as there
was the true grace of God evident, as far as men could judge, I cannot indeed
see. Answ. 1. Let it be marked how in citing the place, chap. 4, 15. he makes
an addition to the Text, for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you all, this all
is put in as the Apostles word, when as in the Text there is no more but I have
begotten you. This is a gross, foul slip, I will not say it has been done out
of design, may be it hes been done inconsiderately, without present turning
over to the place; however, adding to the Word of God is a dangerous practice.
2. As for that to say that this Church did constitute and gather upon another
account, etc. we have noted on it sufficiently before. I add now this, by what
Mr. Lockier says here, and indeed by the Doctrine of all the Independent
Brethren of his way, in this matter of the constitution of the Visible Church,
it appears that their conception about the order of gathering the Visible
Church by the Apostles was this, that men being first turned to the Profession
of Christian Religion, there was a trial made of their evidences of true
inward saving grace, and such as evidences satisfactory of this were found in,
these were gathered in, and the rest casten by, which I dare say is a mere
fiction, of which not the least vestige can be shown in Scripture, and never
man dreamed of until these sad times, broodie of many new fancies under the
name of new lights. 3. I confess persons having such grace in them as shall be
confirmed to the end, as keeps them waiting for the coming of Christ, as are
the comfortable seals of a faithful Ministry, are not outward Professors
only, but are real Saints and Elect, and thence I conclude, it cannot be
understood universally of all and every one of the Visible Church of Corinth.
Will he say that all and every one were real Saints, Elect, to be confirmed
unto the end, and so eternally saved; if he say, yes, in Paul's judgment, so
far as he could judge upon evidences of true grace. I say, 1. That is an
addition to the Text, Paul says simply he shall confirm you unto the end, etc.
not so far as I can judge he shall confirm you. Yea, 2. It enervats the comfort
held forth by the Apostle to them he speaks to, for it imports no more upon the
matter, but this, possibly ye may be confirmed to the end, and so when all is
done ye may be possibly not confirmed to the end: (man's judgment can go no
further) and is contrary to the strain of all the Orthodox, writing against the
Remonstraints in the Article of perseverance, who understand the place of
Saints, and the Lords effectual gracious preserving them in veritate rei, and
so make use of the place, and press it against the Remonstrants. But let Mr.
Lockier rid himself here; if he will have Paul to speak thus of all and every
one of the Visible Church of Corinth, either he must conceive it spoken only
with relation to the state of that Church as its first up-setting: or also in
relation to what it was at the present time of the Writing of this Epistle: The
former cannot be said, because its most evident all along that Passage, Chap.
1. he is speaking of it as still, at the time of his writing, standing in that
condition he expresses in his words, albeit some of the Verbs be used in the
preterit perfect tense, no man can deny this who has any judgment. If he say
the latter, the very Epistle it self will confute it, wherein, to wit, so
gross wickednesses, and impieties are discovered to have been amongst them,
and laid to their charge, schisms, contentious suits of Law, fornications,
communion and fellowship at Idolatrous Tables, drunkenness at the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, denial of the Resurrection. Will any man say, that the
Apostle knowing such things to be amongst them, speaks of all and every one of
them as real inward Saints as far as men can judge.

Galatians is cited, Gal. 4. 9. chap. 6. 1. the latter whereof is so
impertinent to the purpose, that I wonder how it came in his mind to allege
it. The point to be proven is, that the Church of the Galat. was constitute of
persons all truly godly so far as men could judge: The Apostles meaning in
this place is this much, if any amongst you through infirmity or ignorance be
surprised and fall into a fault, such among you as are spiritual i. e. more
advanced and confirmed in knowledge and piety, and more experimentally skilled
in Christianity, being conscious of your own lyablenesse to temptations, apply
your selves to recover and restore such an one with meekness and gentleness;
what is this to that conclusion? If Mr. Lockier had assayed to make up a
Syllogism upon it, for inferring that conclusion, he would, I no ways doubt,
have perceived the impertinency of his alleging it. Neither yet does the
former prove the point: for let that knowing of God, and their being known of
God, be understood of reality of saving grace: Yet the speech is but
indefinite, after ye have known God, or rather are known of God. And every body
knows, what an indefinite speech can bear in materia contingente.

Ephesus is cited, Ephesians. 1. 1. 13. and Acts 20. 28. 32. For the first citation,
I mean what is said in the Epistle, we need say no more then what is said upon
the Romans and Corinthians: The places are all alike, and the same answer
serves all. Only I will say, I am astonished that any man should think or say
that these high Heavenly blessings, privileges, and graces spoken of by the
Apostle to the Ephesians, as blessed with spiritual blessings in Heavenly
places, chosen before the foundation of the World, predestinat to the adoption
of Children, to the praise of the Glory of His Grace, accepted in the Beloved,
having Redemption through His Blood, the forgiveness of sins, obtained the
inheritance, sealed with the Spirit of promise, quickened with Christ, raised up
together with him to sit in heavenly places etc. are all by the Apostle spoken
of and attributed to all and every one in the visible society of the Church of
Ephesus so far as he could judge, wherein he himself clearly intimats there
were some (and he speaks according to his own knowledge) that were given to
teach other Doctrine, giving heed to fables, 1 Timothy 1. 3, 4. some that had
swerved aside to vain jangling, desiring to be. Teachers of the Law, etc. v. 6,
7. that teached otherwise, not consenting to wholesome words, -- proud, knowing
nothing, doting about Questions and Strifes of words, c. 6. 3, 4. some addicted
to the love of Money and Covetousness, v. 9, 10. striving about words to no
profit, but to the subverting of the hearers, vessels to dishonor, as vessels
to honor, Reprobates and Cast-awayes, as well as Elect, the foundation of the
Lord having the seal of Gods Eternal Predestination and Foreknowledge set upon
them, 2 Timothy 2. 19. 20. those that oppose themselves and were to be brought
with meekness unto Repentance, and recovered out of the snare of Satan who had
them captive at his will, v. 25, 26. such as had a form of Godliness but
denied the Power thereof, Misleaders and Mislead, cap. 3. 6. 7. compare with v.
5. who will dare to say that the Apostle writing to a Church, and giving them
all these high styles and commendations, mentioned before; did intend them to
all and every one severally and distributively in that Church? Neither will it
avail to say, that this Church might been so constitute at first, as that all
the Members might been such as these styles might been given to them, as far as
men could judge, though afterward many of them degenerated, and discovered
themselves. Unless Mr. Lockier make it good, that such was the state of that
Church in all the Members of it, at the time of the writing of this Epistle to
the Ephesians, he alleges what is said in it to no effect for his purpose.
But it is certain that the first Epistle to Timothy was written long before
it, this being written long ere he came to Rome, as Interpreters agree, and
that being written from Rome, and that, as most think, in the time of his
second imprisonment there, and so it seems but a little before the second to
Timothy, which was the last of all.

Acts 20. 28, 32. 1. The latter verse. 32. any man who sees any thing, may see
it clearly impertinent to the purpose in hand. 2. To the other feed the Church
of God which he has purchased with his own blood, We Answ. That by the Church
bought with the blood of Jesus Christ, true God, is not meant the Visible
Church, as such, as if the meaning of the words were, bought with the blood of
Christ in the judgment of charity, or so far as men can judge, (which is a
mere addition to the Text;) but the Invisible Church of the Elect, really
redeemed: So do all Orthodox Divines writing against Remonstrants on the
Article of Redemption, expound it of the Church of the Elect only, and press
it as an Argument against the Remonstrants Universal Redemption, and
Remonstrants upon the contrare would have it meant of the whole Visible Church.
Mr. Lockier has given no proof that it is spoken of the Visible Church, as
such, but thought it enough to point us to the place, and to suppose it be as
he would have it. But because Reverend M. Hooker in his Survey, par. 1. c. 3.
page 39, 40. asserteth the same interpretation of the place with Mr. Lockier,
against my Reverend Colleague Mr. Rutherfurd, and assayes to give some reason
for it, albeit I doubt not ere long, the Church shall have a sufficient answer
from Mr. Rutherfurd himself, to that and other things in the Survey: Yet I must
crave humble leave of him to say somewhat to Mr. Hooker in this particular,
seeing it comes so far in my way, and otherwise, Mr. Lockier and his followers
might happily say, I had purposely shunned it.

Church here (says he) whether Congregationall or Presbyteriall, must needs
be visible: Ans. That is not the question, nor the thing he should have proven;
for we shall confess the Church here spoken of, and as spoken of in the
context, must be visible; but he should have said and proven the Church here
spoken of, and said to be bought with the blood of Christ must be the Church
Visible, and as such, considered according to its visible state, and
consequently that the attribute of the enunciation is enunciat of all and every
one in that state; see we then if the argument he forms makes out this. That
over whom Elders and Officers are set to attend to feed by Doctrine and
Discipline, this must needs be a visible Church: for unless they did see them
and know them, how could they execute censure upon them? but these, viz. over
whom Elders and Officers are set to attend and feed, etc. are called the Church
Redeemed with the Blood of God, The conclusion is suppressed but according to
the terms of the premises: It can be no other then this, Ergo the Church here
spoken of must needs be visible. And this we may and do grant, and yet without
any prejudice, or disadvantage, for that may well stand with this assertion,
that only the Elect or the Church Invisible are intended by that name Church,
when it is said there to be bought by the blood of God. For why? because the
Elect or Invisible Church is visible, i. e. persons seen and obvious to the
outward senses, Physically visible, and certainly Mr. Hooker speaks of no more
in his Major and the proof thereof, unless they do see them and know them etc.
the thing that he should have concluded was this Ergo, they are called,
redeemed by the blood of God as the visible Church, or according to their
Visible Church state; but that will not be inferred upon his premises. If any
man will say, his argument may be upon the terms taken in it, mended and urged
to the point thus: These over whom Officers and Elders are set, to attend and
feed by Doctrine and Discipline; must needs be a Visible Church; and that
considered according to its Visible State, and as Visible; but these over whom
Elders and Officers are set, etc. are called the Church Redeemed by the Blood
of God, Ergo, these called the Church Redeemed, etc. must needs be a Church
Visible: and that as such, and considered according to its Visible State; Then
I say, yet the conclusion touches not us for these that are called the Church
Redeemed, may be granted to be a Church Visible, and that considered as
visible, viz. in relation to some other adjunct of it distinct from that
epithet contained in the subject of the conclusion, viz. the denomination of
Redeemed by the Blood of God; and this argument as thus formed carries no
more. But yet if one shall infer the conclusion thus, Ergo. these are called
the Church Redeemed by the blood of God as a Church Visible, or considered
according to their Visible Church state: Then I say this puts the Syllogism
out of the wits and whole frame of it, takes the medium into the conclusion,
for the minus extremum or attribute of the assumption (for the Syllogism is in
the third figure) and jumbles the majus extremum and minus extremum the
attribute of the Major Proposition, and the attribute of the assumption
together in the attribute of the conclusion, and so makes the Syllogism in
whole, to consist of four terms; in a word, let any man take these premises of
Mr. Hookers, mend them, shape, and change them as he will, he shall never be
able to infer the conclusion that should be inferred to his purpose, that the
Church Visible is called the redeemed by the blood of God, as it is visible, or
according to its visible state.

if any man say, that the Elect are only there intended by that name, I answer,
that conceit is contrary to the very strain of the words and scope of the Text,
for they must attend [(...)] to the whole flock: The charge puts no difference
between person and person, nor most their care be different; nay upon this
ground the Elders should not know, what their care was, nor upon whom they
should bestow it, for they might reply, Lord we cannot search into thy secrets,
who are Elect and Invisible Saints, we cannot discern them, and therefore we
cannot tell how to feed them; whereas by the current and common sense of the
Scriptures, taking redeemed and sanctified as visibly, though not really such,
the stream of the Text runs pleasantly without the least appearance of
doubt. Answ. 1. Reverend Mr. Hooker affirms more then he proves well, in
calling that answer a conceit contrary to the stream of the words and scope of
the Text. His first Argument comes to this much; All these are of the Church,
which is said to be redeemed by the blood of God, whom the Elders and Officers
are required to attend; But the Apostle requires them to attend all the flock
without putting difference between person and person, ergo. all the flock, i.
e. every one of the Visible Church are of that Church which is said to be
redeemed etc. Ans. What ever might be said of his Interpretation of the flock
to be the Visible Church as Visible, we deny the necessity of the Major
Proposition. The flock as it is the object of the Ministers external charge
and administration of Ordinances, may be of a larger extent and comprehension,
then is the signification of the Church as it stands under that attribute of
being redeemed by the blood of God. And that you may see that is not my
conceit, see it expressly given by worthy and Learned Whittaker, in answer to
Bellarmine proving that the Church is Visible from this very Text, de Eccles.
q. 2. c. 2. Resp. ad locum. 5. particulares Ecclesiae (such as was Ephesus, of
which the Apostle is speaking) Christi Religionem profitentes, dicuntur
Ecclesia Synecdochic^s, propter sanctos nimirum and electos, qui in iis sunt,
sed quia Pastores non possunt electos a reprobis discernere, itaque totum
caetum pascere, regere, curare debent, and judicium Deo relinquere; where it is
evident, that this Learned Author understood, that that whole Congregation or
flock of the Ephesians which the Pastors are required to attend, is called
that Church which is redeemed, not properly, but synecdochically, because of a
part of it; and that is in effect as much as to say, not the whole flock, but a
part of it, is the Church redeemed by the blood of God. The second argument:
nay upon this ground the Elders should not know, etc. To say it, with reverence
to the memory of the Author, is clearly to any body of common judgment,
exceedingly weak; For, 1. How follows that, if the Church redeemed by the
blood of God, be the Elect only, then the Elders should not know what their
care was, nor upon whom they should bestow it, for it must have this for a
reason of it, that Church which is said to be redeemed is the only object of
the Elders care, which they are required to attend. This we deny, we say they
are part of it, with Whittaker. 2. How weak is that, they might reply, we
cannot search into thy secrets to perceive who are Elect -- and therefore we
cannot tell how to feed them. Then it seems by the Reverend man's reasoning,
when our Lord laid that charge upon Peter, Joh. 20. feed my Sheep, my Lambs,
which are no other, but these same he speaks of, Joh. 10. 26, 27. i. e. only
elect ones, v. 27, 28, 29. he might have replied, Lord I cannot search thy
secrets to know who are these thine elect; and therefore I cannot tell how to
feed them. It is not necessary or a Pastor to feed the Elect, that he know
distinctly who are the singular persons by the head, but for feeding by public
Doctrine, it is sufficient that he know them confusedly, that they are there in
the Congregation; and if he have any grounds of a positive judgment concerning
particular persons, that indeed gives him further advantage to apply himself to
those in a more particularly applicatory way. If indeed it were the Ministers
work to feed efficaciter, to give the increase (as the Apostle expresses the
actual efficaciousnesse, or efficiency of grace) and they were required to
feed the elect that way, I confess if the Lord did not distinctly point out
the particular persons to them; then they might make such a reply, Lord I
cannot search into thy secrets to perceive who are these, etc. but the
efficiency of grace is in Gods own hand alone, and the Minister has upon him
but an external, moral, suasive administration, which he is to dispense for
the good of the elect, but he needs not for that know them distinctly, it is
enough, he knows they are there, where he dispenses them, and let God discern
and wail them out from the rest. 3. It is a groundless supposition, and
contrary to the truth, that in the current and common sense of Scripture, that
redeemed being spoken of spiritual redemption from sin, and eternal wrath,
(as for the name [sanctified] it is not in this text, and therefore is
impertinently brought in here) is taken for redeemed visibly, though not
really. I doubt he can bring many passages of Scripture, wherein it can with
any appearance be so exponed; yea visibly redeemed, is an expression in my
judgment strange to Scripture: Let this suffice us in answer to Mr. Hooker in
this particular: We doubt not but Mr. Rutherfurd, will have more full and
acurate considerations on it.

Lockier to take the same to his consideration; if the Church which Ephesians. 5.
25, 26, 27. Christ is said to have loved, and given himself for, that he might
sanctify and cleanse it, be not the Visible Church, as such, and so all
members of the Visible Church, then neither is it so to be taken here; the
consequence and connection of this proposition, is necessary and clear, because
the attribute enunciate of it in both places is all one upon the matter; for
what else is it, that Christ loved the Church and gave himself for it, that,
etc. but that he redeemed it by his own blood; But that, Ephesians. 5. by the Church
is meant only the elect, i. e. the Invisible Church, is the constant Doctrine
of all Orthodox Divines in their disputes against the Remonstrants universal
Redemption, for the Redemption of the elect only, and likewise of all Orthodox
Divines writing against Papists, on the Question concerning the members of the
true, Invisible Church, the Mystical body of Christ, and also upon the
Question of the Visibility of the Church: I instance but a testimony of one,
viz. Learned Whittaker, de Eccles. q. 1. c. 9. tert. arg. where you shall find
him not only affirm, but solidely prove this we say, reasoning thus from the
place: Christ is not the Head This is to be understood of such headship as has
allusion to the head of the natural body, which has a real influence into
the body; so no doubt Christ is an head, in a political sort to the Visible
Church, having a moral influence, by command, etc.
, but of that Church which he shall save, which he shall present to himself on
the day of Judgment, glorious, not having spot or wrinkle: But only the
predestinate shall be saved, Ergo. only the Elect belong to the Church of
Christ, i. e. the Church mentioned there; and to Bellarmin's answer, that
Christ is Head to that Church which he shall not save, he says, falsissimum
esse: Read that whole paragraph, and you shall find sundry other solid
Arguments brought by him from that context, to prove that only the elect are
that Church spoken of there. 2. Again I desire him to look forward from v. 28.
to ver. 30. of this very 20. chap. of the Acts, and see what the Apostle says,
also of your own selves shall men arise speaking perverse things, to draw away
Disciples after them: Whether we expone of your own selves of the whole body of
the Church of Ephesus, or particularly of the Elders and Officers thereof, is
all one to our purpose: It will not be denied that the Officers were members of
the Church of Ephesus, and as Christians were partakers of the common
Privileges and Titles competent to the Visible Church; now if Paul shall be
conceived to speak, that redeemed by the blood of Christ (let it be out of the
positive judgment of charity, and so far as he could judge) universally of all
the Visible Church of Ephesus; how could this consist with what he says, v.
30. Surgendi verbo, quo utitur, significat iam lupos illos fovere clandestinam
perniciem donec occasion sibi data erumpant, Calv. in loc.
that he knew there was some amongst them presently fostering secret and
clandestine wickedness, who would afterward openly kyth, apostatize from the
truth, and become seducers of others. Could the Apostle have a judgment such
as is mentioned, of such that they were Redeemed by, etc. Sure, understand the
Word, v. 20. as Mr. Lockier would, and we shall have clearly contradictory
judgments of Paul at once: I judge the Church of Ephesus Universally, all and
every one of you Redeemed; and yet I know some among you are lurking traitors
who will kyth afterward: he says not, may be some of you will, but positively
some of you will.

Philippians is cited chap. 1. v. 6. and chap. 4. v. 15, 16. For the latter, I
see nothing in it that has any color of a ground for his point, nor yet does
the former hold forth a proof of it: The Apostle writes to all the Saints at
Philippi, and v. 6. declares the confidence that he had, that God who had begun
the work in them would perfect it to the coming of the Lord Jesus; Will it
follow hence that all and every one of the Visible Church of Philippi were
real Saints so far as man could judge, The 6. verse. by the Orthodox
writing-against the Remonstrants upon the head of perseverance, is applied only
to the Elect and true Believers, in the judgment of verity, or truth of the
thing it self. See Ames. Coron. art. 5. arg. 2. proving this by solid reasons.
no Logic will evince this from these words cited: If he had taken in the 7.
verse. he might had a fairer show of an argument, even as it is meet for me to
think so of you all, because I have you in my, heart, in as much as both in my
bonds and in defense and confirmation of the Gospel, ye all are partakers of my
grace. Here indeed I acknowledge is a judgment of charity passed upon them all
at Philippi, as truly gracious, and such as God would perfect his Work in, and
thinks not that it can be exponed so as to be understood, only of that whole
Church collectively: for as it is well marked by judicious Amesius on the place
now cited, the Apostle in this v. puts in the Universal particle All, which
he has not in the former, wherein he expresses a certain assured judgment of
faith ((...), being persuaded of this very thing) of perseverance of these he
speaks of, and therefore that being spoken indefinitely, this must be
understood universally of all and every one of them; it is very evident that in
the following verse. where that particle is put in, though the act of judgment
be less intensive, but a judgment of charity, a hoping and probable
estimation (and indeed the word is changed, it is here (...)) yet the object is
of larger extension and must be understood of them universally. Then will you
say, do you not yield the point in contraversie, to Mr. Lockier. Answ. No
ways: 1. Remember what we said; ^e main point which Mr. Lockier should have
proven to make out his general Doctrine or Thesis, was, that these particular
Churches did gather, that is, receive in persons to their visible society,
formally upon this account, and no otherwise, that they were truly Godly so
far as men could judge, or as others say in the judgment of charity; But all
that I grant here of the Church of Philippi, is that they were all such de
facto and quoad eventum, and no more can be proven from the Text. 2. Though
this much be granted of this Church, yet his induction is not made out, no, not
as to this much: Because neither has he proven, nor can be proven so much of
the rest of the Churches which he named: Yea this is only the Church mentioned
in the Epistles that has so high and general commendation as this, except it
be that there is an hint of the like title given to the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians.
5. v. 5. Ye are all the Children of the light. Yet this expression is much
different from that spoken of the Philippians, and may well suffer that
exposition given of it by the Learned Nether-Dutch Interpreters in their notes,
ye are all, namely all who believe in Christ. And indeed it is not likely he
should be Interpreted to speak so of all and every one of the members of that
Church, seeing he not only intimates in both the Epistles, but in the second
positively affirms, that he heard there were among them some that walked
disorderly, working not at all, but busy bodies. Obj, But he bids them not
keep company with them, that they may be ashamed, i. e. as some expone it,
Excommunicate and cast them out of the Church.

Ans. He requires not this to be done to them, but in case of obstinacy: Now I
suppose they had not proven obstinate, but left that disorderly walking, in
taking themselves to work for their living in some calling, so they would
escaped the infliction of that censure; but would that been ground sufficient
presently to hold such who had been so walking before, for truly gracious so
far as men can judge? I doubt much if any man will assert it.

Lockier slips the Colossians in the proof of his induction, but what might
been alleged of it, is alike with what was cited for the Ephesians. For the
Churches of the Jews, first concerning that at Jerusalem, he refers back to
what he has said already out of the Epistle to the Hebrews; and we refer the
Reader to what we answered thereunto. Next for them altogether he cites, 1
Pet. 1, 2, 3. 1 Pet. 5. 13. with Gal. 1. 22. And then to the 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13,
14. and then adds, the Church of the Jews were such Professors, as endured
persecution, sharp trials for the truth, and were eminently exemplary to the
World this way, as indeed Profession did then generally expose unto, though now
not; and so voluntary Profession there -- signified a great deal more than the
forced Profession of the Gospel, which now we make, under such powers as call
for, and countenance these things, does; which should be observed, and allowed
by them, which compare Profession then, with Profession now, if they dealt
equally in this Controversy. Ans. 1. The Apostle Peter clearly writes to the
Elect, truly regenerated, who have obtained the like precious faith with
himself, are kept by the power of God to salvation, rejoiced in the hope
thereof, though they had not seen Christ yet loved him, believing on him,
rejoiced with joy unspeakable and full of glory, already (in the first fruits,
and undoubted interest) received the end of their faith, the salvation of their
souls. What? Are these things that use to be given or attributed to hypocrites
(such as Mr. Lockiers Visible Saints may be) and that in such a positive way?
Or were there never a hypocrite in these Visible Churches of the Jews? 2. The
place of the Thessalonians speaks of the Churches in Iudaea indefinitely and
collectively, not universally; says not that all and every one of them endured
such persecution and trialls, again, suppose they did so after they were Church
members, this is nothing to the point in hand; the Question is upon what
account they were taken in. It seems he saw this, and therefore subjoyneth
that Profession did then generally expose unto such trialls. But undertaking of
a profession of Religion exposing to trials, if there be not actual
assaulting, is no sufficient ground or evidence positively to hold a man truly
gracious so far as men can judge. 3. Such wonders and signs as the Gospel was
accompanied with then, may be as forcible to draw men without change of heart,
unto the profession of it (as we see in Simon Magus) as a Magistrates call and
countenancing of it, when there is no such miracles and signs; and therefore
there is not such inequality between profession then and now, nor such inequall
dealing in comparing the one profession with the other as Mr. Lockier imagines.

Asia, beside Ephesus, Rev. 2. and 3. which I think he did forbear to bring in
his induction, because their case would spoken too clear against his
undertaking) nor made good in the particulars, as to the thing affirmed of
them, he forms an objection at his own pleasure against himself, and assayes
to answer it; Let us consider both,

If it be objected (says he) that there were wicked persons in these
Churches, therefore we may constitute Churches now in the days of the Gospel
with good and bad, with truly good and seemingly good, such as make only a
profession, though we know nothing of the power of Religion in them. To this I
Answ. 1. Will you with Anabaptists have the Church under the New Testament
constitute only with truly good, and not at all with seemingly good? this
indeed is your frequently repeated assertion in this lecture; But first, it is
contrare to the express judgment of some of the most judicious and advised of
your own side, how often has Mr. Hooker this, that these of whom the Church is
constitute may be seemingly good, not savingly, not really, gilt not gold,
Saints in the judgment of charity though they be not inwardly sanctified. 2.
It contradicts himself in his additionall qualification, which sometimes he
inserteth as far at least as men can judge. Well then, a Church Visible now
in the days of the Gospel may be constitute of any who are truly good as far
as men can judge, but many such are but seemingly good, and really bad; for
man's judgment cannot discern the power of Religion in the heart, neither
intuitively, nor yet by discourse from outward effects infallibly, but only
probably, cui judicio potest subesse falsum, it may be deceived and the object
of it is but (...) which seems but is not always what it is judged to be. 2.
We form not our objection so naked and waterishly as you make it, there were
wicked persons in these Churches, therefore, etc. But take it thus and answer
it then: In these Churches, at least severalls of them, there were persons,
whose ways were such that they could not positively be accounted so far as men
could judge, truly gracious, such as God could bear witness to as sealed for
his by his holy Spirit, and the Churches are not required to un-Church and
Excommunicate any upon that account, that they were not such, as might be so
accounted and judged of, etc. Ergo, etc. But this is not the only objection we
have against this inductive argument, he may find some others before this. Now
to his answer.

a facto ad jus non valet argumentum, because such things are, therefore they
ought to be, will not hold. Because bad men were in the Churches, the general
state of which in such a time of the world, John speaks of Rev. 11. 1, 2.
therefore they should be there, will not follow; for then why is John bid cast
out that which is without, and not measure it, what is allowed to abide, is
rather the Index, showing what is the allowed and proper matter, the true
constitution of Church State. Answ. Here are a heap of things to be noted. 1.
If that maxim hold good a facto ad jus non valet argumentum, because such
things are therefore they ought to be, will not hold; then Mr. Lockier, your
inductive argument for any thing alleged in it falls to the ground without
force; for all that you have alleged in it is a matter of fact; and therefore I
may retort upon you thus: Because these Churches did consist of persons truly
good so far as men could judge (which is the only thing you can allege from
what is said in the Epistles to them, and yet proves not) therefore they should
consist of such only, and no other, will not follow. 2. You wholly loose your
Argument taken from them again if you grant but that de facto there were other
persons in them then truly godly as far as men could judge, at that time when
the Epistles were written to them. For unless you assert that at that time
they were constitute of persons all such, you allege the Epistles to no
purpose, because the Epistles speaks to them with relation to that very time
they were written in. 3. It is rashly and inconsideratlie said by Mr. Lockier,
without exception, limitation, or qualification, (especially he being now
speaking of matters of Religion) a facto ad jus non valet Argumentum, why, then
let all Arguments which Orthodox Writers have brought from the practice of the
Apostles and Primitive Churches registrate in Scripture to prove they ought de
jure so to do, as in the matter of sanctifying the first day of the Week as the
Christian Sabbath, and many others in other matters, be casten as null. If Mr.
Lockier say this, he shall gratify much the Papists for their Doctrine of the
necessity of unwritten traditions; but shall be disclaimed in this by all
Protestant Divines, who give us sundry cases in matters of Religion, wherein it
is good and solid reasoning from facts and practices registrate in Scripture,
to duty; so such persons did, and therefore so ought we to do; especially in
matters of Church Government has this way of reasoning place; the Lord having
left many things belonging thereunto, only in examples of practices (let the
Reader see concerning this purpose the Authors of jus divinum of
Church Government, part. 1. cap. 4.) from which we are to gather and take our
rule: Now amongst other rules belonging to this head, this certainly is one,
what was the practice of Primitive Churches, registrate in Scripture, in matters
of Religion, of common concernment to the Churches in all ages, and is not
dissallowed nor dissapproven in them, especially when many other things are
reproved in them, nor is against a general precept otherwhere in Scripture;
such a practice has the force of a rule; and we may well reason ab hoc facto
ad jus. See Perkins, Heb. 11. 6. page in fol. 29. col. 1. A, so they did,
therefore so may we lawfully. But I assume, these Primitive Churches, admitted
and retained members, all of which were not truly Godly and Saints as far as
men could judge, and were not reproved for this, even when they were reproved
for other things done by them; Nor can their be a general precept shown in the
word contrary thereunto, Ergo, etc. 4. What may seem to be alleged by him from
Rev. 11. 2. as containing such a general precept, is sufficiently discussed
before. The intention and scope of that place is not to hold forth a rule
concerning the ordering of the constitution of the Church, but to foretell an
event that was to come to pass upon the Church in time of Antichrists
prevalencie; that which is without signifies not persons, but the face and
outward state of the Visible Church, and casting out is not un-Churching of
persons, but judicial giving up the outward state of the Visible Church to
Antichrist and his followers, and by measuring there is not meant regulating of
the constitution of a Society, but a typical prediction of the straitness
that Orthodox and Godly Worshippers were to be at that time redacted unto. 5.
But what means Mr. Lockier, when being about to infringe the objection
brought against his induction of these Churches, ( viz. that there were wicked
persons in them) and saying that because bad men were in the Churches it does
not follow, therefore they should be in them, he casts in that, the general
estate of which in such a time of the World John speaks, Rev. 11. 1, 2. what
means he, I say, by such a time of the World wherein the general state of
the Churches were such? if he mean that time wherein the Epistles were written
to the Churches. 1. That passage of the Revelation is impertinently alleged;
for, be the meaning of it what it will, it speaks in relation to another time,
long afterward to come. 2. It is certain it is the alledgeance in his own
induction that these Epistles importe that then they were all constitute of
truly good ones so far as men could judge, If he mean another time then that,
he speaks this as impertinently; for the objection speaks of these Churches in
relation to the time when the Epistles were written to them.

2ly. Says he in his answer, Churches may be negligent, and not so strict to
their rule to examine and prove the grace of God in such as offer to join
themselves, as the Church of Jerusalem did, if Churches do not mind diligently
their rule, they may have evil persons among them enough, and yet not be able
to maintain that it should be so; it is like the Asian Churches, and most of the
first, quickly after the Apostles time grew faulty in this kind. Ans. 1.
Reader, see here pretty Logic: Mr. Lockier in his induction undertook to prove
and conclude a rule from the examples of these particular Churches, that
because these particular Churches were constitute of persons truly good,
therefore all Churches ought to be constitute only of such persons; it is
objected, there were many other persons then such, in these Churches; and now
he answers, Churches (he must apply it to these Churches, else he is
extra^oleas) may be negligent and not so strict to their rule; is not this a
running in a round? These Churches were constitute of such members, Ergo, so
ought all Churches generally to be, if they were constitute of any other, it
was because they were not strict to their rule, i. e. in plain Language,
because they were not constitute as Churches ought to be. 2. But let go this,
and the inductive Argument; for it is clearly quite here, and refuge had to the
general rule. I say where is that rule of examining and proving the grace of
God in such as offer themselves to join, that they were not so strict to as
they should? And where have we an instance of the Church of Jerusalems greater
strictness to that rule then these other Churches? Thus to set down naked
assertions, is it not to despise hearers and Readers? 3. To what purpose do ye
speak of the Churches of Asia, and other first Churches their p^actice after
the Apostles time? The objection speaks of these Churches even as they were
when the Apostles were living and did write to them these Epistles, out of
which you labor to instruct your induction of them.

3ly. Or Churches (says he) though very diligent and duly strict in this
matter, yet are not infallible, and therefore hypocrites may deceive a Church for
a time, and so get in where they have no right to be; the Apostle Jude does
confess so much, v. 4. not only persons may thus creep into the Church, but
also into office, and still escape the first judgment made upon them by the
Churches of which they are. The Apostle does intimate this to Timothy, lay
hands suddenly on no man, and his charge on this may make a man tremble, 1 Timothy
5. 21, 22. We are, as appears by this compared with other Scriptures, to use
all care as much as in us lies, to prevent by the first judgment of the
Church, all that are not godly, from coming to a state to which they are not
approved by God, but if men by subtilty creep in where they should not be, they
are to be cast out by the after judgment of the Church, which is
Excommunication, when it does evidently appear that they are hypocrites, though
not drunkards, and such kind of bodily-sinners, which is far less simply
considered then hypocrisy, which after-judgement is an Ordinance to cleanse
the house of God and keep it pure, And does strongly confirm the point I am
on, that the matter of the Visible Church should be real Saints. Ans. 1. All
this is just nothing to the purpose in hand. Mr. Lockier to prove his general
Doctrine, that a Church Visible ought to be constitute, in its matter, of such
as are truly Godly, at least so far as men can judge, had undertaken to show
by induction, that these particular Churches were constitute of persons all
such. It was objected that they had in them some others. Now here he tells us
in answer that Churches not being infallible may be deceived (and consequently
so might their be) in taking in such as ought not to be within. Once granting
that it was so in these Churches, hes he not quite again his alledgeance
concerning them in his inductive Argument; and taken him to the general rule,
which was the thing he undertook to prove, and but begs the thing in Question?
But to the matter in this branch of the Answer. Then, 2. When he says
hypocrites have no right to be in the Church, or, as afterward, should not be
there, if the meaning were, that men, though they make a profession of
Religion, yet continuing hypocrites and graceless in their hearts do sin in
adjoining themselves to the Visible Church and that they have no right in foro
interiori this we should not deny; but if his meaning be, that no hypocrites
have a jus Ecclesiasticum and in foro exteriori to be in the Visible Church, we
deny it, and he shall never be able to prove it. 3. It Is true that Jude says,
that such men creept in unawars into the fellowship of the Church, who
afterward kythed to be such, as I shall not deny, they ought to have been
casten out: But Jude says not, that these when they made a Profession of
Religion, and did not vent such abominations, had no jus Ecclesiasticum to be
admitted by the Church into their fellowship. 4. All that Mr. Lockier here
brings in concerning admitting persons into Offices in the Church is idly and
impertinently alleged to the point in hand: We acknowledge that none ought to
be put in such Offices, but such as give evidences of all manner of godly
conversation; We have an express and full rule for this, 1 Timothy 3. And hands
ought not to be laid upon any man, without a foregoing trial and proof of
these things. But where will ye show us in all the Scripture from the one end
to the other such a rule requiring such qualifications in persons, and such a
trial of them before, and in relation to their admission into the fellowship
of the Visible Church; And to be under Pastoral care and the Ministry of the
Word? If he could show us this, either in precept or approved practice, we
should soon yield, and be at an end of this controver^e; But this he cannot,
nor ever will be able to show; and therefore the reasoning from the care and
acuracy to be used in trying persons, who are already in the Church, in
relation to admitting them to places of office, unto admission of persons into
the society of the Visible Church, is unreasonable. 5. When he says that men
are to be cast out by Excommunication, when it does evidently appear, that they
are hypocrites, though not drunkards, etc. I desire, 1. That it may be observed
that an hypocrite may be taken in a double sense. First, for such an one as
grossly and knowingly counterfeits a Profession of Christianity, and so indeed
is nothing else but an histrionicall stage-professor; Secondly, more largly for
any that has a profession of Christianity, wherein, may be, he is morally
serious, but has not within a Principle of true, supernatural, saving grace:
Such are all unregenerate persons in the Church, such an one was that young Man
in the Gospel, whom our Lord is said to have loved, and the Lawyer of whom he
said, thou art not far from the Kingdom of Heaven. Now if we speak of
hypocrites in the former sense, if men appear to be such, I shall confess that
if they have been within they are to be cast out by Excommunication, yet in the
order that Christ has prescribed, after due admonition and evidence of
obstinacy and incorrigiblenesse in the evil, and of this I shall say more then
Mr. Lockier, viz. that it is far greater, not only then drunkenness, and other
such bodily sins simply in genere peccati in the nature of sin; But, if it
evidently appear, also in genere scandali in the nature of scandal (which is
the ground and consideration upon which censure proceeds,) because it is a
very mocking of God in the highest degree: But if we speak of hypocrites in the
latter sense; We deny utterly that every man appearing to be such is to be
Excommunicated and casten out of the Society of the Visible Church. If a man
profess seriously Religion, submitting himself to Ordinances, though there
were appearance, yea though it were revealed by God, that yet he were not
Regenerate, -and endued with true supernatural Grace, I say such an one were
not to be excommunicate; Let Mr. Lockier, or any for him, show a warrant of
Scripture for Excommunicating a man for non-regeneration. The Doctrine of all
Orthodox Divines hither till, concerning the object of Excommunication, and
that grounded upon the Word of God, is that which is shortly expressed by the
Learned and Reverend Professors of Leyden Synop. pur. theol, Objectum circa
quod exercetur haec Disciplina Ecclesiastica sunt illi qui fratres nominantur;
causa vero est vita prava vel Doctrina perversa, nec ideo statim, ubi quis
frater nominatus in hujusmodi scandala incidit, a corpore Ecclesiae excludi
debet, quemadmodum quibusdam Anabaptistis in usu est: Sed post privatas demum,
and publicas Ecclesiae admonitiones contemptas and rejectas, sicuti Christi
verba aperte significant, Mat. 18.] disp. 48. these. 25, 26. And though
drunkenness and such like bodily-sins be less then hypocrisy in this sense,
i. e. non-regeneration, simply, and in genere peccati in the nature of sin, yet
it is not less in genere scandali, in the kind of scandal and offense unto
the Church: Nay this has not the nature of scandal at all. 6. Yet Mr. Lockier
according to the genius of his Doctrine ought to say not only men, when it does
evidently appear that they are hypocrites, but even if it does not evidently
appear that they are truly gracious, and we cannot discern in them the power of
godliness, they are to be Excommunicate: For his Doctrine is that none are fit
matter to be admitted or permitted to constitute a Visible Church, but such as
are truly Godly so far as men truly Godly can judge and discern. I believe
most of the Independent way will disclaim him in this. 7. Excommunication is
an Ordinance to keep the house of God pure and according to what it ought to
be, in point of duty, in foro exteriori, and in order to salvation, this we
grant, only in this sense, that it is an Ordinance tending toward this as a
means, (for this is an end of Excommunication that the spirit may be saved in
the day of the Lord Jesus) but not in this sense that the Church is obliged
thereby to effectuate it quoad eventum, this belongs to God alone.
Excommunication is an Ordinance to keep the Church pure and according to what
it ought to be, in point of qualification in foro exteriori, in order to
external Visible Church State, even quoad eventum; But now what this
qualification in foro exteriori in order to Church State is, is the thing in
Question. So Mr. Lockier in his reasoning from Excommunication to his Doctrine,
either alleges nothing to the purpose, taking his antecedent in the former
sense; or begs the Question, taking it in the latter. 8. In the conclusion as
propounded here: First note, If only real Saints be the proper matter of a
Visible Church, and saving grace the complexion of it; then all Saints so far
as men can judge, are not fit matter; for these are not necessarily real
Saints, simply. 2. When as he says, not one known to be otherwise, he should
have said answerably to the former words, no not one, not known, so far as men
can judge, to be such. 3. [Can justifiably enter] may be conceived, either in
point of duty incumbent to themselves who enter, and so the meaning is this,
men joining themselves to the Visible Church and making profession of Religion,
without true faith and repentance, are not justifiable in this before God; or
it may be conceived to be spoken of the Churches active admission of men into
external Church Communion, and the sense is this, it is not justifiable that
men not having saving grace should by the Church be admitted to enter into the
fellowship of the Visible Church: If in any thing, certainly in propounding
Doctrines, stating controversies, forming conclusions, ambiguities should be
shunned. We grant the former sense, but the latter we deny; and it is not yet
proven. This much of the inducti^: Now come we to the fourth way of probation,
by reasons.

SECTION VI. Examination of Mr. Lockyers proofs brought under the name of
reason.


The Church Visible is a building, whereof Jesus Christ is the Rock and
foundation: Therefore the whole Visible Church and all parts of it, consist of
such persons as must be, and bear upon him as a superstruction, (...),
superstructi, Ephesians. 2. 20. And must be among themselves an uniforme, congruous
building (...), v. 22. so as they may stand. Then supposing that consequent
this will be the second process; But such persons as have not true saving
faith, such as Peter's, cannot hold and bear upon Christ, nor can they make up
an uniforme, congruous building that will stand; how can the building stand,
whose materials have not a symmetry, but antilog^, and antistasie, not an
agreement, but a fighting with the foundation and one another, Ergo, they are
not fit materials to constitute the Visible Church. Ans. Truly this reason,
let me say it without offense, is a building that cannot stand, let a man but
touch it, as it were with his finger, and it will to the ground. 1. If it prove
any thing, it proves not only, that de jure the Visible Church ought to be
constitute of materials or members, truly endued with saving grace and faith;
but also it is no true Visible Church which does not de facto consist of
materials all such, i. e. truly in veritate rei endued with true saving grace
and faith, and then likely there was never in the world a true Visible
Christian Church, unless it was that of the eleven after that Judas hanged
himself, or may be that Acts 1. nor ever shall be in the world. For suppose a
Church consisting of members all which may be accounte^ truly gracious so far
as men can judge; yet seeing men's judgments herein are not infallible; some of
them, many of them, yea most of them, are not indeed truly gracious and
believers; Then say I, according to Mr. Lockiers reasoning here, how can these
bear and hold upon Christ who have no faith? And how can that building stand
whose materials have not a symmetrie, etc. Let men judge of them what they
will, and how probably soever, that helps not; for they want the bond by which
they should bear upon Christ, and they have no symmetrie one with another. 2.
It Is grounded upon a mere mistake or false supposition that the building built
upon Christ as a Rock and foundation, Ephesians. 2. 20, 21. is the Visible Church as
such: Mr. Lockier says well, that it is confessed on all hands, that Christ is
the Rock and foundation stone; but he could not say it is agreed upon by all
that the Church Visible is the building that is said to be built upon that
foundation growing up into a holy Temple, etc. Papists indeed say it is the
Visible Church, that they may draw all the privileges of the Church Invisible,
which is the Mystical body of Christ, to the Church visible; and by that means
at least to their own stinking whore the Antichristian Roman Synagogue: But
Orthodox Protestant Divine have ever maintained the contrary, that it is the
Catholic Invisible Church of the elect that is the building built upon Christ
as the Rock and foundation stone (see Whittaker de Eccles. in many places known
to any that has read him) until of late Separatists and Independents have
joined with Papists in this, and drawn all the privileges, proper to the
Church Invisible, which is the Mystical body of Christ, unto every Independent
visible Congregation. Mr. Lockier should have proven, and not merely taken for
granted, that the Visible Church is the building built upon Christ as the
foundation-stone, seeing he knew that it was denied generally by Protestant
Divines. The Visible Church, according to its visible state is not the
building, but the work house wherein the stones are fitted for to be laid in
the building and built up. 3. Mr. Lockier supposes in this Argument that the
Visible Church, i. e. a particular Independent Congregation must be a standing
fast, lasting house, quae non deficiat, which is not to fail, and that
perpetuity is the privilege and property of it, in this also joining with
Papists, against whom all Protestant Divines maintain that to belong only to
the Church of the elect, or if to the Church Visible, not to any particular,
but to the universal. We grant then that any Church Visible is defectible and
may indeed fall, and that even upon that ground amongst others that there is
not an uniformity and homogeneousnesse amongst all parts of it, some are of the
seed of the Woman, really good; some be, at the best, seemingly good, and
really bad, and the seed of the Serpent (and Mr. Lockiers way will not make it
to be otherwise) and we confess that it is by the finger of God, that any
Church is any long space kept standing: Yet God will keep Visible Churches
standing, for all the asymmetry and heterogeneousnesse of members amongst
themselves (as to their inward, spiritual, eternal state) so long as he has a
work for gathering and building up his elect amongst them, for whose sake it is
that a Visible Church and his Ordinances therein are set up. You will say, but
does not God this by means? Ans: yea verily he uses means which he blesses
and makes effectual for that end, to the keeping down of the evils that are
in many and would be ready to break out to the undoeing of all, as long as he
sees meet; as the Preaching of the Word, exercise of Discipline against
scandals; but God never prescribed this as a means for keeping up Visible
Churches that no persons should be admitted or permitted to be in the Visible
Church, but such as are symmetricall and homogeneall in true saving grace. This
is a means altogether unpracticable by men, unless God by an immediate
revelation should point out the men.

Lockier for the strengthening of this first reason brings in 1 Cor. 3. from
verse. 10. thus: Christ (says he, it should be Paul) does argue from this
medium, that suitable to the foundation should be the building: otherwise such
uncongruous superstructions will be fired and they which make them, verse. 10,
11, 12, 13. -- in which words the Apostle argues as I do, that if Christ be
laid as the Foundation-Stone in a building, it is good for men to take heed that
they make congruous superstructions, least all the building fall about their
ears: and see how he applies this verse. 16, 17. incongruous superstructions if
it be in point of Doctrine, it makes incongruous matter, it defiles the
Temple of God, destroys it, says the margent; and such will God destroy; for
the Temple of God (says he) is holy, which Temple ye are, i. e. such are the
Temple which are holy, which have the Spirit of God dwelling in their heart,
and none else. Ans. 1. I profess I cannot forbear to say that I find Mr.
Lockier abuse much Scripture in the little bounds of this Piece, by most
impertinent Citations. What is there in this place to the purpose of the
constitution of the Visible Church as to its matter or Members? the Apostle
here ver. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. is speaking of Doctrines fundamental and
superstructed, and that these ought to be suitable and agreeable to that, what
is this to the matter of the Visible Church? Ay, Yes, by Analogy would he say
first, because the Apostle uses the same medium and argues as I do, that if
Christ be laid as a foundation, etc. Ans. And must that hold Universallie?
because one using a medium in one matter reasons truly and solidlie, therefore
another using that medium in another matter and reasoning that same way for
form, must also reason truly and solidelie? What if this other err in the
application of the medium, and if some of his premises and principles, whereof
his argument consists, be false upon the matter? so it is here: The Apostle
reasons well and concludently upon that principle, that the superstructure
should be suitable to the foundation that Teachers should take heed what
Doctrines they teach in the Church; Because he assumeth well that Christ or the
Doctrine of Christ is the foundationpoint of Doctrine in Religion, and all
other Doctrines are the superstructures; But Mr. Lockier assumeth amiss that
the Visible Church as such, is the superstructure built upon Christ as the
Foundation. The Scripture says no where so, a Visible Church State, or to be
received unto, or to be in the Visible Church state, is not to be built on
Christ as a Foundation, but is to be taken in under, or to be under the means
of being built, either first or in a further degree of advancement, on Christ
as a Foundation. But further (says he) see how he applies this, ver. 16, 17.
incongruous superstructions, if in point of Doctrine, etc. Ans. This is
somewhat spoken in the mist, but for ought I can conjecture or conceive, the
meaning seems to be this; that wrong Doctrines taught in the Church makes
persons unholy, and so unfit matter for the Church to consist of; and so
destroys or defiles the Temple of God, which is, as he conceives, the Visible
Church. And thus he will have the Apostle, v. 16, 17. to apply that which he
had been speaking in the preceding verses. Now if this be not a forceing of
the purpose and meaning of these two verses, let any understanding man in the
Christian World judge. The plain, genuine intention and purpose of the Apostle
in these verses is, to warn and dehort the Corinthians from defiling and
laying waste the Church, either by corrupt, idle, or curious Doctrine not
suitable to the foundation Christ; or by Schismatic addicting themselves to
this or that man who were teachers among them (which was the purpose whereupon
he began this discourse, v. 4.) or both; and that upon these three grounds. 1.
The consideration of the dignity they were advanced to, that they were the
Temple of God, consecrated by the indwelling Spirit to him. 2. That such things
did defile, and lay them waste. 3. That God would severly punish such as any
ways defiled and destroyed them that were a Temple consecrated to him. Ay but,
3. Says he, it is added, for the Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are,
i. e. such ar^ ^he Temple of God which are holy, which has the Spirit of God
dwelling in their hearts, and none else. Ans. 1. Mr. Lockier then conceives
that these words are brought in as a reason why he that teaches wrong or
incongruous Doctrines defiles or destroys the Temple of God: To this sense,
the Visible Church consists of such as are holy, and hes the Spirit dwelling in
them and none else, therefore men by teaching incongruous Doctrine, making men
in the Church incongruous matter, i. e. unholy, destroys the Temple, i. e. the
Visible Church. A mere forgerie contrary to clear shining evidence of the
Apostles context, wherein any man that is not blind may see that these words
for the Temple of God is holy, are given as a reason why these that defile the
Temple will be severly punished of God; the reason of which consequence clearly
intimate in the words is, because God will not endure the defiling or violating
of that which is holy and consecrate to himself. 2. True indeed, such are the
Temple of God which are holy and none else? So Mr. Lockier supposes, but
without reason or proof. Sure, the Apostle borrows this deno^ation from the
typical Temple of Jerusalem, but that was no type of a Visible Church, but of
Christ's Mystical body and every member thereof. And hence I reason thus, the
denomination of the Temple of God is such as is competent to, and predicable of
these to whom it is attributed, not only collectively, i. e. to the whole
society of them; but also unto every one severally Martyr in loc. non solum
fidelium caetus, qui Ecclesia dicitur, templum Dei dicitur; sed unusquisque
credentium in Christum reperitur ita cognominatus; nam postea de fornicatione
agens Apost^lus (cap. 6.) corpus cujusque credentis vocat templum spiritus
Sancti.
: But if it be taken for the Visible Church it could not be attributed to every
member thereof: Every one in it is not a Visible Church. 3. If such only be the
Temple of God in Mr. Lockiers sense, i. e. a Visible Church; which are holy and
has the Spirit of God dwelling in their hearts and none else; he may seek such
a Visible Church in the new world of the Moon.

In the end of this paragraph he prompts us another Argument equivalent to this
first, from this that Christ is called the Head, and the Church the Body: In
form it must stand thus: If Christ be the Head, there must be an
homogenealnesse in the Church to him, he means they must be truly gracious,
and endued with true saving faith; But Christ is the Head, and the Visible
Church his Body. Therefore, etc. The reason of the connection of the first
Proposition is, because else there can be no mutual derivation from one to
another. Ans. 1. Protestant Divines will with one consent deny your assumption
as Popish, and tell you that it is the Church of the Elect that is the Body of
Christ the Head. See but Whittaker de Eccles. q, 1. c. 13. page 449. in fol.
Yet. 2. For more clear and particular answer we are to consider, that Christ
may be said to be the Head, and the Church his body, either in a political
sense, as a King is called the Head of the Commonwealth, and the People are
called his Body: Or (to speak so) in a physical sense according to the
similitude of man's body. Now we grant that Christ is a Head to the Visible
Church, and the Visible Church has unto him the relation of a body in the
former sense, Christ is a King of the Visible Church, and the Visible Church is
his political Body: But hence it follows not that there must be such a
homogenealnesse in the Church Visible as Mr. Lockier means, that it be endued
with true faith and have the Spirit dwelling in their hearts. And as to the
reason of the connection of the proposition, we answer, such a homogenealnesse
is not requisite for such a derivation, as is from a head political to its
political body; this derivation being only moral, by commands, prohibitions
and the like moral actings. But Christ is not a Head in the latter sense, (as
the head in the natural body is) to the Church Visible as such; nor is the
Visible Church a body to him in this sense, but only vocatione activa and in
external profession: Neither is that derivation from Christ unto the Church,
whereby it grows up in the Lord, unto the Church as a Visible Church, or
considered according to its visible constitution; But unto the Church
Invisible, internal, Mystical as such.

If the Visible Church be the Church of the Living God, the pillar and stay of
truth, and consequently such as should bear up the truth into the World, and be
a stay to truth holding it out firmly and faithfully in the midst of all
trials; and such as in which God lives, and dwells, and walks. Then none can
be matter or members of the Visible Church, but real Saints. For why? Does God
live and dwell in dead persons, who only make a Profession of Religion? Will
such persons be a stay to truth and the things of God? Will they be a stay to
truth (...) firmamentum, as the firmament to the stars, who fall from Heaven
themselves? And so how can God have glory in the Church throughout all ages.
But the Visible Church is the Church of the Living God, the pillar and ground
of truth, 1 Timothy 3. 5. in which God lives, dwells, walks, Ergo, etc. Ans. Mr.
Lockier still in this, as in all his other Arguments, shows that in propounding
his Doctrine, he added that qualification, truly gracious so far as men can
judge, but dicis causa, and in show, to avoid for a while the odium of the
greatest Anabaptists Tenent of the matter or members of the Visible Church. For
such as may be gracious and Godly so far as men can judge, men's judgment being
not infallible in this (as himself confesses) may be destitute of the power of
Godliness in their hearts, and so such as will not hold out truth firmly in the
midst of all trials, may be but dead persons, and so such as in whom God does
not live, walk and dwell. 2. As to that first property and character attributed
to a Visible Church from, 1 Timothy 3. 15. by Mr. Lockier: First, I would ask him
if in good earnest he means that to be a property of a Visible Church rightly
constitute in its matter, as it should be, that it will bear up the truth and
things of God firmly and faithfully to the world in the midst of all trials?
Sure, this is the very thing that Papists allege from this place for the
unerrabilitie and indefectibilitie of the Visible Church against which all
Protestant Divines disputes. Yea it is much more, for Papists attribute this
only to the Catholic Church Visible, acknowledging that all particular Visible
Churches may err and make defection, and let the truth and things of God fall
down; excepting only the Roman Church, because they make it to be the Catholic
Church virtually: but Mr. Lockier acknowledges no Church Visible, but an
Independent Congregation, and will have this to be the property of any
particular Visible Church, and therefore propounds the subject of his
conclusion here thus, a Church Visible, i. e. any Visible Church; now let me
put him further to it; either there was never a Church Visible rightly
constitute for matter from the beginning, seeing all the first constitute
Churches have made defection and let truth fall down, which if he say, besides
that it is absurd in it self, I ask why then did he a little before bring us
paterns of right constitute Churches from these first mentioned in Scripture?
Or if they were right constitute, how comes it that they made defection and did
not bear up and hold out the truth and things of God, but did let them fall? If
he answer, that came to pass, because they kept not a right constitution for
their matter. I repone, that taks not away the force of the Question, For that
same if it was so was a not bearing up and holding out firmly and faithfully
the things of God, and so the Question returns upon this. 2. But to answer
directly to the place; though Interpreters have some variety amongst themselves
about the meaning of it: Yet never one of them acknowledges that Interpretation
which Mr. Lockier gives, but opposes it, and refuteth it in Papists: Some
indeed expone the attribute the pillar and ground of truth much as he does; but
these by the Church to which it is attributed, und^rstand not the Visible
Church, but the Invisible of Elect. So Whittaker de Eccles. q. 3. c. 2. illa
quidem Ecclesia quae est columna and firmamentum veritatis nunquam potest
deficere: Sed quod assumit adversarius, illam Ecclesiam esse Visibilem, illud
affirmo esse falsissimum: Invisibilem enim esse affirmo and demonstro, etc. and
often otherwhere. Others again understand the subject as he does, by the Church
to be meant the Visible Church of Ephesus, but these expone the attribute the
pillar and ground of truth, not of what the Church Visible will do always, de
facto; but what is its duty and dignity, elogium hoc Ecclesiae dignitatem and
officium describit: Non autem quod in ea perpetua luce fulgeat. Gomar. specul.
ver. Eccles. c. 2. So Wall. loc. com. de Eccles. milit. Resp. 1. Hoc dicitur de
Ecclesia Ephesina que tamen periit. 2. Ergo, respectu officii sic vocatur. See
more concerning this place in learned Gomar. in the place cited; also in his
commentar upon the Gallatians, c. 2. in the second Tome of his works, page 244,
245. where you have an excellent discourse of the diverse Orthodox
Interpretations thereof, both ancient and modern Divines. We pass here Camer.
Interpretation of this place, joining these words, pillar and ground of truth,
not with that which goes before, but that which follows.


Cor. 6. 16. We Ans. With all Protestant Divines, that it is not the Visible,
but the Invisible Church, that is the Temple of the living God in which he
lives, dwells, and walks. See Whittaker de Ec^ces. q. 1 c. 11. page 442.
To omit many other Arguments for proof of this, take but this one from the
Text, the Temple of the Living God, in this place, is taken in such a sense, as
that it is spoken and praedicated of singular persons, severally, as well as
collectively and jointly: But if it signify the Visible Church it cannot be
predicated of every one of the persons severally; each person is not a Temple
in this sense, a Visible Church, Ergo, etc. Obj. But the Apostle is speaking
here to the Visible Church of Corinth. Ans. True, but every thing he speaks
of them, is not for that, competent to them as a Visible Church.

Lockier closes this reason, and so how can God have glory in the Church
throughout all ages? Ephesians. 3. 21. Ans. And does continuation of the Glory of God
in the Church throughout all ages, depend upon his particular way of
constituting particular Visible Congregations of all true Saints, and a
particular Congregations firmness and constancy in holding out the truth? Hes
God then not been glorified in the Church throughout the many preceding
generations, wherein there was never heard of Churches so constitute, until of
yesterday Separatists and Independents erected theirs? And yet wail them as
well as they will, they shall never get one such as Mr. Lockier would be at in
this Argument. And how many particular Churches have fallen away, and for their
part letten truth fall?

Malachi 1. 11. must be thus: If the matter of a Visible Church be not persons
truly Godly, then there cannot be offered up in Gods house a pure offering, and
the Churches of the Gentiles cannot fulfill that Prophecy, Mal. 1. 11. For
why? Unto the impure and unbeleeving all things are so; every man's offering is
as he is, let his offering be what it will, let a man make up his offering of
never so much cost and worth, yet it is still in the account of God as the man
is; if the man be impure so is his offering; But it is contrary to that
Prophecy to say the latter, Ergo. etc. Ans. Mr. Lockier himself will not be
able to avoid the stroke of this Argument; no, not by his own way, as some
times he expresses it, for thereby all such as may be accounted truly godly
so far as men can judge are to be acknowledged and admitted as matter of a
Visible Church; now many of these may be, and undoubtedly are really impure and
unbeleeving, and so of necessity must their offering be impure. If it be said,
yet it is not the fault of the admitters that they do so. Ans. That Is nothing
to the purpose, for whether they be faulty or not, still it stands good, that
by that way it cannot be avoided but impure and unbeleeving will be in the
Visible Church, such as cannot offer a pure offering. 2. It reproacheth the
dispensation and wisdom of the blessed Lord God himself, because he hes not
left in his Word a rule and way whereby the Church Visible may be constitute so
as that Prophecy and his decree revealed therein concerning his service among
the Gentiles may be fulfilled, for he hes given no rule whereby the Church
Visible may be gotten so constitute as that all the matter thereof shall be
persons truly Godly; But there may be and cannot but be, in it many impure and
unbeleeving who cannot offer a pure offering. But 3. To answer directly, we
deny the connection or consequence of the first proposition; it is grounded upon
a false supposition, that there can be no pure offering in the Church, unless
all the matter, that is, members of the Visible Church, be truly godly. What?
may there not be a pure offering to God in the Church, and so that Prophecy be
fulfilled of the Churches of the Gentiles, if some in the Churches Visible be
truly Godly, though all be not such? Therefore he takes pains without
necessity to prove that impure and unbeleevers cannot offer a pure offering;
that we grant (I mean not this materially and objectively, for so an impure man
may offer a pure offering) he should have proven to make his consequence good,
that if all the matter be not such as cannot offer a pure offering there can be
no pure offering in the Church at all. If Mr. Lockier say here, that not only
the offering of the unbeleeving and impure themselves, but also the offering of
all that are in the Visible Church Communion with them, is impure; This is
plain and down right Separatism, and is disclaimed of all the pious and learned
amongst the Independents, at least in dogmate, and is most contrary to the Word
of God.

Pet. 2. 5. but to no purpose for the point in hand, and what he comments on
it, is to no purpose We grant it all, 1. That Christ is a suitable foundation
to the superstructure there mentioned. 2. The Stones must be living to make a
Spiritual House. 3. That else they cannot be a Holy Priesthood, to offer up
Spiritual Sacrifices, holy and acceptable to God through Christ. That the
offering and Offerer are one; That the offering may be Spiritual, Holy, and
acceptable, the Person offering must be such; That, persons that have but only
a profession of Religion, are dead stones: But what is all this to the point?
can there be no Spiritual offering in the Visible Church, if all be not such
as can offer a Spiritual offering? that is the thing should been alleged to
strengthen the former Argument, but it is evidently false. If it be said that
the place may be alleged by it self, as holding forth an instance of the
general Doctrine that that Church the Apostle is speaking to was constitute of
all such. I answer, the Apostle is not speaking to any particular Visible
Church, but to all the effectually called Elect Jews scattered throughout
Pontus, Galatia, etc. cap. 1. 1, 2, 3. If it be said, but he intended his
Epistle to the several particular Churches Visible in these several parts; I
Ans. True, but it follows not therefore that every thing he says to them,
is spoken of them as a Visible Church, and so spoken of all and every one of
them in that state: What is spoken by way of declaration and imposition of
duty, may be, is spoken to all and every one; But what is spoken of by way of
assertion, as a privilege or blessing existing, it is not spoken Universally
of all and every on in their visible society; But indefinitely, which may be
verified though it be competent but to some among them; Yea, though it were
spoken Universally of them all; Yet it would only prove what they were de facto
and quoad eventum, and not what their Visible Church ought to have been by
necessity of a command, that it might be a right constitute Visible Church.

J^ws be to be provoked by the glory and purity of his Worship and Worshippers,
then a Visible Church, i. e. every Visible Church ought to be constitute of
such matter, i. e. Members, as are all truly Godly; But the former is true,
Ergo, etc. and if thus, then we deny the connection or consequence of the first
Proposition; And my reason, for the denial thereof is this: Because I may say,
if the Churches Visible be de facto such that all or most part of their Members
be truly Godly, and shining in the Power of Godliness, at the time wherein
God has decreed to bring in the Jews, that will be sufficient for provoking
the Jews, although it be not constitute by a Rule or Precept that the Church in
admitting Members into external Church Fellowship, admit none but those that
are truly Godly. And why may we not say, that the Lord will at some time, for
carrying on a design decreed by himself in the way of the dispensation of his
efficacious Grace, make his Visible Church, at least in most part, the Members
thereof, better as to the reality and Power of Religion, then he requires them
to be by way of Rule, relating to Ecclesiastic proceeding with Persons in
admiting them to external Visible Church Communion. In a word, the futurition
of the provocation of the Jews by the Power of Godliness in Gentile
Professors, proves only, that God is to make the Gentile Professors such de
facto, or at most, what they ought to be in point of their duty, for serving
and glorifying God: But proves not that they ought to be such in point of
qualification in foro exteriori Ecclesiae and in relation to admission to the
external society of the Visible Church.

Ergo, the latter also. And I answer: 1. Suppose the consequent be granted in
as large an universality as it can be taken in: Yet it speaks nothing to the
Question in hand. Why? Because only of what is to be de facto and quoad
eventum, by dispensation of effectual Grace in the Visible Church; And not
what ought to be; by rule, of necessity, that the Church Visible may be rightly
constitute in its Visible Church State; and the Question is about this latter,
not that former; And dispensations of effectual Grace are not our rule in
this. 2. Nor yet does it follow of necessity, that even de facto the Church
Visible shall be so constitute, as to its matter in every difference of time,
but only that it shall be at that time that the Jews are to be brought in and
converted to the Christian Faith. Yea, nor does it follow that de facto even
at that time the Church Visible shall be so constitute in its matter, that all
and every Member thereof shall be truly Godly and shining in the
manifestations of Purity and the Power of Godliness; but that so it shall be
for the most part, and commonly in the Visible Church. I acknowledge that a
means of awaking up the Jews to come unto, and embrace the Christian Religion,
will be a more glorious and full Reformation of Christians, both in point of
Worship and in point of conversation: Now Superstition and Antichristian
Idolatry amongst those that are called Christians (which are these they only
see for the most part) is a stumbling block to them that ly in their way at
this day, and I will not say, but the impurity and unrighteousness of
Christians is also a stumbling block to them; Albeit I think they do not so
much stumble at this as at the former, considering that, which is well known in
the places where they live, how much notour and known unrighteousness is
amongst them generally, being for the most part most covetous, exorbitant
usurers, cheaters, etc. most evidently, the deadest, formal, slight in
performance of their way of Worship (as mine eyes have been witnesses) of any
people in the World. Yet I say, I will not deny that this may stumble them, and
they, may be, do pretend it also; Therefore Babylon the Mother of fornications
must, and will down; And the Princes of the earth that have given up their
power to that Whore, will hate her and burn her flesh with fire; and the Lord
will purge and reform his Worship, and Ordinances, and the Christian World
from Superstition and Idolatry: And I believe also that their is a time coming
when there shall be also a more general and shining Reformation of the lives of
Christians; and that both these shall concur as means to provock the Jews to
fall in love with the Christian Religion, and to seek unto Jesus Christ; But
that all and every Professor in the Visible Church shall be truly Godly, or
shining so gloriously in the Power of Godliness (for indeed it is not
Godliness simply so much, as a more then ordinary shining and eminency of it,
that will be the means of this great work, which Mr. Lockier has not heeded
well in this Argument) or that if any in the Visible Church be not such
convincingly, though otherwise professing the truth and pure Worship, and
living without scandal, shall be casten out; neither the necessity of that
effect does require, nor can there be warrant of Scripture produced to say or
believe that it shall be so.



Esaias 66. from ver. 16. to the end, let the Reader be at the pains to read but
upon the place, Calvin, Junius and the English notes, and especially (if he
have any skill in the Language) the notes of the learned judicious Nether-Dutch
Interpreters, and I doubt not but he shall find such an Exposition and
up-taking of the series and thread of that context, as shall fill and satisfy
his mind, much different from that of Mr. Lockiers, which is but a new coined
Interpretation by men addicted to the millenarian fancy, and forced upon the
Text. I shall only give some little evidence of this, I mean that his
Interpretation is forced and contrary to the Grammar of the Text.

verse. 19. I will set a sign among them and will send those that escape of
them, understands Christian Gentiles, and then says the meaning of the words
following, is that these refined Gentiles shall be sent unto the Nations (as he
must take it) to the countries where the Jews are scattered, and then by these
spoken of, verse. 22. your brethren; he understands the Jews scattered through
the Nations. And then he tells us that these Gentiles sent abroad unto the
Nations, their end and effect here is, that by declaring the glory of God, they
shall not only gain the Gentile World, but shall also bring in these Brethren,
the Jews; they shall also (says he) bring all your Brethen, says the Prophet.
Further, ere I discover the manifold violence done here to the Text, I would
ask Mr. Lockier what he means by the Glory of God, which these refined
Gentiles sent abroad, where the Jews are scattered, shall declare? For he does
not explain himself in this. Certainly if he hold to his scope, i. e. the
illustration and confirmation of his former Argument, he must mean, the
glorious reformation of Worship and Ordinances in their exercise, and of
professors in their conversation spoken of there, as the means which, by the
light thereof, should provoke the Jews to emulation. Now here, 1. One point of
violence done to the Text, (the clear discovery to every body likely he hes
shunned by not explaining what he understood by that glory of God) for by the
glory of God here, I think no Christian Interpreter will understand any other
thing, but the true knowledge of God in Jesus Christ declared by the Preaching
of the Gospel, that same which the Apostle means, 2 Cor. 3. ult. -- the glory
of the Lord beheld with open face as in a glass, viz. in the Gospel, and Chap.
4. 6. has shined in our hearts to give the light of the glory of God in the
face of Christ. If he say he means the same, then I say he passes from the
purpose of his Argument, for clearing of which he brought in this. 2. Another
clear violence done to the Text is, that he maks an addition to the Text, while
as he says upon ver, 20. shall they only gain the Gentiles World? they shall
[also] bring in all your Brethren. As if the Text held forth two sorts of
people gained by these sent abroad through the nations, one sort and also
another called their brethren. The first employed in ver. 19. and the other,
ver. 20. When as there is not such a thing as also in the Text* but the simple
copulative and, which only coupleth together these Verbs, they shall declare my
glory and they shall bring. And so, 2. There is not the least insinuation of
the gaining two sorts of persons as the effect of their labor and pains; But
in the end of v. 19. is set down their labor and work, they shall declare my
glory among the Gentiles, and v. 20. is set down the effect of that their work,
the bringing of one sort of persons called their Brethren. 3. By these Brethren
who are said to be brought in, cannot be understood Jews (I mean as the name of
Jews is now taken under the New Test. as comprehending all that are remaining
of the ancient people professing the Jewish Religion, whether of the Tribe of
Judah or of other Tribes) my reason, from the Text, is this, because, verse. 21.
its set down as a new and unusual privilege and dignity vouchsafed upon these
Brethren brought, that God would also take of them Priests and Levits, i. e.
Ministers to officiat in his Worship and Ordinances. Now it can be no new and
unusual thing to take of Jews to be such: for it had been always so;
therefore we do conceive, with these Learned Interpretets we named and others,
by these Brethren, must be meant Gentiles who are called the Jews Brethren
because when now brought in by the Gospel, in regard of faith, they are
Abraham's children, Romans 4. and Gods Children, yea and are called Gods Children,
even while yet not actually called, viz. in the decree and purpose of God, John
11. 52. I no wise doubt, but the Children of God scattered, distinguished from
the Nation of the Jews, to be gathered in, spoken of by Christ, Joh. 11. 53.
And these Brethren to be brought in out of all Nations are all one and the
same. 4. These spoken of, ver. 19. I will set a sign among them, and send
these that escape among them, are not of the Gentiles. 1. For that which we
said of these Brethren that are brought in by them. If these Brethren be the
Gentiles, these sent out to bring them in must be Jews. 2. Clearly, ver. 19,
20. these sent forth are distinguished from the Gentiles, even the whole
universality of the Gentiles, which are set down, 1. Generally unto the
Nations, then by a particular enumeration or distribution of them according to
the several quarters of the World, East, West, South and North, Isles and
Continent. See English notes on the particulars. Therefore these sent forth
must be of the Jews; and it is remarkable that where the name (...) and another
people or other persons are set down by way of contradistinction, it signifies
not simply people, but the rest of the people of the World distinguished from
the Jewe. Therefore we conclude with the generality of Christian Interpreters,
in these verses is described not the Calling of the Jews, but the Calling of
the Gentiles into the fellowship of the Church, and that by these signed and
sent forth are meant the Apostles and others of the Jews sent forth to Preach
the Gospel among the Gentiles to bring about their Conversion which we see
fulfilled and accomplished, Mat. 28. 18. Mark 16. 15. Acts 8. 14. Romans 10. 15,
18. places also cited by the English notes to clear this purpose.

ah! let men read and with much dread lay to heart which make light of these
things we are upon, its true indeed men especially such as that verse speaks
against, should not, and, had they any spiritual feeling, could not without
much dread of heart (transgressors against God) read that: but when as M^.
Lockier in so speaking, supposes that such as will not acknowledge his way of
constitution of a Visible Church, of such only as are already truly gracious
and regenerate, in so doing makes light of the things spoken of in that Text,
he supposes it without ground or warrant in this place, or any otherwhere in
Scripture. The thing that he is upon, and that this Text is upon, are not one
and the same. And therefore the things he is on may be made light of, as being
but his own, and yet no hazard of the terror of this Text for that.

Rev. 3. 10. spoken to the Church of Philadelphia is but abused. For, 1. What
warrant is there to expone that hour of temptation spoken of there, of the time
immediately before the Calling of the Jews? And the Church of Philadelphia in a
typical sense of some Churches to be then? It Is too much boldness to force
such typical Interpretations upon Scripture, where the Spirit of God in the
Word goes not before us to warrant us. It Is true Reverend Brightman h^s
Interpreted all the Churches and the things written to them, as types of other
Churches in these latter days. But 1. All solid Divines have shown their
coffeehouse with his conceit as groundless. 2. Yet does not he understand
by Philadelphia such Churches immediately before the incalling of the Jews, as
Mr. Lockier fancies, But hes expressly named some present Churches, which he
will have to (...) signified thereby, Geneva, France, Low Countries, and with
the rest even that Church of Scotland, (which Mr. Lockier counts an evil
vessel that will be broken in pieces) and that because of the order and
Government set up in them. 3. The place speaks not here of cutting off
Churches, but of trying the Inhabitants of the World. 4. If these Churches
typified by Philadelphia, are not to be cut off, because of their constitution
like its, how comes that it self which was the Pattern and to whom this word was
spoken in the first instance and place, has been cut off?

Daniel, is as grossly abused. What ground or appearance can Mr. Lockier give
us that the Holy Ghost means one and the same time, Daniel 12. and Rev. 3. in
the Epistle of Philadelphia? He says by these words, Daniel 12. 1. It does
plainly appear that this hour of temptation, viz. Rev. 3. 10. will be
immediately before the Calling of the Jews, and he does no more but say it?
Learned men and that upon considerable grounds and reasons, have conceived that
time, Daniel 12. 1. not to be a time after Christ's first coming, but before
it, the time of Antiochus persecution: And must Mr. Lockiers naked assertion,
without reason, that it is a time immediately before the Jews incalling be
sufficient to obtain belief.

Jerusalem spoken of, Rev. 21. is groundlessely expounded to be the Visible
Church of the Jews, as contradistinguished from the Church of the Gentiles: And
I verily think that it cannot be understood of the Church upon earth at all,
ver. 22. seems to me to speak this much clearly. The place Isa. 11. 7. is
also grossly missapplyed to the Visible Church of Gentiles to be joined with
the Visible Church of the Jews after their incalling, it being clearly, a
Prophecy concerning the Universal Church of the Gospel, reaching along from
the time of Christ's first coming unto the end, as all Interpreters expound it,
and the context it self holds it forth evidently. And so is the place of
Zechariah pointed at to be understood. The hint at Jer. 12. 9. where that
ancient people are likned to a speckled bird, as if thereby were meant, that
because that Church in its visible constitution, was mixed of ^ypocrites with
the Godly, therefore it is called a speckled bird, and that upon that account
they were casten off, might make a man laugh were we not on a serious matter,
and its rather a matter of mourning, to see Scripture, and so much of it, so
wrested: The simple meaning of the words being this, that as a wild strange
bird, of an uncouth color, coming in among other birds, all flies about it
and pursues it: So because the people were become uncouth, estranged from God,
wild, untame, the Lord would raise up the Nations round about to destroy them.
But what means Mr. Lockier to speak here of the casting off the ancient
Visible Church of the Jews under the Old Testament, for not constituting their
outward Visible society, of all truly Saints but suffering it to be speckled:
Seeing all along this discourse, he hes restricted his Doctrine concerning the
matter of the Visible Church, to the days of the Gospel? As for his inference
wherewith he closes, consequently the allowed matter of a Visible Church,
(Remember we are speaking of Matter allowed in relation to the outward
Ecclesiastic Court its proceeding in admitting persons to external Church
fellowship) now in the days of the Gospel are persons truly holy, we say it
follows not upon any thing you have been alleging in this paragraph: For
were all granted, you have been writing out of these places, all comes to this
that God sometime after this will bring the Church Visible to such an estate
that all in it shall be truly holy, de facto. But dispensations of efficacious
grace are not a rule of Ecclesiastic proceeding in admitting persons to the
outward communion of the Visible Church.

SECTION VII. A short modest reply to Mr. Lockyers bitter use made of his
Doctrine.
Lockier commended for a man of an ingenuous, humble, meek, sweet spirit: and
when I read the Epistle of his three Brethren prefixed to this Piece, wherein
they called him a soft, sweet whisperer, I expected to have found him such
here. But sure I am any impartial man, who reads his Use and application of
his Doctrine, may see great want of ingenuity, and such bitterness vented
against men, desirous to keep the truth and to walk before God in simplicity
and godly sincerity, as becomes not any man of a Christian spirit; and the
like whereof could hardly been expected to come from the very sons of Babel
themselves against any Protestants.

Take heed then of setting against a Church of such a complexion and
constitution, Will thou oppose a thing because it is as it ought to be? To whom
do you speak, Mr. Lockier? To us who oppose your Doctrine concerning the
necessary qualification of Church members in relation to external Church
fellow^hip? Do we by opposing this, oppose a thing, because it is such as it
ought to be? Nay, we do but oppose you who says the Church Visible, as such,
ought to be, even in the Ecclesiastic Court, that which God never said in his
Word, that it ought to be, and makes the door of the Visible Church straiter
then ever the Lord made it, and so in effect disclaimes the way allowed by God
himself, for ordering his Church, as not wise enough nor accurate enough. Or do
we set our selves against a Church of such complexion and constitution as you
descrive, consisting of all truly godly so far as men can judge? God forbid,
and far be it from us, were there such a Church in the world of such complexion
and constitution, it should be very dear and precious in our estimation, and we
should bless the Lord for the riches and power of his grace bestowed upon
them. We wish from our souls, that our Churches and all the Churches in the
world were of such a complexion and constitution. And we acknowledge that as it
is the duty of every professor in the Visible Church in the sight of God, that
they be not only so far as men can judge, but in truth and indeed truly
gracious, having true saving Faith, Repentance and Sanctification; So that it
is the duty of Ministers, and of every one in the Church, according to their
station and capacity, to endeavor by all means instituted by God, that it may
be so. But the thing that we oppose is your rigid opinion, that will have no
Church Visible at all unless you have it of such a complexion, and will have
none permitted to enter the society of the Visible Church, unless before they
be truly gracious, sealed of God by his Spirit: at least giving such convincing
evidences hereof, as they may be accounted such, as far as men truly godly ^an
discern and judge, and will have all who are not such casten out to be as
heathens. This we oppose because it has no warrant in the Word, is contrary to
the Word, is obstructive to the salvation of many souls, tends to the ruin
of the Christian Church and Relig^on; But to oppose this, and to oppose a
Church of that complexion and constitution you speak of, are much different.
Here then first we desiderate ingenuous dealing with us.

They have a mere spirit of contradiction, bordering upon malice and blasphemy,
li^ Jews, who not able to disprove things that were taught, yet would
contradict, being filled with envy, Acts 13. 44. A spirit of pure contradiction
haunting men, not a spirit of superior light; a tempter showing men to be
poisoned with Saul's spirit, leavened with envy and malice: and out of this do
little else, but blasheme the Tabernacle of God and these which dwell in
heaven, which is no other but a spirit of Antichrist, Rev. 13. 6. whereupon is
denounced Acts 13. 41. Behold ye despisers wonder, perish, etc. and not
wondering at nor believing the things that God says and does: no other
effect produced by the Word and Works of God brought to their door but
despising: and thereupon with the repetition of the former, 1. New denunciation
of the curse, Ezra 6. 12. and then here spoken to as heathen (such as he
doubts Darius was: but if he was one, then) cursed by one of their own; high
and low of them, one as well as another, as alterers and destroyers of Gods
worship and People, and will have them take this off his hand, as an article of
their Creed. Will ye not believe? And then the Prophecy denounced against the
Antichrist and his followers, Rev. 19. from v. 11. foreward, is applied to
them. Is this the soft, sweet whispering we were told of? Ah Mr. Lockier! my
soul is sorrowful and heavy to think, a man, professing Christianity, a
Minister of the Gospel, standing to speak in the LORDS sight, and in his Name,
should have uttered such a horrid accusation and bitter invective against many
whom Jesus Christ has interest in, and will own at the last day. I beseech
you, Sir, return into your own thoughts, and consider as in the Lords presence.
1. Against whom you have spoken these things, who were the Opposers of that
your Doctrine nearest to you at that time, and so to whom most nearly you
intended your speech then uttered and now Printed? Were they not the honest and
faithful servants of Jesus Christ, the Ministers of Edinburgh and other
ancient Christians there? Were any of the people of that place so opposite to
you in this matter, as the most ancient and solid Christians, many of whom,
were in Christ ere you or I had a being in the World, and then with them does
not the Godly Presbyterians in the three Nations oppose you in this matter, and
the Godly Divines over-seas, some of which have positively Printed their
judgment in opposition to your way? As n. the Valacrian C^asse.
And are all these led by a mere spirit of contradiction, etc. 2. Consider,
Sir, what is the matter of quarrel: Because they oppose your way of outward
constitution of the Visible Church, which will permit none to enter or abide in
the fellowship of the Visible Church under the care of the Ministers of Christ,
but such as are already truly regenerate, as far as the most discerning men
can judge; though they wish and endeavor by Prayers to God, by pains upon men,
that all in their Churches might be such, and would account it their Crown and
rejoicing how many they may have such. Is this to blaspheme the Tabernacle of
God, to destroy his Worship and People, a spirit of Antichrist? For which they
must perish, be cursed, destroyed, and all that written Rev. 19. from verse. 11.
come upon them? Suppose they were in an error (as it is not an error, but the
way of Christ) might it not have passed amongst the Wood, Hay, or Stubble,
built upon the foundation, but not destroying the foundation: which may burn,
the builders being safe? Ay but, say you, they maintain it out of a mere spirit
of contradiction, as did the learned Jews, seeing a great aptness in many of
their Contrymen to receive the Doctrine of Christ, and they not being able
to disprove the things that were taught, yet would contradict, so they, etc. Ah
Mr. Lockier! What could the accuser of the Brethren said more boldly, and more
bitterly? It Is true, some of our Contrymen have shown themselves too ready
to receive your Doctrine, yet, blessed be God, not so many as you by
insinuation boast of. These few that hes done, so I judge not their persons,
they will stand and answer for it before their Judge at the last day. Some are
now but fulfilling that which they had once prophesied of themselves. But to
you here Mr. Lockier. 1. Suppose they be in an error that oppose your Doctrine
concerning the necessary qualification of persons for being matter of a Visible
Church: What are ye to judge them, to do it out of a mere spirit of
contradiction, that they are poisoned with Saul's spirit, leavened with malice
and envy, etc. Would not charity have required that you should have judged,
possibly they do it out of ignorance, and not out of malice, against knowledge
of the truth. Were these Godly modest men, Hooker, Cotton alive, they would,
and such as are alive of that way, that are pious and judicious will, I am
confident, detest and abhor this your unchristian cruel judging of us.
Blessed be God we stand not nor fall at man's judgment we have one that judges
us, our Lord Jesus Christ, and to him we refer this challenge you have laid
to our charge, and, Sir, if you do not repent of the rashness and cruelty of
it (which from our souls we wish you may do) we cite you before his Tribunal
to answer for it. But, 2. Sir we are content also to stand at the Bar of any
impartial, judicious Divines, in the Christian World, and that they give their
judgment, by that same much which I (who pretends not to be one of the Learned
Men in this Land) have Answered to your preceding Discourse, if your Doctrine
be such as we are not able to disprove, and if we do not upon some good grounds
of reason, and not out of a mere spirit of contradiction, oppose the same: And
thus I shall leave your invective without saying any more to it: we have not
learned Christ so, as to repay evil with evil, bitterness with bitterness,
you have cursed us, we bless you, we wish you heartily a blessing, Repentance
and forgivennesse of this evil thought of your heart and the uncharitable
issue of it.

SECTION VIII. Mr. Lockyers Objections he makes to himself, and his Answers
thereto, considered.
Lockier having discharged that bitter foregoing invective against the opposers
of his way, comes to propound and answer some Objections against himself,
choised out, and formed at his own pleasure, Five, in number, whereof two only
are in causa. Were there no other Arguments worthy of his consideration,
besides these, to be found in Orthodox Writers opposite to his way? If he
thinks not; it will seem he hes not read such Writers on this purpose as he
might and ought, for clearing of himself and others: If he knew others, why did
he not assay to clear them also? I think he had not will to present before his
hearers all Arguments brought against his Doctrine, least he should not rid
his feet well of them, and something thereof might have stuck to such as was
judicious. Whatsoever hes moved him so to pass them over, we hope it shall
shortly appear, he had some cause rather to pass them in silence; then to
hazard grappling with them: it was his prudence so to do: But let us see these
he has, and his answers to them.

Why? But they gather Churches out of Churches whom you plead for. Why? I
thought the Dispute hitherto ye have been on, was not about persons and their
practices; but about a dogmatick point. Had we been propounding Objections to
you, we should not troubled our selves with these extrinsecall ones, taken from
prejudices against persons, abaters of your Doctrine: But should more directly
pointed at the throat of the cause it self. Yet we think all Godly Orthodox men
in the Christian World, besides your selves, will judge that the Godly
Ministers of Christ in this Island have just cause to lay this practice of
picking out of Orthodox Churches (in which Jesus Christ is soundly Taught,
Sacraments administered according to their institution, and are by the most
judicious of your own way confessed to be true Churches from which it is not
lawful to make separation) such Professors as by Gods blessing upon his
Ordinances in these Churches have gotten most good, to make up of them
Churches, to your selves. All Orthodox Christians will judge this justly laid
to your charge, as a Schismatic practice having no warrant or president in the
Word of God, tending to the begetting of heart-burnings, divisions, hatred
amongst Christians, yea these of nearest relations, Husband and Wife, Parents
and Children, Magistrates and People; to the hindering and no ways to the
promoving of the Work of Reformation. But see what is said to this.

Nay, it is but Churches out of a Church: Gospel Churches out of a legal
National Church, and the one being abolished, there may be, yea, there ought
to be a departing from it and a gathering out of it unto the order which God
has instituted, so we find Churches gathered out of that Church of the Jews,
Gal. 1. 22. And whether he means by being in Christ merely according to
profession, see 1 These. 2. 14. Ans. 1. The citation of the 1 These. 2. 14. for
clearing what is meant by being in Christ, mentioned Gal. 1. 22. is a
digression from the purpose of the Objection and has been sufficiently
answered before. 2. You gather Churches, say you, out of a Church, not out of
Churches. This is strange, are not the Church of Edinburgh, and the Church of
Aberdene, Churches. Again if it be a fault to gather Churches out of Churches,
shall it be no fault to gather Churches out of a Church majus and minus non
variant speciem. Ay, it is a legal National Church he means, such as the
Jewish, such a Church is abolished, therefore it is no fault, yea we ought to
gather, etc. For Answer. We may consider a National or Provincial Church of a
threefold sort and notion. 1. Wherein all of the Nation are bound to a public
and solemn typical service and Worship to be performed in one place chosen by
God, under the inspection of one Visible Pastor or Priest who in Worship and
Sacrifices does hold forth and represent the whole People of the Nation. 2.
Such a National and Provincial Church, in which many particular Churches are
united and subjected unto one Church (as they call it, Mother or Cathedral
Church) and depend upon a Visible Pastor; who is Pastor and Ruler of all other
Pastors and particular Churches in the Nation or Province; And wherein the
Inferior Churches enjoy Divine Ordinances and Ecclesiastical power and
jurisdiction, of that Mother and Cathedral Church or that Provincial or
National Pastor. 3. Such a National Church wherein many particular Churches
are joined and united together under one Visible Church Government) wherein all
are equally and collaterally concerned; and have equal interest for the use
and exercise of all these Ordinances, which are necessary to the Visible
Ministerial Government of these Churches, and mutual Ecclesiastical
fellowship in it, and edification and preservation by it. Now a National
Church in the second notion is not, nor ever was an Ordinance of God, but a
mere invention of men and Antichristian tyranny, overthrowing the power
granted by GOD to the Churches, and Pastors. A national Church of the first
notion and sense was indeed an Ordinance of God. Such were the Jews, but
instituted and to continue for a definite time, viz. until the fullness of
time should come, and then it was abolished and evanished: And a Church
National in this sense was legal. But a National Church in the third sense
is not a legal or typical Church and Ordinance: But moralis and perpetui
juris. Such was the Jewish under the Old Testament in point of Government and
Ecclesiastic Discipline. They were many particular Churches, and Synagogues,
which did in diverse places celebrat the Moral Worship of God, and the
exercises of Doctrine, Discipline and Church Government, Acts 15. 21. Acts 13.
15, 16. Luke 21. 12. John 12. 42. All which were joined and united under one
National Visible Ecclesiastic Government. This Visible Church-ship (so to
speak) of the Church of the Jews, as it was not legal (I mean ceremonially)
nor typical; so neither was it ever abolished. Let Mr. Lookier show me a Text
in the whole New Testament importing an abrogation of it; Nay, we trust through
the Lords grace, ere we come to an end, to give evidence from the Word of God
that there is a Church Visible under the New Testament of a larger extent and
bounds (I mean in point of Government) then a Province or Nation, even a
Visible Church Universal. Therefore I conclude that we maintaining a National
Church in no other sense then this, which is still warranted and allowed in the
New Testament, it is nothing else but gross Separatisme to gather Churches out
of Churches upon this account, because they are united into one National
Church in this sense. As to that alleged by Mr. Lockier of gathering Churches
out of that one Church of the Jews which he would confirm by Gal. 1. 22. I Ans.
The alledgeance is grossly impertinent; for why? We are now upon the practice
of gathering and constituting Churches in a new Visible Church State, of
persons withdrawn from Churches wherein is the sound Doctrine of the faith of
Christ and pure Sacraments according to their institution (such as the most
judicious and Godly amongst the Independent Brethren themselves confess to be
true Churches) upon this account, because they are united into one National
Church in point of Government. But now will Mr. Lockier say, that the Christian
Churches of the Jews were gathered out of the Jews, upon this account, because
they were a National Church in this sense? He cannot upon any warrant in the
world. The ground of their gathering out from the rest of the Jews, was because
the rest would not believe Jesus to be the Messiah, nor embrace him as their
Savior: But would still adhere to their ceremonial Worship, Sacrifices and
Priesthood, and would be saved by their own righteousness, blaspheming Christ
and his Doctrine.

Those men are full of Heresies and dangerous opinions that follow this way,
many monsters came out of your Independent Churches, therefore surely it is not
of God, etc. I must say again Mr. Lockier does prudently to make choice of such
arguments against himself to answer, as are little to the purpose in hand. I
think no understanding adversary, would have moved this as an objection against
his Doctrine, handled in this Lecture concerning the matter of the Visible
Church. But I think indeed, being well managed, it may be made use of to good
purpose against their Independent Churches in point of their Government, thus,
The Government that is apt to open a door to Errors, seems, cannot be of God.
But such is the Independent way of Church Government; Which makes every
particular Congregation Independent, and supreme in Government, so that if any
of them fall into Error, there is no Ecclesiastic Power on earth, that
authoritatively can interpose to redress* wherein they go wrong. And certain
it is by this occasion, many Errors have sprung up amongst them that follow
this way. And for this very cause it is, that so many maintainers of gross
Errors, as Anabaptists, Antinomians, etc. lay hold on this way of Government,
as most suitable to their designs, and serviceable for their safety and
indemnitie. And here I shall desire Mr. Lockier to remember, how that Reverend
Mr. Brightman, parallelling the Churches of Geneva, France, Low Countries, and
Scotland, put the special point of their commendation, on the nature and way
of their Government, viz. Presbyteriall, whereby they have more then any
Reformed Churches, preserved themselves, in Unity and Truth, free of Schisms
and Heresies. But we will have place afterward to speak of this point of
Government. It seems to me very likely that M^. Lockier has drawn in this
objection in this place, namely upon a design against a Person, as we shall see
apparent ground even now in his answer.

All is not true that is said of Congregationall Churches, and their friends,
it has been an old wyle of the Devil -- Nay, I know all is not true which is
Printed of Persons honoring and loving Churches of such a constitution,
witness Master Edwards Gangren, nay Master Rutherfurds Spiritual Antichrist,
page 250, 251. The Lord General Cromwell is charged with public scandal, and
unsoundnesse in the Faith, because of a letter to the Parliament, then having
set down a part of that letter out of Mr. Rutherfurd, what Heresy (says he)
is in this letter I know not, and then applies to Master Rutherfurd, his
constructing of that letter, Psalm. 56. 5. and that of Solomon, Pro. surely the
wringing of the nose brings forth blood. Then cites another speech of Master
Rutherfurds Spirit. Antich. page 251. ( viz. to my knowledge there is not this
day in England any that is a mere Independent, which maintains nothing but
Independencie, with most of those of New England, and does not hold other
unsound and corrupt Tenets, etc.) and says this makes him tremble, when he
remembers from whom it comes; Surely there be many Independents in England to
whom he is a stranger; And how then should he dare to speak of them all as he
does? Especially this makes him tremble, comparing with what Master Rutherfurd
has in his Epistle, if I lift up my hand or a bloody pen, etc. Answ. 1. It Is a
poor and sorry Vindication, all is not true that is said, yea or Printed of
Congregational Churches and of their friends. That is not the thing, you are
charged with in the Objection even as formed by your self, that all is true,
etc. if a great part or most part of these things ^e true, the charge abides
good. And true it is that more Monsters of dangerous opinions in matters of
Religion have come from Independent Churches and the friends thereof, and have
had their recourse to that way of Government, within those few years by past,
then I believe has arisen in all the Reformed Churches in Christendom since
the beginning of Reformation. As for your bringing M^. Rutherfurd upon the
stage upon the account of that Letter, you will do well Mr. Lockier to enter
into your own heart, and consider from what design and intention this has
proceeded. It Is very apparent, it has come from little purpose or intention to
clear that Letter in the things charged upon it; Seeing you have not so much as
hinted at the clearing of one animadversion on it; But thought it enough to say
you know not what is amiss in it, and to bid the world judge of it. Give me
leave to say it of Mr. Lockier, If General Cromwels Soldiers defended him not
better with the Sword, then you do here with your pen, it were not very safe
for him to go to the fields. Well, I will not determine upon your intentions;
But if the intention of the work of this business, looks not toward
stirring up of persecution against the Godly and precious servants of Jesus
Christ, I leave it to be judged of any indifferent man, considering the posture
of affairs in these Lands: But I believe those whom the Authors words tends to
irritate, will not be so foreward to put forth their hand, as he is to solicit
them. The other challenge made against that precious man, is evidently ^ gross
and palpable wresting of his words (the fault Mr. Lockier had but in that same
breath almost charged upon him without giving any evidence of it) and a very
wringing of the nose to bring forth blood. I report me to every ingenuous man.
If reading Mr. Rutherfurds words as they are alleged by Mr. Lockier himself,
he will conceive that Mr. Rutherfurd means what he says of all and every
Independent in England, as M. Lockier constructeth them: or not rather that he
speaks only of all within his knowledge. And what cause then is there of such
out-crying against Mr. Rutherfurd for these words, as if they were a matter of
trembling? Verily I cannot but think it a matter of trembling, to see a man with
so much confidence and boldness palpably misconstructing an honest man's words
to make him odious.

Answ. 3. That there is difference between a cause and occasion. That we walk
in a fundamental truth, in the power of it, many take occasion hence to
scoff, break forth into much wickedness, is it not therefore the truth which
we follow? And then he tells us that as light has broken forth in every age,
Satan has labored to darken it, and gives instances. As 1. That when the
first Fathers began to lay again that great principle and fundamental of the
Trinity, to darken this, he set on foot Arrius heresy. -- 2. When some of the
modern Divines laid that great fundamental point of Justification by faith in
Christ, to darken this he conjured up the Anabaptists in Germany, which denied
propriety, Magistracy; all which is good; and then adds, now when God has
made another accession of light, respecting the roof and upper part of the
house (the Independent way of constitution and Government of Churches) what
stirs, fogs, mists has he raised? Is all this therefore darkness, dross?
-- I think things about which the Devil makes such ado, may rather be thought
to have something in them, rather then to conclude they have nothing of God
within them; because the Devil does not usually set against his own: Does not
divide against the Devil. When this New Heaven, as the Prophet calls it, this
new order was first set up at Jerusalem, what bloody stirs made it there?
When first at Antioch what work made it there? No small dissension, Acts 15. 2.
and yet the mind of God. Answ. 1. Much mistaking hes been discovered already in
this Lecture of Mr. Lockiers, but in no one passage has he worse acquyted
himself then in this we have now in hand. 1. True, it is no good Argument or
prejudice either, against a Tenet or point of Doctrine that many take occasion
thence to scoff and break forth into much wickedeesse: But this is not to the
purpose in hand. Our alledgeance is that the Independent way of
Church Government is such in the nature of it as gives occasion to men to run
freely without controlement into errors, and is a kind of shelter, for such
as holds and maintains errors, to run to, as experience proves; and this,
sure, if it be not an intrinsic Argument yet it is a strong presumption
against a Tenet, that it is not of God, the like cannot be said of the
Presbyterian way. 2. As to the two instances brought in. They are as
impertinent as the former general; For neither by the Doctrine of the Trinity
was occasion given any ways to the Arian heresy. But the Devil raised up
Arius and his heresy, to oppose and darken that fundamental point of
Christianity. Nor was there, by the Doctrine of Justification cleared by these
modern fathers, occasion given to the stirs of Anabaptists: But these were
raised by the Devil in opposition against that and other points of Religion
then cleared. I humbly conceive it agrees not well with History to say that
upon the fathers beginning again to lay that principal fundamental of the
Trinity; the Devil did set on foot the Arian heresy: The History of these
times seems to say that the setting on foot the Arian heresy gave occasion
to these ancient fathers, to establish and confirm from the Word of God that
principle and fundamental of the Trinity. 3. While as Mr. Lockier (by way of
application of these things noted on before) first says, now in this period
of time God has made another accession of light, respecting the roof and
upper part of the house (meaning his Independent way of Church constitution and
Government) and then subjoyneth by way of Question, and now what sturres, etc?
Why, what now? Is all therefore -- he but miserably begs his Question, viz.
that his way is a new accession of light. 4. Worst of all does he plead for his
own cause in relation to the former Objection when as he alleges that it may
rather be thought a way that has something of God in it, which the Devil
opposes, then to conclude to the contrary because the Devil does not usually
set against his own; Why? The Independent way is that which this day all the
emissaries of Satan (I mean not mere ^ndependents themselves, many of whom I
love and reverence) and almost all the Sect masters of the time betakes
themselves to and hugges in their arms. And the Presbyterian way is that which
all the errors and heresies of the time opposes, looks upon as the great
eyesore and hates cane pejus and angue. 5. It Is somewhat more then
inconsiderat contempt of his hearers and readers, when he will have them
believe; that it was the setting up of his Independent Church order at
Jerusalem and Antioch that was the matter and object of the bloody sturres, and
no small dissentions there. Ah Mr. Lockier! it was another matter, upon which
these things were raised, then who should be members of the Visible Church, or
what form of external Government, should be followed, 'twas the Preaching of
Justification and salvation through faith in Jesus Christ, without the works of
the Law.

Object. Mr. Lockier meets with, till Independency, no such sharp and bloody
stirs and dissentions. Where did you read this brought as an Argument against
your Doctrine of Church Members? Will any body say, that these impertinencies
were brought on the stage for any other end; but to catch occasion to vent
splen against persons of men; for what else is it that follows by way of
Answer to this.

Presbyterians began first to draw the sword, and their bitterness and
baseness has hightned it to that, to which otherwise in likelihood, it would
not have come: The two latter Summers Wars, have been the sharpest, I know they
will say that they have felt. And truly whether their froward spirit did not
principally raise these storms, I leave themselves to judge. They converted so
many Malignants into Presbyterians, and e contra, that if God had not been more
gracious, then they ingenuous, they had undone themselves and others too.

Answ. To this impertinent discourse in the general, if I shall say, that it
is nothing else, but an issue of carnal bitterness, I think no ingenuous
indifferent man, will blame me or think I say too much. For, 1. True, suppose
Presbyterians began first to draw the sword, (which is false, they were forced
to it by others drawing it) but was it not for their just defense in
vindication and maintenance of the Truth of Jesus Christ, and of their just
liberty against oppression, Prelaticall violence, and arbitrary Government? And
must this be charged upon them, as Mr. Lockier does here, as a crime? Tell me
Mr. Lockier, what condition were you in and would been in to this day, in all
humane appearance, had not Presbyterians begun to draw the sword in that
quarrel? Tell me what was the means under God that procured liberty for the
sitting down of a free Parliament in England, 1640? Belike you think it was a
crime, that you got not leave to crouch under the burden, and Religion, and
Liberties were not suffered, for Presbyterians, to ly still under oppression
and usurpation. I believe the wisest and most ingenuous, and those that are
most eminent amongst them, that now are in power amongst you and in these
Lands, will not approve you in their judgment, for this challenge against us;
And unless I be misinformed when they were come to this hight of prevalency,
they are now in, and we brought to this low condition we are now continuing in,
looking back, gave testimony of their acknowledgement, that our beginning to
draw the sword, did put the sword in their hand, tho it was never our purpose
to put it in their hand, for the effect, for which at last they have made use
of it. 2. Your attributing the hightning of the sword to that, to which in
likelihood it would not have come, to the bitterness and baseness of
Presbyterians, seeing ye give no proof nor the least evidence of it (and indeed
ye could not) we must crave leave to say, it is an injury. Tell me, Sir was it
bitterness of spirit, or did it tend to the hightning of the sword, that the
Presbyterians in Scotland, having but girded their sword to them, Anno 1639.
upon promises of tolerable satisfaction, laid it aside again presently, ere
ever they drew it, and having again in the Year 40. being forced to it, by
deadly preparations, drawn it, with advantage which they might have prosecuted,
yet as soon as they were secured by the treaty at ^ippon, put it up into its
sheath, and retired again Remember, Mr. Lockier, and read that speech of one of
your own, Jeremie Buroughs, to the common Counsel of London in Guild Hall,
Anno 1642. and blush. I shall here insert but a few of his words for the Readers
sake who, may be, he^ not at hand a Cople of that speech. Was their ever such
an example seen since the world began, of a people coming out of a poor country
into a fat and rich country, and having these opportunities to enrich
themselves, to go away so as they did. Their greatest enemies they now admire
at them. A people that began to rise for their Liberties when the generality of
this people here was ready, etc. I shall transcribe no more, let Mr. Lockier
read what follows and what goes before these words.
into their own land without any further molestation; and having again drawn
the sword for your assistance in great straits, and upon your earnest suit,
Anno 1643. And having kept it in their hand for sundry years until all enemies
were hushed and gone, as soon as they were desired to return home, did it in a
peaceable way. I pray you Sir, tell me, who were the men that kept up the sword
then? Whether Presbyterians, or some others? 3. Indeed these two latter
Summer-wars have been the sharpest, and we cannot but say, that we have felt;
And it becomes us well to justify the Lord our God in all that he has
brought upon us, and to bear his indignation, because we have sinned against
him, we and our Kings and our Princes and Rulers and the whole People of the
Land: But if, as to the quarrel be-between us and man, frowardness of spirit
in us raised these storms, tho we can justify our selves before the world; Yet
we shall not take upon our selves to be judges of it: But shall refer it to the
Judgment of him, who is the Judge of the World; and though it should be his
blessed good pleasure never to plead our cause by a sensible dispensation of
providence in this world, yet we will acquiesce in the approbation of his
revealed will, without quiting of our innocence, be content to ly down in the
grave, and wait for his sentence in the matter when he shall come to Judge the
quick and the dead. And as for you Mr. Lockier, I verily think he shall never
let you go off this world without a challenge from himself, for such
unchristian, uncharitable insulting over them whom the Lord has smitten, and
talking to the grief of these whom he has wounded. 4. As to that which
follows, they converted so many Malignants into Presbyterians, and e contra,
etc. 1. It Is upon the matter but an injurious scoff smelling rank of a mind,
not purposed to reason but to reproach, a thing unbeseeming a Minister of the
Gospel, especially in a Pulpit. I will not pay you home in your coin, Mr.
Lockier, but I may say. Quamvis dignus ego essem hac comtumelia, indig^is tu
qui faceres tamen -- 2. It Is utterly impertinent to the preceding purpose he
was upon. Was this the quarrel that did principally raise these storms? Where
is ingenuity? I believe we might had liberty to turn Malignants enough unto
Presbyterians or any other thing we pleased, without any quarrel, had we been
content but to have done some one thing, which we durst not do because of the
Oath of God And now I obt^st you Mr. Lockier, say heartily if either then, when
these storms were raised, or now since we felt the dint of them, converting
Malignants to be what they would, for your design, be made bones of among you?
I Will insist no more upon this invective; but leave it spread before the Lord,
that he may, in his time, plead with the Authors heart, for the unjustice and
uncharitableness of it. Come we now to the next Objection he meets with.

Simon Magus was a man in the gall of bitterness and in the bond of iniquity,
yet upon his profession of faith in Christ he was received into
Church Fellowship: Therefore mere profession is sufficient to this state, and
no more to be looked after, de jure, nisi ex abundanti: Hitherto Mr. Lockier
has been pleased to represent his adversaries as impertinent objecting
prejudices against persons, and not reasoning against his opinion, he knows
himself for what end: Now at last he vouchsafes them the credit, of saying some
little thing, a word or two, in causa. As to the former now set down. 1. He
wrongs us in forming the conclusion or consequent: It Is not any mere profession
whats^ever we allow as sufficient to this state, admission unto
Church Fellowship, some may profess mockingly, histrionically, or, to
discerning, on purpose to deceive and subvert the Church, as these, Gal. 2. 4.
Such profession we allow not; but a serious sober profession, such as we
described before stating the Question. 2. We give him the antecedent somewhat
more constringent thus. Simon Magus having been even now a vile sorcerer,
bewitching people with his sorceries, and sacrilegiously usurping the honor of
God, upon profession of faith in a sober seriousness, was by Philip baptized
and received into Church Fellowship, without passing any trial, if that
profession of his proceeded, o^ judgment, that it did proceed, so far as men
could discern from true saving grace and faith in the heart. That his
profession of faith was serious and sober, and appeared so, is evident in the
Text; For he was brought to it by conviction to astonishme^ and wondering at
the miracles that were done: And the Text speaks not of any intended purpose of
deceiving in his taking up that profession. But that Philip tried and examined
his profession, if it did proceed from a true saving work of Regeneration in
the heart, or that judgment was passed upon him as one truly regenerat, so
far as men can discern, the Text says not this, nor any thing to that
purpose. Now let us see what Mr. Lockier replyeth.

Surely (says he) it was not shows but substance that was looked at, and
conceived indeed to be in this man, so far as man can judge (i.) of a tree by
his fruit: for de occultis non judicat Ecclesia. There were surely outward
signs of repentance in this man, and such as the Apostle Peter, who received
him unto fellowship, was satisfied with. Ans 1. Here is a palpable gross
escape committed by the Author, when he attributes Simons receiving into
Church Fellowship to Peter: for clear it is, that Simon was received in
Church Fellowship by Philip and continued with him therein, some space ere
Peter and John came down to Samaria, Acts 8. 13, 14. whether the Author has
committed this escape of inanimadvertencie, or of purpose, I will not
peremptorily determine; But the latte^ seems most probable, that he might
have the fairer occasion to bring in Peter's words, Acts 2. 28. to confirm his
Assertion concerning Simons qualification in relation to his admission into
Church Fellowship, of which place anon. 2. But whether Peter or Philip
received him, that there were such outward signs of repentance in this man,
that as far as men can judge of a tree by its fruit, he was conceived,
positively to be a regenerate and a true savingly believer, and that upon
sat^faction in this, it was, that he was received into Church Fellowship, how
will the Author instruct and prove this?

First, says he, what Peter required at the hands of those, Acts 2. 38. Repent
and be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the
remission of sins, etc. he would, did follow the same rule of Christ which he
had received and delivered to others, and therefore required as much at the
^ands of Simon; If he would not dispense with this rule ^ith none of those
great number ( --) there is no reason to think he durst exact less of this
man, to be satisfied in him, especially ^earing what a creature he had been.
Answ. Besides the continued escape of attributing, Simons receiving into the
Church, to Peter (whereupon yet much of the weight of this reason depends)
here is another great mistake upon the matter, which is the principal ground:
and being discovered, the whole inference evanisheth. Mr. Lockier supposes
that the Apostle Peter in these words ( Repent and be baptized every one of you
for the remission of sins) is speaking unto these people and prescribing a rule
to them fot qualification, in relation to stating them in outward visible
Church Fellowship: when as it is another matter in relation to which he is
speaking and prescribing a direction for, viz. how they might find pardon of
their fearful sin of crucifying the Lord of glory, be reconciled to God, and
saved from the wrath to come: This is evident as the noon day to any that will
look upon the context. For this rule and direction of the Apostles, is in order
to that which at that time was pressing the souls of these he speaks to, and
to answer the question they propounded out of the anguish of their spirits. Now
clear it is, that the matter that pressed them was their conviction of their
horrid sin of rejecting and crucifying Christ: and their danger of the
dreadful wrath of God, and the question they propounded, What shall we do? was
not about stating in visible Church Membership: but how they might be freed of
that guiltiness, and saved from the wrath of God: This is it that the Apostles
rule and direction relates to: and therefore it is more then evidences of true
repentance and faith, so far as men can judge, even true repentance and faith
in veritate rei seu existentiae, that he requires of them. This rule in
relation to this end, he had indeed received from Christ: and neither could he,
nor can any other dispense with it, or exact less from any in relation to that
end: But all is nothing to Mr. Lockiers purpose, that Peter received from the
Lord, or followed in the point of admitting into the outward fellowship of the
visible Church, such a rule as requires either true repentance and faith in
reality of inexist^ce, or convincing evidences thereof, so far as men can judge,
as the necessary qualification in foro exteriori Ecclesiae, and as the ground
whereupon only the Church may admit persons into external Church communion:
this the Text says not, nor any other that he can produce from Scripture.

Simon Magus did give such outward appearance, of real inward grace, that the
Apostle thought him really gracious, a true and real Saint. 1. By what is said
of him in the Text. 2. By the consent of the Learned Interpreters. For the
former, It Is said (says he) that when he was baptized he continued with Philip
(...), and here is is much insisting upon the signification of the Original
word, that it signifies, to be always present, to endure, to be assiduous;
that it is attributed to hunting dogs, that will not cease following the game
till they have got it; that it signifies to persevere with strength, Acts 6.
4. Romans 13. 6. and then upon all this concludes. Thus, no doubt, was Simon very
diligent and full of care and circumspection, to carry it so in all things that
he might carry it with all beholders equally to the Apostles themselves, that
he might be still as high in every ones opinion, even in the opinion of the
Apostles themselves, as he was in the opinion of the blinded and deluded
people. Ans. 1. Mr. Lockier supposes that Simons continuing with Philip, which
is spoken of in the Text, was antecedent to his receiving unto the fellowship
of the Church, and the ground upon consideration of which he was received: But
let him show me in the Text volam au^ vestigium, of Peter's admitting him unto
the fellowship of the Church, after, and upon consideration of this. Nay, it is
not unworthy the observation, that Mr. Lockier in all this discourse upon Simon
Magus, does not so much as once point his Reader to the Chapter where the story
lies, by his custom in making use of other Passages, which makes me
apprehend, he saw that the Reader turni^g over to it, would easily seen the
weakness of his discourse by the conte^ of the words. Says not the Text it
self, that when he was baptized (...) i. e. after he was baptized and so after
he was received into the Church, he continued with Philip? And so what ever may
be imported by this continuing, let it be never so much evidence of inward
grace, it is nihil ad rhombum, nothing to the purpose in hand: For we are
speaking now of what was found in him before, and in relation to his receiving.
If Mr. Lockier shall say, that he was not received into the Church fellowship,
when baptized, or by baptism: I repone, first, Then he must grant that (...)
was required in adultis, for baptizing them, then for admitting them to Visible
Church fellowship. 2. Then it must follow that persons then were first
baptized, and then tried a while further ere they were admitted Visible Church
members; let me see either precept or practice for this in all the Word o^ God,
let Mr. Lockier or any for him show me in Scripture one baptized and not hoc
ipso, made a member of the Visible Church. 2. That his continuing with Philip
(whether antecedent or consequent to his admission) is but a poor ground to
prove what Mr. Lockier alleges it for, viz. that Simon had such outward
appearance of real inward grace, that so far as man could judge he seemed a
true and real Saint. I pray what is said? (...) i. e. he constantly followed
and waited on Philip, (this is all that the word i^ports when joined to a name
of a person (...) est ab alicujus latere non discedere, sed assiduum comitem
praesta re. Constantin. in lex Graec. Lat.
, Mr. Lockiers further criticisme upon the word is to little purpose) and that
he was astonished at the miracles and signs that were done. That which Mr.
Lockier alleges that no doubt Simon Magus was very diligent and full of care
and circumspection to carry it so in all things, etc. is no doubt a confident
assertion without bottom in the Text; and yet is this evidence enough that a
man is a true and real Saint as far as men can judge? I wonder how a judicious
man, before judicious men, can assert such a thing. I confess this carriage of
Simons was ground to repute him not a gross hypocrite, a dissembler* and a
mock-professor: But it can be a ground of no further. I find indeed sundry of
the Interpreters saying that Simon would have been equal in reputation to the
Apostles themselves. But they speak not of this, as his design in his
continuing with Philip, as the Author mistakes (for that was not a sufficiently
^pparent mean to obtain that reputation) but as his design in seeking to have
the power of bestowing the Holy Ghost for his money, which was the very
discovery of his rottenness; so far was it from being any part of diligence,
carfulness and circumspection, to carry it so in all things* etc.

Pisc. English annot. Junius and Premellius, Pellicannus, Beza. And then tells,
that he adds all these testimonies for the Learneds sake that they may see
and know that Simon he carried the matter that he seemed another man then a mere
professor, otherwise the Apostles had not received him: And when thus his
hypocrisy did appear, the Apostles rejected him as one not in Christ, and as
one wh^ had no share in real grace, and upon that ground rejected communion
with such an hypocri^ that all else might know what they had to do, namely, to
follow that rule of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3. 9. Having a form of godliness, but
denying the power thereof, from such turn away. Which place (says he) shows
plainly, that it was the power, and not the Prosession, and not the form that
was looked, and is to be looked at, in the admission of members of the Visible
Church. Answ. I wonder how the Author could so contemn the Learned who might
read him, as to say that for their sakes he had added these testimonies cited
by him, that they may see and know that Simon carried the matter so, that he
seemed another man then a mere Professor, i. e. as he means a true and real
Saint; had he been pleased but to English these testimonies cited by him (as it
was his prudence to let them ly under the Latin vail) the very unlearned, who
had common sense, would evidently have seen and known them to import no such
thing. For this I appeal to the judgment of all that understand Latin, and
will be pleased to read them: For I think it not worth the while to translate
and insert them here; the most that any of them amounts to, is that which the
word ested from the English annot. has, that he made outward profession of
faith and conversion. Might he not done this much, and yet not carried it so in
all things, as to give ground positively to repute him, as far as men could
judge to be a true and real Saint? Will Mr. Lockier acknowledge that a man has
said enough of another, for that end, when he says no more of him but this, he
was so convinced by miracles, as to profess faith and conversion? Nay, he will
say, its the power of Godliness, not profession, that is to be looked at. 2.
That when Simons hypocrisy did thus appear, the Apostle did abominat the
impiety of his deed, discover and bear in upon him the perverseness of his
heart, and his miserable estate, and denunce the tem^le deserved Judgment of
God against him, is clear in the Text: But that he did reject him from outward
communion of the Vi^ble Church, I see it not. Nay, what ever became of him
afterward (about it Writers are of different judgment, see Calv. in loc.)
there appears to be some grounds in the Text to think the contrary, viz. these.
1. That Peter with his severe objurgation and denunciation, joins a serious
exhortation to Repentance and Prayer, with an insinuation of some hope of
mercy, v. 2^* 2. That the Historian has registrate that Simon did not show
himself obstinate, but accepting of the words of Peter, and touched with the
terror of the threatened Judgment, sought the help of the Apostles Prayers to
escape it. 3. But supposing that Peter did at this time Excommunicate him; yet
that it was done upon this account simply, that he was not in Christ, that he
had no share in real grace, has no footing in the Text; we will find a further
matter ^d to his charge, an atrocious crime of seeking to buy the gift of the
Holy Ghost with money. Nay, that for non*regeneration simply a man should be
Excommunicat, is a wild assertion unheard of in the Word of God, which
enjoyneth this censure only in the case of obstinacy and contumacious contempt
of the Discipline of the Church, or at farthest in case of an atrocious
scandal, which case yet is doubtful, as may appear in the debates of Learned
Men about the Excommunication of the incestuous Corinthian. 4. The place, 2 Timothy 3. 5. is most contrary to the scope and purpose of the context, alleged
as a rule, holding forth, that all professors not having true grace of
Regeneration or not giving evidences thereof, so far as men can discern and
judge, are for that to be casten out of the communion of the Visible Church. It
is clear as noo^-day, that the Apostle by the men, of whom he says, they have
a form of godliness, means not every professor unregenerate, or not giving
evidences convincing so far as men can judge of Regeneration; but persons,
openly and grossly in their conversation scandalous, flagitious, blasphemous,
etc. As is evident both by the words going before and following.

the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2. 20. But in a great house there are not only vessels of
Gold and of Silver, but also of Wood and of Earth; and some to honor and some
to dishonor, by house he means Visible Church; therefore the Visible Church
may consist of good ^d bad. Mr. Lockier propounds Arguments against his Tenent
as himself pleases, in the most ^oft way for his own advantage. We hope in the
next Section to give an Argume^ from this and other like descriptions of the
Visible Church formed somewhat more pungent now we shall only consider what he
answ^eth unto it as laid down by himself. His Answers are two.

That there may be bad men in a Church has not been denied; because Hypocrites
may delude the judgment of the best men; but he (the Apostle) says not that
these vessels of earth are there allowedly; but they are there to dishonor:
That is, being creept in where they should not be, they are to be cast out of
the Church as dishonorable, as indeed was Hymeneus and Philetus, of whom and
of one Alexander see what the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 1. 20. which shows, that
when men put away that which they seem to have, faith coupled with a good
conscience; they are to be put away to their master as vessels of dishonor
appointed for wrath. Answ, 1. Passing now that expression that bad men are not
in the Church allowedlie, having pondered before in what sense it may be
granted, and in what not: passing this; what a wild and forced Interpretation
is that vessels to dishonor, i. e. that are to be cast out of the Church by
Ecclesiastic censure, Excommunication? Who ever dreamed of the like before?
Clear it is, that the Apostle in the back or outside of the comparison by being
to honor, means appointed and employed to more honest and honorable uses in
an house. And by to dishonor, means not casting out of the house (to
Interpret him so were ridiculous) but to be appointed and employed to more
base and fordid uses: And in the kirnell or application of the simili^ude,
under the name of vessels to honor is meaned the elect of God, sanctified and
prepared to every good work, and ordained ^o glory, as is clear by the verse
going before, and the verse following. And so by vessels to dishonor, are
meant cast-awayes, whom, being in the Visible Church, God makes use of for such
ends as he pleases, and in end will separate them to that wrath and confusion
they are fitted for, whether ever here-away they break out into such scandals
as shall make them to be casten out of the Visible Church, or they continue in
the heap or in the house to their ending day. That this is the genuine meaning
of the words I think no intelligent man will deny. 2. It is a false supposition
which Mr. Lockier insinuates, that bad men in the Church, i. e. men void of
true grace and unregenerat, as and because such, are to be cast out of the
commu^on of the Visible Church, the Scripture allow^h no casting out of men but
because they are sc^dalous and contum^ous, or at least atrociously scandalous
(which latter yet as we said before is questionable) and it allows men that
are such to be casten out though they be happily in state, truly regenerat and
justified. And therefore, 3. It is a most inconsiderat word of the Authors,
where expressing the nature of Excommunication, he ^ayeth they are to be put
away to their master as vessels of dishonor, and appointed unto wrath, i. e.
in plain words, as reprobates ordained to eternal damnation. This is very
different from Paul's theology, 1 Cor. 5. 5. to deliver unto Satan for the
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord
Jesus. Far be it from me and from the Churches of Christ to use Excommunication
upon such a consideration of a person and for such an end as Mr. Lockier,
determines here, which in effect makes the Church in the sentence of
Excommunication, to determine, concerning men's reprobation, a secret which God
has keped up to himself, and is altogether hid unto, and undiscernable by men
except in the case of sinning against the Holy Ghost, which yet is hard for any
to determine upon. 4. The Excommunication and casting out of Hymeneus, Philetus
and Alexander, is impertinently alleged to the purpose, viz. that all men that
are not true Saints, or have not true grace (so must Mr. Lockier's bad men be
understood) are upon this account to be cast out of the Church; these were not
such men simply, but taught abominable heresies, denial of the Resurrection,
perverse seducers of people from the faith, blasphemers, and for these they
were cast out. 2 Timothy 2. 18 2 Timothy 1. ult.


Moreover by this great house, he (Paul) First, means the Church of the
Ephesians, for whose sake Paul wrote to Timothy, and what they were according to
the judgment of the Apostle who wrote to them ye have heard. Answ. We take what
the Author says, that this great house is the Church of the Ephesians, and it
may well be so taken, as applicable to the Church of Ephesus, or any other
Church; then I say he has furnished a weapon against himself, for if this
house be the Church of the Ephesians to which ^he Apostle wrote, then when as
writing to them he ^lled them Saints, he means not that ^f all and every one
of them, but spoke it (...) the body indefinitely and confusedly, why? Should
that b^ understood universally, it should be a flat contradiction to what he
says here, that the Church of the Ephesians is a great house, in which there
are some vessels to dishonor, non-saints, yea very reprobates, appointed to
wrath. It will not salve the matter to say, as Mr. Lockier insinuates, that the
Apostle in writing to the Ephesians, speaks of what they were, in his
judgment: For Paul is speaking his judgment here too: Now how can these two
judgments consist in one man. To my judgment, all and every one of the Church
of Ephesus are real Saints, sealed as his, and yet I pronounce there are in
the Church of Ephesus some real un-saints, very reprobates. Indeed if the
Apostle here had not determined positively and pure. But by way of suspense and
modaliter, in this house, the Church of Ephesus, may be, or possibly there are
some vessels of dishonor, there would not be such repugnancie or
incompatibilitie of this with the former. But he speaks absolutely and
positively, there are some vessels to dishonor.

SECTION IX. Some further Arguments confirming our Doctrine and everting the
adverse opinion about the necessary qualification of Members of the Visible
Church.
Lockier has chosen out some Objections against his Doctrine as made by his
adve^sarie, but indeed framed at his own pleasure, only two of them are in
causa, the other are but extrinsecall to the cause, Reflections and prejudices
against persons; this I confess has been wittily done, for gaining advantage
in the minds of Hearers and Readers unacquainted with the controversy for his
own, and against his adversaries cause: But it is not very ingenuous dealing.
What? has there never a reason more been brought, against that Tenet of his, by
learned men, but these two? I cannot think, but he has seen and read Gul.
Apolon. consideration of certain controversies etc. s^nt to the Assembly at
Westminster, 1644. Spanhems Epistle to M^. Buchana^* Mr. Rutherfurd his first
and second book against the Independent way; however he might have read them,
and found therein, besides other writings of Orthodox Divines, some other
arguments to answer; Well, because he has thought it fit to content himself
with these two (which yet, how he has satisfied, we leave it to the intelligent
Reader to judge) we shall add some few more, not troubling our selves nor the
Reader with repetition of all that has been said by others.

Moses did admit as Members into the external communion of the Visible Church
under the Old Test. men professing the true God of Israel, the Covenant with
him, and his true Worship, without inquiry for the Work of true Grace in their
hearts, or positive evidences, that they were truly converted, regenerate, and
gracious, so far as men could discern and judge; Yea, knowing assuredly that
many of them were as yet, unconverted and hard hearted: Item, if John the
Baptist, the Apostles, and the Master Builder and Lord of the Church Jesus
Christ himself, did admit into the external communion of the Visible Church of
the New Test. such as did profess the Christian Faith, as soon as they did
profess, without delay for trying and searching evidences of the Work of Grace
in their hearts; Then in all Churches persons ought to be admitted upon the
same terms; And it is not a necessary qualification, in foro Ecclesiastico,
for constituting one capable of Visible-Church-Membership, that he be truly
converted, such as God who knows the hearts of all men can bear witness to,
as indeed sealed for his, by his Spirit, so far as men truly converted and
very spiritual are (...) to discern and judge, but the antecedent is true in
all the parts thereof: Ergo, etc.

Lockier will not acknowledge it upon the first part of the antecedent, viz.
the manner and ground of admitting Members into the Visible Church of the Old
Testament, because his judgment, as seems, is that the constitution of the
Visible Church of the New Test. in this point is essentially different from
that of the Old, for he restricteth his Thesis concerning the matter of the
Visible Church to the day^ of the Gospel, not once, which to me smells ^nk of
Anabaptists, who, as we know, denying Infant Baptism upon this ground because
they cannot give evidences of Faith; Being pressed with the Argument taken from
Infants Church Membership, and sealing with the initiating Sacrament under the
Old Testament to eschew, if they could; the dint of that argument, do run upon
the assertion of an essential difference between the constitution of the one
Church and of the other, and so deayes the consequence from practice in the one
to the other, as we see Mr. Tombs does in his dispute with Mr. Baxter. I will
not think that Mr Lockier does run the Anabaptists length in making use of that
difference: Bu^ certai^ if he assert, as he seems to do, an essential
difference (...) one and the other, he, for his part, gives them a fair ground
(...) that argument used by all Orthodox Divines for Infant Bap^e* but the
Orthodox have solidely asserted and maintained, that the constitution of the
Church under the Old Test. and New, differ not in essentialls but in
accidentals only. If our Author be otherwise minded, I desi^ him to ponder and
answer what the learned and acute Divine Mr. Baxter has on that purpose in his
dispute against Tombs, page 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36. and I will in the mean
time suppose, with the consent of all Orthodox Divines, the consequence of the
Proposition, even upon that first part of the Antecedent, to be valide.

viz. the practice of John the Baptist, the Apostles, and of our LORD JESUS
CHRIST himself under the New Test. admitting persons to the fellowship of the
Visible Church, upon their first professing faith and subjection to the
Ordi^nces, without any delay of time for trying the sincerity ^d ^rut^ of the
work of grace in the heart: I know what uses to be excepted, against the
practice of the Apostles and the consequences there deduced from it, viz. that
the Apostles were men indu^ with an eminent gift of discerning; and therefore
although the (...) admit men as soon as they made profession without further
deny or trial* yet that they did this as, by reason (...) their gift of
discerning, perceiving in the persons true inward saving grace.

theirs either (...) proceed from; and was the act of an (...) ordinary gift of
an (...) and Prophetical Spirit; or from (...) ordinary gift of d^cretion
common to believers. 1. It cannot b^ said that it was from the former. For, 1.
I require a proof thereof from the History of Scripture, because this Question
bei^ about (...) of fact, the probation is incumbent to my adver^ (...) the
affirming party. But he shall (...) be able to (...) of this from the History
of (...) such (...) ^dinary Prophetical gift of discer^ (...) of that (...) E.
G, the gift of Diting and (...) ^nicall Scripture, was not inherent in the mind
of the (...) way of (...) permanent ^abite whereof they might make^ (...) ^eir
own will in ordinary: But was present to them by (...) ^ansient motion or
^scation of (...) Spirit. Now albeit it be true that the Apostles ^me^mes, de
f^cto, had such an extraordinary and Prophetical inspiration, whereby they
discovered secrets of men's spirits, as (...) had in the matter of Ananias and
Saphira, Acts, Yet what warrant have w^ to believe that they were to (...) an
extraordinary gift of discerning the spiritual esta^ (...) ^narily and when
they were to go about the rece^ (...) into the fellowship of the ^ble Church?
We know (...) had a promise of infallible illumination and inspiration of the
Spirit for leading them into all truth, ^n delivering unto the ^urch the matters
of faith, and juris divine by word or writ^: But that they had a promise of
such extraordinary illuminat^ (...) ^tation of the Spirit for discerning such
matters of fact, (...) conversion and ^aith of (...) to be ass^ent to them in
passing judgment, when they (...) have occasion, we no where (...) in the Word
of God. 3. (...) that discerning and judgem^ (...) by su^ ^n extraordinary gift
as this, it had been certa^ (...) ^fallible^: But we find many to have been
admitted by the Apostles, who ^ward positively, discovered themselves to be but
graceless m^.

I say, the ^w^rd (...) they proceeded, as the medin^ or Argu^, to c^nclude the
persons whom they admitted to be truly converted (and as Mr. Lockier has it)
such as God the searcher of hearts did (...) sealed by the Spirit for his, so
far as men truly converted and very spiritual can discern; Was either their
present profession of the faith and subjectio^ to Ordinances, simply considered
by it self and as such; or that profession taken ^ther with some other outward
eminent effect, accompanying or as connotating some circumstance of profession
in that (...) rendering it signif^ of more, as to true inward grace in the
heart, then (...) materially, is ordinarily and in other times. This enu^
^nceive is sufficiently full, supposing (...) now w^, that ^ted them, upon
their first professing, without delay of time; (...) ^her trial and
discoveries.

upon the matter, in this Question to^hing the qualification of Church Members
necessary in foro Ecclesiastico: For this is the very thing, upon the matter,
that we assert and stand for, viz. that serious profession of faith and
subjection to the Ordinances of God, is sufficient: And that having this,
further trial and (...) of the soundness of the work in the heart, is not
(...) foro Ecclesiastico, for the ^mission of persons into the ^ship of the
Visible Church. If it shall be said that it was not that profession alone by it
self, but together with some other outward ^ble effect accompanying it, (such
as was that mournful hum^ expression of these, Acts 2. 3. 7. Men and Brethren
what (...) which was sufficient to supply the place of a continued (...) of
their conversation for (...) and ^ing into their experimental work (...) their
heart. It Is true that in some at their (...) embracing the Christian faith and
Religion, we find some (...) of that kind accompanying it, reported in the
^ory: But (...) will say, that it was so with all and every one of the many
thousands whom the Apostles received and baptized, when as the sacred Story in
speaking of these who embraced the Christian Faith and were baptized, seldom
mention or insinuates any such thing. If the 3. be said, that it was the
^fession considered not (...) such, but as connotating so^ (...) of the (...),
viz. the dang^ of persecution that profe^ (...) Christian (...) brought men
under then (which is the thing Mr. Lockier lays the great weight on as we did
see before page 24, 25.) and that Profession of Christian Religion so
cir^stantiate, was more pregnant to signify a great deal more touching inward
grace, then the same profession, for matter, does now or ordinarily out of that
case. I repone; it is true perseverance and constant holding out in the
profession of Religion under the cross and actual pressure of pers^tion is a
good evidence to ground a positive charitable judgment of an honest heart, and
principle of grace within (...) and undertaking the profession when it may
probably (...), is no^ nothing to this purpose. But I desire it man (...)
^mbred ^ere, that a^ the Christian Profession then was (...) dang^ of
persecution (the it was not always actually ^cuted: Some time the Church had
rest round about) so (...) Gospel then was accompanied with great and many
wonders and miracles which are mightily operative upon the minds of men, to
draw them to the following a Doctrine or way of Religion, even without any
spiritual heart-change. And therefore I think that no man can in reason say
that Profession of the Gospel, liable unto danger of persecution yet together
accompanied with so great miracles and (...) in as to ^ignifying and discovery
of inward grace, so (...) profession, the same upon the matter, when there is
not (...) danger, and withal neither are there such wonders and miracles
accompanying it. Further, let it be considered that besides that the ^acred
historiographer more frequently mentions the circumstance of miracles and
wonders, then that of the dan^ of persecution, in reporting men's bringing to
the profe^ of ^ristian faith; besides this, I say, we never read marked in the
story that, that circumstance of the danger of persecution, was taken into
account by the Apostles for passing judgment upon the in^ ^cerity of
Conversion, when they admitted to baptism person professing the Christian
faith. These things being considered, the conseque^ of the proposition may
appear to stand valid, upon this part of the antecedent. If the Apostles
admitted persons upon their first professing, without delay of time for further
trial and discovery of the sincerity of the work of grace in their hear^ then,
etc.



For the first part to wit M^ses ^racti^ (...) it was such as we said, great
plenty of ^monies of Scripture might be brought forth; But take one for all,
Deuteronomy. 29. here it (...) evident ver. 10, 11, 12, 13. that the whole body of the
people of Israel are acknowledged to be in the Visible Church of God. You stand
all of you before the Lord your God, your Captains of your Tribes, your Elders
and your Officers, with all the men of Israel. -- Yea some of the Independent
way will have, the Covenanting there re^earsed to be understood of a Church
Covenant (as they call it) and that thereby that (...) were, de novo, restored
to the state of a Visible Church from (...) they had fallen, as they allege.
And this (tho it be (...) because it was only a renewing of the General
Covenan^ ^twixt God and that people whereby was confirmed their Ad^tion to be
his Church) makes the place to militate the more (...) against them. Now see
what Moses says of them, verse. 2, 3, 4. Ye (meaning ^ great part of that
people) have seen all the Lord did before your ^yes in Egypt, -- The great
temptations which thine eyes have seen, the signs and these great miracles:
Yet the Lord has not given you an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears
to hear, unto this day. Does not Moses hereby clearly declare, that they were
void of true grace, and ^renewed men? Some of the Independent way have denied
this, alleging, that this exprobration does not import that they were yet in a
natural unrenued state: But only that they were dull and ^low in harkening to
discern and understand sundry particular dispensations of Divine favor and
power: And that the like sinful (...) are objected to the Lords Apostles, Mark
8. 17. But the corrupt and perverse Interpretation upon this place (contrary to
the stream of Orthodox Writers, especially such as oppose the Remonstrants, who
expounds the place almost the same way, being p^ssed therewith in the
controversy touching the efficacy of grace in Conversion, see ^mely Junius his
Analys. Deuteronomy. 29. Calv. Comment. ibi. Am^s^ron. Artic. 3. Argument 2. P^scat.
A^ica duplicat. ad Conr. Vorst) and parallelling it with that spoken of the
Apostles, Mark 8. is abundantly refuted by Reverend Mr. Ruth^f^rd Due right of
Presbyt. page 104, 105, 106. that I need (...) more to what he has said. Only
let the Reader cons^der what is said of that people, Deuteronomy. 31. 21, 27. and
judge i^ nothing else be meant, but some particular sinfu^ (...) ^fections and
^cts incide^ to (...) Mr. Hookers (...) Surv. p. 1^, 2 page 20. 30. will not
^lve the wound given to his opinion by this part of the Argument. He thinks to
relieve the matter without the least trouble, by telling us that such persons
were in that Church having degen^ (...) what they were, and were to be only
tolera^ (...) the censures were tried up^ them: But if then they (...)
incorrigible, they were to (...) that the Question^ is not, whether member
(...) (he means true gracious (...) out of man) may dege^erat: But when (...)
of the Church, according to the way and (...) received Many things might he
(...) But for to show the nullit^ ^f this Answer, it (...) to consider, that a^
this time, Deuteronomy. 29. Moses, at the Lords direction was, by ^en^ing of the
Covenant; either stating them de^ nove (...) Visible Church (as some of the
Independent way do (...) ^er) or (...) is the truth) confirming, or ren^ (...)
of that A^opti^ whereby long ago, the Lord (...) them to be his (...) people:
And (...) restoring, (...) (there are no odds, (...) on, which of them be said)
Covenanting all the people our and other of them knowing, the mean while,
a^edly many of them to be but graceless, unconverted men. And was this not to
acknowledge them as Visible members, (...) them? Verily such a fiction cannot
stand (...) of so clear and evident li^ of Scriptu^.

Baptist* Baptized huge multitude^ without any ^lay (...), it is said that all
Jerusalem and J^ and the R^on round about (...) went out to him and were
Baptized without de^ Mat. 3. 5, ^. Two things principally are replied to the
(...) said in the Text, (...) 6. 2: (...) in their (...) of them t^ bring (...)
For that (...) the consideration which (...) Godly and (...) has upon the pla^
(...) in Answer to the R^emists affirm^ that they did not (...) themselves
sinners in the general only; but that ever (...) ^tter his sins particularly.
That Learned Author (...), that this confession was made by every one apar^ or
of (...) particular fault they had committed; and he says (...) was only
general, not only in regard of the object, (...) not of their (...) but of
their sins generally) (...) every one of them (...) confession personally, but
(...) common they professed themself (...)) and (...) ^siderable and weighty
reasons of (...) they had made confession every one (...) prescription to every
one apart, to every singular person but that he does not: but according (...)
profession of life wherein they lived, to the Publica^, that (...) to that
state of life, to the (...) that which (...) their calling. Secondly, (...) was
impossible (...) have ^eard all these con^e^ particularly. (...) every one of
them (...) confess some (...) this is nothing to take of the strength of our
Argument (...) we find it (...), that John did delay, or make inquiry of the
soundness of the work in their hear^, but presently without more, and with
delay Baptized them. Secondly, True it is, John (...) bring forth (...) meet for
Repe^. But did John Bap^ (...) their baptism until he should see (...) fruits
good works in a course of life, ^ought forth, and thereby (...) them (...) to
be true Saints, and so duly qualified that way? Does (...) any (...) as this?
Or is not John's (...) and clearly, that (...) in his Harmon. page 9^, E^. (...)
Bat^. subjungit (...) fidem and (...)

May, alleges, that John Baptist, no^ content with the external prof^on of
such as came to his baptism, did require of them bringing ^th of fruits worthy
of Repentance before he admitted them: That he did not baptize the Pharisees,
but rejected them, upon this very account, because he did not see in them such
fruits. But what is brought by them for confirming this alledgeance, and what
else they bring for their new taken up way in this point shall be examined
afterward in an Appendix. For the present, what we have said is suffici^n^ to
show that John baptized such as came to him upon the (...) prof^ssion, without
any delay of time, or waiting for trial of the sincerity of their saving
Conversion.

Acts 2. 38. 41. We read they baptized and so added to the Church three
thousand, that same day that they first professed, without delay of the matter
for so much as one day, when as so great a number might excused the delay, if
they would have taken longer time to the bu^nesse. And certainly it being (...)
the conversion of these men was so sudden, one would think (...) Apostle^
would have waited for a trial and proof of their sincerity, if so be such a
trial and proof had been by Christ's institution necessary to go before the
admission of men into the Visible Church. But the Spirit of God which acted and
directed the Apostles, did dictate them no such thing. In like manner the
Samarit^, men and women were baptized without any delay, Acts 8. 1^. So Simon
at that same tim^ albeit to that very day, he had been a Sorcerer, dement^d
that people with his devilish enchauntments, and with sacrilegious impiety,
given himself out as the great pow^ of God: yet as soon as being convinced by
the sight of miracles, he professed the Christian Faith, was baptized by
Philip. Finally, whosoever were baptized by the Apostles that we read of, were
baptized after this same manner: nor can there be given from Scripture so much
as one instance, of any one man, who profess^g the Faith, and desiring the
communion of the Church, was r^f^sed Baptism for a time, until he should give
a trial and evidence of the si^erity of the work of grace in his heart.

John Baptist and the Apostl^ add the practice of Jesus Christ himself. It Is
worthy of observation (says Mr. Baxter well against Tombs, page 127.) that it
is said, John 3. 26. he baptized, ( viz. by the Ministry of his Disciples) and
all men came unto him. Whereby it is evident that he baptized men presently and
without delay, as soon as they came and professed themselves his Disciples.
Shall we then, miserable men, not content with our Lords example, take upon us
to be more severe and exact in his matters then himself? Verily I cannot look
upon this too great diligence, but as a counsel of man's pride, shuffling it
self in under a mask of purity ^d accuracy in the matters of God.

John Baptist admitted persons to baptism, I know not, unless some happily will
say, that baptism does not constitute one a member of the Visible Church (as
Reverend Hooker contends in a large dispute, Surv. p. 1. c. 4. page 55. and
seq.) and that to be admitted to baptism, and to be admitted a member of the
Visible Church are not one and the same thing, and that more may be required as
a necessary antecedent qualification to this, then is to that. But as to this
exception. 1. I yield that baptism in it self gives not the being of a member
of the Visible Church: But that one must be first a member thereof de jure
(which we say is given by such external profession as we have described
before, to men of years, and to Infants by federall holiness derived from
their Parents) otherwise baptism could not constitute one a member;
Nevertheless we hold this for certain, that baptism is the ordinary Ordinance
whereby solemn admission, and initiation into actual communion of the Visible
Church, is performed: Neither since the time that baptism was instituted can
their be shown in Scripture, either precept, or example of any external way or
means of admitting members of a Visible Church, beside baptism; further let me
ask of the adversaries, that they would produce from the holy Scriptures an
instance of any one man who being admitted to baptism, was not presently and
ipso facto esteemed a member of the Visible Church. They cannot, it is a thing
unheard of in the Word of God. Therefore it is clearly evident, that upon what
condition men were ^dmitted to the Laver of baptism, that same was accounted
qualification sufficient in foro Ecclesiastico to constitute a member of the
Visible Church, and how gross an absurdity in theology were it to say that a
man, tho orderly baptized, and no new, impediment interveening, yet were not a
member of the Visible Church: For hence it should follow that a baptized
Christian, even after he is such, were yet (...) i. e. amongst these that are
without, Pagans, and infidels* 1 Cor. 5. 12. for there the Apostle divides the
whole satitude of mankind into these two Classes, of those that are within,
and (...) that are without, and as by these that are within he understands such
as are of the Visible Church, whom also he calls Brethren* v. 11. so by those
who are without, he understands infidels, whom he calls the men of the world,
v. 10. This much for our first Argument.

Arg. 2. If our Lord Jesus Christ has not given, to any man or society of men
upon earth, judiciary power, authoritatively, judicially and positively to
pronounce sentence touching the inward spiritual condition of all men
professing true Christian Religion^, and submitting themselves to the
Ordinances* of Christ, whether they be regenerat or not: Then it cannot be, by
Christ's institution, a necessary qualification requisite to the admitting of
persons into the outward fellowship of the Visible Church, that they be in foro
Ecclesiastico judged truly converted and regenerated. But the former is true;
therefore so is the latter. The connection of the proposition is evident of it
self. As to the assumption, let it be noted. 1. That I deny not but a Minister
has power from God with Ministerial Authority, to determine, Doctrinally and
in thesi, men regenerated and in the state of grace and reconciliation, or
unregenerate and as yet in the state of nature, according as they want or have
the characters of true regeneration and faith. They have a warrant from the
word of God to pronounce all men that have never been humbled before God for
their sins, that esteem not Christ more precious then all things beside in the
World, that walk not after the Spirit but after the flesh, etc. to be
unregenerat men and strangers from the life of God, and contra. ^. I grant that
Ministers have power and authority to apply the general Doctrinall sentence to
particular persons in ^pothesi but conditionally: whom also they may and ought
earnestly to press to make positive application in their own consciences, and
as they perceive more probable appearances of the one or the other sort of
characters, accordingly to press upon persons the one more then the other. 3.
Nor deny I but it belongs to the duty of a Minister seriously and attentively
to observe with wisdom, so far as he can, the way of such as are under his
charge, to discern and understand, so far as may be, their spiritual condition
and estate, and that he may have a probable judgment of discretion concerning
the same, this is necessary (...) behovefull for him, that he may the better
know, how to perform that duty of dividing the Word of God aright. In effect it
is no small part of a Ministers study to study the condition of his flock, yea,
this in some way is incumbent to every particular Christian in relation to
others with whom they converse, that they may be able the more accommodatly and
ptofitably to exhort and provoke one another to good works. But this I deny,
that God has given to any man, or society of men, power and authority
judicially to cognosce upon the spiritual estate of every professor of the
Gospel, and positively to pronounce every professor of the Gospel, upon such
cognition, to be held a regenerat man and in the estate of grace, or to be held
unregenerat and yet in the state of nature: Which yet Mr. Lockier must needs
force say by consequence of his Docttine touching the qualification of Church
matter or members. But now let him or any man show me from the Word of God, any
authentic Divine patent or commission of this power, given to any man or
society of men in the world. The Lord has indeed given to the Church or rather
to the Officers in the Church, a power authoritatively to cognosce upon all
professors outward actions and to determine judicially whether sinful and
scandalous, or not; but to cognosce, determine and judge judicially and
positively upon their inward Spiritual estate, we read not any where that he
has given power to men* this he has reserved as a prerogative to himself to
be exercised openly at last, in the day of Judgment, before all Men and
Angels, and in this life secretly, by his Word and Spirit in the court of men's
consciences when it seems good to himself. And this is the very ground the
Apostle Romans 14. goes upon, in dissuading men to judge one another; Which
certainly must be understood of their Spiritual estates, and not their
actions; Because these without question may be lawfully and warrantably be
judged, see v. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. of that chap.

minimum quod sic, that is, the lowest degree and measure of such characters,
less then which, if Professors should be found to have, they are to be
accounted non-regenerate, or at least, not to be counted Regenerate. But there
is no such rule in the Word of God, therefore etc. The connection of the
proposition is certain and evident, and as I conceive cannot be denied by any
man. For first, it cannot be conceived how it can consist with the Wisdom of
God, that he would have ordained that only persons so and so qualified should
be admitted to the fellowship of the Church, and all others debarred: And that
the Church should have power to cognosce; And positively to judge every
professor, that they are so qualified or not, in relation to admitting or
excluding them; And yet not have prescribed a definite rule for regulating the
Churches cognition and judgment of rhis: But left it without rule to men in
their consciences, as both judge and rule, to determine who is to be held
regenerate or not, certainly this cannot consist with humane, let be divine,
wisdom: Alas! even gracious men being of very different and unequal syzes of
light and discerning, could not but vary much one from another, so that
oftentimes their would be tot sententiae quot capita. Then any man will readily
vary from himself at diverse times: Yea, the best of men are subject to sinful
affections which may and would no doubt oftentimes by-asse the judgments, as
having no small influence thereupon: And so what confusions, disorders, yea and
oftentimes grievous injuries to persons in the matter of admission into or
exclusion from the fellowship of the Church, might not this open a door to, if
the matter were committed wholly to man's judgment without law or rule:
Therefore it must be confessed, that there must be a rule for regulating the
Churches cognition and judgment in this matter which the opposites will not
deny. 2. This rule must be such as holds forth not only the particular
characters, upon the having or wanting of which the Church must cognosce, and
accordingly as is found to judge men Regenerate or not: But also the very
minimum quod sic, the lowest degree and measure whereupon the judgment of the
Church is to proceed. My meaning, to speak as plainly as I can to the weaker
sort is this: the rule must declare, how much is sufficient and necessary at
least, to ground a positive judgment that a man is Regenerate, of which if a
man come short, or have any ways less, he is to be reputed non-Regenerate, at
least not to be reputed Regenerate, which according to Mr. Lockiers Doctrine
debars him from being received as a Member of the Church. The reason of this is
clear: because otherwise the matter should be left in a mere uncertaintie, and
in effect devolved, upon the mere arbitrament of the Churches judgment: if, to
wit, the rule should say no more but indefinitely: a man, that he may be
positively judged a true Regenerate Convert, must have some knowledge of the
Articles of Religion, experience of effectual calling unto Faith and
Repentance, and conformity of conversation to the Gospel: Not determining
definitely this or thus much at least, he must have; which if he have, he is to
be judged and reputed truly Regenerated, and if he come short of this much,
not.

ways, and to compare the same with the rule, may pass a positive, yea a
certain and infallible sentence and jugement upon himself, whether he be
Regenerate and in the state of Grace, or not: This we assert against Papists
maintaining that Believers nor have, nor, by ordinary means, can have assurance
of their being in the state of grace: and against the wild Antinomians of this
time maintaining that this cannot be had by inherent works and signs of Grace.
2. We deny not but there are some more eminent outward works and actings of
Religion and Piety, upon which men in whom they are seen, may be warrantably by
others, so far as is competent to men, positively judged truly gracious: and
that there are some outward works and actings of the flesh designed by the Word
of God so gross and corrupt (such as are constant known neglect of the Worship
of God, open contempt of Divine Ordinances, customarie mocking of Piety and
Religion, and such others, see 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4.) which appearing in men,
others may esteem them void of Grace, carnal, without the Spirit and fear of
God.

These things then being put out of controversy, this is the thing we cannot
see in the Word of God: a general and universal rule for trying and giving
judgment upon all and every Professor in point of Regeneration and
non-Regeneration, by others then themselves: and holding forth such definite
limited and bounded Characters of Regeneration, whereupon others may pass a
positive sentence or judgment, viz. this man is to be held truly Regenerate,
because he has so much, or so much Profession and practice: and this man is to
be held not Regenerate, at least, not to be held Regenerate, because he has
not so much. I say we cannot see any rule of this kind, held forth in the Word
of God: let Mr. Lockier if he has seen it, point us at it. Verily if he had
had a mind to satisfy his readers and hearers, or done that which was
requisite to have been done by him in reason to satisfy and convince them of
the doctrine he delivered touching the matter or Members of the Visible Church,
viz. that all and every one of them must be truly converted and sealed of God
for his, so far as men very spiritual can judge: he should have told them and
that from the Word of God, the particular definite bounded Characters whereby
all and every Professor may and are to be by others then themselves discerned
and judged to be such or otherwise, but having never so much as once in his
lecture assayed to determine this we must crave leave to say he has left them
and his Doctrine both in the mist. However let him do it yet, and we shall
pass that escape. Others of his way or toward it, have assayed it: but when
that which they have said to this purpose is duly examined and pondered, I
believe, it shall be found by judicious and impartial men much unsatisfactory,
and still leaving the matter in the dark: let us take into consideration what
some of the more judicious of them have determined in this matter.

Hooker Surv. p. 1. c. 2. page 24. lays down the rule or ground in these
words, he that professing the faith, lives not in the neglect of any known
duty, nor in the commission of any known evil, and has such a measure of
knowledge, as may in reason, let in Christ into the soul, and carry the soul to
him. These be grounds, by which charity passed according to rule, may and ought
to conceive; There be some beginnings of spiritual good: Here are two things
laid down to make up the ground to proceed upon. 1. Living without omission of
any known duty, or in commission of any known evil. 2. So much knowledge as
may let in Christ to the soul, and lead the soul to him. But commonly amongst
them there is yet a further thing required to ground this judgment, viz. a
declaration of the experimental work of faith and Conversion in the heart. Mr.
Norton, page 13. and Mr. Hooker himself, p. 3. c. 1. page 4. he (the person to
be admitted) must be tried, not only what his knowledge, but what his
acquaintance is with the things of Christ and his Kingdom. Experience and
acquaintance with Christ imports more then knowledge that may let Christ into
the soul, and carry the soul to Christ: Even knowledge that he is in, de facto.
Now let us examine these things so far as concerns our present purpose.

this premised, 1. It Is to be observed that, as to that part of the ground,
knowledge; Mr. Hooker gives us nothing but an indefinit general, so much
knowledge as may let in Christ into the soul: But tells not, defines not, the
bounds of knowledge, that we might know how much knowledge, will serve for
that purpose, and less then which, will not do it. So the rule as to this part
set down by Mr. Hooker is but a blind. And verily I think it shall be hard for
any man to define particularly, how much knowledge is requisite to let in
Christ and less then which will not do it. Mr. Norton speaking of this part of
the (...), upon which the judgment of the Church must proceed, page 12. in
sin. and 13. princip. he defines the knowledge required, to be the
fundamentalls, and other heads of Religion, the knowledge whereof is necessary
for leading a life without scandal. But beside, that it has never been
clearly yet shown by any what are the precise fundamentals of Religion (and I
suppose hardly can be) it were a hard assertion to affirm that the knowledge of
all these heads of Religion that are necessary to lead a life without scandal,
is necessary to a man's Regeneration, and so the declaration thereof necessary
to ground the Churches judging of him to be such, for admitting him to Church
fellowship. I think a man may be ignorant all the days of his life of the
strict morality of the Lords day (the knowledge whereof yet, it being supposed
to be of divine institution (as it is) is necessary to lead a life without
scandal) and yet be truly regenerat, and such as the Church may judge in
charity truly gracious.

Hooker himself speaks) he is informed and convinced by the power of the word
and evidence of reason, which is secret, and falls not under the cognition of
any outward Judicatory. Mr. Norton says somewhat more purposely that it must
be a conversation without scandal, that is, offense before men. And Mr. Hooker
himself a little after he has laid down the rule, wavering from himself (as
indeed in handling this Question, about the necessary qualification of Church
members, he is exceeding uncertain in expressing his mind) he speaks not of
living in any known sin, but of committing some gross evil. But then, 2. Is
freedom from living in gross evils, or outward scandalls, ground sufficient,
with a profession of the truth, for the Church to pass a positive sentence or
judgment that a man is regenerat and really in Christ? I think indeed it may
be a ground, to keep us from positive judging the contrary of them, which in
effect is nothing else, but to abstract from positive judging of their inward
spiritual condition at all. 3. If not living in the neglect of any known duty,
i. e. living in the performance of all known duty (or if he will, all known
duties obvious to the notice of men) and not living in the commission of any
known evil, i. e. living in abstinence from any known evil (or if he will,
obvious to the notice of men) must be the ground whereupon to proceed upon this
judgment to be passed upon a man's regeneration in relation to his admission to
the Visible Church, and this living imports a trade (as Mr. Hooker exponeth)
that is, a continued course: Then I would enquire how long time living so is
sufficient to ground the Ecclesiastic judgment, and less then which will not
serve the turn? This was necessary to have been determined that the rule might
be certain, i. e. definite and constant, that the matter might not be devolved
upon the arbitrament of man's judgment, or rather pleasure. Here is altum
silentium, and so again the matter left in the mist. To press this the more and
the more clearly, I put the case the person desiring to be admitted to the
fellowship of the Church, and so to be judged of the Church, whether Regenerat
or not, is one who has been an heathen, living before and till that very time
in some known sins (as many sins are to heathen known sins) of omission and
commission. Now I inquire how long time must be taken to evidence him, not to
be a liver in these known sins, to the effect that a positive judgment may
pass upon him that he is Regenerat? Let a positive Answer be given to this. If
any shall say, a definite time is not necessary for trying such an one, if he
have Repentance for these sins, and as soon as he has it, it is enough
according to what Mr. Norton speaks (conversatio absque scandalo, paenitentia
non sanato.) then I say, Repentance here must be understood either as
comprehending the inward grace in the heart; but this falls not directly and
immediately under the cognition of the outward Court, to be a ground or medium
of their procedour into judgment, yea it is the very thing, or a part of the
thing, which is to be concluded in the judgment: Or it must be taken as only
comprehending the outward part of it, i. e. Reformation which is nothing else
but performing of the duties formerly neglected, and abstaining from the evils
formerly committed, and if so, then we are just where we were, in the mist yet.

Hooker expresses it, or (as distinctly the Author of the narration of the
practices of the Churches of New England, page 9.) of their effectual
vocation, in their sound Repentance toward God and faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ, is most unwarrantable and rigid. What? must this be a general
rule for all professors, that they must make a declaration of this
experimental work upon their heart, that they may be judged Regenerat and
Converts, and so capable of admission to the Visible Church? What warrant for
this in the Word? The places pointed at by that last Author, Mat. 3. 8. Luke 3.
8. Acts 8. 37. does not warrant any such thing. In the former two John Baptist
indeed charged these people to perform really the work of Reformation and
Repentance, that they might not delude themselves with vain imaginations of
interest in God upon common privileges: But requires not of them a
declaration of the experimental work thereof upon their hearts, that thereupon
a positive judgment might be passed concerning the truth of the work in their
heart. So in the place, Acts 8 37. Philip tells the Eunuch, what is his duty
in relation to the susception of Baptism, that he believe with all his heart.
And together, I confess, insinuates the requiring of a profession of so much,
that he might Administrat baptism to him. But neither does Philip require, nor
the Eunuch make a declaration of the experimental work in his heart, in
relation to passing a positive judgment concerning the inexistence of the work
in his heart. Verily, were this made an universal rule or ground whereby to
judge of professors Conversion, and consequently of their admission unto
Church fellowship; many an honest, gracious soul should never obtain such a
judgment upon them while they live; there being many such, who, put them to
declarations of this kind, could say little or nothing. He that were best read
in practical tractats of the nature of Repentance and Faith, and the way of
the Spirits working of these, and had a gift of utterance, should carry the
fairest sentence, what ever were the real work in his heart; if he could but
carry fair outwardly in his conversation, as an hypocrite may, without
scandal. Nay, it were in effect to erect a stage for hypocrites to out
themselves upon, and to cast a stumbling block in the way of honest hearts, not
endued with the gift of expressing themselves. I deny not but good use may be
made of drawing out of Christians, what experience they find of the work of the
spirit upon their hearts, and conferences between Ministers and People, and
between Christians among themselves, may and ought prudently to be exercised
for that end; But I speak against the making of declarations of this sort, a
general rule and ground for judicial trial and passing judgment concerning
the Regeneration and Conversion of Professors.

or the deed done, but as they are done from such principles, faith, and love,
and for such an end, the glorifying and pleasing of God, that argues the heart
to be Regenerat, and the doer to be in Christ and in the state of grace, and
consequently, that a man cannot positively judge of another Regeneration by
them, but as they appear, someway, to be done out of such Principles, and for
such an end. 3. That actings good upon the matter, may in some probability, at
least, appear to others, to be done from such principles and to such an end,
it is not enough to have the man's own word and assertion for it: but there must
be, a good time of them, and that under some variety of cases and conditions,
and some tentations. For to act right for a start, or to act right even for a
good time, a man coming under no alteration of condition or being under small
or no tentations, does not give much appearance to men without, that these
actings are right in their principles and ends. It Is evennesse and constancy in
alterations of cases, and under tentations assaulting to turn off the way, that
carries appearance of discovery of this. 4. That the greatest part even of
true Converts are not eminent Saints, but weaklings and but as Children, and
that unregenerat civilians and hypocrites may in outward go far beyond many
sound gracious Christians. 5. Yea that many true Converts may be under the
prevalency of some sinful infirmities and affections, so far, as not only to
have, but for a long time, may be even to their last days, as to live (though
not with inward liking and allowing (which is not seen by others) yet to the
outward committing) in known sinful actings. As for example, may not gracious
Christians be thus subject to an outward course of known cankerdnesse or some
other the like distemper? Let these things be considered and laid together, and
tellme if there can be a general rule whereby there may and should be a
judicial trial and positive judgment passed upon all and every Professor
desiring the fellowship of the Church, concerning their Regeneration or
non-regeneration? Wherefore I cannot but commend both the judicious and
moderate determination of Mr. Norton, who when he has laid down the rule or
grounds of the (...), whereby judgment it to be passed upon persons about
their spiritual estate, in relation to admitting them to Church Fellowship
(wherein yet I cannot join with him as being too strait and rigid) and coming
to define what sort of judgment it is, that is to be passed upon them, he
says we must not judge positively, but negatively and practically, i. e.
(says he) not judge evil of them. 2. To carry our selves toward them in
common duties as if they were good, where it is clear, that as to the act of
judgment, he requires no more, but that we judge not men unregenerat, and this
is nothing else upon the matter but that same which we determined instating the
Question, viz. that in admitting of persons into the fellowship of the Visible
Church, we are to look at, and take for sufficient qualifications such or such
outward professions, prescinding or abstracting (simplici abstractione) from
the inward spiritual estate of the man; for when I do not positively judge a
man Regenerat or really gracious, but only judges not him unregenerat and
graceless, certainly I abstract from both.

Baxter in his Book against Tombs has distinctly (for until this time I had
much longed for it, yet I had not the occasion to see that Piece) which may be
replied, to that I have been saying in the prosecution of this Argument, tho it
comes not up to that M^. Lockier and others of his way would be at. This
Reverend Author, I find, says these things. 1. That none is to be admitted
into the fellowship of the Visible Church, but such as may and are judged, to
be members of the Invisible Church and true believers. P. 1. c. 27. page 73. I
take it for granted (says he) that to be a visible member of the Church, and
to be a member of the Visible Church is all one. And a little after, Because
men seem to be of the Invisible Church, therefore they truly are of the
visible, and then, if we were fully assured by his own external discoveries,
that any man were not of the Invisible Church, that man should not be taken to
be of the Visible. And a little after, therefore if a converted Jew were to be
taken in to the Church upon his profession, we ought not to admit him, except
his profession seem to be serious, and so sincere. 2. That the judgment to be
passed upon a man that he may be received into the Visible Church, is not purum
that he is a true believer, but modale that it is probable that he is a true
believer, page 93. 3. That the rule of this judgment he says is this, a
serious professor of the faith, is to be taken by us for a true believer, he
means as before, probably. I do much reverence and honor in my estimation,
this Judicious acute and Godly man, and accounts the Church of God much obliged
to him under God, especially for his learned and profitable pains in
vindicating the right of Infant Baptism. Yet I do confess, in sundry things I
cannot be of his judgment, which I know by his frequent and serious
expressions to this purpose, he will not take ill; had it not been for
distractions otherwise and particularly, by this unseasonable piece, and I may
say, both uncharitable to this Church and unsatisfactory to any judicious man;
I would made bold ere now modestly to have represented to himself
considerations upon some things I have found in his other Pieces; and may be if
God grant us both continuance of life, and me some leisure I shall do that yet,
and add some things also out of this Piece last come to my hands.

viz. a serious profession of the faith, including a profession of subjection
to the commands and ordinances of Christ, is sufficient for this, and that
persons making this profession, are without delay or searching for trial and
discoveries of the work of their heart-conversion, to be admitted. The Passages
he cites for this purpose, P. 2. c. 8 page 126, 127. are clear for it. I do
heartily approve his weighty exhortation subjoined thereunto, to these of the
Independent way, and presents the same to Mr. Lockier to be laid to heart by
him, as in the Lords sight. See the Margin Oh that our Brethren that are so
inclineable to separation because of the unsoundnesse of our Church members and
un-Church whole Paroches (Mr. Lockier does whole Nations) and gather Churches
out of them, as if they were no Churches, and that must have such trial and
discoveries of the work of men's conversion before they admit them, would but
lay to heart all the Scripture examples, and make mo^e conscience of observing
their rule and not presume to be wiser and holier then God. He that goes
beyond Jesus Christ shall go without me, So he, and so say I with him.
. But 2. I cannot yet agree with him in this, that men are not to be received
into the Visible Church but under the notion of true believers, and positively
judged to be such, though but probably. 1. I can see no warrant in the Word for
this. 2. The grounds that the learned Author hints at for it, page 73. do not
seem convincing. 1. Whereas he says that it is all one to be a visible member
of the Church and a member of the Visible Church. And he that denies this will
but show his vanity. I say if the name Church be taken in one and the same
notion in both Propositions, I confess it is true he says: and he would show
his vanity that would deny it: But if in the former thereof Church be taken
for that society which is Christ's mystical redeemed body, the Epithete Visible
noting so, not the nature of membership, but an adjunct of it: I deny the
identity of these two Propositions: and cannot see but it is solid enough to
deny it. Again when he says that the Invisible is properly and primarly called
the Church, and the Church Visible containing all the unsound part, is called
the Church secundarly and for the sake of the Invisible;ble; I acknowledge this
is ordinarily said, but can see no reason for it. I find three special
Ecclesiastic significations of this name (...) in Scripture, viz. 1. The
society or company of redeemed ones, effectually called from the estate of
nature. 2. A society outwardly called into and making profession of the faith,
worship and service of God in Christ. 3. An Assembly of Officers employed in
government of Professors. However I confess the strict signification is
principal and most excellent as to the thing: yet I think all of them are
alike proper and none of these things has the name by way of reference to
another of them. 3. When as he says. That if we were fully certain by his own
external discoveries, that a man were not of the Invisible Church, that man
should not be taken to be of the Visible; and if any Jew or Pagan were to be
taken into the Church upon his profession, we ought not to admit him, except
his Profession seem to be serious and sincere. For this I represent these
considerations. 1. If we were fully certain by his own external discoveries,
that a man were not of the Invisible Church, neither actually, nor potentially,
or in the purpose of God, i. e. if we were fully certain by his own external
discoveries, that he were a reprobat (as these that sin against the Holy Ghost,
and these only, discovers themselves to be such) true he were not to be
received into the Visible Church, even because he were known to be, this way
not of the Invisible Church. 2. I confess also that (...) a man's outward
carriage and way such, as did discover him positively not to be of the
Invisible Church actually, i. e. as did discover him positively, to be an
unregenerat man (though I did not discover him to be as a reprobat, i. e. not
so much as potentially of the Invisible Church) he were not to be received into
the fellowship of the Visible. But withal I say he were to be debarred or not
received, not upon the account of non-regeneration, or upon that carriage
considered under this formality and reduplication, as a sign and discovery of
non-regeneration; but materially, as being contrary to the very outward
profession of the faith, for such a cariageonly I conceive it would be this; my
reason why I deny that non-regeneration or any thing considered formally under
the notion or reduplication, as a sign of non-regeneration (which is all one)
should be the cause for excluding a man from admission into the Visible Church,
is because I conceive it is Gods revealed will in his word that men be received
into the Visible Church that they may be Regenerat and converted and that the
Ministerial dispensation of the Ordinances, are by Gods revealed will set up
in the Church to be means of Regeneration and Conversion, as well as
edification of such as are Regenerat. 3. I conceive between such as are in a
course and carriage, which indeed discovers evidently and certainly
non-regeneration ( e. g. as to be without the profession of Christianity, to
live in some heresy directly contrary to the foundation, as is Socinianism, to
live in a constant course of known prophanity) and such as are seemingly
Regenerat and so to be positively judged such in probability; there may be, yea
and are many of a midde sort who are in such an estate and condition outward,
and as relating to man's judgment of them that as they do not, unto full
certainty of judgment, discover themselves non-regenerat, so there is not
sufficient ground positively to judge them probably Regenerat, and so to use
them, that is to dispense Ordinances to them as such and in a way suitable to
men supposed to be Regenerat: But the most we can in our judgment of their
state is to prescind from passing a positive judgment either way; as for
example, a man when he comes first to make a serious, sober profession of the
faith, before we have further experience of his way, or of whom we know no more
as yet, but that he seriously professes the truth, and offers subjection to
Ordinances, I confess this is a ground sufficient, probably to judge the man
is elect, God has a purpose to save him, and could we not judge this much
probable of him, I will not say we should receive him in that case. But it is
not sufficient this alone and by it self, to ground a positive judgment that
he is Regenerat or actually in the state of grace, though you call it a
judgment of probability; my reason is this, because to ground a positive act
of judgment, that a man is Regenerat in foro exteriori, there is requisite
some seemingnesse (to speak so) of spiritual sincerity in a man's profession,
i. e. that he does it from a spiritual principle, upon spiritual motives, and
for a spiritual end: But a mere sober, not mocking, serious profession without
more is not a positive appeara^ce of spiritual supernatural sincerity; at
least, therefore I humbly conceive it is a mistake to confound seriousness and
sincerity, if he understand spiritual or supernatural sincerity (as he must
understand it here) for that is larger then this: many are serious in their
profession, who are not sincere in this sense: yea may evidence seriousness
when they do not as yet give any positive evidence of this. And therefore I
conceive, he does not upon good enough ground quarrel with Tombs, page 129.
for that Mr. Tombs requiring a profession sober, serious and understanding; he
does disclaim an inquiry after the sincerity of their profession, if Mr.
Tombs meant supernatural sincerity, as I conceive he did; the distinction of
moral sincerity, and spiritual or supernatural sincerity is common amongst
practick Divines, and rational; and there may be positive probable evidences
of the former, when there is not yet so much of the latter. I humbly conceive,
there cannot be had positive, probable evidences of this, ordinarily, without
observation of a man's way after profession for a time, wherein notice may be
taken of his walking equally in the latitude of duties, and constantly in
variety of cases and conditions. But the other may sooner and more easily
appear and positively be judged of, as we judge of a man's seriousness in any
other action. And it is Mr. Baxters own judgment, that as soon as a man makes
profession of the faith, without delay or trial for discovery of his
heart-Conversion, he is to be admitted into the Visible Church. To conclude,
Mr. Baxter and I are at agreement upon the matter concerning the qualification
that is sufficient for admitting persons into the Visible Church, viz. sober
serious profession, without delay to enquire for more, and so we are agreed in
the maine about the matter of the Visible Church: We differ in this that he
thinks persons are not to be admitted, but under the consideration of persons
judged, at least probably, Converted and Regenerated. My mind is that they are
to be admitted under the name of serious, sober, outward professors,
abstracting from Conversion or non-conversion. Which upon the matter, and as to
the main business of the matter of the Visible Church, will only make some
differences between us in some Arguments to prove the maine conclusion. Some
Arguments that I use will not suit his way: But that is not much to the point.
Now I come to a fourth Argument.

in foro Ecclesiastico, i. e. in the outward Court of the Church, for admitting
them into the external communion and Society of the Visible Church, that they
be before truly Regenerat, Converted, sealed of God by his Spirit for his, or
give such manifest evidences of this, as that they may and ought to be judged
by the Church, truly Regenerat and Converted. But the former part or
antecedent is true: Therefore also the consequent.

ex suppositione consequentis sequitur oppositum antecedentis, i. e. if all
that are in the Visible Church be supposed to be already and antecedently to
their reception into the Visible Church, truly Converted and Regenerated; What
is the Minister as a Minister, or the Ministerial dispensation of the Gospel
ado with Converting of souls? All with whom he has to do as a Minister are
supposed to be Converted to his hand; and so in his Ministry he has only to do
with their advancing in grace. This is the more constringent toward our
Brethren of the Independent way, that they make the Ministry relative to a
constitute Visible Church only, and that a Minister cannot act, as a Minister,
but in relation to a particular Visible Church and these that are within it:
And therefore if a Minister by Preaching the Gospel should be an instrument of
the Conversion and Regeneration of an infidel, yet that is but by accident,
and that is not done by him as a Minister. If any shall say that many of these
who are received into the Visible Church, albeit they be supposed and judged to
be true Converts and Regenerat ones, yet they may really be unconverted and
unregenerated, and so may, being in the Church and under the Ministry, be
converted by the Ministerial Preaching of the Gospel. That is nothing to the
purpose: It Is but by accident that this comes to pass, and were it known that
a man were unregenerat and unconverted, he were not to be received under the
Ministry; Yea were he before a member, he should be by Mr. Lockiers Tenet,
un-Churched again, until he were a true Convert. And that which comes to
pass by the Ministry of the Word, but by accident, cannot be said to be an end
for which it is institute and set up in the Church. Yea further I say, if the
Visible Church consist of all and only such as are supposed and judged, so far
as men can discern, to be antecedently to their admission into the Church,
truly Converted and Regenerat; It follows necessarly, that the ordinary
Minister of the Gospel has nothing ado to Preach points of Doctrine tending
to preparatory humiliation, awaking of natural consciences, and Converting
souls to Christ, but all his Preaching ought to be upon points that concern
comforting, directing, strengthening, confirming, souls already Converted; he
shall have nothing ado to entreat souls to be reconciled to God, but he is
only to help them to enjoy the sweetness and comfort of Reconciliation, they
are already stated in; Farewell all Preaching of men's miserable estate by
nature, of the terrors of the Law, except only it be to let souls know the
better what they are delivered from.

viz. that the Ministry and Ministerial dispensation and Preaching of the
Gospel, is instituted to be an ordinary means of Converting souls, as well as
of advancing grace in them that are Converted, may be proven by innumerable
Scriptures. I shall point at some, 1. Prove. 9. 3, 4. Wisdom has sent forth
her maidens, she cries upon the high places of the City, who so is simple let
him turn in hither; as for him that wants understanding, she says to him,
come eat of my bread and drink of the wine which I have mingled. By these
maidens of wisdom are meant (as Interpreters agree) the Ministers of the Word
sent forth by Jesus Christ: Now what is the end and erand for which they are
sent? To call and invite such as are simple and have no understanding i. e. (as
Cartwright well expounds) such as yet are void of Religion and wisdom, ( i.
e. of true saving grace, tho not malicious opposers of the truth, and the
professors thereof, that is in effect such as we described in stating the
Controversy, serious, sober, outward professors, but yet unregenerat) to
invite and so to be means of bringing in such to communion with Christ and
participation of his saving grace set forth under the Parable of a Feast. Hence
then it is evident, that the Ministry, and Ministerial dispensation of the
Gospel is ordained and instituted in the Church, to be an ordina^y means of
Conversion. 2. 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20. Hence we reason thus: The Ministry of the
Gospel, i^ a Ministry of Reconciliation, i. e. for bringing men from their
estate of enimity, to peace with God, and it is the Office of Ministers, as
ambassadors in Christ's stead, to treat with souls, and bring them in to
Reconciliation with God. Therefore they are appointed to be the ordinary means
of Conversion. 3. 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. The servant of the Lord must not strive,
but be gentle to all men, apt to teach, patient. In meekness instructing those
that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them Repentance. Then
it is evident Ministers are instituted to be means of Converting souls, and they
must be qualified in relation to this as the work of their Ministry. It is well
marked by Estius, tho a Papist, yet in most things, a judicious solid
Interpreter, docet hic locus Deum ad convertendum peccatores uti velle opera
hominum qui externum adhibeant Ministerium correptionis and Doctrinae. 4. Romans
10. 14, 17. It Is so clear from this place that the Ministers of the Gospel, by
their Ministerial Preaching thereof, are the ordinary means appointed by God
for Conversion and begetting faith, that it cannot be avoided, but by denying
absurdly with Arminians, Socinians and others, everters of the Ministry, that
by a sent Preacher is not understood any other, but any gifted man, though not
called and set apart to the Office of the Ministry. We conclude then, that
seeing the Ministry of the Gospel is ordained of God to be an ordinary mean of
converting the elect and bringing them to Christ, it cannot be a condition
necessarily requisite in the members of the Visible Church, antecedently to
their admission into the society thereof, that they be already converted, or
supposed and judged to be such, so far as men can discern. And that which
follows upon the contrary; That private Christians, and not the Ministry of
sent Preachers, are the ordinary means and instruments of converting souls, is
a mere dream having no warrant in the Word of God. Hooker Sur. p. 1. c. 7. page
84, 85.
I know Mr. Hooker storms at my Reverend Colleague, for charging this absurdity
upon them: And he confesses that is a dream, and has no warrant in the Word,
and wonders how such an absurdity is so continually in the ear and mind of
Mr. Rutherfurd, and says he knows not whence it comes. But verily the good
man was angry at Mr. Rutherfurd without cause. For it comes as naturally from
his principles as any conclusion can come from its premises: For if a Visible
Church cannot be constituted of any but such as are supposed to be before
converted; and an Visible Church is prior to an ordinary Minister; neither can
there be a Minister but in a constitute Church, (as themselves maintain) I
pray, what must be the ordinary means (for there are not always Apostles
extraordinarily sent of God) of converting souls but private Christians? What
the good man says, page 84. materials of new gathered Churches with us, are
such as have been converted by Ministers in their several Congregations, With
reverence of his memory be it spoken, is childish and nothing to the purpose,
for first, the Question is not how or by what means, de facto this or that man
is converted, but what follows upon his Tenet: And according to the genius of
this it follows clearly that all are supposed to be converted (we speak of
Conversion ordinarily) before ever they come under a Ministry, and so by private
Christians. And these some, of whom you gather your Congregations, having them
from under other Ministers, in their several Congregations, if these
Congregations be rightly constitute, according to your principles, were
converted ere ever they came under such Ministers.

Argument 5. If the matter of the Visible Church were only real Saints and the
complexion of the Visible Church true holiness and saving grace (as Mr. Lockier
roundly expresses in his Tenet, page 29. and that by express opposition to
seemingly good, page 25.) or such as are positively to be judged such by
evidence so far as men very spiritual can discern (as other where he
expresses it) then it does follow that a man being in the Visible Church, for
non-regeneration simply or nonappearance, or defect of positive evidence to
ground a positive judgment of his Regeneneration ought to be Excommunicat and
casten out of the Visible Church; but the consequent is false: Ergo the
antecedent also. The connection of the proposition Mr. Lockier cannot deny, for
in effect it is his own, page 28. where he says Excommunication is an
Ordinance to cleanse the House of God and keep it pure, and according to what
it ought to be so far as men can discern, according to his Tenet, consisting of
only real Saints, and not one other. And says expressly that if men creep in,
where they should not be ( i. e. if men not Regenerat creep into the Visible
Church) they are to be cast out. It Is true, page 29. in the end of the
paragraph, he mincheth the matter, and says only, not one known to be
otherwise can abide within. But he should have said, by the consequence of his
Tenet, not one, not known positively, to be such, etc. As to the Assumption,
that it is false, that for non-regeneration simply, or defect of positive
evidences of Regeneration, persons are to be cast out of the Visible Church. 1.
Because there is neither precept nor practice in the Word of God for casting
out any upon this account. Let Mr. Lockier produce us any thing from Scripture
of this kind. The Scripture enjoyneth Excommunication for obstinacy, in known
public scandalous sins in conversation, or heresy in Doctrine, or at most for
atrocious crimes (whether the persons be judged Converts and Regenerats or not)
but no mention of any other cause of Excommunication: And in matters de jure in
Religion, a negative Argument from Scripture, is sure, it is not commanded, it is
not written in Scripture, Ergo it ought not to be done. I do profess this
consequent following upon this opinion is one of the considerations amongst
others, that of a long time has swayed me to think, that it is a way which is
not of God: But on the contrary (tho I esteem reverently of many of the
followers of it and has no harsh thoughts of their intentions therein) that
it is a subtle device of Satan transforming himself into an Angel of light, set
on foot by him as to advance Atheism in the World, so in special to overturn
the Protestant Religion and Churches. For if none shall be permitted to be
members of the Visible Churches, but such as are real Saints, at least so far
as men very spiritual can discern and judge upon such evidences, as these of
this way holds forth. These being in all parts the far fewest number even
very few in comparison: all the rest (of whom yet, many may have some seeds of
true saving grace in them, albeit it be not so perceptible to others) tho they
were not outwardly contumacious against the Ordinances, must be un-Churched,
casten out, to be no more under any Pastoral care, for watching over their
souls; to live as they like, without any spiritual means, to restrain or
reclaim them: to be a ready prey to Satan and his instruments, to be turned
sta^k Atheists, or seduced unto any error or heresy whatsoever. What a fair
field for hunting and catching of souls, would Romish Emissaries have were this
way of Mr. Lockiers put in practice in all the Reformed Churches? I verily
think the keeping of it on foot and driving it on in this Island is not without
influence from that Antichristian Synagogue upon this very design to overturn
the Protestant Churches.

Argument 6. That Doctrine which tends unavoidably to the holding out from the
fellowship of the visible Church, and so from all the ordinary means of grace
and salvation instituted by Christ, not only many who may be the elect of God,
and whom we cannot but probably judge to be elect: but also many, who may have
some measure of true Regenerating grace in them, and yet leaves a door open to
any Reprobat hypocrite (whom it pretends, ought not to be there) to come in if
they can but dissemble well and carry it fair outwardly; that Doctrine, I say,
it seems, cannot be from God. But that Doctrine concerning the necessary
qualification of Church Members, asserted and maintained by Mr. Lockier is
such: therefore, etc. The proposition I conceive will not be denied by any who
will consider these things. 1. That the means of grace and salvation, the
Ordinances of God, are institute and set up in the Church, primarly and per se,
for the elects sake, that they may obtain salvation. Hence is that of the
Apostle, 2 Timothy 2, 10. Therefore I endure all things for the Elects sake, that
they may also obtain salvation which is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory:
Notable are the words of that Judicious Popish Commentator Estius upon the
words, ideo (Graece, propter hoc) i. e. ut Euangelium disseminetur ut Verbum
Dci currat and clarificetur (acutelie pondering the connection of this verse
with the end of the preceding, but the Word of God is not bound) omnia dura
suffero, nullum laborem refugio, idque propter electos: Quamvis enim reprobi
sint electis permixti and eadem officia per Ecclesiae Ministros impen^dantur
reprobis, ut Doctrina, oration, exhortatio, correptio, Sacramentorum
Administratio: Non tamen propter reprobos sed propter electos fiunt. And a
little after, Ministros utique oportet cum Paulo in universo suo Ministerio
(and so in receiving into the Visible Church) hoc ipsum intendere. 2. That as
it is Christ the great and chief Pastor, his own way not to quench the smoking
flax, so it is his will that his servants and Ministers should not doit; but
that they should receive these that are infirm and weak. Now it being so; can
any man think that, that way can be of Christ, whereby the entrance into the
Visible Church, and so to the benefit of the public Ordinances, which are the
ordinary means of obtaining salvation, is made so strait, that many elect and
such as, we cannot but probably judge to be such may he held forth from the
benefit of all these, shut out of the ordinary way of salvation: Yea and even
many, who may have beginnings of the true grace of Regeneration. If this were
not a way to quench smoking flaxes I know not what will be.

Lockiers Doctrine, tho persons profess the faith, be desirous of the
fellowship of the Church, declare willingness to subject themselves to the
Ordinances; Yet unless they be truly Converted, and Regenerat, sealed of God
by his Spirit for his, so far as men very spiritual can discern, they are not
to be admitted into the Visible Church, and are held forth from the benefit of
all the public Ordinances, the ordinary means of salvation. 2. As to the other
part, it is also clear thus; because there may be many smoking flaxes, who have
some measure of true grace in them, who yet not only are weak in knowledge,
unable to give an account of all the fundamentalls of Religion, and such points
as are necessary to lead a life without scandal (which yet are required as the
ground of that judgment our adversaries will have to pass upon persons, to be
admitted members of the Visible Church) but also under many sensible, sinful
infirmities, which may render them suspected to others, to be no real Saints,
may puzle others to pass judgment on them, at least, may put them to a
suspense from passing a positive judgment upon them, as true saints, sealed of
God for his, by his Spirit. And all such by Mr. Lockiers Doctrine must be held
forth from the Visible Church, and so from the benefit of all public
Ordinances, the ordinary means of Salvation. These two considerations, I
profess have been to me further motives to make me think the way held forth by
this Doctrine concerning the qualification, in foro Ecclesiae, of Church
members, not to be of Christ, it being so obstructive to the proper end and
design of the setting up of the Ordinances and means of grace in the Church,
and contrary to Christ's own way of dealing with souls, and yet no castaway or
unregenerat man shall be excluded, if he but be studied in tractates of
theology, and can carry it fair before men, as indeed hypocrisy may stand
with great external formalities of Religion, in word and conversation.

we admit say they even infidels to the hearing of the Word. To this I think
Reverend Mr. Rutherfurd has said truly, that to be admitted as ordinary
hearers of the Word, and Church prayers, is a degree of admission to
Church Membership; and they who are baptized, and ordinarily hear and profess a
willing mind to communicate with the Church in the Holy things of God, they,
being not scandalously wicked, ought to be admitted, yea are members of the
Visible Church. But 2. To say that men are not members of the Visible Church
and yet that they may be ordinary hearers of the Word, according to your
principles is but a fair word to make Children fain of nothing. For say ye, a
Minister is a Minister only in relation to his particular flock and the members
thereof, therefore say I, as a Minister he is to Preach the Word only to them,
and therefore he must suit his Preaching of the Word unto them, that is unto
men sealed of God by his Spirit, so far as men very spiritual can discern, and
so as a Minister or a Ministerial Preacher of the Word, he is not obliged to
bring any word for hearing, for the case of that man that is not a member, and
so if that man hear ordina^ly or at all (tho he come to h^ar) any Preaching of
the Word fitted or prepared to do him good, it is more through hap then good
guiding, as we say; or else you must say, that a Minister when he is to Preach
the Word, he must prepare and study something as a Minister, for Visible
Church Members, suitable to such; and something to Preach as a private gifted
man for such as are without. But 1. An ordinary Preacher of the Word as a
private Christian, is a Preacher unknown to Scripture. 2. And one and that same
man Preaching at that same time, as a Minister to some, and as a private man to
other hearers, is far more uncouth to cripture. I believe a Minister by
Scripture rule, ought in his ordinary and public Preaching of the Word, to act
and Preach as a Minister, and to be wholly taken up with the work of his
Ministry: For to that he is appointed of God, and commanded to look to and
fulfill, Ephesians. 4. 12. Collos. 4. 17. 2 Timothy 4. 2.

in soro Ecclesiae, for admitting of persons to be Church members: but this you
acknowledge not to be sufficient: Let men thus seriously and soberly profess,
there must be a time for observing their conversation, and their must be a
trial and searching into the experimental work in their hearts: Now if it
must be somewhat more then that I enquire, what is the least thing more? We
have seen before what they held forth in their rules of trial, and dare say
(yea thinks it were unchristian, unwarrantable rigidnesse to say the contrary)
that there may be and are many honest, sincere Converts, in whom there is not
to be seen by others, and who cannot show to others, that which they hold forth
as the least, more then that which we have said; and therefore still by their
way many truly Regenerat may be held forth, tho desirous of Church communion,
and offering subjection to the Word and Ordinances of Christ; for my part. I
had rather, twenty hypocrites were let in, then that one gracious soul, yea or
Elect, tho yet not Regenerat, come this far on, as to desire to be in, and to
profess subjection, should be held forth, and yet this accurate and pretended
cleanly way of these Brethren, tho it tend to exclude many, who may be are
truly Regenerat, yet it may let in any unregenerat, if they can but play the
Hypocrite handsomely, and have some Book-learned-knowledge.

Argument 7. Shall be taken from these descriptions of the Visible Church in
the Word of God holding it forth to us frequently as a mixed society of good
and bad, under the similitudes of a barn floor, wherein is an heap of wheat
and chafe, Mat. 12. of a corn field wherein are growing together tares and
wheat, Chap. 13. 24. of a draw-net gathering in good fish and bad, ibid. verse.
47. etc. and of a great house wherein are vessels of Gold and Silver, and
vessels of Wood and Earth, 2 Timothy 2. 21. I confess this Argument has not been
well managed against the opposites, which has given them occasion to slight it,
as proving nothing but what themselves grant. For when no more is alleged from
these places, but that the Visible Church is such a society, as even when
rightly constitute, there are in it a mixture of true believers and hypocrites,
they say they yield the Argument wholly, that in the purest Visible Churches,
there may and will always be a mixture of hypocrites with true believers and
Saints, de facto: but that the Question is what sort of persons ought, de jure
to be admitted or permitted to be members of the Visible Church. But the places
duly pondered and considered together will afford us a more pungent Argument,
which will not leave open a way for such an escape. We present it thus in form:
if the Lord himself describing the outward constitution of the Visible Church,
as to the matter whereof it consists; not only holds it forth as a mixed
society of some truly good, and gracious, and some bad unconverted and
graceless ones: But also declares that his will is that his servants should
not cast out of it all such as they conceive to be bad and unconverted, but
that they permit even such in the outward Visible Church, leaving to himself to
make the full separation of the one from the other: Then it cannot be that by
his apointment and institution, it should be the necessary qualification of
Visible Church Members, in foro Ecclesiastico, that they be all true converts
and gracious ones, at least, so far as men can discern and judge, this
proposition if the consequence and connection thereof hold good; leaves no door
open for the former escapes, as is evident: and I conceive that the connection
or consequence of it, is undeniable, because upon the supposition of the
opposite of the consequent follows clearly the opposite of the antecedent,
that is to say, if it were Christ's institution and will that true grace, at
least, so far as men can discern and judge, should be the necessary
qualification, in foro Ecclesiastico, of all Church Members, it should clearly
follow that it were his will, and the duty of his servants to cast out all such
in the Visible Church, as they did see not to be qualified, not gracious
converts, which is flatly contrary to that which is supposed in the antecedent.
Now I assume that the antecedent is clearly held forth to us in these places.
1. It Is clear that in these places he holds forth the Visible Church in its
outward consti^ution as to the matter thereof, to be a mixed society of good and
bad, truly gracious and such as are void of true grace, and not only this, but
2. That not only he permits it to be so until the last day: But also it is his
will and he commands his servants to permit such to abide in the Church as even
to their discerning are bad, leaving the separation of them to himself at the
last. The servant said unto him will thou then that we go and gather them up?
Yes, would Mr. Lockier say, leave not one of them; No not one of them in a
Visible Church; they are where they ought not to be, they want the complexion
of the Visible Church, etc. But says the Lord himself: Nay, but let both grow
together until the Harvest.

Object. If it shall be objected against this exposition and application of
this place, that hereby it should follow that any profane ones ought to be
permitted to be members of the Visible Church, which in consequence is contrary
to Christ's institution of Ecclesiastic Discipline enjoining incorrigible
offenders to be casten out and Excommunicat; and that therefore by these tares
must be understood latent hypocrites, which may be such in appearance, as may
charitably be judged by men true believers. Answ. It cannot be that such latent
hypocrites as these only are understood: Why? They are such tares as are seen
and known by the servants; they must therefore be such as falls into sins and
whose badnesse is obvious to the senses of others, yet there is no
contradiction between this of Mat. 13. 29. so understood, and that of Mat. 18.
verse. 17. We may say as Augustine on the same places against Donatists, Domino
in Euangelio dicenti in illo obtemperare debemus ubi ait, si neque Ecclesiam
audierit sit tibi tanquam Ethnicus and Publicanus, and in illo, ubi prohibuit
colligi Zizania ne simul eradicetur and triticum, potest enim utrumque
custodiri: The reason is because they may well be conceived to speak not
adidem, in respect to these same sort of persons. The command of
Excommunication is against such notorious offenders as to their offenses add
contumacie against the Discipline of the Church, or at least, if it be further
to be extended, whose offense is atrocious and these that offends these ways,
whether they be tares, graceless men, or endued with true saving grace. But
there may be sinful livers in the Visible Church seen to be such by the
servants, who falls not under either of these two sorts.

Dickson has upon that Parable, Mat. 13. 24. etc. are worthy the reading and
consideration to this purpose we are on, and they are genuine and naturally
flowing from the place. The Book is common, so that I need not transcribe all;
I shall but bring two or three of them for such as may be has not the Book at
hand. 1. The external Visible Church is worthy to be called the Kingdom of
Heaven even in respect of the external constitution of it in the world
notwithstanding the wicked hypocrites in it; because therein Christ rules as
King, and has his Subjects, all professing him to be King of Saints. 4. It is
matter of grief and offense to see in the Church of Christ so many unprofitable
weeds -- 5. The rash zeal of servants before they consult their Lord and Master
is ready with the hazard of the Church and true members thereof, to have such a
constitution of the Visible Church as they should suffer none to be a member,
who are not inwardly Regenerat: But have all others of whose inward
Regeneration they are not assured plucked from among Professors. 6. The Lord
although he has given order to censure scandalous offenders, yet he discharges
his servants to press toward such a separation, as to have all weeds and
wicked in heart to be cast out; Least while they gather out the graceless
tares, they should root out also the gracious wheat with them: For it is not
possible for any man to discern the renewed from the unrenewed so clearly but
he may be mistaken. 8. The mixture in the Visible Church, Christ the Lord is
minded to permit and commands to be permitted till the day of Judgment, and
then, but not till then, shall a full separation of the godly and the wicked,
of the Elect and Reprobat be made; In the time of Harvest I will say gather the
Wheat, etc. See also his note on the ver. 47. This Parable teaches us, that
the Visible Church, in the way of gathering members, and in the manner of
constitution thereof, it is like a draw-net taking in all who profess
subjection to Christ and his Ordinances, good and bad, true and false
Professors, for it gathers of every kind, to wit, whosoever profess faith
in, and promise subjection to Christ.

Argument 8. The Doctrine which excludes the Infants of Christians from being
members of the Visible Church, cannot be from Christ nor have any truth in it.
But Mr. Lockiers Doctrine concerning the matter of the Visible Church excludes
the Infants of Christians from being members of the Visible Church, go etc. For
the proof of the proposition I refer Mr. Lockier to Mr. Baxters Dispute against
Tombs: If he deny that Infants of Christians are members of the Visible Church,
let him take some pains to answer these many, solid and acute Arguments brought
by that Learned man, to prove that they are. The assumption is most clear. For
Mr. Lockiers Doctrine is that none others, no not one other, are fit matter of a
Visible Church, but such as are truly converted, so far as men truly converted
and very spiritual are able to discern and judge: This is a thing that cannot
be spoken or understood of ^nfants. And it is remarkable that Mr. Lockier nor
here when he propounds his Doctrine concerning the matter of the Visible
Church, nor else where in prosecuting it in this Lecture, does so much as once,
with these whom he allows to be matter of the Visible Church, take in their
Infants, as some others of his mind are wont sometimes to do. And therefore
that which Mr. Caudrie says, considering Mr. Hookers conclusion concerning
the matter of the visible Church that had he not added a little after,
comprehending the Infants of conf^derat believers under their Parents Covenant,
he might have been suspected, etc. Mr. Lockier having altogether left this out,
I may say it of him positively, he is justly to be suspected of concurring with
Anabaptists whose Doctrine concerning the matter of a Church is the very same
with his.

Lockier was pleased to take into consideration (besides which he may find
sundry others, in other Divines, who have Written on this Subject, as namely,
Reverend M^. Rutherfurd, Apollonius, his consideration of sundry Controversies,
etc. and Spanhemius his Epistle to David Buchanan) I might add a large enough
Catalogue of Testimonies from Orthodox Divines, both ancient, especially in
their Writings against Novatians, and Donatists, and Modern, since Reformation
of Religion from Popery. But being of the mind of that Reverend and Learned
man, who said, he esteemed more of one Testimony of Scripture, then of ten
reasons, and of one solid reason, more then of ten humane testimonies, I will
spare to fill up Paper this way, only this I may say, that our opposites have
the whole stream of Orthodox and Reformed Divines against them, Let the Learned
Ames. (a man in some other points too much inclining to the Independent
Tenants) speak for this: Bellar. Enervat. Tom. 2. lib. 2. c. 1. 11. 5. falsum
est (says he) internas virtutes, equiri a nobis ut aliquis sit in Ecclesia
quoad Visibilem ejus statum. i. e. its false that inward virtues or graces are
required by us, that one may be in the Church as to its visible state: And he
had good reason to say so: for we shall find all Orthodox Reformed Divines,
alwise defining the Visible Church by outward Profession of the true Christian
faith or Religion, and external communion in the Worship and Ordinances of
God: But never by inward holiness and heartconversion. Thus I have done with
Mr. Lockiers Lecture.

APPENDIX, Wherein is Examined so much of that Letter Written by these of
ABERDENE, who lately have separated from this Church upon the INDEPENDENT
grounds, as relates to the present Question touching the necessary
qualification of Visible Church Members.
Aberdene, did Write a Letter of the date, 24. of May, to some Godly men in the
South, declaring their separation from the communion of the Church of Scotland,
upon two points of Controversy between us and these of the Independent way,
viz. the constitution of the Visible Church, and the Government thereof,
contrary to their solemn Vows made to Almighty God in two Covenants, the
National Covenant of this Kirk, and the Solemn League and Covenant of the
three Kingdoms, and undertaken with so*lemn declaration of their conviction in
Conscience of the truth of Religion, professed in this Church, and under the
pains of Gods everlasting wrath, and of infamy and of loss of all honor and
respect in this world if they should ever make defection from the same; which
curse, I pray the God of all grace avert from them, granting unto them
Repentance and forgiveness of their great sin, through Jesus Christ.

Lockiers Examination. The cause why I do this, thus apart in Appendices, is
partly because I was loath to interrupt so much, the thread of Mr. Lockiers
Examination: Partly because it was long time, and I had gone on a great way in
that Examination, ere a Copy of this Letter came to my hands. Come we then to
consider here what they say upon the first point.

To us it seems, for ought we can search in the Word, that none should be
admitted constitute members of a Visible Church: But such as with a profession
of the truth, join such blameless and Gospel-like behavior, as they may be
esteemed, in a rational judgment of charity, believers, and their children.
On which I would represent these animadversions. 1. A little before, they
express a restriction of this to Gospel Churches. 1. As I conceive Churches of
the New Testament, for ought we understand (say they) the real constitution of
Gospel Churches, etc. Now as to this, we desire these things propounded upon
the same restriction made by Mr. Lockier before, Sect. 2. may be considered. 2.
When as they speak of the members of a Church, and not of the Church, I would
know whether they do acknowledge the being and unity of an Universal Visible
Church, or not. If they acknowledge the being and essence thereof, then why do
they not define the qualification of members in relation to it; but in relation
to a Church, i. e. a particular Congregation? Is the necessary qualification of
a member of the Visible Church Universal, one thing, and the necessary
qualification of a member of this or that particular Congregation, another; and
may one be fit to be a member of the Universal Visible Church, and yet not
qualified to be a member of a particular Congregation? If they deny the being
and unity of the Universal Visible Church (which may be, p^obably, they do)
then I desire them in the fear of God, to consider and, if they can give us
satisfactory answers to the weighty reasons from the Word of God, brought by
sundry late Divines, particularly these of the Judicious and Learned Mr.
Hudson, in his late Treatises on that purpose, to prove the being and unity
thereof. Which I am persuaded nor they nor any living man shall ever be able to
do. 3. When as they speak not simply, of members, but distinctly, of constitute
members (none say they are to be admitted as constitute members of a Visible
Church) I would ask them what is the other part of the distinction? What other
members are there of the Visible Church, unto which these constitute members
are contradistinguished? How are they called in their specification? And what
is their necessary qualification? 4. When as they say that none are to be
admitted constitute members, but such as with a profession of the truth, join
such blameless and Gospel-like behavior as they may be esteemed in a
rational charity believers. i. e. true gracious believers with a saving faith.
1. I would ask here why do they omit that part of the qualification required
and made a part of the ground of esteeming persons believers, by others of that
way they have taken themselves to? viz. a declaration of the experimental work
of effectual vocation upon their heart, and only mentioned the behavior or
conversation. 2. Why have they not defined that blameless and Gospel like
behavior which is requisite to be a ground of esteeming persons believers,
what at least is requisite and must concur to make it up, and less then
which will not serve? That so we might have the general determinat rule,
whereby cognition is to be made and estimation to be passed upon all
professors of the truth, that they are believers, or otherwise. For certainly
while as they say, but indefinitly, such a blameless and Gospel behavior, and
tells not what is requisite to make up such a behavior, they leave the matter
in a mist of uncertainty, and for ought we can see, devolves the weight of that
estimation upon men's apprehensions without a rule. If they say they were
writing an Epistle to friends, and could not therein say all that is to be said
in the matter. I Answer, that, if they could have told it, it might been said in
short bounds, and it was as necessary for clearing their mind, to have been
told as the Thesis, they have set down, it self. But yet let them point us to
such a rule in the Word, if they know where it lies. For my part, I profess
humbly, I could never yet see in the Word of God, an universal definite rule
whereby judgment may and ought to be passed upon all and every professor of
the truth, by others, that they are to be held for true believers or otherwise.
5. When as in the designation of the persons that are fit to be admitted
members of the Visible Church, they with Parents, join their children. I do
heartily acknowledge their Orthodoxy in this, beyond others of that way, who
have omitted wholly that addition, and wishes they may continue in that point
of truth, considering how easy it is, as the Authors of that Epistle
themselves may perceive by experience in others that went off with them first,
by that step they have gone on to slide into that other of excluding the
Infants of believers from the Visible Church. But now I would know whether they
acknowledge such Infants members completely, I mean in actu primo, or not? If
they say the former, they are at a disagreement with others of the Independent
way. If they say the latter, then we must have another distinction of
constitute members and so many sorts of members of the Visible Church, and so
also, we must have many sorts of qualifications of members.

i. e. positively judged a true believer or Regenerat person. I shall not here
add any new reasons to what I have brought before: But shall come briefly to
consider if these present Authors have brought any new strength of reason for
that Tenet: Only I would desire them in the fear and love of the truth, to
consider if they can find in the Word of God, amongst all these many, whose
admission into the fellowship of the Visible Church of Christ, is mentioned
therein; any instance of persons or one person, who after their first
professing Christian faith and Religion, was, what ever their behavior and
course had been before to that very time, delayed of their admission to be
Church Members until they should be seen and found, with that their
profession, to join such a blameless and Gospel-like behavior, as the Authors
requires; many of them, no doubt, until that time had been of a very blameable
and un Gospel behavior and course of life: And certain it is, that to be seen
joining with profession of the truth, an unblameable and Gospel-like behavior
requires some delay and length of time. For my part I could never yet see any
instance of this kind, but on the contrary; finds, that persons, as soon as
they once embraced the profession of the Christian faith, albeit to that very
time their behavior had been most blameable, were forthwith baptized and so
admitted members into the Christian Church. Consider this, I beseech you dear
brethren, if so ye will yet suffer your selves to be called and exhorted by me.

Such (say they) were the Churches founded by the Apostles (which ought to be
paterns to us) as appears by the title given to them. Saints, sanctified,
justified, washed by the blood of Christ. For Answer, we refer to what we said
before, to that same inductive Argument in Mr. Lockier, now in a word only, to
make this Argument good, it must be alleged and made out, not only that all
and every one of the Churches founded by the Apostles (at least such as are
mentioned in Scripture) were actually and defacto consisting of such members as
were all and every one Saints, justified, etc. in the positive judgment of
charity: But also were in their gathering constitute of all and every one
formally considered and taken in under the notion of such upon trial found and
judged to be such; But 1. It Is not so much as alleged by the Authors that they
were so gathered and constituted, nor can these titles, let them take them as
they will import any thing of this. 2. Nor suppose these titles should import
that the Church^ to which they are given were eventually consisting of such
members, as were all and every one such: Does it follow, that all and every one
of the Churches founded by the Apostles, were so; I mean even such of them as
are mentioned in Scripture: Because these titles are not given unto all and
every Church founded by the Apostles or Apostolical men, in the Apostles time:
We give instance of the Churches, Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis, Laodicea,
nay had the Authors duly considered what is said of these Churches, Revel. 2,
and 3. I think they could not in reason said, what they say here. Nor, 3. Do
these titles import necessarily that the Churches to which they are given, did
de facto, and eventually consist of all and every one such. These titles may
and must (at least of some of them) be understood of their visible body
synecdochically, by a denomination taken from the better part, as I would
rather say of the body communiter and confuse, not universaliter.

We cannot (say they) acquiesce to the common Answer that these expressions are
to be understood of the better part. Answ. Yet as good, and as judicious as
you, the whole stream of Interpreters, until Anabaptists, and Separatists did
arise, have given, and acquiesced in, that Interpretation of these titles. But
if you can bring solid reason to prove they must be understood otherwise, we
shall yield as to this; We give more assent to one solid reason, then to an
hundred Authorityes of mere men. Come we then to see what reason is brought to
prove they ought to be understood otherwise. 1. For that (say they) they are to
be understood of them all according to the judgment of charity: The Holy Ghost
has clearly said, Romans 1. 7. To all that be at Rome, beloved of God, called
Saints. And again, verse. 8. I thank my God for you all. This the first, then
they subjoyn another. We hope when the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 6. 18. flee
fornication, none will deny but he speaks to the whole Church: Yet to the same
persons he immediately adds, verse. 19, 20. Your body is the Temple of the Holy
Ghost which is in you, you are not your own, you are bought with a price, this
is an Argument taken from the condition of the persons whom he exhorts thus.
But the exhortation is to all the Church of Corinth. Therefore they were all
such as the Apostle judged in charity the redeemed of the Lord. Answ. Remember
what we have said before, that tho all were granted that is here alleged, yet
the main point in Question touching the constitution of these Churches is not
proven. The main point in Question is upon what formal consideration only, the
members of which these Churches did consist, were received and admitted into
the constitution thereof. But the most that can be made out of what is alleged
here, let it all be granted, is, that all the members were such de facto and
eventually; this being remembered, to the present purpose. 1. Suppose it were
granted, and that the reasons alleged did prove, that these titles, as given
to the Churches of Rome and Corinth were to be understood as the Authors will,
of all and every one in these Churches, that they were judged by the Apostle in
charity, the Redeemed of the Lord, truly sanctified, etc. It is hereby clear
and evinced that so these titles, must be understood also, when they are given
to the other Churches founded by the Apostles? I know the chief Author of the
Epistle has more skill (however it be with others of them) in Logic, then to
think so, and hopes he does not so despise others that have any tolerable
knowledge that way, as to think they would take such a thing off his hand, and
therefore wonders, that having undertaken to prove that all the Churches
founded by the Apostles, were constitute of such members as were all positively
judged in charity, Redeemed and Sanctified, because of the titles of Redeemed
and Sanctified given to them: And then that these titles given to them, must
not be understood synecdochically by a denomination taken from the better part;
but of all and every one of them: In the proof of this he brings in two of
them, without so much as one word of assay to prove the like of the rest. If it
shall be said that if that be proven of one or two, it is proven also by
consequence of the rest. I deny it, for the Question being about the sense
wherein a title ascribed to several particular Societies, whether, viz. it be
ascribed to them universally as competent to all and every individual
contained therein; Or only by a denomination taken from a better part of these
individualls? To prove that is to be so or so understood of one or two of them,
is not sufficient to conclude, that so it is to be understood of the rest: If
yet it shall be replied, that there is no reason why it should not be so
understood of the rest of these Churches, as of these expressed. I answer this
much at least should have been alleged (which is not) to have made the
Argument in appearance, at least, to have some force for the main point
intended. But what if, tho it should be granted that these titles are
attributed to the two Churches expressed here, are to be understood as spoken
of them universally: yet it shall be shown that in some other of these Churches
founded by the Apostles, there were persons to whom these titles could not be
applied? We conceive this has been done before in our answer to Mr. Lockier
particularly of the Church of Ephesus, and that the 2 and 3. of the Rev. hold
the same clearly forth of some others. But 2. as for that brought for the
Church of Rome we refer to what we have answered before to M^. Lockier, in that
same purpose. 3. As to the Argument brought to prove that the title of Redeemed
(and consequently the rest) is given to all and every one of the Church of
Corinth, it lies thus in form as propounded by the Authors themselves. The
Apostle exhorting the Corinthians to flee fornication, takes an Argument from
the condition of the persons whom he exhorts (to wit that they were Redeemed)
but the exhortation is to all the Church of Corinth. Therefore they were all
such as the Apostle judged in charity to be Redeemed of the Lord. Answ. I
wonder exceeding much, that such a loosly formed Argument should have come from
the hand of such a Philosophe, as I take to have been the principal Author of
this Epistle; for take it as it lies here, it looks not like a piece of
art, a syllogism consisting of three terms: but seems to have some more. But
to take it in the most candid way, I conceive it may be resolved into those two
processes to make it formal, the first may be thus, all these to whom the
Apostles exhortation to flee fornication there is directed, are by him called
Redeemed: And so were at least to his judgment of charity. But to all the
Church of Corinth is that exhortation of the Apostles directed. Therefore, etc.
The other is for proof of the major or first proposition of that, thus: These
persons who are exhorted to flee fornication by an Argument taken from
Redemption as their condition are called Redeemed by the Apostle: But all these
to whom that exhortation is directed are exhorted by an Argument taken from
that condition. Therefore, etc. Now then to Answer. 1. I think the assumption
of the first syllogism may well be denied; viz. that exhortation is directed to
all and every one in the Church of Corinth, the Authors prove it not; Only they
think it so evident, that none will deny it. But for what reason they are so
confident of this I know not, unless it be this, that flying fornication was a
duty incumbent to them all and every one of them. But this reason is not
constringent; for why may not a duty, which is in a common obligation incumbent
to all, be pressed upon some peculiar persons by an exhortation particularly
intended and directed for them? I can see no circumstance in the Text here, why
we may not conceive this exhortation, tho to a duty of common obligation, yet
particularly intended and directed by the Apostle to the elect and truly
redeemed amongst them, not distinctly by the head and name pointing them out,
but confuse, in the Visible Society they were amongst. 2. Passing that
assumption of the first syllogism: the assumption of the second which is
brought to prove the major of the first, is as loose, viz. that all these
persons to whom the exhortation is directed, or are exhorted to flee
fornication, are exhorted by that Argument taken from redemption as their
condition. This may well be denied, for why may not an exhortation to a common
duty, directed to a whole society mixed of persons of different spiritual
conditions, be pressed upon all by some Arguments common to all (such as that
whereby this exhortation is pressed, verse. 18.) and upon some, by some special
Argument relating properly to them. There can be no circumstance of the context
alleged to prove, why it may not be conceived to be so here, supposing that
the exhortation is directed to all? But, 3. To beat out the bottom of this
Argument, I prove from the very Text it self that the Apostle here speaking to
the persons, whom he calls redeemed, speaks of them as such in the verity
of the thing or object, i. e. as truly and really redeemed and consequently
cannot be conceived to speak it of all and every one in the Church of Corinth,
as the Authors themselves will confess, I doubt not. I prove it thus, these
whom the Apostles calls Redeemed here, they are such as might and ought
themselves to know, and be assured that they were Redeemed, and had the Spirit
of God dwelling in them. But only such as are in real^ty and the verity of the
thing, Redeemed, etc. may and ought to know and be assured of this of
themselves. Therefore the second Part of this Argument is clear, because
otherwise a man might and ought to know and be assured of a lie, concerning his
estate, which is deluded presumption. The first part is also clear from the
Apostles words, v. 19. What? know ye not that your bodies are the Temples of
the Holy Ghost, etc. That know ye not so frequently used by the Apostle,
especially in these Epistles to the Corinthians, and in this very Chapter five
times, imports a certain assurance of the thing he is speaking of, and
therefore here the Apostle imports that these whom he is speaking to as
redeemed, and having the Spirit dwelling in them, they are such as may and
ought to be assuredly sensible that they were redeemed. And is not this place
parallel to that of the very like expression, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Know ye not that
Christ is in you? Which all Protestant Divines press against Papists for
proving Believers certain assurance and persuasion of grace and salvation.
Therefore I conclude: That the Apostle by these whom he calls the Temple of the
Holy Ghost, understands them that are such indeed and in truth of the object,
and not in the judgment of charity; And what an incongruous interpretation were
it to put upon these words, Know ye not that ye are the temples of the Holy
Ghost redeemed with a price? this sense; Know ye not that ye are accounted in
the judgment of charity, temples of the Holy Ghost, etc. 4. Yet I think it
cannot in truth be said that all and every one in the Church of Corinth were
judged positively by the Apostle in the judgment of charity, gracious, renewed
and sanctified ones, even because of the gross wickedness he in these
Epistles expresses himself to have known to be amongst them.

Neither has it any weight with us to the contrair which is objected that
there were gross faults amongst them, as divisions, intemperance, questioning
the Resurrection, incest; Will not Lots drunkenness, David's adultery, Peter's
denial, prove these to be sins incident to the Saints, tho justly censurable,
as the incestuous was excommunicate: a man who once, as is spoken of Gaius,
has been approven of the truth it self, though he be overtaken with gross
infirmity, albeit for it he be censurable according to the nature of his
offense, yea the highest Ecclesiastic Censure pass against him; yet he is to
be esteemed as a brother, 2 These. 3. 15. Answ. 1. Tho that objected, has not
with you, yet has it had with many judicious and godly men in the Church of
God, both ancient and modern, much weight to the contrair: I name, for the
present but one (there be no doubt of many others) because of the Controversy
he is upon in making use of this consideration. The godly Orthodox and ancient
Augustine, ad Donatist as post collationem, cap. 21. where disputing against
the Donatists maintaining separation from all other Christian Churches, because
of the mixture (...) many wicked ones amongst them from that place, 2 Cor. 6.
14, 15, 16, 17. (just as these Authors of this Epistle do afterward from that
same very place, ut non sit ovum ovo similius) answers them from the
consideration of these many gross wickednesses expressed by the Apostle as
abounding in that Church, that there were many graceless persons amongst them,
yet they neither made nor were commanded to make separation from that Church. I
humbly desire the judicious Reader to be at the pains to read the whole Chap.
and I shall but point at two or three remarkable Passages of it, here see the
Margin. In eodem quippe ipso populo Corinthioru^ quod dicimus demonstramus ne
forte arbitrentur prophetarum tantummodo moris fuisse. and non ad Novi Testsed
ad V^eris consuetudinem pertinere, s^c arguere reprehensibiles quasi omnes in
eo populo, arguantur, and sic allo qui laudabiles quasi omnes illi la^dantur.
Ecce and ad Corinthlos sic Apostalus loquitur. Paulus vocatus Jesus Christi per
voluntatem Dei. and Sosthene^ frater Ecclesiae quae est Corinthi sanctificatis
in Jesus Christo vocatis sanctis. Quis haec avdiens credat in Ecclesia
Corinthiorum esse aliquos reprobos quandoquidem verba ista sic sonant velut ad
omnes directa sit laudatio? Et tamen paulo post dicit: Obs^ro autem fratres, ut
id ipsnm dicatis omnes, and non si^t in vobis schismata. -- In ipsis etiam
Corinthiis ibi erant qui non credebant resurrectionem mortuorum quae singularis
sides est Christianorum -- Attendamus verbailla quibus C^inthiorum Ecclesiam in
principio Epistolae sic laudat ut dicat^ Gratias ago Deo meo semper pro vobis
in gratia Det quae data est vobis in Christo Icsu, quia in omnibus divites
facti est is -- Ecce sic erant ditati in Christo in omni verbo and in omni
scientia ita ut iis nihil decsset in ulla graetia, ut in illis essent qui
resurrectionem mortuorum adhuc usque non crederent etc. where it is most
evident that this learned and godly Father expounds these titles of saints etc.
given to the Church of Corinth. not of all and every one, but of a part thereof
and that upon this very consideration that there were amongst them persons
guilty of such wickedness as are afterward fallen upon by the Apostle to whom
his mind is, these titles were not competent.


But waving the Authority of men, let us consider the things themselves, and
see if the Authors have not, as it would seem, strained themselves here, to
make this consideration appear light unto them. Then, 2. Let it be observed
that in the account of these gross wickednesses that were amongst the
Corinthians alleged as a ground against their assertion, that all and every
one in the Church of Corinth were such as were judged true Saints in the
positive judgment of charity by the Apostles, some maine gross faults are
omitted, and some of them reckoned up, are minced by them. First I say some are
omitted: as for example, vain carnal abuse unto ostentation of the gifts of
the Spirit with which the Apostle meets, 1 Cor. 12, 13, 14. vile envying,
traducing, and laboring by all means to disgrace and bring in disgust amongst
them the blessed Apostle and his Ministry: Read, 2 Cor. 10. and 11. and 12. and
consider what was the practices of these amongst the Corinthians, against whom
the Apostle vindicates himself, and say if they were such as the Apostle judged
true Saints, nay does he, not in express terms, Cap. 11. ver. 13, 14, 15. say
of them that they were false Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming
themselves into the Apostles of Christ, Satan's Ministers, transforming
themselves as the Ministers of Righteousness, whose end should be according to
their works. Martyr in loc. Eos non omni notitia Dei exuit: sed tantum loquitur
de ea notitia quae salutaris est and ad regenerationem conducit, ignorare autem
Deum hoc nomine se satis declarabant, quod resurrectiome inficiahantur.
Again some of them reckoned up are minced. Not only were there amongst them
intemperance simply, but coming drunk to the Lords table, 1 Cor. 11. 21, 22.
and it is spoken of as a thing ordinary and habitual in them; not simply
committing of fornication, but impudent slighting of it as little or no sin at
all, as appears, 1 Cor. 6. not simple questioning (as they Interpret it) i. e.
doubting about the Resurrection, but downright positive denying of it, 1 Cor.
15. How say some among you that there is no Resurrection of the dead. How could
the Authors hearts endure to parallel such habitual drunkenness and whoredom
with Lots and David's lapses through the surprizall of such temptations as they
were under: Such heretical denying of a most fundamental point of Religion,
the Resurrection from the dead, with Peter's denial, of a matter of fact, his
knowledge and acquaintance with Christ (which yet was a grievous sin on the
matter) under the violence of a temptation, as if these former, as well as these
latter, were to be accounted but infirmities of Saints? Nay, albeit I deny not,
but atheistical doubtings may arise and infest the hearts of gracious ones
(which yet are a torment to them) yet I see not how a formed denial of that
fundamental point of the Resurrection, now since Christ's Resurrection, and so
clear and full revelation of the Gospel, can be consisting in the heart with
true saving faith; And is it not upon this very account that the Apostle
speaking to these Corinthians in that 15. cap. verse. 34. says, some (he means
of their Church, as the Nether Dutch Notes well observe) have not the knowledge
of God, i. e. they have not saving knowledge of God. 2. What, shall we yet say
that the Apostle judged all and every one in the Church of Corinth truly
gracious Saints. 3. As to that, a man who once spoken of as Gaius, etc. 1. It Is
true that such a man, though he be overtaken with a gross infirmity, and
therefore be censurable and censured with the censure of Excommunication, yet
is not for that, to loss the estimation we had of him before upon such
grounds; but what is this to the purpose in hand? Have the Authors shown us, or
can they show us any evidence or proof that these mentioned in the Corinth. as
guilty of these gross wickednesses, were such as Gaius is said to have been,
approven of the truth it self, yea or positively in charity judged true Saints
and Regenerat? To suppose this, (as the Authors do but suppose it here) is
nothing else but to suppose and beg the thing in Question without any proof of
it. 2. I conceive the Authors are in a mistake, when as they take that, 2 These,
3. 5. esteem him (it is, admonish him, in the text) as a brother, to import
necessarily the accounting a man one truly Regenerat; For in Christianity as
there is a special brotherhood in regard of communion in Regenerating grace;
so there is a common brotherhood, in regard of common profession of Christian
Faith and Religion, and it is sufficient to understand a brother in that place,
in that more common notion and relation, as is evident by the opposition there
made to an enemy. Tho I think the Apostle there is not so much speaking of the
state of the man censured, what it is, or ought to be judged; As what the
affection and carriage of these yet in the Church ought to be toward him for
his good. Thus we have seen and considered the first ground brought by the
Authors for their Thesis, taken from the examples of the Churches founded by
the Apostles and the confirmation brought to hold it up.

Their is ere they come to the next, this word casten in, but this is not our
case; our Churches are overflowed with a deluge of profane Atheists, who have
been such from their birth to this present hour, which I can no otherwise look
upon in this place of their Epistle, but as an untimous eruption of despite
against their mother Church. Afterward such as it is, it might have come in its
place, when they come to speak to the point of their practice of separation
from this Church: But here in this place of their Epistle, they are upon the
question de jure, of what members Churches Visible ought to be constitute, what
is it to this purpose that these Churches have de facto, such and such persons
in them? But now to their second ground: John (say they) thought not a bare
verbal profession sufficient ground to admit persons to Baptism. These who
came to him to be Baptized, unless he saw joined with it fruits meet for
Repentance, and upon this score he could not (I conceive it should be, For if
it be, he could not, it must be meant de jure, as we say, illud possumus quod
de jure possumus. For to deny that Physice he could were but false and
impertinent: but that were to beg the question: for now they are reasoning from
his fact or practice to conclude the jus or rule, therefore knowing some of the
Authors acure enough to see such a thing, I conceive, it has been first written
would not, and that the other is an escape of the transcriber.
he would not, see the reason of my conjecture on the Margin) admit the
Pharisees who came to him to be baptized, as is clear, comp. Mat. 3. with Luke
7. 30. the Pharisees were not baptized of John. If it be replied that Christ in
Luke speaks only of some of the Pharisees, the scope of the Text will easily
refute it. For he chides the Pharisees as worse then the Publicans, in this,
that the Publicans came to John's baptism in a capacity to be baptized and were
baptized of him, which the Pharisees did not; But if these many Pharisees, Mat.
3. 7. had been baptized of John; and only some others of them rejected his
baptism, surely the Pharisees in this had been nothing behind the Publicans,
for neither were all the Publicans baptized.

John Baptist thought not a bare verbal profession sufficient to admit these
to Baptism who came to him to be Baptized, unless he found joined with it
fruits meet for Repentance Answ. 1. It Is not a bare verbal profession that we
plead for as a sufficient ground, nor say we that John Baptist proceeded upon
it as a ground in admitting persons to his baptism, a bare verbal profession
may be apparently in jest, mocking, and in gross palpable hypocrisy. John no
doubt would not thought such a profession a sufficient ground: nor do we think
it either. But between such a profession, and a profession wherewith are seen
presently and actually fruits meet for Repentance, i. e. positively evidencing
and proving true Repentance in the heart; there is a profession sober and
serious, tho for the present there be not, nor can be for the present, seen
such fruits, meet for Repentance joined with it, such a Profession we say as
this, is a sufficient ground to admit to Baptism upon; And upon such a
Profession, we say John admitted those to baptism, that came to him to be
baptized, without enquiring or waiting to see fruits meet for Repentance. For
it is most evident by comparing the Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke, yea and
John 3. 23. that great multitudes of people coming to him were baptized by him
together, at the same time. Now I pray how did John see fruits meet for
Repentance in all and every one of these by themselves? was he acquaint with
every one of their conversations personal, before they came there, who will be
so impudent as to hazard upon such an assertion especially, of him who lived in
the wilderness remote from their Cities and Societies? Or after they came
forth to him and offered themselves to be baptized, did John delay their
baptism and they abide in conversing with him, so long a time (which could not
be for some few days, yea or weeks) as he might see such fruits in their
conversation, viz. (as the Authors of this way tell us) omitting no known duty,
and committing no known evil, or leading a conversation without scandal? Who
will say or believe this either? Or did John see these, by examining every one
of them severally, and causing them make a declaration of the experimental
work of Repentance upon their heart? 1. But how could he do this, with so great
multitudes, yea when all is done, this would be nothing but verbal profession
of the work, and not fruits, spoken of in the Text, which are real good works
and practices in life and conversation. And as to their hinting at the Baptists
words, bring forth fruits meet for Repentance: As if it were imported thereby,
that John is requiring the works to be brought forth, and that he might see
them in relation unto, and before his administration of baptism to them, is a
gross mistake or deceit; for it is evident that John is not requiring a
qualification in relation to his administration of baptism to them; But
Preaching their duty, without which neither their profession nor outward
baptism, nor any other outward privilege or prerogative should save them from
the wrath of God. Yea it is evident that this Sermon exhortatorie was so far
from being Preached to the purpose the Authors intimats, that it was Preached
either in the time of the administration, or rather after the administration
was performed; As would appear by Mark 1. 8. I indeed a have baptized you.

John Baptized not but upon seeing fruits meet for Repentance joined with
Profession. How? upon this score (not seeing fruits meet for Repentance with
their profession) he could (it should be would) not admit the Pharisees who
came to him to be baptized. Answ. 1. I know Reverend Pareus thinks these
Pharisees were not admitted to Baptism by John: but he gives not this as the
ground of John's debarring them, not seeing in them fruits meet for Repentance,
but this, that they came out of curiosity, or maliciousness, to disturb his
Ministry and were manifest hypocrites: and we confess if any were known to be
such, they ought to be debarred, and that to administer Sacraments to such were
to prostitute them, as that Reverend Author says, for such are known mockers
and dispiters of the Ordinances. Musculus, Hum. Aret. Calv. also though he
expresses not this in formal words as those, yet his whole discourse upon the
text, materially speaks it clearly enough.
But there may be a profession not of this kind, with which yet there is not,
at the present, seen joined fruits, positively evidencing the sound work of
Repentance in the heart. 2. Most part of commentators are of a judgment
contrare to that of Pareus, that they were not debarred, see these on the
Margin: Observe, that these two verses, Luke 7. 29, 30 by some are taken to be
spoken by Christ himself as part of his discourse concerning John Baptist, and
so our present Authors of the Epistle take them* By others they are taken to be
the words of the Evangelist, expressing the different effect, that Christ's
discourse concerning John had upon diverse hearers, viz. that the common people
and very Publicans hearing that discourse glorified God, having been such as
were before baptized of John: but the Pharisees despised it and rejected it
being such as were not baptized by John we will not now discuss which of the
two are most probable, the former interpretation is the more common.
and true^y to me there appears nothing in the Text against it, but rather
some what for it, that these Pharisees that came to him then were Baptized by
him: for that sharp objurgation, O generation of vipers, etc. on which weight
may be laid, was spoken not only to the Pharisees (though in special way it
was to them) but to the whole multitude of the people. Luke 3. 7. Nay does not
John in the prosecution of this discourse directed in special way to the
Pharisees say, I baptize you? yea as in Mark, I have baptized you? If any shall
say this was not one discourse, with that going before, because Luke says
that he uttered the last point as the people were in expectation, and all men
mused in their hearts, etc. I say this proves not that it was another
discourse, or that there was any interruption or intervall of time
interveening: it only shows that upon consideration of these thoughts in
men's hearts concerning this, as an special reason, he uttered this point,
which yet as appeateth in Matthew. and all other interpreters take it, he spoke
also for clearing the Doctrine of Baptism, to show what belonged to him as the
external Minister of it, and what to Christ as the principal Cause and Author.

John, were not admitted by him, and that upon this score, as not seeing ( viz.
at that time, so we must circumstantiate the matter) in them fruits meet for
Repentance joined with their Profession. It Is clear (say they) if we compare
Matthew. 3. with Luke 7. 3. the Pharisees were not baptized of John. Ans. 1.
Suppose it were granted that this were meant Universally of the Pharisees and
so of those that came to John, Matthew. 3. with the rest: Yet were proven but the
half of that which was alleged, viz. that they were not admitted by him to
baptism. But nothing is brought for the other half, viz. that it was upon this
score, viz. because he saw not fruits meet for repentance with their
Profession. Might it not be that he admitted them not, not upon that negative
ground, but upon this positive; Because he saw them coming out of curiosity or
maliciousness, or jesting, and not so much as in sober seriousness. Nay take
these verses, 29. 30. as a continuate part of Christ's speech concerning John,
(as our present Authors takes them) and not so much is proven, viz. that John
refused to admit them. They import rather, that they themselves refused to be
baptized, despised and rejected his baptism; Then that he refused to baptize
them desiring to be baptized, and so interpreters commonly, especially those
that take these verses to be a part of Christ's speech, understand them. But 2.
take these verses as you will, I see not how it appears clearly by them, that
these Pharisees that came to John, Matthew. 3. were not baptized by him. For take
them as the Evangelists words (as it seems very probable they should be,
comparing them with Math. 11. 15. and the beginning of ver. 31. of that 7. of
Luke) then they are meant of such Pharisees as were present hearing this
discourse of John, and the meaning is this much, The Pharisees that were
present hearing this discourse of Christ, not being baptized of John, etc. Now
can this be brought to prove that the Pharisees that came to John, Math. 3.
were not baptized: unless you will say, that all the Pharisees in Judea, yea
in the world, were present hearing that discourse; Which is neither said in the
Text, nor any ways likely they could be present. And take them as a continuate
part of Christ's discourse concerning John, and supposing also that it were
meant that John debarred them from baptism (the contrary whereof, that
themselves rejected, despised it, and would not be baptized by himl, is likely
to be meant, as we said a little before) yet it is not clear thereby that these
Pharisees that came to John, Math. 3. were not baptized, because the
proposition is but indefinite, and so may be verified tho understood
particularly; And if so, what evidence have we from the words that these that
came to John were the men. Judicious Interpreters, by name Musculus and
Aretius, expressly comparing the one place with the other, affirm they are not
the same particular persons spoken of in both.

The scope of the context will easily refute it: for Christ chideth the
Pharisees as worse in this, etc. Answ. It Is easier for men to say, that their
Adversary is easily refuted, then to do it. 1. It is likely as we show before,
that in these verses 29, 30. it is not Christ that speaks, chiding the
Pharisees as worse that way then the Publicans: But Luke expressing how the
people and Publicans present upon the one hand, and the Pharisees on the other,
were affected with Christ's discourse concernin John. But 2. let them be Christ's
own words, it will not be found by the context that it is Christ his scope to
chide the Pharisees he speaks of here for this, that coming to be baptized,
they came in an incapacity, and for that incapacity were refused Baptism by
John, tho desirous (which they should have proven, and not begged) but for
this, that they would not be baptized by him; For the words are not, that they
rejected the counsel of God, and John baptizeth them not, or therefore were
not baptized of him: but they rejected the counsel of God, themselves not
being baptized by him (...). Take these words as uttered by Christ speaking on
in a continuate discourse, And what can a man conceive to be the meaning of
them, but this simply, that they put away, despised, rejected the means of
salvation ordained by God (that is his counsels) and made known by his Minister
John, and this was an evidence of it, that they were not baptized by him. But,
3. To the point we are on more nearly here; let it be granted which the Authors
says, that he chideth the Pharisees for that cause they alleged; The
co^equence built upon it, to prove that these Pharisees that came to John, Mat.
3. were not baptized, is feeble: For it must be thus, Christ chideth the
Pharisees as worse then the Publicans, for this, that when as the Publicans
came in a capacity to be baptized and were baptized. The Pharisees did not so:
Ergo, none of the Pharisees were baptized, and so neither were these mentioned,
Mat. 3. I deny the consequence. For the antecedent may be true, and Christ's
chiding the Pharisees, generally, reasonable and just, tho some of them had
been otherwise affected and thereupon baptized. As for the reason of the
consequence brought by the Authors, if these many Pharisees, Mat. 3. 7. etc.
The whole strength of it lies in a sophistical insinuation, that these
Pharisees, Mat. 3. because they are said to be many, were the greatest part of
all the Pharisees, and these being said to be baptized there were but some few
beside, of whom these words, Luke 7. 30. (they were not baptized) could be
expounded, this I say is but a mere sophistical insinuation: for albeit these,
Mat. 3. be called many, yet their might been Pharisees many more, ten to one
beside, of whom that Luke 7. 30. might be said. Now considering that the
Publicans and other such common people tho all of them were not baptized of
John, yet generally they show themselves more obedient and respective to the
Ordinances Ministered by John, as also they did unto Christ himself, then the
Pharisees did, albeit some of them also might been disobedient to him and not
baptized by him, it may be clearly enough seen, that the Pharisees were much
behind them in this, and that Christ might justly chide the Pharisees as worse
then the Publicans, for the cause mentioned (speaking of them indefinitely) tho
all and every one of them had not been in the blame. This is not unusual in
comparing two sorts, orders or conditions of persons, to blame the one as worse
then the other in such a particular respect (in an indefinite speech) when the
one is more generally blameworthy that way, then the other, tho, may be, some
of the party blamed are free of the fault, and some of the party commended, may
be deep enough in that fault. This much for clearing John Baptists procedure in
admitting persons to baptism, viz. that he did baptize persons coming to him
upon their first profession, withour delay or waiting for discoveries of true
heart Conversion and Saintship in them.

John's order of baptizing, they tell us that, many more and more pressing
grounds from the Word might be alleged to make forth this point: But we are
loath (say they) to be tedious: only sure we are, holiness becomes the House
of our God. It is certain our Churches are not constitute according to this
rule in the full extent of it; Yea alas few of our most precious men will
acknowledge it to be the rule. Answ. 1. Albeit the Authors conceiving to their
knowledge many more grounds to be in the Word of God for making forth their
point and having set down here but some few of them, omitting the rest, might,
without incurring the hazard of animadversion, alleged that they passed these
others, being loath to be tedious, because to wit they were writing an Epistle,
not a Tractat: Yet their purpose being in this Epistle, to give an account of
their thoughts (as they say in the beginning) in this matter to some Godly men:
I humbly conceive, that when as they say, that there might be alleged more
pressing grounds (which I doubt not but they speak as even to their own
knowledge) for their point then they have alleged, but they are loath to be
tedious by setting them down: This censure might justly be put upon it, that
either it is an open writing themselves with their own pen, knowingly, foolish
wrongers of their own cause; When as purposing to pick out some few grounds of
many, for giving an account of their belief to men, whom they would give some
satisfaction to, and draw to their judgment and side, they leave out the
grounds that are most pressing for making out their point: But verily I think
some of them, at least, not so simple as to have committed wittingly and
willingly such an error; Or it is, give me leave to say it, a mere windy word,
to say the least, inconsideratly uttered. And how sinful a thing it is so to
speak, especially in matters of this kind, they are not ignorant. 2. But is that
word, Psalm. 93. ult. Holiness becomes thine House for ever, hinted at to
close up the matter, one of these more pressing grounds, for making forth their
point? O! but first this is an Old Testament Scripture spoken in relation to
the then Churches of the Old Testament (whatever the place imports) as well
as to the Gospel Churches. Now why then did you before, as seems with your
Master, restrict your Doctrine concerning the qualification of Church Members
to the Gospel Churches? Or if you will now disown that restriction, is it your
mind that this Holiness you plead for, was also the rule of admitting Members
to the Visible Church under the Old Testament? Then sure, Moses was in a great
fault, who walked not by this rule in his practice about Church Members as no
man can deny. Far be it from you to say it, Brethren, when the Lord has given
him a Testimony that he was faithful in all his house. 2. We shall not here
mention the diverse interpretations of these Words of the Psalm given by
several interpreters (see Calv. Pareus in locum) the most genuine
interpretation I conceive to be; Either to take them, as our English
translation renders them. Holiness becomes thine House: and so as holding
forth the duty of these who are the Lords House. Or thus rendering them, to thy
house beautiful holiness, viz. belongs as their peculiar privilege
bestowed on them by thee: but whither of these ways they be taken, they make
nothing to the Authors point; Not taking them in the latter interpretation, as
is evident, the Authors I beleve will not say, that God by the efficacy of his
Grace works Holiness in all and every Member of the Visible Church. Nor yet
taking them in the former; According to which the simple meaning of them, is no
other but that which is expressed in the latest edition of the English Annot.
on the place a holy life and conversation becomes them that profess
themselves to be servants to so great and glorious a Majesty, and who of us
will deny this: this imports what is the duty of all that profess themselves
to be in so near a relation to God as his House, which is to be Holy in the
Truth of the thing or object, and not only so to carry it before men as to be
esteemed by them such in charity, which men may do without the reality or
Truth of the thing. And this we grant, that men professing themselves the
people of God ought in duty, as they would answer their profession, to be
truly Holy. But what is this to the point of the qualification necessarily
requisite in persons in foro Ecclesiastico that they may be admitted to the
external fellowship of the Church? Wherefore. 3. we confess our Churches were
not constitute according to this rule; I mean of the Holiness spoken of in
that passage of the Psalm: Nor indeed could they, nor can ever any Churches in
this world be so constituted: because it is true Holiness in the reality and
truth of the thing, that is spoken of, which falls not under the cognition of
the Ecclesiastic court, to be a rule of admitting persons unto the
constitution of the Visible Church. 4. I know not well whom they mean by these,
few at least precious men whom they insinuate to acknowledge their rule; Except
they mean themselves who have sinfully separated themselves from the Church of
Christ. But I may say they have no cause to weep and say alas for the precious
men that will not acknowledge their new rule of constituting Visible Churches:
because it is a rule that God never constituted for that purpose; But they have
cause to weep and say alas (which I pray God of his Grace they may do) for
themselves that they have separated themselves from the Church of Christ upon
the very ground that Donatists separated of old.

touching the necessary qualification of Church members. I doubt not but some
of these men to whom they directed that Letter has returned them a sufficient
Answer upon that point of their separation. And one of them has abundantly
refuted that same point in Print against Separatists, as many other Orthodox
Divines has done the like, not only modern Divines in their writings against
late Separatists; But also ancient against Donatists and Novatians. Certain it
is and cannot be denied by any that has any tolerable insight in the Ancients
that these our Authors in their separation goes upon that same very ground that
Donatists and Novatians separated of old. It was one of the Errors of these,
that by fellowship with wicked and ungodly men in the Worship and Ordinances of
God, others are polluted (as we may learn from Cyprian Epist. 51. and 52. and
August. in his writings against Donatists, particularly, contra Epistolam
Parmeniani) and therefore did separate from all other Churches as defiled with
such mixtures, using as an Argument and ground for them, that same very passage
brought by these present Authors for themselves, 2. Cor. 6. As we see by
Augustine. ad Donatist. post collationem, cap. 21. cited by us a little before,
where the Godly and Learned Ancient does abundantly and solidly refute the
Donatists abuse of that place, as he does in his several writs against these
proud Schismatics, all their other Arguments: And I much wonder that these our
Brethren (I yet say if so they will suffer themselves to be so called by us)
should have licked up that Schismatic Doctrine and practice of Donatists, so
universally condemned by the ancient Church, and solidly refuted by the
Orthodox Divines that then were. But it not being my purpose at this time to
prosecute this part of their Epistle, I shall close this Appendix, adding only
a word or two out of these two Ancients I have named concerning this matter.
Cyprian. Epist. 21. written to 4. Confessors who, having been seduced into the
Novatian separation and schism, had returned again to the unity of the Church,
and signified the same to Cyprian, thus says he to these Confessors. Postea
quam vos de carcere redeuntes, ^maticus and Haereticus error excepit, sic res
erat quasi vestra gloria in carcere remansisset. Illic enim vestri nominis
dignitas recedisse videbatur, quando milites Christi non ad Ecclesiam de
carcere redierunt in quem prius cum Ecclesiae laud and gratulatione venissent:
nam and si in Eccesia videntur esse Zizania non tamen impediri debet aut fides
aut charitas nostra, ut quoniam Zizania in Ecclesia esse cernimus, ipsi de
Ecclesia recedamus; nobis tantum modo laborandum est ut frumentum esse
possimus, ut cum caeperit frumentum Dominicis condi horreis, pro opere nostro
and labor fructum capiamus. Apostolus in Epistola sua, 2 Timothy 2. dicit in domo
autem magna non tantum vasa sunt aurea, etc. -- nos operam demus and quantum
possumus laboremus ut vas aureum vel argenteum simus. Caeterum fictilia vasa
confringere Domino soli concessum est, cui and virga ferrea data est, esse non
potest major Domino suo servus nec quisquam sibi, quod soli filio pater tribuit
vendicare se putet: ut ad aream ventilandam and purgendam paleam far se jam
posse aut a frumento universa Zizania humano judicio segregare. Superba est
ista obstinatio and sacrilega presumptio quam sibi furor pravus assumit: Et dum
Dominium sibi semper, plusquam mitis justitia deposcit, assumunt, de Ecclesia
pereunt, and dum se in solenter extollunt, ipso suo humore caecati, veritatis
lumen amittunt. Here we see separation from the Church because of the mixture
of naughty persons solidly condemned and noted with a black mark by this Godly
Ancient. The like or almost the same he has in the Epistle immediately
following that former cited. The word I would present from Augustine is that,
contra Epistolam Parmeniami, lib. 3. cap. 1. Ab initio cum omnis pia ratio and
modus Ecclesiasticae Disciplinae unitatem Spiritus in vinculo pacis maxim
debeat intueri quod Apostolus sufferendo invicem praecepit custodire, and quo
non custodito medicinae vindicta non tantum superflua sed etiam perniciosa, and
propterea jam nec medicina esse convincitur, illi filii mali, qui non odio
iniquitatum alienarum, sed studio contentionum suarum infirmas plebes jactantia
sui nominis irretitas, vel totas trahere, vel certe dividere affectant,
superbia tumidi, per^i^a vesani, calumniis insidiosi, seditionibus turbulenti,
ne lucis veritate carere ostendantur, umbram rigidae severitatis obtendunt, and
quae in Scripturis sanctis salva dilectionis sinceritate and custodita pacis
unitate ad corrigenda fraterna vitia, moderatiori curatione praecepta sunt ad
Sacrilegium Schismatis, and ad occasione^ praecisionis usurpant dicentes, ecce
ait Apostolus, auferte malum ex vobis ipsis. Yea the very universal Argument
and purpose of these Books against Parmenianus, this Ancient himself, Retract.
lib. 1. cap. 17. expresses to be this, in tribus libris contra Parmen.
Donatislarum Carthaginensis Episcopi, successorisque Donati, question magna
versatur and solvitur; utrum in unitate and eorundum communione Sacramentorum
mali contaminent bonos (which is the very ground whereupon these our Brethren
builds the necessity of their separation) and quemadmodum non contaminent
disputatur propter Ecclesiam toto orb diffusam cui calumniando Schisma
fecerunt. If I would bring here all that, that Ancient has against this Tenet
and practice of separation of these Authors I might transcribe the most part of
all his writings against the Donatists. Therefore I refer the Reader to the
writings themselves, and beseeches these our Brethren yet in the fear of God
and in humility of Spirit to consider and ponder their way they have run into
was condemned, and solidely refuted from the Word of God, in these ancient
Schismatics, by the Godly and Orthodox ancient Doctors of the Church in that
time. And now I go on to Mr. Lockiers Appendix.

PART II. Wherein is EXAMINED Mr. LOCKIERS TWO ASSERTIONS, Concerning
CHVRCH-GOVERNMENT: And what is said for Confirmation thereof.
I Have been, I confess, well long upon the Examination of Mr. Lockiers
Lecture, because I found not so clear and distinct handling of that matter in
others, as I could have wished: and I thought it expedient that, in regard he
speaks with so great a deal of confidence in it, and others made so much noise
of it, and this new-fangle itching-ear'd age is ready to take with every new
fancy, busked up with gay words, and, like children, to be carried about with
every wind of doctrine; In this regard I thought it expedient the more fully to
discover the weakness and unsatisfactorinesse of his alledgeances therein. I
shall not need, nor mind I to insist so largely upon the Appendix I mean as to
every particular Question handled here; For here are more particular questions
handled.
The matter therein touched, viz. What is the proper subject of Ecclesiastic
Authority and Government: And whether there be an union of more Congregations
and Churches under one common Presbytery: has been already so learnedly and
fully cleared by others, that it were but needless labor for me to insist on
it; And I confess, I mervail much that Mr. Lockier should have presented the
world with so sorry a discourse upon these matters (as I think every judicious
Reader will perceive this Appendix to be) when as there are abroad so learned
Tractats and Debates on them. Always we must be at the pains to animadvert
upon this part of the Stone too, else the world should be made believe we were
felled dead with it: But we shall do it as briefly, as to particulars, as we
may, and shall refer M. Lockier to such Pieces as are written already, for
further business and work to him, as occasion shall require.

Mr. Lockiers APPENDIX. SECTION I.
That the Eldership which is within the particular Congregation, is not in most
weighty things, to exert power, without the consent and approbation of the
Church whereof they are. By things most weighty, I mean these things which are
most essential to the state of a visible Church: as admission of Members,
ordination of Officers, and excommunication of either.

Math. 16. 16. which allegiance he is pleased to pass with a very light and
slight show of a proof, as if it were a matter of small Debate. Whether thus he
has done from deliberate and advised policy, to shun Debate upon that which is
the very (...), in this Question about Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction, and to make
his common Readers the more favorable to his part, as pretending only to
dispute for interest of consent and approbation to them in acts of Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastic of greatest concernment (and indeed as man's pride naturally
carries him with a desire to have a finger in rule, so it is a plausible
subject to speak for it to him) or if he has done it from some other principle,
I will not determine; Let the judicious Reader conjecture, what he thinks most
likely. Only I must say it seems to me a very strange and irrational way of
procedure, to take so great pains and make so much ado, as Mr. Lockier does
here in pleading for a certain condition of persons formal interest and
concurrence, in acts and the exercise of jurisdiction, and to make this the
Question or conclusion to be insisted on: And mean while, to take it almost for
granted without proof, or at most, in a slight overly word to allege, that
they are chiefly invested with that power and authority from which these acts
must flow, when as he knows, at least might have known that his adversaries,
not only deny, but by many considerable Arguments goes about to demonstrate,
that, that condition of persons never were invested with, never received such a
power or authority, from him to whom it belongs originally. Mr. Lockier does
just here, as if a Papist or Jesuit, going about to Dispute the Controversy
concerning the Popes supremacy, should be taken up all along the Dispute in
bringing some topical Arguments, that this and that and the other act of
supremacy, as calling of oecumenicall Counsels, to be presiding in them, final
and infallible determining of controversies in Religion, etc. ought to be
performed by the Pope of Rome; And mean while should misken the Question, if
ever Christ gave him a grant of power and authority to perform these things,
but only suppose it be so, or content himself to cite for it as it were in
transitu, Tibi dabo claves or Pasce oves meas, as if it were out of question
clear that these places held forth a sovereign power and authority over all
things, and persons Ecclesiastic in Peter, yea and in every Pope of Rome,
bestowed on them by Christ. I think a judicious adversary might well laugh at a
Papists disputing after such a manner. And so may any judicious man at M^.
Lockiers manner and method of disputing here, contending much in some topicall
Arguments to prove that the people ought to have an hand in such and such acts
of Government, and mean while slight proving that they have the power and
authority to govern granted them by Christ. I think a rational disputant would
have labored first and mainly about this; And indeed were this made once
clear, we should soon be at an agreement about the acts and exercises of
government, once prove the form or habit to be in such a subject, and there
will be no question about the acts thereof, whether they be competent to that
subject or not. If any man shall say for him here, that by showing such and
such acts to be competent to the people, it is proven consequently a
posteriori, that the habit or power from which these acts do flow is in them: I
answer, if that had been his intention so he might have done: But then he
should not alleged the inexistency of the power, as a medium to prove that
these acts are competent to them (as he does in his 1. Arg.) for this is
nothing else but to run in a round: but we must apply our selves to follow his
method.

an sit, or being of the subject of this Assertion. Whether there be de jure
and of Divine institution, an Eldership, or Presbytery within a particular
Congregation, i. e. a College of Elders belonging to one single Congregation
by it self having power of Government and exercising Ecclesiastic Discipline;
although I know men Learned and much excercised in the study of the Questions
concerning Ecclesiastic Government, are of the judgment, that there is not
such an Eldership or Presbytery; And I confess it is right hard to find in
Scripture either precept or example for it: But I shall, going along with Mr.
Lockier in the acknowledgment thereof, note but some few things upon the
attribute of his Assertion: There be three things therein contained. 1. the
acting spoken of, viz. exercing of power. 2. the object of that acting, most
weighty things. 3. The limitation of that acting about this object, as
competent to the Eldership.

Lockier speaks so here as he would seem to grant to the Eldership some power
and exercing of it about these weighty matters, providing it be with consent and
approbation of the Church, i. e. the society of Professors they are in. But
verily by his way the Eldership as contradistinguished from other professors,
and as the Eldership has no power, nor can exert any power at all; I mean power
of authority in these matters: All their part is merely to preside and moderate
the meeting of the Church, and as a Moderator, or Chairman, to propone and
state a Question; Ask and gather the votes, and declare the sentence concluded
by the votes of the collective body of the Church; conveen and dismiss the
meeting; Or at most as a Committee of a Judicatory, to prepare matters for
public cognition and sentence: All which is no Authoritative power. I think
therefore that Mr. Lockier would have dealt more heartily to have plainly said,
the Eldership can exert no power at all in these matters; This belongs to the
collective body of the Church, and their part is only to preside and moderat
the meeting in exerting its power: But such plain language, which yet speaks
the truth of his way, is too plainly dissonant to the language of Scripture,
which speaks of Church Officers, as Governors of, and to be over the people,
and having the rule over them, and many such other things attributes unto
them, which imports another kind of thing then mere presiding, moderating, or
being the mouth of a meeting or a preparatory Committee.

Lockier here restrict his assertion, to these matters of greater weight? Does
he grant that yet they may exert power in matters of less weight without the
consent and approbation of the Church? Nay, he cannot. For, 1. most of his
Arguments following, if they prove ought to his purpose, they prove the
Eldership cannot exert power in any matters of Ecclesiastic Government without
the consent of the Church, whether of greater or smaller weight. Yea, 2. in his
last Argument to prove they cannot exert power in these greater matters* he
assumeth that they may not do it in smaller matters. For (says he, Sect. 11.
Page 81.) if in less things the Eldership may not act alone, surely not in
greater. What then needed this restriction of the object in the Assertion?

these things which are most essential to the state of the Visible Church; And
then reckons up particularly these three admission of Members, ordination of
Officers, and Excommunication of either. To pass that expression of most
essential importing degrees in essentiality which Philosophy will not admit,
as telling us that essentia rei non recipit magis and minus. I do humbly
conceive that the fixed Preaching of the Word of God, and right administration
of Sacraments are as essential (to use his words) to the state of the Visible
Church as any of these particulars mentioned. Nay they are much more
essential; there may be a true Visible Church, where these are, tho
Excommunication be wanting, and that admission of members Mr. Lockier speaks
of, unknown to the Primitive Apostolic times. It has been the constant
Doctrine of Reformed Divines, that the sound Preaching of the Word and right
Administration of Sacraments, are necessary to the being of a Church, and
exercise of Discipline only to the well-being. Some Churches have no
Excommunication, which though we approve not in this; yet because they have the
true Doctrine of the Gospel taught and professed in them, and the Sacraments
therewith administrat right for their substance, God forbid we should account
destitute of the most essentialls (to speak so with him) of a true Church. Now
if the Preaching of the Word be a thing most essential to the state of a
Church, as certainly it is, must the Ministers of Christ, not Preach any
Doctrine, as the Doctrine of Christ, without the consent of the Church, i. e.
of the professors to whom they Preach? Must it be first propounded to them to
have their vote and sentence pass upon it, and upon that Preached? I conceive
Mr. Lockier will not own such theology. 2. That admission of members which ^e
means here, is so far from being one of these things most essential to the
state of a Visible Church, that, as he and others of his mind conceive it, it is
but a mere new device, unknown in the preceding ages of the Church, and
without ground in the Word of God: He means admission into the fellowship of
this or that particular Church or Congregation by a Church Covenant as they
call it, which he conceives to be that which formally gives
Visible-Church-Membership, and that it must be upon such qualification as he
has been disputing for in his Lecture. But as there is no warrant in the Word
of God for such qualification as necessary to Visible-Church-Membership (as has
been cleared in our former part) so it is a plain mistake that admission unto
the fellowship of this or that particular Church, is that which formally makes
one a Visible Church Member; And that it is founded upon another mistake, which
is a (...) in the Church way of the Independent Brethren, viz. that there is no
Visible Church Catholic or Universal; but that a particular Congregation is
the only Church. The truth is, profession of the true Faith and of subjection
to Ordinances, with the seal of baptism completely makes a man a Member of the
Visible Church, (else, such were (...), without, and so but of the world of
heathens and strangers, which is absurd) and admission in this or that
particular Congregation, gives him only the opportunity of exercise of his
Church Membership and the privileges thereof (whereunto he had right before)
hic and nunc, all which has been so cleary evinced by judicious and learned Mr.
Hudson, in his Vindication of the Essence and Unity, etc. that any man that
will not wilfully shut his eyes against the light, may be fully convinced
thereof. So then as for admission of Persons into this or that particular
Congregation, it is not a matter of so high essentiality to the state of the
Visible Church. And for that wherein solemn admission into the state of the
Visible Church formally consists, baptizing, if Mr. Lockier shall say that this
cannot be done without the sentence of the collective body of Professors,
he will speak beside the book of God, which holds forth to us baptism
administrate, by one Minister alone without the knowledge of any particular
Church: and mentions not any instance, so far as I can remember of Ministers
requiring the vote of the Church for baptizing any at any time.

not without the consent and approbation of the Church. Upon this. 1. I would
inquire of Mr. Lockier, whom he means by the Church, without whose consent
and approbation, this ought not to be done? Whether the whole Congregation, i.
e. all Members thereof promiscuously and indifferently, or only some certain
Members thereof excluding the rest? If the whole Congregation and all the
Members thereof; Then women and children also must have an hand in these
weighty matters of the Government of the Church: which I cannot well think he
will affirm, sure I am, will not be owned by many of his side, and is contrary
to the Word of God. If not the whole Congregation, but some certain Members
viz. men and these of years of discretion, or of a manlyage; Then 1. why
speaks he of the Church indefinitely without any such restriction not without
the consent and approbation of the Church. Are not women a part of the Church,
yea and children also under age, unless we shall say that they are without, i.
e. of the world of heathens and aliens from the Israel and Household of God,
which is absurd. Nay I suppose there may be a Church consisting of only women
beside the Officers, as in case all the men of a Congregation were removed by
death or otherwise, for must we say that a Congregation consisting of 40. men
and as many women, if by Pestilence all the men should be removed, excepting
the Officers thereof, that it should, because of this, cease to be a Visible
Church. 2. It cannot consist with what he says afterward in sundry of his
Arguments brought to prove his Assertion: In the first thereof he alleges
that the power of the Keys are given to persons not as Officers, Apostles, or
Elders, but as believers, to the Church of believers, and believing with such a
faith as flesh and blood cannot reveal, but I assume that Women are believers,
and believers with such a faith as well as Men, Ergo, by his Argument they must
have an hand in the Government by their consent and approbation as well as the
men. Again in the third, whereas he alleges, that other ways (viz. than as he
asserted) the Elders cannot but offend the little ones of the Church, yea the
tender consciences of stronger Brethren, for as much as persons may be taken in
and casten out concerning which they can have no distinct knowledge. I assume,
that this will hold as well for women, little ones of the Church and sisters of
tender consciences, as well as men; Because offending of these must be eschewed
as well as of those. Further in his fourth Argument, he alleges as a ground
of his Assert. that the spirit of discerning is not confined to Elders: but may
be in great measure in some of the members, and a greater gift when all are
joined together in the Name of Christ, and his presence with them to discern
and judge. And adds, that the Saints shall Judge the World: All which take in
female Saints as well as male Saints.

private, obedientiall, and not-authoritative: And a consent and approbation
public and authoritative by way of a judicial decisive vote; Why is it that
the Author does not in his Assertion determine which of these he means? It Is
true afterward in his 5th Argument he is express, that the whole Church (and
so men, women and children) should be jointly authoritative about these acts of
Government: But here in propounding the Assertion involves the matter in an
ambiguous generality. It would seem, to bear the ignorant Reader in hand that
we did grant nothing to people about these acts of Government, but a passive
blind obedience to what is determined by the Eldership; It would seem I say,
this is the drift of it, the rather that afterward SECT. 5. end. he hints at
our Doctrine in this expression. If the managing of all things be committed
wholly to the Presbytery, and the people left out, only to see and judge
implicitly by their eyes and wills who thus impropriat power. But surely this
is either a gross misunderstanding or a foul misrepresentation of the Doctrine
of Presbyterians in this matter, which may appear by these things which they
reach and grant unto the people, in relation to matters belonging to
Ecclesiastic Government. As





Acts 17. 11. 1 John 4. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18. and the like judgment of
discretion, we grant to them in relation to other parts of worship.

Colloss. 4. 17. but this we say is an act not of authority and jurisdiction,
but of charity. 2. They are to complain to the Church of such as are obstinate
in their offenses against their private reproof and admonition; but neither is
this an act of authority and jurisdiction formally, but only preparatory
thereunto, it is not gradus in re, but gradus ad rem* of authoritative
Ecclesiastic Discipline. 3. When a person is sentenced by the Presbytery unto
Ecclesiastic censure, For example Excommunication, they are to obey that
sentence, and by avoiding the person as a Publican and heathen, put it in
execution, not in an implicit and blind, but rational obedience, and assent,
for they must do it. 1. Out of clear knowledge of faith in themselves of the
justice of the sentence, in materia juris, that the offense for which the
censure is inflicted is by Gods appointment in his Word so censurable. 2. That
the person is guilty of the fact for which he is censured: so that if the
person do not acknowledge and take with it by confession, the manner and means
of probation of it, ought to be signified to them, in the general, at least.
And if they can allege any just reason against the justice of the sentence,
either as to the point of law, or to the matter of fact they ought to be heard
and admitted. Nor do we deny but that private professors, being desirous upon
just grounds, and for their clearing in giving obedience in such matters, may
and ought to be admitted to hear and be witnesses of the leading and deducing
of such processes. By all these it may evidently appear, how injurious an
insinuation that is of the Author, wherewith he asperseth Presbyterians, that,
to wit, by their way, the managing of all things in the Church is so committed
wholly to the Presbytery that the people are left out only to see and judge
implicitly by their eyes and wills impropriating this power to themselves. This
way of managing the Government of Christ's Church and binding people to implicit
and blind obedience, we abhor as Antichristian usurpation and tyranny. And
the Author in aspersing us with it, has dealt either, uningenuously or
ignorantly.

Lockier plainly asserteth afterward, SECT. 6. init. but involveth in a mist,
in propounding his assertion at first, for what end he knows best himself)
but only to Christ's Officers, the Rulers set over his Church. Thus having
cleared up the meaning of the Question we have in hand with the Author here,
come we now to consider his Arguments for his Assertion.

SECTION II. Examination of Mr. Lockiers 1, 2, 3, 4. Argument.
because the power of the Keys was not at first given to Peter, as an Apostle,
or as an Elder, but as an Believer -- The consequent he would infer must be
this, Ergo, that the Elders must not in these weighty matters of Government,
admission of Members, ordination of Ministers, censures, exert power without
the authoritative joint acting and concurring of the Church, i. e. the body of
professors therein, with them. Ans. 1. If this consequence be good, then it
must follow as well that Ministers cannot exert power of authoritative
Preaching the Gospel but with the joint authoritative concurrence of the people
in Preaching with them. For certain it is that the power of Preaching the
Gospel is comprehended in these Keys given to Peter, as well as the power of
censures, etc. and therefore if it follow, the power of the keys was not given
to Peter as an Apostle, nor as an Elder, but as a Believer: Ergo the Elders
cannot exert power in ordination, censures, etc. without the joint authorative
concurrence of the body of Professors therein, it must follow also: Ergo, they
cannot exert power in preaching the Gospel without their joint authoritative
concurrence therein: and so when the Minister preaches, all the people must
authoritatively preach with him, else his preaching is null. 2. But waving
this, and granting it were true that the power of the keys was first given to
believers, and so to Peter, not as a Minister, but as representing Believers. I
do not see how it must of necessity follow that the body of Professors must
act authoritatively, jointly with the Rulers in the exerting of that power. For
we may suppose it was given to the body of the Church, not formally, but
radically and virtually to be by them derived to Rulers to be formally exerted
by these only, and then the consequent will not follow; as, suppose it were
true, which many Politicians, and with them some Divines, maintain (which yet
for my self I cannot see solid proof of) that the power of Civil Government
is first given of God by a natural right unto the body of people: yet from
this it follows not, that no Magistrates elected by people must exert power
of Government without the joint authoritative concurrence of the people with
them; Then when ever a King is to exert an act of Government, or a Parliament,
they must do nothing, unless the people sit down upon the Throne or in the
house with them, and thus no doubt sundry Divines in former times, when they
say that the power of the Keys were given first to the whole Church of
believers, are to be understood to have meant, that this power was given to
them not to be formally inherent and abiding in themselves, to be exerted and
exercised by them: But virtually, by them to be settled upon such persons as
they should design for Ministerial offices in the Church, by whom only it is
to be formally exerted and exercised, which yet is a mistake.

viz. That the power of the Keys was not first given to Peter, as an Apostle,
or as an Elder, but as a Bel^ever. Only by the way, first, it is worthy
observation that these of the Independent way, are not at agreement among
themselves, yea nor some of them with themselves, touching this matter of the
first subject to which the power of the Keys was given, as we see marked in
their own expressions by the learned Mr. Caudrey, in his scheme of
contradictions and contrarieties in the Independent way subjoyned to his
vindiciae vindiciarum. I shall here note some few of them to this purpose for
the Reader, who, may be, has not the book at hand.

1. The keys were given to Peter as an Apostle, as an Elder, and as a
Believer: So the sense is most sit: the Keys, page 4.

The power of the keys is given to Peter, not as an Apostle, nor as an Elder,
but as a professed believer. The way, Peter received not the Keys merely as a
Believer, but as a Believer publicly professing his faith. The way cleared, P.
2. fol. 39

9. It appears that Christ gave the Keys to the fraternity, with the
Presbytery, ibid. and the way cleared, Part. 2. page 22.

A particular Church of Saints, professing the faith ( i. members without
Offificers) is the first subject of all the Church Offices, with all their
spiritual gifts and power: The keys, page 31.

9. As the keys of the Kingdom of heaven be diverse, so are the subjects to
whom they are committed diverse* The Keys, page 11.

So Lockier here, but that he adds not professed.

The Apostles were the first subject of Apostolical power, ibid. 32.

A Synod is the first subject of that power whereby error is convinced and
condemned, ibid. page 47.

Not believers as believers, but believers Convenanting and fitly capable
according to Christ's appointment, Hook. Surv. P. 1. p. 203.

9. The power of the Keys belongs first to a Congregation of Covenanting
believers, Hook. Surv. Part. 1. page 219.

The power of the Keys is in the Church of believers as the first subject,
ibid p. 195.

That conceit is wide to make one first subject of this power and yet others to
share in this power not by means of that, for this is to speak daggers and
contradictions, ibid.

upon the confession of his faith, had he this trust bequeathed to him, Mat.
16. 16. Therefore to the Church of Believers, and believing with such a faith
as flesh and blood cannot reveal, was the Keys of power primarily given, and
to the Elders in the second place, as exerted out of this first estate, and as
Officers and Servants of it. Answ. And first note somewhat upon the consequent.

Peter as, etc. but as a believer, here it is the Keys of power, the former
expression, (supposing there were such a distinction of Keys, as Keys of
power, and another sort of Keys different from these) being indefinite, may
import both, but the latter imports a specification of a definite sort of
Key^s. What means this variation? That the Reader may understand this mystery
the better, it is to be observed, that when as hitherto in the Church of God, by
the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, being understood the Ordinances of Jesus
Christ which he has appointed to be administrate in his Church, or the power
of administering these Ordinances under himself, these Keys have been
distributed unto the Key of Knowledge, or Doctrine, which is the preaching of
the Gospel, taking in therewith the Sacraments as the Appendicles and seals of
the Gospel, and the Key of Jurisdiction, or Discipline, which consists in
Censures and absolution from Censures: Independents of late have forged new
sorts of the Keys, whereby they have confounded themselves, and wound confound
the whole Church of Christ in the matter of its Government. They tell us there
is 1. a Key of Knowledge or Faith, the first subject whereof is every Believer,
whether joined to a particular Congregation, or not. 2. A Key of interest,
power or liberty, which is in all the Brethren of a particular Congregation.
And 3. a Key of Rule and Authority, which they say is in the Elders of a
particular Church or Congregation. The meaning and refutation of these new
forged Keys see in Jus Divin. of Church Govern. part. 2. c. 10. page 108, 109.
etc. and Mr. Caudreys Vindiciae clav. c. 2. per tot. Now when Mr. Lockier in
the consequent of his Argument speaks of the Keys of power, it would seem he
must understand that second kind of Keys. For I know no other going under
that name amongst Independents. Yet may be, by a new conception of his own, he
means that all power of government distinguished from the Preaching of the Word
and Administration of Sacraments, exercised in ordination of Ministers, and
dispensation of censures. Again see another great variation. At first he
propounds that the Keys were given to Peter first as a believer. This may
import (and as spoken there by the Author without any explication, cannot be
otherwise understood but that it does import) that they were given to him as a
single believer; but now in the consequent inferred in the pretended proof, he
says thus, they were given first to the Church of believers, this is a
society of persons collectively and unitedly taken, and not persons singly. 2.
Where shall we ever read, the Elders or Ministers called the Officers and
Servants of the Church, that is, (as Mr. Lockier means) by way of relation to
the Church as a Superior, or Mistress, deputing and employing them to
officiat and act in her place? We find indeed they are called the servants of
the Church of believers by way of relation of a means to an end, for their
good, 2 Cor. 4, 5. 1 Cor. 3. 22. as Angels or Ministering Spirits sent forth to
Minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation. Heb. 1. ult. But they are
only Christ's Officers and Servants, by way of relation of Deputs to officiat,
and employed to serve unto a Superior and Master deputing to officiat, and
employing to serve in his place, and are set over the Church by him.

good. Now I humbly desire him to give us that suppressed and supposed
premisse. Verily, keep him to one syllogism, and it is impossible to do it,
observing the rules of good Logic and reason. But it may be done, may be, by
two processes; Well then, they must be these for ought that I can conceive, (if
he can do it otherwise and better, let him do it, and we shall consider of it)
the first is this, that which was given to Peter upon the confession of his
faith, was given to him as a Believer: But the Power of the Keys were given to
Peter upon the confession of his faith Ergo, etc. then taking this conclusion
for a ground of the second it must be thus That which was given to Peter as a
Believer, was given to the Church believing with such a faith as Peter
believed. But to Peter as a Believer was the Keys of Power given Ergo, etc. It
might be noted upon the major or first proposition of this latter sylogisme,
that which was given to Peter as a Believer was given to the Church as
believing with such a faith, as he believed with; That if in the attribute
thereof, the Church be understood collectively, for the society of such
Believers, as united and associated; and withal when it is said, that what was
given to Peter as a Believer was given to the Church (thus taken collectively)
believing with such faith, the meaning be, that it was given only to the Church
considered, viz. collectively: then the connection is not necessary (and so it
is false, because it is materially and indeed an hypothetick proposition, and
in an hypothetick proposition, if the connection be not necessary, the
proposition is false, as Logicians knows) for that which was given to Peter as
a believer, might be given to the Church as believing distributively, i. e. to
every one of the Church believing, singly. If it shall be said, that that
proposition may be mended thus that which was given to Peter as a Believer not
singly considered; But as associated with others, that was given to the Church,
etc. 1. That qualification is not once mentioned by this Author, nor hinted. 2.
Seeing this qualification must be again taken in also in the assumption, thus
the Keys of Power was given to Peter as a Believer, not singly but as
associate, then I say, suppose we should grant that in the Text now under our
hand, Math. 16. 16. the meaning were that the Power was given to Peter as a
Believer: Yet, what could the Author bring from that Text to show that it was
given to him as a believer, not singly; but as qualified with this
consideration, as associat with other believers? There is not the least hint
for this in the Text: But somewhat to the contrair. See Caudrey Review. Of Mr.
Hookers Survey. cap. 11. p. 172.

viz. what power was given to Peter upon the confession of his faith, was given
to him as a believer, i. e. considered under this formality, to be a power
competent to him, simply as he was a believing person. The weight of all the
proof, I say, hangs so upon this, that unless it stand good and be necessary,
all falls to the ground, and indeed it is but a groundless supposition, of no
necessity, and may be as easily denied, as it is supposed. Why? Might it not
be, that Christ did upon Peter's making so eminent a confession of faith give
unto him a power, competent to him not simply, as believing with such a faith,
and so not common to all believing with such a faith: But official competent
to him as in such a particular office amongst believers, or constituting him
formally, such an Officer? What evidence or necessity of reason can be brought
to the contrair of this? I think Mr. Lockier did wiselier to suppress and
suppose this basis of his proof, then to have expressed it, because the
expression of it would too evidently discovered the weakness of his proof of
his main point, that the Keys of power, or power of the Keys, was first given
to believers, and not to the Officers in the Church. And now I must profess, I
wonder much, that (after so many learned men have debated so much on that Text
and brought so many considerable Arguments to prove that it cannot be meant in
that place, that the power of the Keys was given to Peter simply as a
believer, or to the Church of believers; And given so considerable answers to
all Arguments brought by others to the contrair, a man of reputation) as
Lockier, should come forth with this poor one, that power was given to Peter
upon confession of his faith. Ergo, it was given to him as a believer, or under
that reduplication, as if this were enough to dash all, and in reason to
convince all gainsayers. The Lord pity them that are carried about with such a
wind of Doctrine. I think it not needful here to waste time and Paper in
bringing Arguments to prove that, the power of the Keys was given to Peter not
as a believer, nor to the community of believers; but as a Minister and Officer
in the Church, there is abundance said to this purpose already by learned men,
to whom I refer the Reader: namely, Jus Divin. of Church Government, Part. 2.
C. 10. page 93. and seq, Mr. Rutherfurd peaceable plea C. 6. page 63. Due
right. C. 1. page 8. etc. C. 8. page 179. etc. Caudrey vindic. vindiciar. Cap.
1. Sect. 1. and Review of Hookers Surv. c. 11. Baily disswasive from the
errors of the time, c. 9. What is brought against any of these upon the point
by Hooker in his Survey, I doubt not but will be sufficiently examined by
another more able then 1. If Mr. Lockie^ will be at the pains to represent any
thing upon their Arguments, we shall be ready, with the LORDS assistance, to
take it to consideration.

Gerson, Claves dat^ sunt Ecclesiae, ut in actu primo, and Petro, ut in actu
secundo. I could have wished that the Author had pointed us to the place where
we might have found it, and considered antecedents and consequents. I confess
I have not so much leisure as to read over every man's writs to find out every
passage that may be cited out of them at random. Yet for Answer, this of
Gerson, maks nothing for the Authors purpose. For, 1. By the name of the
Church, Gerson understands the Church Universal, as is clear to any that knows
any thing of his and the Parisian Doctrine of his time. Our Author means a
particular Congregation, to which the Independent way asserts, the fullness of
the power of the Keys to have been given, of such a subject recipient of the
power of the Keys, Gerson never dreamed. 2. Gersons mind was not, for ought
can be perceived in his writs, that the power of the Keys was given first to
the Church, as distinguished from the Rulers and Officers, as the subject in
whom it is formally inherent and so to be acted formally thereby: But to the
Church as conveened and represented in a general Counsel, in the Church
Synodically conveened. Potestas Ecclesiasticae jurisdictionis, si sit Ecclesiae
data, Concilium generale representans Ecclesiam, habet illam; imo videtur quod
Ecclesia sparsim considerata, non habet illam potestatem, nisi in quodam
materiali seu potentiali, sed Congregatio and unitio quae fit in Concilio
generali dat ei formam. De potest. Eccles. Consid. 4. Whence it is evident that
in these words, Claves datae sunt Ecclesiae, ut in actu primo, and Petro, ut in
actu secundo, Gerson is not to be conceived to speak of the Church denotating
the body of believers only, as contradistinguished from all Officers and
Ministers, and so is not speaking of Peter as comprehending or representing all
Officers and Ministers, but of Peter under the imaginary notion of a Pope or
Head of the Church, and as standing in contradistinction both to the body of
believers and also to all Inferior Officers and Ministers, even conveened in a
Council, and so of the Church, as comprehending all Inferior Officers and a
general Council of them. And here, because some are ready for the Independent
Tenent, concerning the first subject of Ecclesiastic jurisdiction, to allege
the judgment of the Parisian Theologs, at, and after the time of Counsels of
Basil and Constance, affirming the Church to be that first subject, it is to be
observed carefully, besides that these Theologs, means not a particular Church,
but the Universal Church; That the Question which they had in hand with their
adversaries the Papaline flatterers, was not between believers as such, and all
Officers and Ministers as such, but between the Universal Church as
comprehending Inferior Officers, and that as conveened in a general Council,
on the one part, and the Pope of Rome on the other: Whether the precedence of
Ecclesiastic power and jurisdiction, was seated in the Pope, or in the
Universal Church so considered as we have expressed? This was the state of the
controversy, and that for which the Parisian Doctors stood, was the latter of
these. This is clear to all that have read any of these Doctors Writings upon
that matter: So that to allege their Assertion concerning the first and supreme
subject of Ecclesiastic jurisdiction, for the Independent Tenent in this
Question, which is between a particular Church of believers on the one part, as
contradistinguished from all Officers and Ministers, and Officers of the Church
upon the other, is very impertinent.

Elders are set over the Church, by the voluntary choice of the Church, whereof
they are such Officers, who choose them to be their Ministers in the Lord, and
may depose them again, if they prove unworthy of such a station: Therefore have
they no absolute power over that Church, to which they are servants; but in the
nature of guides, to direct them in the ways of the Lord, and so long as they
go right, to be honored and followed; but if otherwise, to be admonished; and
if impenitent to be rejected, i. e. Excommunicated as they whose sins follow
after to judgment. Now such judgment could not be exercised upon Elders, if
such an exempted power be taken to themselves, without the Church, but might do
what they please with the Church in which they are Servants, and the Church not
able, at least not sufficiently able to do any thing to them; which is to make
them Lords over Gods Heritage, 1 Pet. 5. 3. Answ. Here is much impertinency in
the conclusion inferred, and in the antecedent bare Assertions, begged but not
proven, and never will be: 1. The conclusion propounded in the Assertion was,
that the Elders in a particular Church are not to exert power in most weighty
matters, as admission of Members, ordination of Officers, Excommunication,
without the consent and approbation of the Church, i. e. without the judicial
concurrence, consent, and joint authoritative vote of the members. Now that
which is inferred as the conclusion here, that they have not an absolute power
over the Church, an exempted power to do what they please with the Church, I
appeal to all rational men to give their judgment if this and that be all
one. Why? May it not be that the Elders or Officers set over a particular
Church may exert power in putting forth such acts of Government without the
joint authoritative consent and vote of the members of that Church, and yet
notwithstanding, not have absolute power over that Church, an exempted power to
do with the Church what they please? Yes verily: for notwithstanding that, they
may in their exerting of power of these acts of Government. 1. Only act
Ministerially and adstricted to a certain definite rule over which they have no
power. And 2. if they in their exerting their power deviat from that rule and
act contrary to the direction thereof, the members may have liberty, upon
discerning, by the private judgment of discretion to refuse obedientiall
consent to them. 3. And there may be an authoritative power over and above them
to which they may be countable, who may authoritatively correct and redress
their deviation, and to which the people may have recourse for that ^ffect. And
if so, then their exerting of power in the matters of Government tho without the
joint judicial and authoritative consent and vote of the members therein, is
not an absolute power, an exempted power to do with the Church what they
please. And so indeed it is in our Doctrine. The power it allows to Elders and
Officers to exert acts of Gover^ent, without joint judicial authoritative
consent of the members, is a Ministerial power adstricted to a certain and
sovereign rule of Christ's Laws set down in his Word: It allows to people a
liberty, yea asserts it to be their duty, to prove in the judgment of private
discretion, if the Officers in their actings of Government deviat from, or
cross the rule, or not; And in case they do, not to give their obedientiall
consent thereunto: And that there is authoritative power above the Elders of a
particular Congregation, etc. So that the Author deals not ingenuously enough,
in insinuating such an aspersion upon our Doctrine, that by it is given to the
Elders of a Church an absolute power over the Church, an exempted power to do
with the Church what they please. But now judge if the Independent way (in that
strain of it followed by our Author) be not guilty of giving a power very like
this to members over Officers: When as it allows to the members, or the greater
part of the members, of a particular Congregation (which may be 3. or 4.) to
censure, depose, Excommunicat all their Officers (which must be 3. at least) by
a supreme Independent Authority, without any Superior Authority on earth left
to have recourse to for redress, were their proceeding and sentence never so
unjust, this I am sure is very absolute, exempted, and lordlylike indeed. Well
then, correct the conclusion as it is inferred here, and reduce it to the more
modest and ingenuous terms of the Assertion.

i. e. ordains, them in their Office, 3. May depose them again, the Elders are
the Churches servants, by way, to wit, of relation to her as a Mistress. 4.
The Elders are only guides to lead the Church, to wit, as a Chairman or
Moderator in a Judicatory, guides and leads the proceedings of the Judicatory.
5. The Church, if the Elders go wrong, may not only admonish them: But 6. if
impenitent, reject, i. e. Excommunicate them. Ans. 1. If the Church, ordain
their Elders, may depose them, may Excommunicate them: To speak of Elders
exerting power but not without consent and approbation of the Church, is, give
me leave to say it without offense, upon the matter a Gilli-maufrey. The Church
can, and does exert Power it self by it self without Elders exerting any Power,
in these weighty matters of Government And what need then to talk of a necessity
of their consent and approbation to the Elders exerting the Power? nay by these
suppositions the Elders, as such, shall have no Power, no judicial or
authoritative Power at all, to exert; As such they are at most only as
Chair-men and Moderators to the Church in its exerting Power. But. 2. all these
Assertions making up the Antecedent or proof, except the first concerning the
electing of Officers (which is no act of Government, nor makes a man a
Minister, but only is a designation of the person to be made a Minister by
ordination, or an application of him being a Minister, to exercise his office
in a particular charge) and the 5th. concerning admonition (which is not an act
of jurisdiction or authority, but a duty of love and mercy competent to every
single Professor) except these two, all the rest are but bare unwarranted
Assertions, and a very begging of the things in question: More of them
severally hereafter. Only in a word now here concerning the last, that the
Church may Excommunicate their Elders, however many of the Independents,
affirm so: Yet some of them, and these not of least account, have scunnered at
it, yea denied it downright, and given reason for their so denying. As Mr.
Cotton, Excommunication is one of the highest acts of rule, and therefore
cannot be performed but by some rulers. The Keys, page 16. The Church cannot
Excommunicate the whole Presbytery, because they have not received from Christ
an office of rule without their Officers, ib. no act of the peoples power does
properly bind, unless the authorit^ of the Presbytery join with it. 3. But
one word more for the present, when the Author says that the Elders are set
over the Church and yet makes them but servants of the Church, in the sense we
have before expressed, subject to judicial trial and censures by the Church,
etc. he gives us but an empty word, nomen sine re, which is another scorn, it
is impossible by his way, to show us one act of authority, in regard of which,
they can be said to be over the Church. See this I say, made good impregnably
by Reverend Mr. Rutherfurd, due right of Presbyteries, page This is to be
looked after the retrogradation of the number of pages mentioned by the Printer
in admonition about Errata.
311. to 323.

Peter there gives an account of his going in to the uncircumcised. But 1. was
he required by a Church of Believers only and contradistinguished from all
Elders and Officers (in which notion it is that Mr. Lockier is now speaking of
the Church) to do this before them judicially? this is a dream: The Church at
Jerusalem, before whom Peter was at that time, consisted of Elders as well as
Believers* And the Apostles and Brethren that were in Judea heard, etc. and it
is well observed by the Nedder Dutch Notes, that under the name of Brethren,
are comprehended the Elders, who afterward, c. 15. 23. are distinguished from
private brethren, it is said, v. 2. that some of the Brethren contended with him
for that deed, now, supposing that they challenged him judicially, and that he
made his Apology judicially, how shall it be evidenced from the Text that he
did it, before the body of Professors, and not before the College of Apostles
and other Elders only, sitting and cognoscing judicially upon the matter? the
sharpest sight in the World will not see a vestige of any thing of this kind in
the Text, nor can any man show us either precept or example in Scripture for a
Church of Believers alone judicially cognoscing and giving sentence of censure
upon their Elders and Rulers. 2. Suppose there had been none but private
Believers amongst them to whom Peter made that Apology to remove the scandal;
Yet that were but a poor ground to prove, that he did it to them judicially
sitting upon him, and as having authority to judge and censure him, for why?
One Christian doing any thing at which offense is taken, may and ought to give
an account and satisfaction to another private brother who is offended, for
removing the offense: Yet has not a private Brother authority or power,
judicially to cognosce and pass sentence upon another Brother.

Cor. 3. 22. brought for that, Peter and so other Church Officers are the
servants and Ministers of the Church. 1. It Is true the Pastors there are said
to be the Churches, and so also are the world, life, death, things present,
things to come, and all things. But I hope none will be so absurd as to say
that the World Life, Death, etc. are the Churches, as servants, in way of
relation to the Church, as a Mistress, calling, commissionating them under
Her* they are the Churches as means to Her good, and so are the Pastors and
Rulers Her servants in this sense. 2. Tho Independents will not stand to
affirm that ordinary Officers are the servants of a particular Church as their
Mistress commissionating them and having Power over them; Yet I am ready to
think their stomachs will stand at it, to affirm so much of the Apostles of
Jesus Christ as Apostles: And yet by that Text even the Apostles themselves as
Apostles are held forth to be the Churches, as well as ordinary Pastors and
Rulers, and that in a like manner for ought can be perceived by the Text.

Because otherwise (if the Elders should exert power in these matters of
Government without the joint Authoritative consent and vote of the members of
the Church) the Elders cannot but offend the little ones of the Church, yea the
tender consciences of stronger Brethren; But offense ought not to be given to
Christ little ones, one of the least of the family. Ergo, etc. To prove the
assumption needless pains is taken. Now if this Argument hold good, it will
conclude, that not only men but women also, must have joint authoritative
consent and vote with the Elders in these matters of power and Government: For
he might as well in the proposition spoken, what he says, of Sisters, whether
little ones or of stronger, but of tender consciences, as of Brethren: And it
is no less sin to offend the one, then it is to offend the other. But now see
we how the consequence of the proposition is proven, for as much (says he) as
persons may be taken in and cast out, and Officers be set up and pulled down,
concerning either of which, they can have no distinct knowledge, or at least no
sufficient ability to hinder, because decisive sentence lies altogether in the
Eldership. (...) ^lbeit only the Eldership exert power authoritatively in these
(...), and sentence decisively, yet professors notwithstanding this, may have
sufficient knowledge for their private and obedientiall consent and concurrence
with the sentence of the Eldership, as we have cleared before. And so that part
of the proof of the connection of the proposition, that if the Eldership only
without the Church of believers, exert power authoritatively, the Elders cannot
but offend, etc. because if so, the members cannot have distinct knowledge
concerning these things, etc. this is null, it seems the Author was sensible
and therefore passes from that former part to the second with that [or at
least] which usually signifies a tacit passing from that which has been said
before, and a betaking to what follows to be said: They can have no distinct
knowledge or at least (says he) no sufficient ability to hinder, etc. But 2.
here lurks a principle of the grossest Levelling that I have heard of, and
abrogating all Government, but of a confused multitude; if private professors,
the body of a Congregation, must have joint authoritative consent and vote with
their Rulers in acts of Government, because it will offend them that they have
not sufficient ability by their judicial and authoritaive interposing to
hinder the acting of the Eldership, the decisive sentence lying altogether in
the Eldership: Then I say it is as good a consequence, that a Major and common
Counsel of a City must not act without the joint authoritative concurrence and
vote of the body of the Citizens, lest they be offended for want of sufficient
ability to hinder, by their judicial and authoritative interposing, the actings
of the Major and Counsel. Again see the clear strength of this proof comes to
this much, the people ought to have a joint authoritative consent and vote with
their Rulers, the Eldership; Why? Because they cannot but be offended if they
have it not: For to have ability sufficent to hinder judicially and by
authoritative vote (of this way of hindering he must be understood to be now
speaking) and that, is all one thing. Now I say, there being in case of the
Eldership of a particular Congregation erring and going wrong, superior
authority to which people may have recourse for authoritative hindering or
redressing of the error and wrong acting, and withal a liberty granted to the
people* upon evident discerning in their private judgment, the error (...) the
Eldership, to withhold their obedientiall consent to the wrong sentence (which
is sufficient to keep them from being accessory, unless it were first clear
that by Gods appointment they have a command, calling and warrant, also to
interpose by a judicial vote to hinder it, whith now in this Argument is the
conclusion to be proven and not to be supposed) if they be offended because
they cannot and has not place to hinder it by their own judicial and
authoritative concurrence, and vote with the Eldership, the offense is not
given but taken.

neither is the offense taken but given, how proves he that? For as much as in
these great transactions, the benefit or hurt of every member, is not only
equally, but mainly concerned. The transaction of other things, which are
merely prudentiall, are not of general concernment, or not of so great
general concernment, no doubt, do properly, and determinatly belong to that
power which the Church does institute within themselves, as their eyes and
hands, more conveniently, decently, and expeditiously to deal with. Answ. 1. A
power as eyes, etc. i. e. Officers instituted, i. e. made and ordained by the
Church within it self, is a begging of a part of the Question, and a dream
unknown to Scripture, which teaches us that Christ has set such Officers in
the Church, and as for the instituting or ordaining of particular persons into
these Offices, either he does this himself immediately, as to extraordinary
Officers, or by the Ministry of other Officers, as to ordinary Officers, tho
the designation of the persons to these Offices may be by the choice of the
whole Church, 2. Not Officers only, but the whole Church are eyes by Mr.
Lockiers Doctrine, attributing to the whole Church joint authoritative
concurrence with the Officers in acts of Government: And where is the rest of
the body if all be eyes? 3. It could been wished that the Author had expressed,
what are these transactions merely prudentiall or not of general concernment,
or not of so great general concernment, which he says, belongs properly and
determinatly to the Officers or Elders; Which had he done I doubt not, but we
should have seen, either matters of mere order, no ways importing any such
power or authority, as Church Officers have attributed to them in the Word of
God: But only such as a Chairman or Moderator of a Judicatory may do in
relation to its judicial proceedings, who yet as such has no authority over
the Judicatory: Or some of them to be such transactions as are of as great
general concernment as any can be. I remember Hooker Surv. Part. 3. c. 3. page
41, 42. amongst other things gives to the Elders as properly belonging to them,
in matter of censure and Excommunication, the Examination of the cause, and
dogmaticall propounding of the sentence, and says that the fraternity has no
more power to oppose the sentence of the censure propounded by them, then they
have to oppose their Doctrine delivered in Preaching of the Gospel, and so that
the one is as binding as the other. If these be not transactions, more then
merely prudentiall, of very great general concernment. I profess, I know not
what is. Nay, I affirm it, and it is evident, that hereby greater power is
given to two or three Elders in a particular Congregation, then ever
Presbyterians attiibuted, I say not, to the Elders of a particular
Congregation, but to any Classical Presbytery of many combyned Congregations:
For by the way of Presbyterians, when a Classical Eldership has given forth
sentence of Excommunication, there may be an appeal to a more ample and
Superior Judicatory for judicial recognition and redress. But here by this
Independent way, power is given to two or three Elders to propound the sentence
of Excommunication, which the fraternity are bound to join with as much as to
obey their Preaching, and there is no superior remedy of judicial recognition
and redress left to the party under Heaven. 4. If any matters of general
concernment wherein the benefit or hurt of every member is concerned, must be
authoritatively transacted not by the Eldership alone, but by the members
jointly with them, I see not why all matters of general concernment ought not
to be so also: Magis and minus non variant speciem. But to come to the point
wherein lies the proof of that, that it is an offense given and not taken when
the members are offended, because they cannot by judicial and authoritative
vote, hinder the sentence of the Eldership, the decisive sentence lying only in
the Elders. If because, in these transactions the benefit or hurt of every
member is generally and greatly concerned; Therefore it is an offense given if
they have not such power of judicial concurrence and vote in the sentence:
Then I say women also must have this power and if they offend for want of it
(as they are as ready as men to offend if they have not power to get their
will) the offense is given and not taken; Because women being members, are
comprehended under that every member, and their benefit or hurt is concerned as
well as men's. The Author will never be able to avoid this upon his medium. 6.
If because in these transactions, the benefit or hurt of every Member of the
Church is generally and greatly concerned, when they are offended because they
cannot by judicial and authoritative joint vote hinder the sentence, the
decisive power thereof lying only in the Elders, the offense is not taken but
given, and therefore they ought to have such vote, then say I by as good
consequence, it follows, because in the great transactions in civil
Government, suppose, by a Major and his counsel, by a Parliament, the benefit
or hurt of every member of the city or Commonwealth is generally and greatly
concerned; If the Members offend that they cannot by joint authoritative vote
hinder the sentence, the decisive power thereof lying altogether in these
Governors, the offense is not taken but given; And therefore they ought to
concur jointly and authoritatively in these transactions with their Governors.
Here is again Levelling, backed with reason such as it is. 7. Therefore to
Answer directly, it is but a loose and false principle, that in all transactions
in which the benefit or hurt of persons is concerned, all persons whose the
hurt or benefit is therein concerned, if they offend that they have not
sufficient ability to hinder sentence, by their joint authoritative vote, the
offense is not taken but given, and therefore they ought to have such joint
authoritative concurrence and vote. Nay it tends to the eversion of all
Government and bringing in mere Anarchy and confusion. Yet 8. I think from this
rightly understood may be inferred somewhat which Mr. Lockier would consider in
the matter of his next Assertion. For if all whose benefit or hurt is greatly
concerned in Ecclesiastic transactions, ought to have authoritative joint
concurrence in these transactions, then when as in some main transactions in a
particular Congregation, for example Excommunication, many others benefit or
hurt is greatly concerned, beside these who are Members of the Congregation, it
must follow that these others ought to have power of joint authoritative
concurrence in these transactions, or at least some for their inrerest ought to
have such power. And this I conceive will amount to the overturning of the
supreme Independent tribunal (as Mr. Hooker calls it, Part. 3. c. 3.) of
single Congregations; and setting up an Ecclesiastic authoritative Judicatory
over more Congregations.

Because the spirit of discerning both respecting persons and things, is not
consined as a peculiar to the Presbytery or Eldership of the Church -- but the
same gift may be in a great measure, in some of the Members, and a greater gift
when all are joined together in the name of Christ and his presence with them
to discern and judge of a conjunct strength of saints what mighty things and
glorious are spoken in Scriptures? That they shall judge the world, Angels,
much more able to judge their own affairs: This is the one part of this
sections Argument. There follows another of which afterward. Now to this, 1.
If this Argument hold good, then again Women, at least some Women, ought to
have judicial concurrence and vote jointly with the Eldership in transactions
of Government. Why? the spirit of discerning may be in as great measure in some
Women, as in some Men, and the greater will the gift be, when they with the Men
are gathered together, and I think it will not be denied that Women will be a
part of the Saints who are to judge the World and Angels, 2. Upon the same
ground, by proportion, it follows, because many private men may have the same
gift of discerning in a great measure, that is in Magistrates, in the Members
of Parliament; Yea, may be, in a greater measure in some of those then is in
many of these, and there is a greater gift when all is joined together;
Therefore all such discerning men must have joint authoritative consent and
vote, with Magistrates, with the Parliament, in the Acts of Government. Here is
again pleading for Levelling. 3. Because some men, may be, have as great a
measure of knowledge and understanding for teaching the Word as Ministers, it
follows proportionally, upon that ground, that such men may and ought to
Preach authoritatively, as well as Ministers, and as Socinians, some
Remonstrants, and Separatists teach, a gifted man needs not an outward calling
to be a Minister; His gift is a calling sufficient. 4. To answer directly, to
reason from a gift of discerning in matters coming under Acts of Government to
actual right and power to concur authoritatively in these Acts of Government,
is a gross and palpable non sequitur. Let a man never have such a measure of a
gift, for exercising Acts of Government or public authority, he must besides,
have the warrant of Commission or calling to exert them, else if he take upon
him to exert them, he is but an intruder, as all men will grant that are not
against both Scripture light, and light of nature, and for turning all Affairs
Civil and Ecclesiastic into a Chaos of confusion. 5. Whereas the Author,
saying, their will be a greater gift when all (Officers and private professors)
are joined together, (viz. in these Acts of Government) in the name of Christ
and his presence with them to discern and judge. We grant, that, when all
private Professors with the Church Officers, are joined together, possibly
there may be a greater gift of discerning, by way of aggregation then when the
Officers are alone: But whereas withal it is tacitly supposed, that all may
meet in the name of the Lord ( i. e. in his Authority) and may the more expect
his presence for assisting the discerning and judging in these matters of
Government: in the former he begs the thing in question, we deny that they do
all meet for acts of Government in Christ's Authority; and in the latter
supposes a great mistake, for the promise of Christ's assisting presence for
judicial and authoritative discerning and judging, runs not equally along with
the gift of discerning simply; But with his calling and commission to govern.
That lo I am with you to the end of the world, as to Acts of Government, is
not made to persons having the gift of discerning, simply, tho never so many of
them met together: But to persons who beside their gift, are invested with his
Commission. Therefore you must show that persons have a Commission and Calling,
beside their gift, to exert Acts of Ecclesiastic authoritative judging: Or to
speak of expectation of the Lords presence to assist their judging, let them be
never so many, is to bid men presume to act with expectation of his assisting
presence without a promise. There may be more of Christ's presence expected to
assist a few having a Calling and Commission from himself, in exerting Acts of
Government; Then with a huge multitude though having gifts enough, but wanting
Commission. If it shall be said that private Professors have a Commission to
judge authoritatively with the Eldership in these matters of Ecclesiastic
Government. 1. Then the medium of this Argument is passed from, for it
alleges no more but the gift of discerning, to prove they ought to concur in
authoritative judgment. 2. This is but said and begged, not proven; Show us
the authentic grant of that Commission. This much for the first part of the
Argument in this Section, he adds further thus.

The Scripture again says that variety of gifts are given to the Church, as
Christ will, and when he will, and where he will, and by what door, and by what
mean hand he will, for the good of the whole, and light comes in some times
from a little crany, and hole, when large windows are close shut up, and not
one window leaf opened, all the while businesses of great weight are in debate;
So that the greatest cannot say to the least, I have no need of thee. All this
help to the good of the whole, would be void, if the managing of all things be
committed wholly to the Presbytery, and the people left out, to see and judge
implicitly, by their eyes and wills, who thus impropriat power. Answ. 1. Here
is a foul misrepresentation of the Presbyterian Doctrine, as if it allowed
nothing to the people but a Popish implicit blind obedience to the Elderships
decrees. See this aspersion discovered and wiped away, before in our first
SECT. and the Author in his own conscience knows, may know, this is a wrong.
Further, when Christ has by his institution appropriat a power to a certain
order (and he has, as to Pastors and Doct^s, the ordinary public authoritative
Preaching of the Word, so to Elders in common the power of Discipline) for
these alone to exert such power, is no impropriation. But 2. To the Argument
propounded here, I say 1. If it hold good, as in the former, it will follow
that women must not be excluded from joint authoritative concurrence in
exerting power of Government with the Elders more then men in the Church, Why?
Women have their share of the variety of gifts given to the Church, and some of
them a greater share then many men, and light may come in by such a weak hand
as a woman, when, etc. And so all this help of their share of gifts will be
made void if the managing be committed wholly to Elders and other men in the
Congregation, and they left out, only to see, etc. And the very like Argument
may, by proportion, be framed for admitting all private persons in a
Commonwealth to concur authoritavively in the Civil Government, with
Magistrates. ^. Take this A^ument in plain and full form, it must stand thus to
prove the Authors Assertion propounded, SECT. 1. and intended (...) the
conclusion here. If the Eldership or Rulers of the Church exert power in these
acts of Government, without the joint authoritative consent and vote of the
people or other members, then the help which may be had to the whole, by that
share of that variety of gifts bestowed by Christ upon the Church, which is in
the other members, should be made void. But this ought not to be, Ergo, nor
that. Now I deny the consequence of the proposition, the share of that variety
of gifts given to the Church, which is in private members may be of good use and
help for the good of the whole, tho all of them do not concur authoritatively
in exerting or exercising acts of Government of the Church. May not private
members make their share of gifts forthcoming and helpful for the good of the
whole, by observing, instructing, exhorting, admonishing, and provocking to
good works one another, in the private extrajudiciall way of charity? Ay, but it
may be said the help of these gifts in them to the good of the whole in the way
of authoritative acts of Government is made void. Answ. This supposes, that
these gifts of private members, are given to them by Christ, to be exerted for
the good of the whole in the authoritative acting of Government, and that the
authoritative actings of Go^ment, are appointed by Christ to be managed and
carried by the formal influence and concurrence of these gifts given to private
members. And this is to suppose, and so, to beg the thing in Question. Yet
further, we say the gift that is in private members may be forthcoming to the
good of the whole, which is to be effected by the acts of Government exerted by
the Elders, albeit themselves concur not with the Elders judicially and
authoritatively in these acts, as by admonition of offenders, and informing the
Rulers of the stubborn offenders, which is helpful by way of preparation, ^o
the good ofthe whole by acts of Government: Also by charitative admonition of
the Elders themselves, if they be ^misse or partial or otherwise wrong in
exerting acts of Government; by proving in the judgment of private discretion
the actings of Government exerted by the Governors, and accordingly giving
their obedientiall consent thereunto.

Cor. 12. and hinted by the Author, it is impertinent to this purpose: For to
omit many things which might be brought to clear this from that Chap. this one
is sufficient: That it is evident the Apostle is not speaking there, of the
mutual need, mutual help, and mutual concurrence of the members of the body,
by making their several gifts forthcoming in judicial Acts of Government for
the good of the whole: As if when the Apostle says the eye cannot say to the
hand, nor the head to the feet I have no need of you ( i. e. one member whether
greater or less cannot say to another I have no need of thee, i. e. every one
has need of another) his meaning were, every one has need of another in
authoritative judicial actings of Government, and therefore we must all
whatsoever members we are, help the good of the whole, by concurring in such
authoritative acting. No such thing. But he is there, for remedying the abuse
of gifts amongst the Corinthians (amongst whom there was bestowed great variety
of gifts) and for preventing Schisms which might be occasioned and produced
thereby. Amongst many other considerations presented by him for that purpose,
he is, I ^y, showing generally that the Spirit having distributed variety of
gifts in the Church, not giving all to every member but some to one and some to
another, there is no member can stand alone by it self, bu^ needs the help of
another and the gift thereof, whether it be a gift for ruling or for some other
operation; And (...) it is, that some of the gifts spoken of by the Apostle
there, are soul* as belongs not to these acts of Government, nor are
contributive of light, for directing, in going about and exerting them. As for
example, the gift of healings, the (...) of speaking with tongues. But would
the Author yet duly (...) the Apostles Doctrine along that Chapter, I am
persuaded he might therein find as much as does very clearly evert his
Assertion, (...) to private professors, and members of the Church the (...) ^he
Keys and joint authoritative judicial concurrenc^ with the Eldership in the
acts of Government. Nay, I think that one Chapter contains as much as over^urns
all the Independent Brethren^ new way and model of Churches; besides many
particulars in (...) contrary to several particulars of this new way* that one
general, so clearly held forth in it, of an Universal Visible Church, is
enough to batter it all to the ground, as might be evidenced, were it our
purpose here. But for the present to the pa^ticular we are now upon, does not
the Apostle, there as also, Romans 12. declare the Visible Church, in the
constitution thereof to be a body* not similar, consisting of parts all
homogeneall or of the ^ame nature, quality and operation, such as water, fire
and the like are: But dissimilar, as man's body is, consisting of several
heterogeneall parts, or members of diverse functions, gifts and operations,
some as eyes, some as ears, etc. some to be Rulers, some to be ruled. But if
all must join in the judicial and authoritative actings of Government, all are
Rulers, all are eyes, and if so, where are the ears? The nature of the body of
the Visible Church, as it is declared to be constitute by Christ, is quite
altered into another kind by this means.

SECTION III. Mr. Lockiers 5th Argument prosecuted, from SECT. 6. to SECT. 11.
inclusive discussed.
FIfthly (says he SECT. 6.) in these weighty things forementioned, Censures,
Ordina^ions, etc. The Scripture is express, that the whole Church should be
jointly authoritative about them, and not the Presbytery or Eld^ship of the
Church alone. Hitherto we have had some Theological reasons (such as they are)
brought by the Author for his Assertion: How he has acquit himself in these
for his intended purpose, we leave it to all impartial Readers to judge. Yet
what ever weakness be in these, if he can bring us express Scripture for his
Assert^on, if one express Scripture, we are ready to yield. See then now how
he makes good this undertaking, only Reader take notice here, what it is for
which he undertakes to bring express Scripture: That the whole Church should
be jointly authoritative, etc. if the whole Church, then Women and Children,
are no part of the Church, or they also must be jointly authoritative in these
matters of Government. Either here is an hasty unadvised expression: Or an
uncouth undertaking, that no sober man, I believe, will join in with him, to
bring express Scripture for Women and Childrens joint authoritative
concurrence in the matters of Church Government, which in effect, is as much as
to undertake to bring express Scripture contradicting it self. But come w^ to
see how this undertaking is made good in these several particulars, that
Scripture is express that the whole Church (w^ether men of age, women and
children all together, or men alone) ought to be jointly authoritative in these
actings.

As for censures the command of Christ is that we tell the Church, Mat. 18. 17.
which word, I judge, does mean the whole Church, and not the Eldership only,
unless I could find, the Church thus used in Scripture for the Presbytery
only. If it should be said that Church here means the Jewish Synedrion, and
so by prop^rtion the Eldership of the Gospel Church. To this he Answers two
things. 1. That the Synedrion was instituted for civil affairs, Numb. 11. 17.
and then takes some pains to clear that these Officers mentioned in that place,
we^e only Civil Officers, notwithstanding that they are said to have received
a Spirit whereby they Prophesied, and then concludes, that to make a proportion
between a Civil station to an Ecclesiastic, is not regular. 2. I see no
reason (says he) from the context, why it should be thought, that the Jewish
Representative, of ^ne kind or other, should be meant their conven^ judicum,
or their conventus Ecclesiastici, etc. Ans. 1. Mr. Lockiers judgment
concerning the meaning of the word Church (I judge says he) may have its own
due respect, as the judgment of one man: But, (...) must give us leave to have
re^ ^oo, (...) judgment of the many, Ancient and Modern, (...) for the (...)
part, except of late, until Morellius, (...) and (...) ^ose, have understood
by the Church, (...) the Elders and Rulers of the Church. (...) Mr. Rutherf
^oa^gable plea, cap. 8. p. 88. to who^ we might ^de many more. 2. If so be that
the word Church be of such signification, as that it has been ordinarly^ used
to signify a ^dge of Rulers and so mig^ be applied to signify a College
(...) ^rgument to say, the word (...) else (...) Scripture is used for the
Presbytery or Eldership only: Ergo, neither is it so used here in this place:
By a (...) consequence one might say* when it is said, 1 Cor. 11, 10* (...)
ought to have power on her head, the word power cannot mean, a covering as a
sign^ of subjection to the power of the (...) a double me^ ^, of the thing
signified for the^ (...) one Correlatum for another) because the word pow^
(...) found other where in Scripture used in this meaning. Sure if that
consequence be good, the genuine true meaning of many places of Scripture
(wherein words are found taken in such meaning, as they ar^ not to be found
taken in else where) should be overturned. If a word in some particular passage
of Scripture, may, in cong^uity of speech, bear such a particular sense, and to
take it in that particular sense in that particular place, is not contrary to
the Analogy of faith, nor puts a sense upon the passage contrary to any truth
otherwhere delivered in Scripture, may consist with the purpose of Antecedents
and Consequents in the context; It may well be Int^ret in such a particular
signification, in that particular place, the it could not be found in that same
signification, in any other place of Scripture: Much more if the purpose
intended in the Text and some circumstances to be found in the context, be such
as requires it to be taken in such a signification. Now to the pres^ purpose in
hand. 1. The genuine grammatical signification of the word Church, (...), is
such as may well be applied to signify a co^tion or College of Rulers, and
certain it is, that the Hebrew word (...) is oftener then once in Scripture
used for the convention (...) College of Judges or Rulers, as Psalm. 82. ^. 1.
2. To take the word in such a sense here for the College of Church Rulers the
Eldership, puts no sense upon the place, contrary to the Analogy of fa^or any
truth otherwhere delivered in Scripture, let Mr. Lockier show us any thing of
this kind. What is brought by him a little after from 1 Cor. 5. 4. shall be
considered in its place. 3. ^here is nothing in the antecedents or consequents,
or in the context of the place inconsistent with it. Yea 4. The purpose spoken
of in the Text and circumstan^ are such as seem to requ^ it to be taken in
such a signification. ^y, I will ^ot say that the purpose or circumstances will
force us to take the name of the Church, here, in a different signification
from that whereby it signifies the visible society of Christians, as well,
private professors as Rulers: Yet this I will say, that such is the purpose and
such circumstances are in the context, as permits not all and every one
Universally, who are coprehended under ^signification otherwise, to be taken in
as the definit persons to whom that dilation of offenses, and inflicting of
censure spoken of there, does belong; but that must be the Rulers alone. I like
well the judicious observation of Cameron in his praelect. on the place, page
26. Edit. Salmur. in 4. where after that he has said sundry things before, upon
the use of the word Ecclesia, at last has these words, which I think speaks the
most genuine meaning of the place. A^ haec omnia and illud accedit, etc. to all
(says he) that has been spoken this may be added, that these things may be
said, to be told to the Church, which are told to these, who are with authority
over the Church for as the body is said to see, when as only the eyes do see;
so the Church is said to hear, that which these only hear, who are as it were
the eyes of the Church, no^ that the Rulers, are vicarii, or substitutes of the
Church, as the eyes are not vicarii, or substitutes of the hands and feet: But
as the body is a certain who^e whereof the several members have their several
functions, in the very like manner, the Church is a^ body that consists of the
compaction of more members, to each of which belongs their proper functions;
so that when one presents an object to be seen by the eye, he is said to
present it to the body, so he that dila^eth a matter to the College of
Presbyters he seems to dilate it to the Church whereof that College is a
part: so far he judiciously.

Church in that sense that is competent to the whole body of Christian
Professors: yet that all and every one of the body signified by that name
cannot be taken as the definite person to whom these actions spoken of here
belongs, as formally concu^ing therein, I prove 1. because the actions here
spoken of, as belonging to the Church, are Acts of Government and Authority,
yea Acts of highest authority and power, receiving of public judicial
delations, judging upon them, authoritative commanding amendment of the
offense, inflicting of public, even the highest censure of Excommunication
upon disobedience: But cleat it is from Scripture that not to all and every
one, members of the Visible Church, for example women and children, are Acts of
Government and Authority, formally competent: and therefore these things
ascribed here to the Church cannot be understood to be ascribed to the whole
Church; Therefore I think Mr. Lockier must either say one of these two, that of
the whole Church, women and children are no parts, or that women and children
must have an hand and concurrence formally, in receiving public judicial
delations, etc. or else he must correct that, Which word (Church, Math. 18.
17.) I judge does mean the whole Church, and expound it of all men of age in
the Church, Professors as well as Elders: and then give us leave to ask him,
where he can find the Church, so used for only men of age professing,
excluding women and children? And, to use his own Argument, if he cannot find
it so used otherwhere in Scripture, how can he judge it to mean so here? But 2.
that the persons here designed cannot be all and every one of the Church, that
are men of age, but must be the Rulers or Eldership only. I prove 1. by an
Argument ad hominem, upon a ground acknowledged, confessed and practiced by
these of the Independent way themselves, well observed by worthy Mr. Baillie,
Disswasive from Err. par. 1. c. 9. p. 192. they to whom offenses are to be told
immediately, after the two or three witnesses in a private way are not heard,
are intended and meant here, when Christ says, tell the Church; But the Elders
alone without the people concurring with them, are these to whom offenses are
to be told and delated immediately, etc. Ergo. the Major or first Proposition
is clear in the Text: The Minor or Assumption is their own confession and
practice. See Hooker Surv. Part 3. c. 3. p. 36. matters are first brought to the
Elders, they must judge whether the matters be of weight or worth, examine the
cause, call witnesses, take depositions, yea and at last ere ever the people
give any vote, propound the sentence dogmatically, which the people are
oblidged to obey in the same way, that they are oblidged to obey their
preaching of the Gospel; So then either our Brethren must acknowledge that
under the name of the Church here, Tell the Church, are intended the Elders
alone, or their doctrine and practice of bringing scandals first to the
Eldership thus as we have seen, must of necessity be not only groundless,
beside Scripture warrant, but directly contrair to the Scripture in hand. And
here it is remarkable that the learned and godly Mr. Parker, albeit he be of a
judgment contrary to us touching the first subject of the power of the Keys,
yet is forced to acknowledge with us that in these words, Mat. 18. 17. Tell the
Church, in the beginning of the Verse is meant the Eldership only: De Pol^.
lib. 3. c. 15. [Ecclesiam primo loco consideratam in his verbis, Praecise
partem Aristocraticam, id est Presbyterium, significare existimamus] Tho in the
next immediately following words, If he will not hear the Church, he will have
the people, as concurring with the Presbytery, to be understood, which is
exceeding strange to me. But 2ly. that which we have affirmed, That it is only
the Eldership whom Christ definitely intends under the name of the Church
there, and not the people as to concur authoritatively with them in the acts
spoken of in the place, besides that Argument ad hominem, there be many other
solid reasons both from the circumstances in the place, and from the nature of
the purpose spoken of in it, comparing it with other places of Scripture
speaking of the same purpose to demonstrate that Assertion. Being resolved to
be as short as we can conveniently in this part of our Examination, in regard
the purpose herein treated, is so learnedly and largely handled already by
others, we spare inserting of these reasons here, and refer the Reader, for
satisfaction in the point in hand, to Mr. Rutherfurds peaceable Plea, C. 8.
desiring also Mr. Lockier, if he think fit, to assay an answer to his Arguments
there for that which we have asserted.

As for Mr. Lockeirs insisting so much to refut^ these who say that Christ in
that direction, tell the Church, and if he will not hear the Church, etc. meant
the Jewish Synedrion or Judicatory then standing, the it were granted which he
intends, that Christ meant not that, yet it gives ^o advantage to his cause,
that not the Elders alon^ of the Christian Church, but the whole people must be
understand by it. Certain it is, that Christ in giving these directions
concerning Ecclesiastic proceeding in the matter of public scandals and
c^nsures in the Christian Chur^ at least allud^ to the manner and over of
proceeding in the ^ewish Church abo^ matters of judgment and censures, and to
their Syn^ry or consistory with which his hearers were well acquainted, that so
they might the better understand his mind concerning the order he was now
apoin^ in the Christian Church, and that is sufficient for our purpose: For
certain it is that in the Jewish Church, matters of judgment and censures, were
never authoritatively managed by the people, but only by their Rulers and
Elders. Now Christ speaking to his hearers in a form of speech known to them,
and alluding to that way of Judicature in use amongst them hitherto, what else
could they understand, by tell the Church, but, tell the Elders of the
Congregation, see Bez. great annot. on the place. So we need not insist upon
examination of his two Replies to these who say that by the name of the Church
here is meant first the Jewish Synedrion, and then by proportion the Eldership
of the Christian Church which was to be afterward. Yet this much I may say,
that Mr. Lockier has but weakly refuted these: Therefore a brief word to each
part of his reply to them.

viz. that the Synedrion was instituted for Civil Affairs between man and
man, Mr. Lockier might known that these men he speaks against here, could
answer that beside the Synedrion instituted for Civil Affairs, there was
another Ecclesiastic, distinct from that Civil, for things Ecclesiastic, and
considering that so many See these cited by learned Gillespy, A^rons Rod, book
1. c. 3.
learned men, much studied and acquainted in the Jewish antiquities, have
asserted this Ecclesiastic San^hedrin distinct from the Civil, and given so
many considerable reasons for it. I wonder much that Mr. Lockier could come
forth with a naked. Assertion of the contra^e without the least shadow of
proof: As for that he speak for clearing of Numb. 11. that these Officers
mentioned there, were Civil, is not ^o purpose (...) these Authors; Because
they grant these spok^ of there (...) Civil Rulers, but they bring other
places for the ^her Ecclesiastic Court. If Mr. Lockier would make it out, that
there (...) no ^nhedrim amongst the Jews bu^ for Civil Affairs, he (...) well
to take into consideration and solidely answer what (...) for the con^rate by
that (...) Aaron R^d, book 1. c. 3. through (...) must pu^ (...) in mind, that
he will find a (...) Godwyn, B. D. not only ass^ing upon the like grounds (...)
Gillespy^ that distinct Ecclesiastic Cou^, ^n his Moses and A^ron, l^. 5. c.
1. but also expressly affir^ing, that this of our (...) the Church, was spoken
with relation to it. His wor^ are ^emarkable, and worth the inser^ ^ag. 199.
The Office (says he) of the Ecclesiastic Court was ^o put a difference
between things Holy and unholy, and between clean ^d (...), Lev. 10. 10. and to
determine appeals in controvers^ of difficulty. It was a representative
Church, (...) Ecclesiae, Matthew. 18. 17. Because unto them belong^ (...) of
Excommunication: belike this Learned man has not been of Thomas Goodwin, B. D.
his mind touching Ecclesiastic Government; For sure I am that which he says
here is as contrary unto the Independent way, as one part of a contradiction to
another.

Lockier reasons but weakly against them that says it is directly meant. There
is (says he) nothing foregoing or following that gives any leaning langwage
this way: But much to (...) and signify that he speaks of that Church which
should spee^ ^ake place, to wit, the order of the Gospel Church. Ans. 1. Mr.
Lockier so speaks here, as if these who Interpret that tell the Church of the
Jewish Ecclesiastic Court, did so understand it of this, as to exclude the
^der of the Gospel Church from the meaning of it. This is a mistake or a
misrepresentation of their mind, for they comprehend both under it as is known,
a^ so Interprets the direction, as for the present time relating to the Court
of the J^wish Church, which was then in present being, and enjoining the same
course by Analogy to be taken by Christian then they should have Churches set
up. 2. Tho I will not say (...) ^ere is ground in the words to prove
demonstratively that (...) saying (...) the Church, meant it of the order of
the Jewish Church directly, and so was ^cting his present hearers in case of
suc^ offenses mentioned there, to have recourse to their Ecclesiastic Court:
Yet I cannot judge so basely of learned Divines, that have understood so, as to
think they would of mere will, without any expression in the words seeming to
incline, or leaning that way, and indeed there are in the context two things
especially which seems not improbably to lean that way. 1. Not only speaks he
to his hear ^s in the present ^se^ if thy brother offend thee, go and tell
him, tell the Church, but also is speaking of a case that might have in that
present time fallen out, and which falling out, it was necessary for them to
know, and be informed, what course they should follow f^edresse of it. Hudson
vindic. of the Essence and Unity of, etc c. 1. p. 3.
2. It inclines not a little to understand a Church that was in present being
among the Jews, because he applies his present speech to the capacity of the
Jews: Let him be to thee as an Heathen and Publican, who might not have
communion with Heathens, and would not with Publicans. But Christians might eat
and drink with both: I say not these are demonstrative grounds; Yet they may
seem to lean that way. But see we what the Author brings from the Text that the
order of the Gospel Church, and it only (for so he must be understood) is meant.

He (Christ) speaks in the verse foregoing of little ones, which he explaines
to be true believers and converted ones, v. 6. and v. 3. and this is made the
qualification of the visible members of the New Church in the Chapter
foregoing, Mat. 16. 17. Ans. 1. That true saving faith and conversion is the
qualification ( viz. in the external Ecclesiastic Court) of Visible Church
members, is a dream; and that it is taught, Matthew. 16, 17. is another dream;
and that another kind of qualification (as to substance) is requisite in
visible members of the Church under the N. T. then was under the Old is a
third, as many of his own side will confess, who usually, in that Question,
bring Arguments from the constitution of the Church under the Old Test. 2. What
necessity of consequence is here. Christ in the foregoing* v. 14. of Matthew. 18.
speaks of little ones true believers, and true faith is, the qualification of
members of the New or Gospel Church: ^rgo, when v. 17. he bids a Brother, if he
cannot get an offending ^rother reclaimed by private admonition, tell the
Church, he is to be understood to speak only of the order to be kept in such
offenses, in the Gospel Church that was to be afterward; I confess, if this
consequent can be clearly deduced and proven from that ante^den^ per decimam
nonam consequentiam I am deceived, certainly, the consequence of it is not
immediately evident, let the Author assay to make it out.

Then (says he) the very words of censure in case the Church be disobeyed, are
the same he uses to Peter when he gave the Keys to him upon his faith,
Whatsoever ye bind on earth, etc. Mat. 18. 18. and just this he says to Peter,
c. 16. 19. And I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and
Whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, etc. so that the one explains the other;
That by Church is not meant the Presbytery or Eldership of one sort or other
but the Gospel Church the Congregation of believers, these conjunctim have the
power to censure -- Answ. I confess, I cannot well (such is, may be, my
dullness) conceive what is the order and form of this Argument in relation to
prove that which he undertook a little before, viz. that in that, tell the
Church, is not meant the Jewish Eldership whether Civil or Ecclesiastic. 1.
If he would reason thus, the words of censure here used are the same with
these, Mat. 16. 19. when the power of the Keys were given to Peter upon his
faith, and these are words expressing the order of the Gospel Church. Therefore
by the name of the Church used here cannot be meant the Jewish Eldership. I
Answer, then the Author considers not, that the first words of censure are such
as are relative to the order of the Jewish Church, let him be to thee as a
Heathen man and a Publican. Or, 2. If his purpose be to reason only thus. The
power of censure spoken of here, being the same with that spoken of, Mat. 16.
these to whom it is ascribed here, and given to there, are the same* the one
pla^ explains the other: But there, Mat. 16. it is given (...) Peter is a
believer, and so in him, to the Church of believers the Gospel Church, Ergo,
here must be understood, not the (...) of ^e and or other, J^wish or Christian,
Answ. Its (...) ^ver yet proven, not ever will be, that the power of the ^yer;
of binding and loosing were, Mat. 16. given to Peter, as a believer, (...) to
the (...) Church of believers.

These (...) have the power to censure and cast out, according to that, Corn.
5. 4. When you are gath^ed together, etc. to deliver such a one to Satan, etc.
and by the same power ^ved in again, that as his punishment was by many, so his
consolation (...) reception might be by many also, as it is 2 Cor. 2. ^. that
Sat^ might take no advantage, which is enough to show, how that admission of
members should be by a joint act of the Church, as well as excommunication of
Members. ANSW. The Author contemns his Read^ very much, when as he thinks it
enough, to cite controverted Pa^ges of Scripture, and affirm they speak enough
for his (...), without the least essay to bring any argument or ground to prove
and clear that to be their meaning which he affirms. They are too too
credulous that will be moved by such kind of dictating, rather then disputing.
We deny that the place, 1 Cor. 5. 4. does import that the power to censure and
excommunicate does belong to the whole Congregation of believers, as Judges and
formal authoritative Actors therein. And we deny in like manner, that, 2 Cor.
2. 6. does import that the reception of the censured or excommunicated, is by
the whole Congregation acting therein authoritatively. When Mr. Lockier shall
be pleased to present us some reasons for what he says, we shall take them
into consideration. In the mean while, he must give us leave not to be moved by
his naked Assertions, and withal we refer the Reader, for further satisfaction
concerning these Passages, to Cameron. praelect. in Mat. 18. 15. p. 19, ^0.
Edit. Salmur, in 40. Rutherfurd. due right of Pres^. c. 2. page 36, 37. and c.
10. page ^48, 349, 35^, 351, 352. Jus Divin. of Church Government, par. 2. c.
10. page 97. and humbly desires Mr. Lockier to consider what they have said on
the places.

the contrary to this understanding, etc. to the end: Is nothing else but a
bitter railing, which I think the judicious godly men of his way will not own,
and account unworthy the defi^ng Paper with transcribing it, only briefly to
it. 1. Whether ^e Independent way or the Pres^yterian way of Government be
liker and nearer to Prelaticall or Papal tyranny, ^et all indifferent men
judge: When as we put the authoritative and judicall Power of censures in the
hands of the Eldership or Rulers of the Church only, we make not people mere
spectators or witnesses of what is done; But give unto them a rational
obediential consent, so that they are not oblidged to give their obedientiall
consent and concurrence to the Elderships acts, if they find the^ not agreeable
to the Word of God: And your own most judicious and best advised, make the
dogmaticall determination of censure, which they ascribe to the sole Eldership,
as obligatory upon the people for their obedience, as we do the Presbyteries
sentence, and as their Preaching of the Word of God (...): (...) 2. whereas in
the Presbyterian way, inferior Elderships are countable for their proceedings
to Superior, more ample and larger Elderships, and incase of grievance by the
sentence of an inferior, appeal and recourse may be had to a Superior more
ample (which is far from the Prelaticall or Papal way, wherein the procedure
is from more to fewer till you come to one: A Lord Metrapolitan or an universal
Pope) but in your way three Elders giving a dogmatical determination with four
or five private brethren concurring with them (as they are obliged to obey
their determination, as much as their Preaching of the Gospel) may
Excommunicate a man and are accountable to none on earth in a Church way, to
recognosce or ^edresse, if they do amiss, and if they should deliver souls
enough to Satan unjustly, there is none on earth that can autho^itatively call
them to an account in a Church way to say to them; What do you. Now let the
World judge whether of these two be nearest a See a sad instance of this
related by M. Caudrey vindic. vind. Epistle to the diss.
Papal power, three Elders with some few private brethren having supreme
Power on earth to Excommunicate persons, unaccountable, uncorrigible by any
Superior on earth: Or some Presbyters acting in subordination to a larger
Presbytery, to whom recourse may be had for recognoscing their proceedings and
sentence, and rectifying it, if amiss; and if these happily fail, then recourse
may be had yet to a Synod* may be, consisting of a hundred Ministers, and as
many or more choice Elders of all the Churches of a whole Province: Yea and if
happily the (...) a failing there, recourse may be had to a Synod of severa^
^undreds of the choice Ministers and Elders of all the Churches of a whole
Nation. I say again ^et all indifferent men judge whether of these ways be
nearest to the Papal Power. 2. Its a foul misrepr^sentation that our
Interpretation of the place, 1 Cor. 5. 4. is the very Doctrine of Jesuits of
Rhe^s. We confess, we say as they (because therein they say with the truth)
that authority of giving sentence was not in the whole multitude of the Church,
and that the Power of binding and loosing was not given to the who^e Church, at
the subject; but for their good as the end, and in this they say righter then
they that say the contrare (which they falsely ascribe to all Protestant
Divines) But the Rhemists Jesuits puts that power in the hands of the sole
Prelates, Office^ that were never of Gods appointing, excluding all other
Ministers of Christ, we with the Word of God, disclaiming all Prelates,
maintain it to be in all the Ministers and Elders of the Church, to ^e
exercised by them conjunctim: Rhemists with other Papists, make their
Prelaticall power and authority lordly, sovereign, dictatorian: tyrannical,
oblidging the people to absolute blind obedience. We give no power to Elders
but Ministerial, the actings and determinations whereof, ought not to be
received by people in a way of blind obedience; but may and ought by them, be
tried and proven in the judgment of private discretion whether they ^e
agreeable to their rule, the Word of God, or not. 3. When as Mr. Lockier says
that Gods people are deprived of their best liberties, when they have not joint
authoritative concurrence and vote in the Acts of Government, but these are
only in the hands of the Eldership, and that is a bondage to them, and that
it is little odds under whom they have this bondage; one Prelate or many
Presbyters. 1. I think upon more serious advice and deliberation he will take
up that word again, where he calls, liberty of judicial authoritative
voteing in Acts of Government the best liberties of the people of God, I think
he will find they have liberties much better then that. But, 2. does Mr. Lock^r
indeed account it a depriving of people of their Liberties, and a bondage to be
under the Government of Rulers, with whom they may not all and every one of
them; join (...) ^tively in the Acts of Government? Certainly this princip^ ^s
under his words here, and believe tho it may please Levellers well (for it is
just their language) yet it will not ^ellish very well to such as have the
present Government in their hand. ^ When he says that Presbyters take power
to themselves without the word ( viz. in acting in Government without joint
authoritative concurrence of the people) and therefore may justly have the same
title with other usurpers, etc. we say the Author bu^ begs the Question (that
they take that power without the (...)) which he has not yet proven, nor ever
will; The Word of God being clear for it, that they are Rulers set over the
Church to govern them, and people commanded to give obedience unto them in that
relation; and therefore to call them, as (...), whom Jesus Christ never
appointed to be Rulers over his Church, usurpers, is nothing else but to call
good, evil, and light darkness.

Jerusalem, Acts 15. Where the Apostles themselves were present and diverse
Elders with them, the matters being of great consequence, as well for faith as
practice; Yet nothing was done in the beginning, carrying on, or ending of the
same, but with interessing the Congregation and the Brethren, their names being
to the Letters, they speaking in the Assembly, they having satisfaction by
Argument, and not overborn by Authority, and these joining their assent, in
sending back chosen Messengers from amongst them, as Judas and Silas, to other
Churches; they were the Apostles, Elders with the whole Church that joined in
it, Acts 15. 22, 23. If at any time the Church might been left out, it might
have been at such a time a^ this, when the inspired Apostles were present and
in matters of this nature -- yet would they not leave such an example, to
future Churches of such a way. Ans. Were Mr. Lockiers cause he pleads for,
never so good, yet I must crave leave to say, it is ill managed in this
instance, If I have not ground to say so, I ^ave to impartial men to judge by
these things following. ^. Let the matters handled and concluded in this Synod
be, objec^ly, of never so ^ca^ consequence; Yet by Mr. Lockiers (...)
prosecution of his (...) Assertion, namely, SECT. 30. and (...) The Synods Act
and determination thereupon, was mere counsel, and no authoritative
juri^dictionall decree. Nor could they do any more but counsel and (...), by
the Independent Doctrine, (which (...) truth) But from this ad hominem. If
(...) with Apostles and Elders, in a matter of mere counsel and advise; What is
that to the purpose now in controversy? Because private Christians may jointly
concur with ^ders in Acts of counsel, does it follow that they must also joint
(...) ^thoritatively concur with them in authoritative juridicall Acts of
Government? ^. When he says that nothing was done, in the b^ginning, carrying
on, or ending of these matters but with interessing the Congregation and the
Brethren. 1. Why does he here use so ambiguous a word as, interes^ing the
Congregation: and (...) not plainly and speci^icall^ but with joint
authorit^tive concurrence of etc. may the^ not be a interessing of persons, in
the managing of such a public procedure, and yet without their authoritative
concurrence? viz. to be witnesses of the justness of the procedure, that they
may have the more clear satisfaction in their consciences in giving their
obedientiall concurrence, to have their consultative advice upon the business,
to have their private, tho not authoritative approbation? Mr. Lockier in all
this Section does not once mention their joint authoritative concurrence,
because as I conceive, he thought the act of the whole Synod to be no
authoritative juridicall act. 2. Whom means he by the Congregation, without
whose interessing in the whole business nothing was done? Whether the
Congregation of Jerusalem alone, or also the Congregations and Brethren of
Antioch, Syria and Cilicia? The latter cannot be said, as is evident: and to
say the former. First is nothing to make out his purpose: Because these other
Churches, being as much if not more concerned in the matters that were to be
concluded in the Synod, if nothing could be done without the interessing or
joint concurrence of the Congregation and the Brethren of Jerusalem, with the
Elders, these other Congregations and Brethren, ought as much and more to have
been interessed, and jointly to have concurred. Again, nor yet can it be that
all the Congregation or Church of ^rusalem could ^e so (...) to concur jointly
in acting and voting that business in (...) with the Apostles and Elders
(which yet M^. Lockie^ (...) say) first the believers in ^erusalem were so
numerous that they could not all conveen with the Apostles and (...) one (...)
and in one place to act and vote in the (...). The^ could not all meet together
at once, in one place, for ordinary acts o^ Worship, and so were indeed a
Presbyteriall Church, as is demonstrat irrefragably, by sundry, Mr.
Rutherfurd. The Assembly in their Answers to the Dissenting Brethren. Jus.
Divi^ (...) Church Government, and others: And therefore the whole Church
mentioned, v. 22. must not be understood of the whole Church of Believers in
Jerusalem, but of the whole caetus Synodious, the Synodicall multitude, the
Synodicall Church.

Lockier intends here that the Congregation, private Brethren, jointly
concurred with the Apostles and Elders in the determination. Granting that the
Brethren mentioned, were private Christians out of office. 1. These were not the
whole Churches concerned in the business that was determined (which yet he
must say, if he would say any thing to his purpose intended in his first
Assertion) as has been shown, yea, nor all the Church of Jerusalem as has been
also shown. 2. We deny that these private Brethren concurred with the Apostles
and Elders authoritatively in the determination of the sentence. They gave at
most but their private assent and approbation, which we grant may be given unto
private Christians in any Synod. That they had not authoritative definitive
vote, seems clear from somewhat expressed in the history it self of ^at Synod
observed by Mr. Rutherfurd peace. plea. c. 14. p. 213, First these only had
definitive vote who met together Synodically to consider of the Question. But
these were only Apostles and Elders. c. 15. v. 7. Non dicit Lucas convenisse
totam Ecclesiam; Sed eos qui ratione officij erant legittimi judices. Calv.
com. in loc. again the Canons of the Synod are denominated (...), decrees which
were ordai^d by the Apostles and (...) Jerusalem, c. 16. 4. and 21. 25. the
particulars reckoned up (...) Mr* ^ckier proves not the country. 1. That their
names wa^ in the ^yhodicall Letters (rather the Letter^ were in their name
generally: For we read ^thing of their particular subscriptions) First this is
no act of authority in it self. Secondly, Nor does it nec^ssarily imp^ their
author^tative concurrence in the determination co^luded in the sentence ^f the
Synod, and intimate by the Letters to the Churches. For as Letters being Written
to a multitude consisting of persons of diverse capacities, some public and in
office, some private without office, may contain some things peculi^r to the
one, some things belonging to the other, yea may recommend one business to
both, but to be acted by them according to their different capacities and
stations. So Letters as sent from such a composed company, in name of all, may
contain some things as common acts of all in whose name they are written, and
some things as proper acts of a part of them, or somethings as proceeding from
all but in a different way according to their several capacities, as
proceeding from some authoritatively, and from others, a^ giving their private
consent thereunto which may add more weight to the authoritative determination
amongst others. 2. For their speaking in the Assemb. 1^ It is not said in the
Text that they did speak: The speech and Disputation that was in the Assemb.
for ought appears, was amongst the Apostles and Elders before the Brethren; Not
by the Brethren: what is said v. 12. that all the multitude kept silence (...),
proves not that they disputed before; the word (as Mr. Caudrey well observes,
vindic. clav. page 54.) signifies no more but this, that they were quiet or
held their peace from noise or murmuring, usual with multitudes, they hearkened
attentively. 2. Suppose they did speak, propose, and reason upon the matter (as
we grant that private Christians may in a Synod, in an orderly way, so the 2.
Book of Discipline of the Kirk of Scotland, c. 7.) that proves not ^t they did
vote authoritatively and definitively in the determination, that they received
satisfaction by reason, proves it not neither: That may be necessary and given
to clear men's consciences in concurring by private approbation and rational
obedience. 3. That they joined their assent we shall not deny, but the Question
is, what sort of assent, whether authoritative and definitive^ (...) is not
proven, nor can be proven from the Text. Their ^urring in sending Messengers
prove^ it not.

Lockiers words in this 8. SECT. yet would they not leave, etc. 1. What he
means by Presbyters Primats, and these introduceing superintendents bringing in
general coercive Assem. I confess I understand not, sure I am, Presbyterians
acknowledges no presbyters Primats, nor superintendants either, but that their
way is very contrary to both. 2. I confess the Apostles in their practice in
this Synod left no example introducing of a Pope, but withal I think ^hey left
an example for a Synod (general or particular) wherein Church Rulers may
juridically determine controversies in Religion according to the Word of God,
oblidging people to obedience under hazard of Ecclesiastic censure (as shall
be more cleared hereafter) and that this does not supersede any power of people
or particular Assemb. of Saints (private believers) that is competent to them by
the grant and appointment of Jesus Christ. I close this purpose of this Section
with the words of the Learned Professors of Leiden Synop. Pur. Theol. Disp.
49. de Council. These. 29. Si ex. Laicis cujuscunque status and conditionis sunt
viri, pietate, sacrarum rerum intelligentia, sapientia and prudentia, modestia,
pacis studio and mansuetudine insignes, admitti and accedere possunt, sed
vocati, seu ab Ecclesia selecti and missi, iique suo ordine and modo rogati,
sententiam dicere: -- verumtamen ab illis in publica hac action, consilium and
arbitrium potius quam suffragium requiritur. Adfuisse sane plebem consilio, and
Apostolis Presbyterisque adstitisse, ut auditores, and testes, and silentio
saltem suo, si non voce approbatores fuisse, consensumque praebuisse, videre
est, Act. 15. Atque id etiam comprobat primarum and probatarum Synodorum praxis
and usus ut in Concilio Carthaginensi sub Cypriano liq^et. Interea tamen and
populo Christi mane^ h^c suum ex divino Verbo judicium sed privatum, ^e humana
placita pro divinis accipiat, Math. 7. 19.

Acts 6.) or applye^ (...) to exercise his (...) in this particular charge, if
ordained and in office (...). Nor is it any authoritative act of Government.
Ordination is done only by the Presbyters and Officers, as the Deacons elected
by the people were ordained, not by them, b^t by the Apostles.

Lockier sh^weth us express Scripture, that the people must jointly conc^r
^uthoritatively therein. His first Scripture is, Acts 1. (...) Communibus
calculis, simul suffragijs electus est: By joint voice was Matthias ordained to
his place; After the Lord had pointed out which of the two should be successor
to Judas, one would have thought that the Lord pointing out the man, had been
enough to formalize the matter; And yet lest this might prove a means to justle
out the privilege of the whole Church in matters of essential concernment,
after the Lords designation which was proper to him, they jointly take this
designation, and enstate him amongst them, not by the suffrages of some, but by
the suffrages of the whole Church by preparing and drawing out of the whole to
this particular work by the Apostle Peter, who stood up in the midst of the
Disciples, the number being about an hundred and twenty, and speaks of this
matter jointly to a^. Answ. 1. Granting that by that word (...), were signified
an act of ordination performed upon Matthias formally constituting him an
Apostle: Yet there can be nothing brought out of the Text to prove that all the
Church present concurred formally in that authoritative act* Mr. Rutherfurds
reasoning from the Text to the contrary, to show that it was only the Apostles,
is very considerable, Due righ^ of Presbytery, c. 8. page 1^0. ^eed not
transcribe his groun^ ^e^ Mr. Lockier answ^ (...)* What he brings is either
(...) and (...) sufficient to prove his point o^ an addition unto, or rather a
corrupting of the Text, or a begging of ^he Question. 1. That the who^e hundred
and twenty were drawn out to this Work, and Peter spa^e (...) them all about
the matter and told them that one amongst them must beg^en; ^s a poor Argument
to prove that all were to act formally in the authoritative act of the
ordination of the man. They might all be called out to the Work, and Peter
might speak to them all and yet not all of them be there in one and the same
capacity as to ^at Work; But some as witnesses and consenters, some as formal
actors. 2. That Peter in his speech said to all, that one of them, might be
chosen by them. i. e. all of them. This is a plain addition unto or corrupting
of the Text, wherein there is no such thing. Peter says, of these men that
has companied with us -- must one be ordained to be a witness, he says not
must be ordained by you. 3. When he says they appointed, they gave forth
their lo^ they numbered, meaning as he does, they all, the hundred and twenty,
he begs the thing in Question. But 2. I confess I never thought that in this
place was held forth an ordination performed by men, at all, People or
Apostles. I find learned Mr. Caudry of the same judgment Vindic. Clav. page
28, 29. whose solid considerations I present here. That place Act. 1. was not
an ordinary case, wherein the people had little or no hand. I add the Apostles
themselves had little or no hand, For 1. they were confined to some sort of men
that had conversed with our Savior. 2. They propounded two, it was not in
their power so much as to nominate the particular man. 3. The Lord himself
determined it, and not the Apostles, much less the People; As for that word
(...) stood upon (as Master Lockier also stands upon it) it cannot be properly
taken, as if they by their votes or suffrages had constituted or ordained
Matthias to be an Apostle, but barely thus: Seeing God had chosen and ordained
him they accepted him by orderly subjection to the revealed will of Christ.
With this Interpretation agre^ that of the learned Nedder Dutch Interpreters,
in their Annotation upon the place. All this (...) election they did
acknowledge and accept for good. And is it (...) ^mmonly by Divines made one of
the Characters and Proper^ (...) of Apostles, (...) the ^ad their calling to
that function, not by the ordinary (...) Ministry of men; Bu^ extraordinarly
and immediately from Christ himself; As Paul alleges for himself ^o prove his
Apostleship. G^. 1. 1. Paul an Aostle not of men (this is common to all
Ministers) nor by men, (i. e. the inter^ening Ministry of men) but by Jesus
Christ. But one word more here: That of Mr. Lockiers, one would think that the
Lords pointing out the man had been enough -- but least this might prove a
mean^ ^o justle out the privilege of the whole Church -- seems to me, to say
no more, very inconsiderately said* What more could the Lords full constituting
Matthias an Apostle, without any interveening Act of the Church, prove a means,
to justle out the privilege of the Church in matters essential, than his sole
immediate both electing and ordaining all the rest of the Apostles, Mark 3. 13,
14.

Acts 14. 23. and when they had ordained them Elders in every Church. On which
the Author for his purpose commenteth thus. 1. On the Margent he rejects the
opinion of some, tho learned men, that says here was no ordination but only
an election, and gives a reason why there behoved to be ordination, because
there was Fasting and Prayer joined with the action. 2. Then in the body,
says he, (...). From (...), a hand, and (...), Attollo, to Not attollo but
tendere, extendere, i. e. to stretch forth.
lift up. Which shows what this ordination was in the formality of it; That
the Apostles in and with every Church of Believers where they came, did make
suffrage who should undergo this great Office of Eldership in such Churches,
and so jointly with each Church, and not by distinct exempted power above them
was this work done, according to In that place is no pattern for ordinary
ordination of ordinary Elders, see before.
the first pattern, Acts 1. for to apply this only to the Apostles, in number*
but two, is improper to the nature of the word, for two to lift up their hands;
Suffrage is not a thing to be managed by two, as fencing cannot be done by one.
Answ. I grant that here was ordination, though I think Lockiers Argument
brought to prove it is but weak, viz. because Prayer and Fasting was joined,
Why? may not Fasting and Prayer, be joined with other actions besides
ordination, with election? the nature of the business it self affords a (...)
^oncludent Argument: It was a calling of men to a Ministerial ^ffice in the
Church of Christ, and this cannot be done, ordinarily, without ordination. 2.
The Author gives us such a description of ordina^on of Elders as confounds and
makes it ^ust all one with election, viz. did make suffrage who shall undergo
the office. What is this but election? Yet in these two Sections he
distinguishes election and ordination, and brings them as two distinct
instances of Ecclesiastic matters, wherein he will have the Church of Believers
to have authoritative concurrence. But 3. more di^ctly to the point in hand,
the whole strength of the Authors reason here to prove that the private
Believers in these Churches concurred formally with the Apostles in the
ordination of these Elders, lies upon the grammatication of the word (...),
which signifies to give suffrages by streaching forth or lifting up of the
hand, and so must here be understood that the Elders were ordained by
suffrages: And suffrage is not a matter competent to two; which was the number
of the Apostles employed in this business, to which. 1. Let that force of the
word be taken in here, and the place rendered, when they had by suffrages
ordained or constituted, yet as Mr. Gillespy well observes Miscell. c. 4. p.
57. out of Calvin. instit. lib. 4. c. 3. 15. Calvin's words pondering the same
signification are clear that the act of ordination was only by Paul and
Barnabas Creabant ergo, ipsi duo: Sed tota multitudo, ut mos Graecorum in
electionibus ^rat, manibus sublatis declarabat quem habere vel and.
the sense may be this, Paul and Barnabas did make and ordain Elders, according
to the suffrages of the Churches themselves, that is, they ordained such as the
Churches by their suffrages elected and desired. So here are involved two acts.
1. Election, (which is the only act performable by lifting up of the hand in
suffrage) and in that we grant the people concurred. 2. Ordaining and
constituting, which was not done by lifting up of the hand in suffrage: But
laying on of the hands, as a sign of separating the person to the Office. And
this we say was done only by Paul and Barnabas. But, 2ly Albeit that former
answer does sufficiently overturn all Mr. Lockiers reasoning from this place;
Yet I confess I see no necessity of re^dering the word here thus made by
suffrages. For how ever it be true that the use of this word (...), arises from
that manner of suffrage ^ed amongst the Grecians, either in choosing of persons
or ^aking o^ Laws, and it be often (...) ^sed to signify expressly the (...) o^
suffrages in such matters, (...) i^ is ^nown to any that has an^ knowledge in
the Greek Language, that sometimes it is used to signify simply the a^ of
con^tuting or making, and (...) ^e^her of a Law, o^ person in an Office, not
expressly (...) the manner or way o^ doing, by suffrages, or lifting up o^ the
(...) And thus simply the Old Latin ^erpreter ^enders i^ ^n this place, and
c^m constituissent illis per singulas Ecclesias Presbyteros, etc. and I think
hardly can it with congruity of speech be otherwaye^ rendered here. For
certainly the substantive to the participle (...), in the ^t, is Paul and
Barnabas, and can be no other, can be none of the people or private Disciples,
as is most evident to any man looking upon the Text, and therefore by this word
must here be understood an act done by the two alone; which cannot be formally
suffrageing (for as Mr. Lockier says well, that can not be done by two) but
another, unless ye will Interpret the word in such a figurative sense, as I
doubt much it shall be found in the like an^ otherwhere in the world, viz.
thus, and when they ( Paul (...) Barnabas) had by suffrages made to them ( i.
e. the Disciples) Elders, that is, when they had caused them to make by
suffrages to themselves Elders. Now let any man judge if the Author has brought
us express Scripture for private Believers formal and authoritative
concurrence in the act of ordination of Elders. And whereas he adds in the
close of his Section. By these two first examples are other Scriptures which
speak of ordination, as if they did attribute it to the Elders only, to be
Interpret, if other answers proper to such places cannot be found out. I Answ.
If he find not out more proper answers for these places then to expone them by
these two examples, it may easily be perceived by what has been said, that he
is at a weak pass in maintaining his point undertaken. And I pray, tell us why
such places of Scripture as plainly attributes the act of ordination to
Presbyteries only, should be expounded to take in the people with Elders, by
these two examples, wherein yet their is no demonstrative ground brought to
evidence that the people had formal hand in ordination of the Officers
mentioned in them: And not rather these two examples or practise^ (seeing it is
not expressly said in them that the people concurred in the ordination) be
expounded by such places wherein the acts of ordination is expressly attributed
(...) Eldership alone? I v^rily ^hink that to any understanding man, the latter
of these two will seem most rational. As for Arguments proving that, ^ot the
people, but only the Officers of the Chu^h ^ve the power of ordination, See
these Authors often mentioned.

Finally (says he SECT. ^.) I might instance in lower matters, which would
strengthen the Argument; for if in less things the Eldership may not act
alone, surely not in greater. Answ. 1. If Elders may not in lesser matters act
without joint concurrence of the people, what needs that restriction in the
Assertion first propounded, not in most weighty things? 2. It is a very weak
Consequence, In less matters they may not act alone, Ergo not in greater. Some
persons may have the managing of great matters laid upon them by special
commission from such as have supreme authority to commissionate in these
matters, and yet have no special commission laid upon them to manage less
matters. Men's capacity to act alone, or not alone, but with others, in such
matters, arises not from (...) ^uantity or weight of the matters, but from
Commission and wa^ and granted by him that has supreme power and authority
over those things. But let us briefly see these particular instances of less
things alleged by him here.

As in Letters recommendatory (says he) they were not directed to the
Eldership of such a Church, but to the whole Church, of which they were to be
received: So Paul recommended Phebe to the Church of Corinth ('it was to the
Church of Rome, Romans 16. 1, 2.) So John wrote to the Church, concerning certain
brethren, that were to be received by them; on^ Diotrephes the Elder, which
stood upon his sole authority in this and such like things, and used the Keys
at his own pleasure, to keep out, and cast out as he would, is noted with this
mark not to be of God, but of Satan, for this very thing, and one that had not
seen God. Answ. What poor stuff is here to the purpos^ in hand? 1. Directing
of Letters commendatory to persons* Eldership or Church* is not their actings,
but the actings of some others that (...) the Letters, and I may say their
passion. But if it (...) recommendator^ (...) not be at all directed^ ^to^
(...) ^ceived by the Eldersh^ (...), but the whole Church: (...) ^fesse this is
a strange Assertion and he that will believe (...) of^ is too too credulous. 3.
The mat^er that Paul* recommend P^eb^ for to the ^oman Christians, was a duty
of common Christian love, to intertain her kindly as a Christian, to assist her
as they could in her affairs at Rome, a duty jure naturali incumbent to all
Christians both conjunctly and severally. And so the recommendation for that on
her behalf, might well be directed to all, Elders and people. But interest of
concurring in actings of Church Government, being not juris naturalis but juris
positivi, persons must be sure of special warrant and vocation for concurring
in them. So that it is but a very sick consequence, if Letters of recommendation
for such purpose, as these for Phebe, may be (or if ye will, ought to be)
directed to the whole Church, then ought the whole Church also to concur in
actings of Church Government and ju^isdiction: He must have a good head that
will make it out. 4. As to the instance of Diotrephes, Mr. Lockier is, I
conceive, in a mistake when he supposes, that ^ving of these Brethren, for
which John did write to the Church, was to receive them into the state of
Church membership (they needed not that, they were Church members, yea it seems
Ministers, before) and an act of the Keys: It was a receiving of them into
duties of Christian kindlinesse and charity, v. 5, 6, 7. but what is all this
of Diotrephes to the purpose. Because Diotrephes, one Elder, usurped sole
authority to himself alone in the Church, made peremptor acts inhibiting the
members to receive, unto duties of Christian charity, stranger-Christians, did
tyrannically at his own pleasure Excommunicat-persons, and that for disobeying
his unjust acts, if he for this was marked, not to be of God, but of Satan, not
to have seen God, must the same mark be put upon the College of Elders in the
Church, if they all jointly and equally act authoritatively in matters of
Ecclesiastic Government and jurisdiction, without the authoritative
concurrence of the whole Congregation, yet not according to their own pleasure,
but according to the Rules of Gods Word, nor yet pressing upon the people blind
and absolute obedience, but reserving to them the liberty of their judgment of
discretion; must they for this be Classed with D^otreph^s? It Is evident Mr.
Lock^ ^liquely reaches this blow at Presbyterians: but they need no^ (...) it.
I will spare what I might say to this. Only this much (...) ^e give better
proof then yet we have seen, for popular concurrence in Acts of Ecclesiastic
Government, I can judge no otherwise of su^ bitter hints as these, then as is
said of Diotrephes words, verse. 10. of that Epistle.

SECTION IV. Mr. Lockiers Argument from common Testimony, SECT. 12. considered
and Answered.
Lockier having alleged first reasons, next some express Passages of
Scripture (wherein how he has acquit himself we leave to be judged by the
impartial discerning Reader) in the last place. Take (says he) common consent
for this truth (i. e. his Assertion, no truth) that the whole Congregation are
to have joint authoritative suffrages in all matters of greatest weight, i. e.
all acts of Ecclesiastic Government. By common consent he must mean the
testimony of Ecclesiastic Writers, and now I pray what testimonies of
Ecclesiastic Authors brings he? Just two, one of yesterday, I may say juggling
in the business, and another nothing to the purpose, see we them both.

In the first times this was so well known and so frequent in practice -- that
Bishop Whitegift himself, one that wanted not wit nor learning, nor any other
help, and setting all his strength to maintain a These contrary to what we are
upon, yet is constrained to confess that in the Apostles times the state of
the Church was democratiall or popular, the people or multitude having hand
almost in every thing, Defense, page 182. which word almost, does suit with the
thing I am upon. For indeed, as I have said, in all weighty matters the whole
body had their joint voice -- as has been before proved.

Answ. 1. That Whiteg^ft set all his strength to maintain (...) These contrary
to what (...) pres^ation of the man mind. The (...) was, that the (...)
Government and ju^ (...) hands only of the (...) ^lats, excluding no^ (...)
all other Presby^ (...) Church. 2. By the^ (...) wherein he says, that (...)
^nown and frequen^ (...) he means (...) of the Church (...) themselves (...),
or therewith taking in the next (...) the church* If (...) mean the latter, I
conceive he would ^one much better to (...) cited some Writers of these times
themseves saying so much, then taken the matter upon report from Whitegift. But
let him, if he can produce any Ancient Writers Ecclesiastic of these times
either speaking for his Tenet in dogmate, or relating any practice thereof in
the Church of these times: This he will never be able to do. If he mean the
former, it is true Whitegift says so that in the Apostles times the state of
the Church for outward Government was popular --: But 1. Whitegift withal for
uphold^ ^he power and Government of Prelates in the Church of England, excluding
all other Church Officers, maintains most falsely and perniciously, there was no
particular form of Government appointed by precept in the New Testament. But
that the determination of this is (...) the power of the Civil Magistrate, the
chief and principal Governor of the Church in his judgment: And therefore
granted, for his own design, that the people had sometimes an hand in matters
of Government, accidentally, because of the want of Civil Magistrates to
establish Rulers. 2. Who had hand in acts of Government of the Church in the
Apostles times, can be known best by Scripture it self, and no otherwise
c^ainly. If Mr. Lockier, has brought forth any Scripture holding forth, either
by precept or practice, that the body of the people ought or did concur
formally and authoritatively in acts of Government, tho he has assayed to do,
and says here he has prove^ it, I leave to the Readers to judge. Whitegift
would never allege precept of Scripture for this, and for practice I find none
alleged by him, but in the matter of Election of Officers, which is no act of
government or authority, and yet he alleges that neither in that did they
always concur, which I conceive to be an untruth. To close this, let Mr.
Lockiers ingenuity b^ observed here in speaking for a popular and (...) of the
Church by his applauding of ^his (...) Whitegifts* Independents commonly refuse
altogether that the Government they maintain (...) and profess a discla^ of
Mo^llius for this. But (...) it is no other. And (...) Author ^ere is ingenuous
in t^king with, and applauding that name. For why should not a true thing have
i^ own name?

^aodie^, ^0. years after Christ (yea and 4. if not 8. years more) ordaining
that the people, after that should have no hand in the choice of their
Officers, unless it formerly had. What means this Canon (^aith he) unless
formerly it was so that the people had hand in it? Answ. Let it be so that this
Canon does import that formerly the people had hand in Election of their
Officers (as we grant they (...) ought to have, and have with us) Election is
no act of Ecclesiastic Authority or ^risdiction, nor makes one a Church
Officer, as was said before. But what is this to the purpose? His undertaking
was to bring common testimony to prove that in the first times of the Church,
the body of the people, the whole Congregation had joint authorita^ve suff^age
with the Officer^ in all matters of greatest weight, i. e. in all acts of
Eccles^stick Gov^ment, is it not a very sufficient making out of this, to (...)
one Canon, of one Council, indirectly importing that they ^d hand in one act,
and that no formal act of Government and Authority? And is this all the common
testimony we must be content with? Now when as all acts of Ecclesiastic power,
authority and government (in Scripture designed by the Keys) are comprehended
in these, 1. Public Preaching of the Gospel: 2. Administration of the Seals or
Sacraments of Baptism and the Supper: 3. Ordination and authoritative sending
of Officers: 4. Dispensation of Discipline, Excommunication and Absolution. I
would have the Author producing to us common testimony for the peoples
concurring jointly and authoritatively in these or any of them in the first
times of the Church.

big empty words, added unto weak reasoning, to startle silly Readers, to which
shortly. 1. Whom he mea^s by his superintendents once and again reckon^ (...)
with (...) and Bishops. I know not well, he may be pleased (...) That Bishops
and (...) did piece by (...) of God many (...) ^pirituall liberties, and (...)
of Christ, is certain. But any (...) testimony (as he (...) by him, very
little of this appears, as appeate very evidently. 3. In representing the
servants of God that are (...) new devised model of popular Government of the
Church, under the name of the children of these Metropolitans and Bishops is
both an unjust and ridiculous slander. I believe these Hierarchicall Lords
never did, nor ever will look upon Presbyterians, as any of their kind. 4. To
order the Church of CHRIST, as that therein his Officers and Ministers rule his
People, under him, by his ordinances, according to the rule of his Word, and
that the people over whom they are set, obey them in the LORD, is not the
taking from people any thing, for which these, that teach and hold by that w^y,
need to repent, nor know we any words of GOD spoken against them for that way;
And for ^ans words without Gods Word they stand not: Nor have they cause to
take any works or blows, or bloods of their body (you have taken too much upon
you to pronoun^ upon their soul blood, think Sir, upon Romans 14. and let your
heart (...) you for this) as inflicted by God on that account, tho they (...)
they have sinned against him, and desires therefore to bear his indignation. If
men has given them blows and shed their blood upon that account, let them look
to it, and Sir take heed your hands be not defiled with it; As indeed in this
Book ye breath out somewhat that way not once. And for your outcry, O Lord how
low shall we be, etc. to it as intended by you, I must say to you, as Job to
his friends upon somewhat the like unjust challenges against him, and
misconstructions of Gods rods upon him: Will ye speak wickedly for God? And
talk deceitfully for him -- is it good that he should search you out? Or as one
man mocketh another do ye so mock him? But now Sir, look upon the pollutions,
and layings waste of his dwelling place in England at this day, which makes all
the Churches abroad the World to lament the case of it, and see whether the
Presbyterian way, or that way you stand for has effected them: And I believe ye
may say it was not without a Providence of (...) that ye uttered this
exclamation in that (...) you have ^red it in: How low, shall W^ be, er^ W^ lay
(...) heart.

SECTION. V. Mr, Lockiers Answers to some Objections made against his Assertion
from some Passages of SCRIPTURE, SECT. 13, 14. Examined.
Lockier, now proceeds to propound against his Assertion, and to Answer some
Objections, and in wisdom chooses a few of many that are extant to the World
in Presbyterian Writers, of als great weight as these he has picked out, and
propounds some of them in as slender a way as he can, that the force of them
may appear as little as may be: But see we them and his Answers to them as they
are.

Object. First, is from 1 Timothy 4. 14. Here is mention m^ of a Presbytery or
Eldership, by the imposition of whose hands and by no other conju^, Timothy was
ordained: Therefore the Presbytery wholly without the Church may exert power
authoritative in most weighty matters, and (...) and gov^ the Church alone.
This place we conceive will car^ (...) this and more too, even a Classical
Presbytery or a Presbytery of more associat Churches. But for the present
consider we his answer as to the point in hand. The Presbytery here (says he)
cannot be meaned of an ordinary Eldership, which has its ordination from men
because it is beyond the power of ordinary Officers to give being to an
extraordinary. Now such was Timothy, to wit, an Evangelist: And therefore comes
not under our Dispute, but is to be ranked with extraordinary Apostolical
acts, and ordinations to extraordinary Offices which are ceased: of which
nature sec Acts 13. 43.

Answ. 1. Whether this was an ordinary Eldership. i. e. A College of ordinary,
perpetual Elders, or extraordinary, yet it was an Eldership and not the people
that performed this act of ordination, as he himself yields. What then is
become of his Assertion in the preceding Section: That i^ these first times of
the Church, the whole body (...) ^ear the^ joint ^thoritative voice in all
matters of greatest we^ght. And S^. ^. 10. even in an ordination of a^
extrao^dinar Officer, of great (...) then an Evangelist, (...). Wherein he
allege the ^at lest it might have proved a (...) to lustle out the privilege
of the ^hole Church in matters of essential concernment, he was enstated
a^ongst the Apostles themselves not by the ^ffrag^ of some, i. e. the Apostles
alone but by the s^ffrages of the whole Church. 2. If the Presbyte^ here cannot
be meaned of an ordinary Eldership, what was it? I hope the Author will not say
with some P^pish and Prelaticall writers, that it was an company of Bishops
that were, both Elders, and more then Elders: I conceive he can mean no other
thing but that same which the Author of the Queries concerning ordination. Qu.
19. that they were some other Apostles or Apostles fellows together with Paul,
who 2 Timothy 1. ^. is said to have ^ayed his hands on Timothy, and that Apostles
are called Elders, and a company of Apostles are called a Presbytery or an
Eldership. I say it seems the Author can conceive no other thing to be meant,
for he says it must be an Eldership that had not And yet he himself above,
Sect. ^0. Such ex^raordina^ie Elders might have their ordination from man, and
le facto. Ma^hias had his so. So that by this ^e ^ayeth here Mat^ias, tho an
Apostle could not be one of this Eldership.
ordination from man. But this conceit is so abundantly answered by Mr.
Gillespy of worthy memory, Miscell. c. 8. page 104. and seq. that little
needs to be added to what is said (...) him. I shall here briefly touch at
some particular^ given in Answer to this. 1. Suppose the Presbytery in this
place 1 Timothy 4. 14. to be an Assembly of Apostles, yet nothing shall be gained
thereby to Mr. Lockiers cause. For the name Presbytery or Eldership, being
purposely chosen in this Text which mentions laying on of hands in ordination,
will prove, that the Apostles did it as Elders, and as an act of an Assemby of
Elders, not as a thing peculiar to them as Apostles; For no rational man will
imagine, that the Holy Ghost intending to express some extraordinary thing,
which the Apostles did as Apostles, and which belongs not to ordinary Elders,
would in that very thing purposely call them (...), an Assemby of Elders. 2.
That the Presbytery here is not an Assembly of Apostles but of Elders who were
not Apostles may be proven. 1 By comparing this Text with 2 Timothy 1. 6. The gift
of God which is in thee by the putting on of my hands. If it had been an
Assembly of Apostles that had laid their hands on Timothy, and so joined with
Paul in that action, Paul had not thus distinguished his laying on of hands
from that of his fellow Apostles, as if the gifts of the Holy Ghost had been
given to Timothy only, by the laying on of his hands, and not by, but with the
laying on of the hands of his fellow Apostles. Of this difference of the Phrase
in the one Text and the other, see this same worthy Author, page 101. 2.
Apostles and Elders are ordinarily distinguishing names in Scripture, the latter
signifying the ordinary, perpetual, fixed Rulers in the Church. So that it
must be but a devised fiction, to leave the ordinary notion of the word Elder,
which signifies an Office diverse from the Apostleship, and to take the
Eldership here for an Assembly of Apostles. Nay we do not find at any time in
Scripture the name Elder given to the Apostles, at least never to them or any
of them as Apostles contradistinguished from other Officers. It Is true Peter, 1
Epist. 5. 1. calls himself (...): But from that very appellation, the worthy
Author, we are now borrowing from, does excellently reason, and for our
purpose, against Mr. Lockier here, I need not transcribe his words, seeing the
Book is common, the Reader may have recourse to it self, and have much
satisfaction. See pages 105, 106, 107. We conclude then and affirm that this
Eldership was no other but an Assembly of Elders, as were these, Acts 20. 17.
ordinary Elders of the Church; And to expound it of an Assembly of
extraordinary Officers, is but a fiction without ground in Scripture, devised
by men, to shut out clear light. And Mr. Lockier may remember that as able
judicious men as are of his way, the Dissenting Brethren in the Assembly at
Westminster, in their Reasons against the Proposition of Ordination, take it to
be an ordinary Eldership, and so reason from it to the regulating of ordinary
Ordination of Elders in the Church. That a sufficient Presbytery (say they,
meaning, as is evident, an ordinary Presbytery) may assume all and sole power
of ordination, is proved, 1 Timothy 4. 14. by the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery.

Lockiers Reason to prove the contrary is of no force. Timothy was an
extraordinary Officer, an Evangelist, and it is beyond the power of ordinary
Officers to give being to an extraordinary, That same worthy Author, we
mentioned, sufficiently discovers the weakness of it in the place cited.
page 103. For 1. If it should be said that Timothy was twice ordained: first to
be a Presbyter, then to be an Evangelist, (as some Episcopal Writers say to be
a Bishop: but a Bishop distinct from a Presbyter is a humane creaature not in
Scripture) and the first to be that, mentioned 1 Timothy 4. 14. done by the
ordinary Eldership; The second mentioned 2 Timothy 1. 6. done by Paul an Apostle,
an extraordinary Officer above an Evangelist; I know not what Mr. Lockier will
bring to infringe this. 2. Supposing that he was but once ordained, an
Evangelist and Elder both (as who ever was an Evangelist was also an Elder) yet
an ordinary Eldership might concur with Paul in his Ordination, and the act of
these ordinary Elders extend no further but to that which was common to him
with other Elders, the Office of Eldership, that which was extraordinary
flowing from the Apostle Paul's concurrence in the business. In this mixed
action we may very well distinguish, what was ordinary and what extraordinary,
ascribing that to the Presbytery ( viz. together with Paul) this to the
Apostle. 3. Yet further I say with the worthy Author, I bring these things
from, that I can see no inconsistency or absurdity, if it be said that the
Presbytery sent forth and ordained Timothy as an Evangelist: that it is
alleged an Evangelist is an extraordinary Officer, and therefore the Elders
being ordinary Officers could not give him a being, i. e. ordain him, I deny
the necessity of the consequence, any reason that can be brought to prove that
consequence must be, as I conceive, one of those two, viz. Either, 1. That
which is brought by some, from, Hebrews 7. 7. The less is blessed by the
greater, to which, as to this particular in hand, that worthy Author has
sufficiently Answered, by two things First, that although Timothy as an Evanelist
was greater then a single Presbyter, yet that proves not that he was greater
then the whole Presbytery, as one of the house of Lords is (sure was) greater
then one of the house of Commons; Yet not then the whole house of Commons, 2ly
That he that blesses is not greater then he that is blessed, every way: But
quatalis, in so far as he blesses, and so why might not the Presbytery be
greater then an Evangelist, not simply and absolutely, but so far as they
blessed and ordained him? That Author gives two instances of the like, Act. 9.
17. and Act. 13. 1, 3. Or 2. the reason of that consequence must be this:
Because, ordinary Officers not having in themselves that extraordinar office,
can not give that which they have not. And if this be it, I would then ask Mr.
Lockier, how can people give the Office of a Minister which they have not in
themselves, nay, the Office of an Apostle, as he alleges that the people
ordained Mathias an Apostle, whatsover he can answer for that will serve our
turn for the Presbytery, ordaining Timothy to that Office, which they had not
in themselves. The truth is, men's ordaining a person to an Ecclesiastic
Office, not being by way of proper efficiency, nor yet the Ordainers acting
therein as principal agents or conferrers of the office (that is Gods part by
his institution) but as moral instruments under God: It is not, ex natura rei,
requisite, that the ordainers have in themselves formally the Office, whereunto
they Ordain the person; But it is sufficient that they have a warrant from God
to interveen as instruments to apply the person to the Office instituted by
God. And I see nothing in the Office of an Evangelist that can prove that
ordinary Officers could have no warrant from God to act in this kind of
causality to the applying of a person to it. Read that which the often
mentioned worthy Author has judiciously spoken upon the nature of the Office
of an Evangelist, Miscell. c. 7. p. 93, 94. and it will show, I say not this
without reason.

Lockier would have his Reader believe, but that it is a pattern of ordination
in ordinary (which some of the most judicious of his own side acknowledge with
us) showing us also the right hands into which Christ has committed this power,
to wit the Eldership. The example which he refers us to, Act. 13. 2, 3. we
thank him for it, as making very much against himself: For albeit Barnabas and
Paul, the persons on whom the act mentioned there, passed, did not then receive
any new ordination, to an Office extraordinary, as Mr. Lockier, in a mistake or
inanimadvertency has imagined when he wrote this (they were Apostles before) yet
did they receive a new call unto a more particular application, or as it were
appropriation of the exercise of their Office unto a certain definit charge,
the Gentiles to wit, as Paul himself declares it, Gal. 2. 7. and yet, we see
evidently that as this calling was not performed by the body of the Church, so
it was performed by some ordinary Elders, I say not that it was by ordinary
Elders only, for there were Prophets that had hand in it; But I say that
ordinary Elders did also concur in it, as appears, v. 1. There were at
Antioch certain Prophets and Teachers; I hope it will not be denied that
Teachers are ordinary Elders.

Object. Is from 1 Timothy 5. 22. and Tit. 1. 5. We read (says he) that Titus and
Timothy did ordain and are exhorted in an ordinary way to go to work by an
ordinary spirit; to wit, not to lay hands suddenly on any man, nor to be
partial, but to weigh fit qualifications in every one, that they were
blameless, the Husband of one Wife, not accused of riot, not self-willed, not
soon angry, not given to filthy lucre. And this ordination they acted alone:
Therefore the Eldership, may do in most weighty things in the Church without
the Church, without the joint consent of the Church. Answ. We bring not these
places for the general, that Acts of Government belong to the Officers of the
Church, only; To wit, to act therein authoritatively. But, for this particular,
ordination. Again the Author propounds the conclusion invidiously, without the
consent of the Church. We acknowledge that in these weighty matters the Church,
i. e. the people, are to have a rational obedientiall consent, but private; The
Question is whether they ought to have an authoritative decisive suffrage? And
in the Calling of Ministers they ought to have suffrage in their election: But
as for the potestative mission, or ordination, that, we say, belongs to the
Officers in the Church only. 3ly It is to be observed how the Author labors
to cover the force of these places for proving of this, by slipping by the
principal words, Titus 1. 5. and ordain Elders in every City, and produces
only the words of the verses following, expressing the qualifications requisite
and to be presupposed in the persons that are to be ordained. In a word the
argument from these places, is by him as slightly propounded, as, I think,
possibly he could. But let him take it thus. If ordination of Pastors by
Apostolic authority be committed to Officers in the Church as Officers, then
it belongs not unto the people. But the former is proven from these places.
Therefore, etc. The Proposition is clear of it self. The Assumption is cleared
from the Texts. First, Timothy is charged to lay hands suddenly on no man in
that same way, and under that same consideration that he is charged, not to
receive an accusation against an Elder, but upon two or three witnesses
testimony; And as he is charged to rebuke sins publicly, that others may fear;
and that he is charged to observe these other Rules given to him for ordering
his administration in the Church, v. 19, 20, 21. But these things are a charge
given to him as a Pastor: So by what power Titus was charged to rebuke the
Cretians sharply, that they might be sound in the faith, v. 13. By that same
power was he left in Crete to ordain Elders in every City. But this he was to
do by an Official power, and as an Officer, as is evident by comparing that v.
with v. 9. Therefore, etc. Again, here is an express Commission to men in
Office, to ordain, and charge laid upon them to be aware of doing it in a wrong
way. Let the Author show me in all the New testament, a Commission given to
people to ordain Ministers, or a charge laid upon them to take heed how they
ordain: But see we now the Authors Answers to these places.

One of these places (says he) answers another, and opens another. It Is said
to Titus, that he should ordain Elders in every City, as Paul had appointed
him. Now it cannot be thought in reason, that the Apostle would appoint him to
ordain, otherwise then he himself had ordained: but he himself did ordain by
the suffrage of the people, and did establish them by the help of their fasting
and prayer, Acts 14. 23. And this is all which is left upon record, for
direction in this matter, as yet we can find; and therefore this appointment
Timothy and Titus must and did follow. Answ. 1. True, Paul would not appoint
Titus to ordain otherwise then he ordained himself. But that Paul did ordain by
the suffrage of the people is but begged: and that place, Acts 14. 23. does not
prove it. The most that can be deduced from it, is, that Paul and Barnabas
ordained the Elders, being nominated, designed and elected, by the peoples
suffrage, as is shown before, whether we refer the Author and the Reader. I
shall only note a word here of worthy Cartwright upon that place, Acts 14. 23.
whereby it does appear that, albeit he stands for the first signification of
the word (...) in that place, to wit, that it imports giving of suffrages by
lifting up of hands: yet he refers that to Election, which he will have to
have bee^ done by the people: (and we deny not this) but says not that the
people had hand in the ordination of these Elders with Paul and Barnabas: But
on the contrair expressly gives ordination to the sole Officers. You speak
untruly (says he to the Rhemists) which accuse us, as if we so commended the
Churches Election, as we shot out the Bishops Ordination, which we not only
give unto them, but make them also the chief and directors in the Election;
Understanding by Bishops such as are mentioned in the Scriptures, and not
humane creatures. 2. Is this, viz. Acts 14. 23. all that is left upon record
for direction in this matter, to wit, Ordination? Then 1. its sure M^. Lockier
has little ground for his faith that Ordination ought to be done by the people,
when as we have so express Scriptures for Officers acting in it; And he has
none for the peoples acting in it but that one, which neither mentions people,
nor, vi materiae, by force of the thing spoken in it, can by consequence import
any more, as to them, but their suffrages for Election. 2. But it seems he has
forgotten himself in short bounds: for did he not, SECT. 8. cite Acts 1. 28.
for direction in this matter? Or has he afterward changed his mind of that
place, finding that it made nothing for his purpose? But 3. He may, if he will,
find more upon record for direction in this matter, besides these present two
places: Acts. 6. 3, 6. Acts 13. 1, 2, 3. 1 Timothy 4. 14. 2 Timothy 1. 6. 2 Timothy 2.
2. in all which we find Ordination performed by Officers, without people. Also
Tit. 1. 13. Rev. 2. 2, 14, 15, 16, 20. Acts 20. 28, 29. In which places the
censuring of Ministers is committed unto, and required of the Officers of the
Church, which is never committed unto or required of people. Now to whom
belongs the Authority of taking away an Ecclesiastic Ministry, to the same
belongs to confer it. Gul. Apollon. Consider. of sundry Controv. c. 4. page
58, 59


SECTION VI. Mr. Lockiers Answers to some other Objection made by way of Reason
SECT. 15. 16. 17. Examined.


If the Eldership cannot determinately act in the Church without the consent of
the Church, then Church Government is a Democratie, all are Elders, and
Officers, and Pastors, and Teachers, and Rulers alike, and then what needs
different names, and stations, when these, as to distinct power, signify
nothing. Ans. We do justly charge that way of Church Government maintained by
the Author and his Associates, with this, that it sets up such a Democratie or
popular Government in the Church, condemned by the French Church in Morellius:
Which also Independents themselves would fain seem to disclaim, but it will
not be for them. The Author is pleased in his wisdom to propound the Argument
for evidencing this, as slightly as he could: But let him take it thus; That
Government in the Church wherein, albeit there be such as bear the name of
Officers and Rulers, yet not only all the power of Government is placed in the
body of the people as in the first and proper subject thereof, and not in their
Officers; But also the whole body of the people formally and authoritatively,
concur and act in the exercise of all the acts of Government, at least all acts
of jurisdiction, so that all matters of this kind, are carried and determined by
the authoritative suffrage, consent and dissent of the people, nothing therein
being left to the Officers as Officers, but to preside and moderate the body of
the people in their authoritative acting, or, may be, to prepare and ripen
matters for their authoritative decision, and to be their mouth to declare the
sentence determined by their authority, yea and wherein, the body of the
people, may authoritatively call all the Officers to a judicial account,
judicially cognosce upon their Administration, censure, degrade, yea and
Excommunicate them all together, such a Church Government must needs be
Democraticall or popular, and therein all are Rulers and therein different
names and stations signify nothing, (I say not simply but as Mr. Lockier) as
to any distinct power of Authority. If any will deny the connection of this
proposition, I beseech such to give a description of a popular Government. Sure
I am that the very Government of Athens it self, the most popular and
Democratricall that we read of, was never more popular then that which we have
expressed in the Antecedent or first part of the proposition. But now the
Church Government maintained by the Author and his Associates is such in every
one of these points expressed, as is undenyably evident both by their Doctrine
and practice, Ergo, etc.

Hookers Surv. Par. 1. c. 11. which I think not worth the while to insist
particularly upon. Briefly, the sum of all comes to this: He tells us there
is a power of Judging, to take in and to cast out Members, to exert Office (he
means to confer Office) or to degrade from Office, which he calls essential or
fundamental power; And there is the manner of managing this, and exerting it: He
expresses it also, To declare, act and exercise judgment in the name of the
rest, which he calls organicall power, and Potestas Officii particularis. And
tells us that that former power is common to the whole Church Elders and
fraternity: The latter is in the Elders (yet I cannot understand how this can
stand with what he says, that it lies formally in one: But be it so) And so
their (to wit, the Elders) power is distinctly useful and significative. Ans.
To pass by here the exagitating of that distinction of a power essential and
a power organicall (the absurdity whereof in Philosophy might be shown
abundantly, might we stay upon every such triffle) and other such minutias.
Here, to the main purpose in hand. 1. To talk of, and suppose a power of
judging, in taking in and casting out, investing Officers and degrading them,
belonging to the people and also exercised by them formally, meaning, as he
does, of authoritative judging, is but a supposing and begging the main thing
in Question. The place, 1. Cor. 5. 12. proves it not, Tho the Epistle be
written to the whole Church of Corinth, yet not every command and direction
there relates to all and every one in that Church, as to act formally in the
work commanded or required. We say that command of casting out the incestuous
person judicially respects the Officers of that Church only. See this made good
by Mr. Rutherfurd. Due Right. page 36, 37. Gul. Apollon. Consider. of certain
controv. c. 4. page 64, 65, 66. Mr. Lockiers Argument to the contrary, is weak;
The Apostle says cast out from among you. But the incestuous person was not
only amongst the Elders, but among the people. What a poor Argument is this?
Then it should follow, that the Women and the Children should judicially and
authoritatively voiced in the Excommunication of the incestuous person; For he
was not only amongst the men; but also amongst the Women and Children; These,
sure, were a part of the people. So then certainly the Apostle here, cast out
from amongst you, tho Writing to the Church of Corinth in general in the
Epistle, yet in this particular command, must be understood to be spe king with
relation to such in the Church as were invested with a moral capacity of power
and authority to act that which he was commanding. 2. When he says the power
of judging is common to the whole Church, Elders and fraternity, its but a
fallacy as to Elders; For in effect Elders as Elders, by his way have no power
of judging: As such they have only the manner of managing the judgment. 3.
When he expresses the act of essential power (as he calls it) competent to
the whole Church, thus, Some to judge; and then the act of the Original or
Official power, thus, Some to declare, act and exercise that judgment: I
would ask him what he means by acting and exercising judgment? Either it
must be the determining of the judgment; But that is nothing else but judging
it self, which belongs to the essential power of the whole body: Or he must
understand the execution of the sentence, as for example, shunning the company
of the Excommunicat; But that is no act of Office-power nor of authority, but
is common to all the Church Men and Women: Or he must understand the public
uttering and pronouncing the sentence of judgment: But that is just all one
with declaring, and to call this acting and exercising of judgment, is very
abusive speaking: Except these words be used otherwise in English Language then
I know of. But 4. The chiefest thing I would observe is, that the Author in
saying much to the objection propounded, has said just nothing, but in effect
yielded it wholly. For when as he says that the power and exercise of
judging, to wit, authoritatively (for of this, and not of judging by way of
private discretion is the present discourse) belongs equally to all the
Church, and that the matter of managing this only, belongs to the Officers,
what is this but as much as if he had said in formal terms: It Is true, I yield
it, the Government of the Church is Democraticall. And as for that he says,
that seeing the Elders have in their hands the manner of managing the
judgment, therefore their power is useful and significative, and not useless
and nothing from the whole. True, it is not simply useless and nothing
significative. But sure I am it signifies nothing as to any power of Authority
and Government. A Mr. Speaker or Presidents part in a Parliament, a Prolocutors
or Moderators in an Assembly, is not simply useless and nothing,
significative, but it is just nothing significative, as to Authority or
Government.

But is not this confusion, for all to have an hand in these great things? This
absurdity is most justly charged upon your way of Government. It is confusion
to speak so, both formally and effectively. First I say, formally: For when as
the Lord has instituted his Visible Church to be a body organicall consisting
of dissimilar parts: some as eyes, some as feet, some as hands, some to rule
and some to be ruled, some to be over others to command and govern in the LORD,
some to obey in the LORD: This way makes all in the Church to be Rulers, and
all to be ruled, all to command and govern, and all to obey: all to be eyes and
also all to be feet, and all to be one member, and so the whole not to be a
body, to wit, organicall and dissimilar. Yet more, it has yet a greater
confusion in^t by attributing the judicial determination of all matters of
Government and Jurisdiction to the suffrages of the people, who by Scripture
are these who are to be ruled, and to obey, and are as the feet and the hands
in the natural body; Indeed it makes these who ought to be ruled, to be the
Rulers, and contra; Sets the feet above the head, etc. 2. Effectively, it
cannot but in the exercise of it produce many confusions. Was there ever a
Democraticall or popular Government to this day, but it did so? And is not that
the evil of popular Government: in regard of which, it is by all intelligent
Politicians postponed, both to Aristocraticall and Monarchical Government, and
scarce accounted worthy the name of an allowable Government? But see we the
Authors Answer.

No: It Is not confusion: The Church being considered as an organicall body, the
power of acting may be fundamentally and intrinsecally in the whole, and yet
each organ move orderly in his distinct place, and way. As for instance, in the
natural body of man the sensitive faculties are all in the soul originally:
and the soul it solf is in the whole body fundamentally, tota in toto, etc. So
that the senses are radically and potentially in all the soul, and the soul
radically and potentially in all the body, and yet these senses, act only by
such powers (I humbly conceive this to be a sault of the Printer, and that it
should be, parts) as are fit to act by, as seeing by the eye, and hearing by
the ear. And the soul acts all its works by such organs as are proper to each
work; The hand to work and the feet to go.

simile here, and am of the mind some of his late associats here, will not
comply with his physical conceptions, whatever they esteem of his theological
Tenets. How the sensitive faculties may be said to be all in the soul,
originally, radically, and potentially, I can understand. The meaning being
that the soul is the effective principle from which these faculties proceed by
way of issue or emanation (as they call it) to have their subjectation or
inherency in their several respective organs, and to say this is not
incongruous. But how the soul can be said to be in the whole body
fundamentally, radically and potentially, I cannot well understand. That the
soul may be in some one part of the body as in the heart (which some) or brain
(which others have thought) substantially and informative, and in the whole
rest of the body, virtually and operative, as the Sun which is substantially
and locally in the Heavens, is in the Earth by its influence and operation.
This I can conceive, and it is not altogether incongruous to say so, though I
think it be not true. But to say the soul, especially the soul of man, is in
the whole body; fundamentally, radically, and potentially, is such a soloecisme
(to speak so) in philosophy, as I think we shall hardly meet with one grosser
amongst men of any knowledge. For then, not only, does it follow that the soul
must be by way of information, only in some part of the body (which tho false,
yet is not so untollerable) but also that the whole body is the effective
principle from which the soul is produced and issues by way of emanation, into
that part of the body which it is supposed to inform: Now how absurd this is in
Philosophy, yea in Divinity, let any judicious man consider of it. But yet I
further wonder, that the Author, when he is expressing this his way of the
souls being in the whole body, to wit, fundamentally, radically, etc. he brings
for it that common saying amongst the Schools, totain toto and tota in
qualibet part: For indeed that is the proper expression of their Doctrine who
maintain that the soul is in the whole body, essentially and informative, and
withal that it is in it as a spiritual form, indivisible, without extension
of parts. But to pass this and to come to our present purpose. I verily think,
Mr. Lockier could not made choice of a fitter comparison to make good and
establish the Objection against his way, which he pretends to answer, then that
same he has pitched upon, and his own very words condemns him. He says the
Church is to be considered as an organical body. So it is indeed, and this will
make for us, as we have shown before. Next whereas he says that it being so
considered, the power of acting may be fundamentally and intrinsecally in the
whole, and yet each organ move orderly in his distinct place and way, as in the
natural body the sensitive faculties are in all the soul originally, etc. To
this 1. Suppose it were true that the power of governing were in the whole body
of the Church fundamentally or originally, yet it can not be said that each
organ formally acts the acts of Government; For governing being an organicall
act in a political body, thence it should follow that all the organes were but
one organ, and the body of the Church were no organicall body; But a similar
body: As, if each member in the natural body did formally act seeing, all the
members were eyes or one eye. And so, where were the body? To say that however
that each member acts in their acts of governing, yet each acts orderly in
his distinct place, viz. private Christians in their place, Elders in their
place and station: Yet this takes not away the absurdity: For seeing Mr.
Lockier will have all and every one in the body of the Church formally and
authoritatively to act in the acts of Government, it follows that all and
every one of them are formally Governors and Rulers, the private Christians as
well as the Elders, and there is no distinction between them at all, as to
governing, except of mere order in acting. Certainly if all and every member of
the natural body did formally elicit the act of seeing, albeit that part of
the body which we now call the eye, were supposed to act therein, in some
respect, somewhat distinctly, as to order, from the rest of the parts: Yet all
the rest of the parts were as formally and properly an eye, as it. Therefore as
it were madness to say that in the natural body, each member does formally
act seeing: So it is exceeding absurd, supposing the Church to be an organicall
body, and some of the organes whereof it is composed, are rulers governing and
commanding in the Lord, to whom subjection and obedience in the Lord is to be
given by the rest, and are as the eyes in the natural body; Yet to say, that
all and every member in the Church has a formal authoritative hand or
influence in the acts of governing, 2. See the incongruity of the Authors
comparison. The power (says he) may be fundamentally in the whole, (viz.
body, For he is speaking in the immediately preceding words of an
organicall-body) and yet each organ, etc. for instance, the sensitive faculties
are in all the soul originally, etc. What incongruity is this, to propound in
the general of power fundamentally in a whole body organicall; And then for an
instance o^ simile to tell us of powers or faculties in the whole soul
originally? Is the soul an organicall body? But may some say, the Author says,
the sensitive faculties are in all the soul fundamentally, and radically, and
the soul radically and fundamentally in all the body, and so would by
consequence say that the sensitive faculties are in the whole body
fundamentally, and radically. Answ. 1. It Is a very gross absurdity to say that
the soul is in the whole body fundamentally and radically or potentially, as we
have shown before: It is formally and by way of information in the whole body.
2. It is a gross inconsequence, the sensitive faculties are in all the soul,
and the soul is in the whole body: Therefore the sensitive faculties are in the
whole body fundamentally. Nay, they are fundamentally and radically in the
soul, and therefore are not fundamentally and radically in the body, neither
whole nor part. But are formally and by way of inhesion, in their respective
parts or organs of the body. 3. I would fain know of the Author what he does
make in the Church answerable to the soul in the natural body, and so that
wherein the power of governing is fundamentally and radically, as the sensitive
faculties of the natural body are fundamentally and radically in the soul? Is
it the whole Church as comprehending both people and Ministers? That is the
body. Or is it, the people? That is a part of the body. The truth is, Mr.
Lockier is at a loss here with his simile. Jesus Christ as King of the Church
is unto the Church as the soul in the natural body; And the power of governing
is fundamentally and radically in him, and not in the body of the Church. And
therefore, 3. to make use of the last words of his similitude (for which we
thank him as making clearly against himself and for us) as the sensitive
faculties are radically and fundamentally in the soul, and act only (as he
says well) by such parts as are fit to act by, as seeing by the eye, and
hearing by the ear, and the soul acts all its works by such organs as are
proper to each work; The hands to work the feet to go: So (to give the apodosis
which he had no will to express) Ecclesiastic organicall powers (such as the
senses are ^n the natural body) as the power of governing, teaching,
administrating the seals are fundamentally in Christ the King of the Church,
and act only by such parts as are fit to act by Rulers, Teachers, and
Ministers: These are the proper organs of those works.

The Elders of the Church are called overseers, stewards, shepherds, fathers:
All which in their analogy, hold forth a peculiar and sole power to do things,
fathers govern alone, so overseers, etc. As to this propounding of this
Argument. 1. We speak not for a peculiar sole power to do things indefinitely,
in Elders; But for a sole power of authoritative acting in matters of
Government, and not excluding or denying unto people a private judgment of
discretion to try and prove the actings thereof by the rule. 2. The Author
leaves out some of the names and titles given to the Elders, which use to be
alleged in this Argument, besides the name (...), Elders, as (...), guides,
leaders, conducters, governors, Heb. 13. 7, 17, 24. (...), (...), 1 Timothy 5.
17. Romans 12. 8. 1 Thessal. 5. 12. (...), Governments, or Governors, the
abstract being put for the concrete, 2 Cor. 12. 28. 3. Because the Author is
pleased to propound the Argument from this ground, in the softest way for his
own advantage, we desire the Reader will be pleased to take it thus. These
persons and these only in the Church have power and authority to govern, and
consequently are to exercise formally acts of Government, to whom in the
Scripture by the Spirit of Christ are appropriated such names and titles; which
do import the power and authority of governing. But to the Officers of the
Church are such names appropriat as imports power and authority of Governing,
Ergo, etc. For the major or first proposition, I think it may be clear to any
of it self. And if any shall be so wilful as to deny it, I would ask him (as
does the learned Authors of jus divin. of Church Government, Par. 2. page 170.)
to what end and for what reason are such names and denominations importing
power and authority of Government, appropriated to some persons, i. e. given to
them and not to others, if not for this end and reason, to distinguish them
that are vested with authority to govern in the Church, from others, and to
signify, and hold forth a duty or work incumbent to them and not to others?
The assumption see evidenced at length, in jus divinum of Church Government,
Par. 2. page 171, 172, 173. the sum is this. These titles, Elder, Overseer,
(...), Conducter, Governor, (...) Steward, Pastor, Governments, Ruler, are
names which generally have power and authority gra^en upon them and are such
names, as not only heathen writers, but also the Greek Version of the Old
Testament by the 72. and the Original of the New Testament are wont to give to
political Officers, to express their political power and government, now all
these titles and denominations, are attributed to Christ's Officers in his
Church, as cannot be denied: And are not any where in Scripture attributed to
the whole Church or any other member of the Church whatsoever, besides Church
Officers: Nay, they are ordinarily attributed to the Officers in
contradistinction to the body of the Church. But see we what the Author answers.

Minuta's (says he first in general) in Parables must not be fastened on, but
principalia, what is their main scope. Ans. What? And are all these names given
to Christ's Officers in his Church nothing else but parables? Or are they
Parables at all, taking them as titles or names given to the Officers in the
Church? I have thought a Parable (as we take it now in the Scripture sense) to
be narratio rei verae vel verisimiliter gestae ad simile significandum seu
explicandum (as Pareus describes, Math. 13. 3.) i. e. a narration of a thing
truly done, or probable, to signify or explain a like thing: and not a simple
term or title given to a thing. Indeed some of them, no doubt, are
metaphorical; But a simple Metaphor, for ought I know, is not a Parable. And I
pray, when the Apostle says, Romans 12. 8. He that rules, let him do it with
diligence. And 1 Corin. 12. 28. God has set in the Church -- governments. And
1 Thessal. 5. 11. Know those that are over you, (...), in the Lord, and other
such places; is the Apostle in these places speaking parables? But be it so
that the Author, takes a parable for a simple Metaphore. Will any man but the
Author say that all and every one of these forementioned names are attributed
to the Officers of Christ in the Church, only Metaphorically, and none of them
in a proper signification. Indeed some of them I confess are Metaphorical, as
Father, Pastors, or Shepherds, Stewards: But withal others of them, as,
Presbyters (in the political sense of the word) Rulers, (...), (...), (...),
are as properly and univocally attributed to them as unto such as in the civil
Commonwealth have the same names attributed to them. The Philosopher tells us,
Categor. c. 1. that these are Synonyma, and so participate a name properly,
which have not only the name common, but also the same definition accommodate
to that (...) ^o it is here, as (...) Eccl^sia^ (...) of (...) a com^ (...)
endued (...) ^ay of (...) ^ndent (...) will no^ (...) same (...) being (...)
pro^ (...) of (...) Church, ^o import in the (...) authority (...) we (...) to
his more (...)

Elders (...) should (...) not absolute ^ow (...) power, is to make the (...)
self and others, (...) as being (...) stock. Ans. (...), brought by (...) ^urch
of the (...) borrowed from the (...) ^ether Eccles^stick (...) ^at can be said
to ^lude the (...) ^tive power of Government (...) abundantly d^sh^d by (...)
^d, Book ^. c. 9. page (...) his read, I wonder ^ow (...) s^ry answer he hat^
(...) Author has on this purpose: (...) him, adding what (...) true that the
(...) which of them y^u (...) Rul^ of the Wo^d? (...) ^o more (...) to direct
(...) ^sell or (...) the Rul^ (...) having (...) others, (...) rules a^ (...)
superio^ (...) as Beza (...) vit no^ (...) word (...) ^xim^ (...) Sep^ (...)
^the^ (...) the is (...) use (...) of Government (...) Church, (...) it (...)
Mr. Lo^^ (...) the only (...) ^me name, (...) which (...) way of counsel and
(...) of ^wer and (...) to all the Church (...) way of (...) to authority, and
(...) simple (...) forth of ^ght. 2. (...) this (...) ^uted to the Office (...)
were to mak^ (...) ^erse exposition (...) think the Author^ (...) ^representing
o^ (...) ^ording (...) unto, (...) ^steriall, not (...) but also limited (...)
^sts (...) people (...) oblig^ (...) of the wor^ (...) simple dire^ (...) and
perswas^ (...) ^govern^ (...) ^all Go^ (...) Presbyteria^ (...) not merely
(...) ^reater knowledge (...) ^an of knowledge (...) ^oer of (...) Erastian
says: (...) ^differ one from an other (...) ^ost contrary to common (...)
^ment. 2. I would (...) whole body of the (...) then mee^ di^ection (...)
^thoritative power of government (...) that their power over (...) absolute
(...) ^ver their ^aith? I think^ (...) say that* (...) Ministerial and such
(...) very place, 2 Cor. 1. as in v. 24* ^ed by the Author, he affir^ of
himself and other Officers, that they did not take unto themselves a (...)
power ov^ (...) of the Church. So in the (...) Officers had a (...) then of
mere (...) To spare you (...) power to cor^ (...) ^oved to have (...) Go we on
with the (...)

They ar^ (...) such (...) should use diligent inspe^ (...) to the ^ck, that
none go ast^, (...) ^oof, consolation, etc. (...) ^ops or Lording Presby^ (...)
dominantes in Ecclesi^^ (...) ^stle does not by that (...) ove^ (...) in^ (...)
or Lording Presbyte^ (...) Church by force and violence* Mr. Lockier but stand
(...) the Doctrine of Presbyterians in (...) ^tation of the t^rme upon them and
fights (...) own (...) We (...) no other sort of pow^ (...) to Presbyter^ over
the Church, than he (...) to the Congregation and Presbyters jointly, (...)
particular member (Unless he will with State-syco^t ^rastia^ deny all
Ecclesiastic rule and government) and I (...) he will not say, this is
Lording, or Lordly rule, dominiering by (...) violence. The Question between
Presbyterians and Independ^ is not touching the nature of Ecclesiastic power
of government in it self, whether Lordly domi^ering or not, but touching the
Subject in which it is, and by which it is to be formally ex^sed whether the
Officers of the Church, or the whole collective body of the Church. We say, the
Officers or Elders only, and that the nam^ (...) (...) importing a ruling power
and authority given to them by the Spirit of God (...), in contradi^ction to
the body of the Church, prove^ this, which is not infringed by what is said by
Mr. Lockier here. For ^. when as he ^yeth that they are called (...) because of
diligent inspection, wa^fulnesse, heed taking to the flock that none go astray
for want of counsel, (...), consol^ (...), whether be means inspec^ (...)
over, (...) ^hibiting reproof, conso^on* (...) a not-authoritative (...) we
have our point: For (...) by that name, and the (...) ^guished from the rest of
(...) that the power of r^ing is only (...) by them only. If he say the later*
(...) and (...) to every single Believer, (...) 11, 12. Coloss. 3. 16. Galat.
6. 1. and (...) might have the name of (...) as well as the (...) Spirit of God
gives it to Elders as contradi^ (...) from single Believers, but also from the
whole ^lack (...) ^hy would the Spirit of ^od give thi^ name to Elde^ (...)
^guished from the whole flock, if thereby were (...) out wha^ ^is common,
competen^ (...) and ought to be ^one by, every single (...) Lockier, reckoning
up the acts whereby the (...) are to (...) the flock; That none, so far^ (...)
none (...) ^presseth some only, and (...) ^der an, etc. I would ask him (...)
beside (...) expressed, does he intend by that etc; (...) here be understo^d
exercise of discipline and censures, (...) ^ons going astray, or ^one astray,
if otherwise they cannot (...) or reclaimed and reduced? I believe they must by
this me^ (...) by these expressed, take heed that none go astray, (...) and is
not this not only a^ act of Government, but even of corre^ve jur^diction? O!
but may he say, they are not to do this ^ct by themselves, but to have a care
that it be done by the whole body of the Church. But I pray how? by telling the
offenses of (...) the Church, or giving joint vote as other Professors in the
(...) it comes under public cognizance and judgment* Ay, (...) ^his may and
ought to be done, by the Authors way, by any other Professors in the Church,
besides the Elde^. and so nothing is left to them in regard of which, that name
(...) should be more pecu^ar to them than any other Professors.

^seers, and (...) others, as (...) ^ked in (...) ^her; which (...) ^en rather
(...) ashi^ his Dis^ (...) and s^l^ (...) are so Rule^ (...) But (...) to the
Ch^ (...) that t^ the (...) ^y o^ (...) ^d (...) and (...) But (...) as a
Brother (...) the (...) or in^ (...) ^y to con^ (...) of Ruling and Go^ (...)
power, nor alone to exercise (...) ^in con^ction* (...) Shep^ (...) ^cive that
Mr. Lockier, as he (...) so he will not deny that the (...) only of the Church
are so called (...) the^ only ^ut the rest of the Prof^ (...) in the power and
acts o^ Ru^ (...) it i^ (...) to give the (...) the (...) of (...) as much and
much ^ore o^ (...) thing (...) them. It Is true indeed that Elde^ (...) ^hood
with the rest of Professors, but (...) in another thing, then that power which
is signified by the names of Ru^ ^ver^eers, etc. i. c. the power and authority
of governing; For were it that, that they are (...) ^ood in this (...) why are
they not all (...) ^verseers, etc? If they (...) the name? The thing (...) the
rest of P^of^ (...) ^ession of (...) ^eing of (...) tell (...) ^siastick Gover^
(...) ^qually in the (...) of Govern^ (...) cal^ (...) Overse^ (...) tha^ (...)
Go^ (...) ^at then (...) Elder^ (...) con^ the (...) meeting (...) vote^ (...)
intimate (...) the whol^ (...) ^te con^lude (...) ^er for which (...) over the
Church? (...) as in the (...) And as the fa^ (...) exercised by (...) And (...)
of seeing (...) part of the (...) ^vernment (...) Rulers, (...) so in, and
(...) ^sed by any other ^art of the (...) the Auth^r (...) the (...) of Christ^
washing his (...) feet, to illustrate how the Elders organicall power of
Government should not prejudge, destroy, or take away the peoples equal
sharing in a power of Government, which ^e calls fundamental (which yet is,
by his way as (...) of Government, as any Rulers in the World ha^ (...) acts
in the exercise of Government) When I (...) confess I was amazed, and could
scarcely believe my own eye (...) that such a thing could be Written by an
understanding (...) ^dverting to what he did Write: As w^ste in Chri^ (...)
that as, relates ^o the purpose he has (...) before: viz. that Elders
organicall power of Government ^ould not take away the peoples equal share of
fund^ (...) (a^ he calls it) nor the exercise thereof. (...) and his Discipl^
Brethren or a Brotherhood (...) of mutual and equal power fundamental of
Government; Mr. Lockier, I know will abhor a thought of this. H^ Christ,
(says himself) was the sole Ruler, viz. Sovereign and (...) and Lawgiver. Or
wa^ Christ here condescending to (...) of Government together with his
Disciples? Neither (...) he ^ay Washing of feet is an act very (...) from
(...). Or was h^ by abasing himself to wash his Disciples feet, (...) him ^ow
they being to b^ Officers of his Church, should (...) the acts of Government in
the Church, viz. that they should ^n the exercise thereof take in jointly with
them the who^ ^ople? Sure we find no intimation of such an intention by (...)
in the Text: And the thing it self in the matter, (...) of such a lesson. that
I think never man till (...) would imagined such a thing intended by it.
Besides, an (...) is a peculiar action of that same kind with that for which i^
i^ given to be an example, done for direction to do the like. (...) washing of
feet is an action very far different from exe^ise of Government, but is it not
evident enough from Christ's own ^pounding ^f that fact, John 13. 14, 15. that
his intention thereby was to give to his Disciples and in them to all
Christians an example of (...) and charity amongst themselves, and that every
one of them should be ready to the meanest and basest duties whereby they may
^e serviceable and helpful to another. Now what is this to Mr. Lockiers
purpose here? if this be not, I know not what is (...).

Lockier answers to the Argument for proving the power of Ecclesiastic
Government to belong to Christ's Officers in the Church only, and not to the
whole body of Believers or Professors, taken from the names and denominations,
importing power and authority of Government given by the Spirit of God in
Scripture to the Officers, but never to the people, then to them in
contradistinction to the people. And all that he has said as is it is but weak
in it self (as we trust we have made evident) so he has therein passed by a
great part of the Argument, having neglected sundry of these Titles, and
altogether miskenned the Passages of Scripture, which by Presbyterians use to
be produced for them, and are urged upon the point as containing much ground
for their Doctrine, besides the names or titles given therein to the Officers.
I humbly desire the reader, and our Author if he will be pleased, to be at the
pains, to consider what M. Gillespy has to this purpose, Aarons Rod, Book 2.
c. 9. wherein he proves that there ought to be an Ecclesiastical Government in
the hands of the Church Officers, see there Arg. 1, 2, 3, 10, 11, 19, 20. But
now are these Objections brought by the Author and as slightly propounded as he
might, and, I may say, Answered just so; Are these, Isay, all the material
Arguments tha^ he could find used by Presbyterians to prove the power and
authority of Ecclesiastic Government to be in the hands not of the people, but
only of the Church Officers? I cannot think he will say so, if he has been at
the pains to Read them. Why then has he passed others in silence, if he minded
to give his rational Readers satisfaction touching his Tenet in this Question?
We refer the Reader to see these touched at by the Author here, more pregnantly
managed, and others besides them, in Jus Divin. of Church Government, part. 2.
c. 10, and c. 11. Sect. 2. Gul. Apollon. Considerat. of certain Gontrov. c. 4.
Spanhem. Epist. to David Buchan. q. 2. Mr. Ruth. Peaceable Plea, and Due Right.
Now come we to Mr. Lockiers second Assertion.

SECTION VII. Mr. Lockiers 2. Assertion touching Presbyteries of many
particular Congregations combined (whether Classical or Synodicall) and their
power considered, and the true state of the Controversy touching this matter
between Presbyterians and Independents laid forth.


That Presbyteries or Elderships without the particular Congregations, exercing
authoritative and coercive power over it, are an invention of man. Having thus
propounded his Assertion, He explaines the subject of it thus. By Presbyteries
or Elderships without the Congregation, I mean such an Eldership as is chosen
out of several particular Congregations, assuming to themselves, superior and
decisive power over them. Afterward he calls it foreign Eldership, SECT. 20.
And so forth in the rest of his Book. And then again undertaking to explain the
nature thereof, says, I find among our Brethren themselves that Elders and
Brethren, sent and empowered from their several Congregations, respectively,
to transact, and conclude such and such Ecclesiastic affairs within such a
limited bounds, ex sua potestate, are a foreign Presbytery. A note or two upon
these things and then we shall more clearly and distinctly set forth the true
state of the Controversy, and what is our Doctrine therein. 1. Whereas he
propounds to himself to Dispute against the Authority of an Eldership or
Presbytery without the particular Congregation, i. e. as he calls it afterward,
foreign to the Congregation, he but enters in a conflict against his own
fiction. And whereas he says, SECT. 20. that he finds, amongst their
Brethren. (he means Presbyterians) that a Presbytery sent from several
Congregations is a foreign Presbytery. I humbly conceive, for ought I can
remember of any of them, he wrongs them exceeding much. I do not remember of
any Presbyterian, that acknowledges the Presbytery of several Congregations
associat in Government, to be a foreign or extrinsecall Presbytery, to these
Congregations: Nor is it so indeed. It cannot be called a foreign Presbytery to
all the Congregations associat under it; Because it is made of their own
several Elderships: Nor yet can it be foreign or external to any of them;
Because every one is a part of it, and in it as a part of the whole. As a
Parliament cannot be called a foreign Judicatory to the whole Kingdom whereof
it is the Parliament, nor unto any of the several Cities or Counties, which
are parts of the Kingdom, and are in the Parliament by their Deputies or
Commissioners, as parts constituents thereof. Indeed the Prelate and his
Cathedral consistory taking to themselves the Government and Jurisdiction over
all Congregations in the Diocese were an external and foreign Judicatory to
these Churches, because they excluded the other Congregations and their
Elderships from all collateral concurrence and copartnership with them in the
Government. But the Presbytery we speak for, is made up of the Elders of the
several Congregations which it governs, as intrinsecall collateral parts
constituent thereof, and therefore cannot be called foreign to these several
Congregations. 2. When as he expresses the power of these Presbyteries against
which he propounds this dispute, under the name of coercition, calling it a
coercive power. He seems on purpose to choice an odious word, to render it
suspicious by the very name: For the word of coercing, in the common use,
mostly seems to import, outward bodily or civil force exercised upon persons
or things to stop and repress their actions, ipsis etiam renitentibus, we
ascribe no such power unto Presbyteries: But a power of executing spiritual
censures which have no external force upon persons, yea nor Physical neither,
but only Moral, as administered by the Eldership: Tho they may be accompanied
by God, With a Physical (I mean a real) operation upon the persons, either in
mercy or judgment. And if at any time those who are for Presbyteries over more
Congregations, speaking of their power, call it coercive, they mean no other
thing, but a power of Spiritual jurisdiction exercised in Spiritual censures,
such as the Author himself and these of his way, attributes to particular
Elderships of a single Congregation together with the Congregation over every
member thereof. If the Author had dealt ingenuously with us, he should not used
such a word without explanation of the thing, he knows we mean. But now let us
see the clear state of the controversy in this matter.

Hooker Surv. p. 4. c. 1, 2. 2. That these consociations are and may be of
several sorts and degrees, some lesser, some greater, Classes, Synods, and
these Provincial, National, Oecumenicall, Idem, Ibid: So then there is no
controversy about the being simply of Elderships and Presbyteries of more
Congregations consociated, that they may lawfully be, and of diverse sorts is
confessed. But there are these points especially concerning them of which there
is controversy between us and our Brethren.

Hooker, in the forecited place, page 2, 3. it is true he calls this power of
counsel, by the name of Authority. And so Mr. Lockier from him, Sect. 30. but
an authoritative power of mere counsel, advice and persuasion may be justly
counted a Chimaera. But we shall not contend about names; Call it authority or
power or what you will, the thing it self is nothing else but brotherly
counsel, which has no binding force formally as issuing from the Presbytery:
But binds merely vi materiae, materially in regard of the thing which is
propounded by them, as it is a Scripture truth or command, as is confessed by
Mr. Hooker; And this is no more then one Brother may do toward another, and
one sister Church may do to another. Mr. Cotton in the Keys, chapter 6. seems to
attribute more power to a Synod. They have (says he) power not only to give
light and counsel in matter of truth and practice: But also to command and
enjoine the things to be believed and done. The express words of the
Synodicall letter imply no less, Act. 15. 27. It is an act of the power of the
Keys, to bind burdens, and this binding power arises not only materially
from the weight of the matters imposed (which are necessary necessitate
praecepti from the word) but also formally from the authority of the Synod,
which being an ordinance of Christ, binds the more. For the Synods sake. This
in the letter of the words is a flat contradiction to what Mr. Hooker says.
He says they have only a power of Brotherly counsel M^. Cotton not only
that, but also to command and enjoin. He says they bind only materially,
because what they determine is either expressed in, or infallibly collected out
of the Word: Mr. Cotton, not only materially, but also formally, from the
authority of the Synod. Yet I conceive for all such fair words, in the
intention and real meaning of the Author, little more is understood than what
Mr. Hooker says, at most nothing more but a Doctrinall power, which is
competent to any single Pastor as M. Caudrey shows Vindiciae clav. c. 6.
page 53. We, on the contrare assert that by warrant of the Word of God, the
Presbyteries of associated Churches, Classical or Synodicall, have a power and
authority of Spiritual jurisdiction, whereby they authoritatively discern
matters Ecclesiastical and impose these decrees under pain of Ecclesiastic
censures, and may inflict Ecclesiastic censures upon the disobedient and
refractory in the particular Congregations within the combination or
association. Only let it be observed here, that this authoritative and
juridicall power we attribute to such Presbyteries of discerning matters
Ecclesiastical, and imposing their determinations under pain of censure, is
not Autocratorick and absolute, binding absolutely, by virtue of their
authority; But Ministerial, and adstricted in its determinations to the rule
of the Word of God: So that that obligation formal which flows from the
authority of the Judicatory into the decree in actu exercito, presupposes that
material obligation of the thing decreed, as contained in the Word of God,
else it has not place.



3. Point is concerning subordination of lesser Assemblies to greater. The
Independent Brethren deny altogether subordination of Inferior Assemblies to
Superior as juridicall Ecclesiastical Courts. Albeit they acknowledge that
difficulties arising in a particular Congregation in matters of Government,
there may be a going out to an Assembly of more Churches, and if need be, full
satisfaction and clearing not being found there, there may be a going forth yet
to a greater and more large Assembly. Yet they say, that is elective and only
by way of reference and arbitration, and only for counsel and direction, and
assert, that a particular Congregation, is the supreme Ecclesiastical
Juridicall Tribunal under Jesus Christ upon earth. So that a person although
wronged by an unjust sentence there (as they are not in their determinations
infallible) suppose sentenced to Excommunication (which cutteth him off from
the benefit of Church Ordinances and fellowship of Christians in all the
Churches of the World) he may have no appeal from their sentence to another
Superior Judicatory to have his process juridically recognosced, and the
injurious sentence rescinded, but must ly under it without any Ecclesiastic
remedy till death, unless that particular Congregation be pleased themselves
to revoke their sentence. So does Mr. Hooker tell us, Survey, par. 3. c. 3.
page 40, 41, 43. and par. 4. page 19. We, on the contrary, assert that both the
Law of Nature, and the positive Law of God revealed in his Word, both in the
Old and New Testament, holds out to us a juridicall subordination of lesser
Assemblies Ecclesiastical unto greater, so that appeals may be made from
Inferior and lesser, to Superior and greater Assemblies, That it is both
against the Law of nature and the positive Law of God to place a supreme,
Independent Ecclesiastical juridicall power in a particular Congregation, yea,
or in any lesser Assembly when as a greater and Superior is to be had and may
conveniently be had. We assert also that, that series and gradation of this
subordination which is acknowledged and maintained by Protestant Churches, viz.
of Congregationall, Classical, Provincial and National Assemblies is lawful
and agreeable to the Word of God.

Lockier propounds to dispute against in his Assertion, is that which is
asserted by us in the first point: Yet some of his Arguments afterward used,
touches not at that, but against the third, a series of subordination of
Inferior Assemblies to Superior. But come we now to consider his proofs such
as they are, and let the Reader have before his eyes the true state of the
Question as laid forth by us.

SECTION VIII. His first Ground brought against a Presbytery, having
Authoritative juridicall power over more Congregations (prosecute by him, Sect.
22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33.) Examined.
Lockier undertakes by four mediums to prove that a Presbytery having
juridicall power and authority over more Congregations is but an humane
invention. 1. Because they are without a foundation in the Word. This he
undertakes to make good by clearing these Scriptures on which such Presbyteries
are built: And brings in four Scriptures, Act. 1. 15, 23. Act. 4. 35. Act. 15.
28. 1 Timothy 4. 14. So that his first Argument comes to this much in full matter
and form. If such a Presbytery over more Congregations had any foundation in
the Word it were in some of those four places: But in none of those has it
foundation, therefore not at all in Scripture: But now tho his assumption were
granted, and he did clearly evidence that in none of these mentioned places, it
has sufficient foundation: Yet I must say, he does very grossly despise his
Reader (to say the least) in his major proposition. What, did never Mr. Lockier
read in Presbyteriall writers any other Scripturall grounds brought to prove
such a Presbytery but these 4. places, might he not at least have read sundry
others? Let him read them over again, and I believe, besides these mentioned,
he shall find other grounds of Scripture brought to prove such a Presbytery, as
he shall never be able to withstand the force of. For instance, let him
consider the Argument grounded upon Matthew. 18. 17, 18. brought by Gul. Apoll.
considerat. of certain controv. c. 6. p. 94, 95. on which place Parker himself,
de Polit. Eccles. lib. 3. c. 24. groundeth the authority of Synods. 2. The
Argument grounded upon 1 Cor. 14. 32. in that same Author, page 98, 99. 3. The
Argument brought from what the Scripture holds forth concerning the Churches
of Jerusalem, Ephesus, Antioch, Corinth, Assembly of Divines 3. Proposition
concerning Presbyteriall Government, with the defenses thereof against the
Reasons of the Dissenting Brethren. Jus Divin. of Church Government, Part. 2.
c. 13. 4. The Argument grounded upon practice of the Church under the Old
Testament in matter of Government, wherein it was not paedagogicall and
ceremonial, but essential and of moral convenience and so perpetual. Gul.
Appollon. page 96, 97. Did Mr. Lockier never Read these grounds of Scripture
urged in this matter by Presbyterians, that alleging here that such a
Presbytery has no foundation in Scripture, and taking upon him to make out
this, by clearing such Scripture grounds as are brought for it, passes these
in silence? If not, I wonder much he should come to handle this controversy,
having taken so little pains to be acquainted with his adversaries grounds: Or
if he has read them, why has he passed them by without an essay to clear them.
If he contemned them, we tell him it is easier to contemn them, then to answer
them. But come let us see the places he has been pleased to take notice of, and
what he has upon them to the purpose.

Acts 1. 15, 23. etc. The eleven Apostles here meet together, and these as a
supreme body over all others, conveen the Church at Jerusalem, dictat what and
how to be done, in that case of loss upon the Church, which shows that there
is a foreign (put out that name, as none of ours, but a nickname and
miscalling of the thing feigned by your self) authoritative Eldership over
particular Churches. Answ. I do not remember of any Presbyterian Writer that
brings this place as a full proof of a Presbytery ruling over more
Congregations, albeit, may be, some arguing from the Government of the Church
of Jerusalem, viz. 1. That that Church consisted of more Congregations then
one. 2. That these diverse single Congregations are held forth as one Church.
3. That they are under one common Presbytery Governing them; Some, Isay, may
be, bring that place jointly with others to make up a proof of that complex
medium. Let Mr. Lockier point us at the man that brings it as a full proof by
it self. It Is an easy thing for men to devise, at their own pleasure,
Arguments as used by their adversaries and then seem to get a victory over
them, when as indeed they are but fighting against their own fictions. So we
need not trouble our selves with following Mr. Lockiers Answers to this place.
Only I shall note some few things said by him in his Answers, which are two.

The station of the Apostles (says he) was extraordinary to take care of all
Churches: Being therefore by this place Elders in all Churches, might and did
interpose their power in several particular Churches -- And therefore what
they did modo extraordinario, is not competent to be exemplary; extraordinary
practices, are not fit matter to make up ordinary precedents. Answ. That it
pertained to the extraordinary Office of the Apostles, as Apostles, to exercise
their power of Teaching and Governing in all particular Churches, without any
particular call, we confess it true. But that their Ruling of more particular
Congregations then one, simply, was extraordinary, and that when they did this,
they did it modo extraordinario, may well be confidently said, but will never
be proven. And how will Mr. Lockier prove that there were no ordinary Elders
with the Apostles in that meeting. I think he shall find this an hard stick of
work. But passing these things now. I would here ask him one thing. Why is it
that he brings this as a solution to this place, Act. 1? Does he mean indeed
that the Apostles acted in this matter modo extraordinario, and according to
their Apostolical Office? Why then did he before, Sect. 10. allege the
managing of this matter of Matthias call, as a ground and pattern for ordinary
ordination of Elders?

true it is the eleven Apostles were here together because they were commanded
by Christ to abide in Jerusalem, until they were endowed with the Holy Ghost
from above. But there was nothing here done, but any one of them might have
done it. I would ask what he intends by this? Is his meaning, that it was but
by accident that they did act together in Collegio, in this business, and that
they acted as Apostles only, because what they did any one of them might alone
have done what they did? And therefore it is no ways a pattern for a College
of ordinary Elders acting jointly their ordinary power? But 1. tho it be true
that they were together in Jerusalem, by Gods command waiting together for the
pouring out of the Holy Ghost: Yet it follows not, that by accident they did
join in Collegio for that business: Because being together, by Christ's
institution they were to join together in managing the affairs of the Church;
They were bound and it was necessary that they should do so. 2. True, what was
done might have been done by any one of them alone; had they been alone: But it
follows not that, being all in one place, where they might join together, hic
and nunc, any one of them might do it alone: Nor does it follow either, that
they acted as Apostles, because any of them might have done it alone. Any of
the Apostles might alone, by decisive sentence, determined the controversy
Synodically concluded, Act. 15. yet the Author will not for this, say, that in
that business the Apostles acted as Apostles The next thing I note, is a great
mistake of our mind concerning the nature of the Presbytery ruling over more
Congregations then one. That it should be a combination of appropriate Elders
to several particular Churches, which these Acts 1. were not, but general
Officers. We do not think it is necessary to the essence of such a Presbytery,
that it be made up of Elders, appropriated to several fixed Congregations. We
say, at the first where there were more Professors then could meet in one
Congregation, their Pastors and Elders did teach and rule them in common, not
being distributively appropriated to the several Congregations, and that yet
in some Cities where there are more Congregations, it may be so, as it is at
this day in some Protestant Churches: Tho we think, that now in the ordinary
condition of the Church, it is convenient that Congregations be fixed, and have
their several fixed Officers. Therefore we say further, what ever use be to be
made of the present passage, Act. 1. in the Question in hand, it is but a poor
Argument the Author insinuates. There was not here concurring Elders of other
Churches, this of Jerusalem being the first and only Gospel Church, Ergo, there
was not here a Presbytery ruling over more Congregations then one, it does not
necessarily follow. For that very Church of Jerusalem might be made up of
several Congregations, nor can the contrary be proven; the number of names set
down, v. 15. will not prove it, because it cannot be demonstrate that that was
the whole number of Christians in Jerusalem.

Act. 4. 35. For as many as were Possessours of lands, etc. sold them and
brought the price and laid it down at the Apostles feet. And how this place
will maintain a This nickname the Author will put in at every turn, which we
desire may be as often rejected as wrongfully given to the Presbytery we speak
for.
foreign coercive Eldership I do not yet under, stand. Answ. Here again is a
gross mistake or a wilful wronging of his adversaries. I know none that
alleges this place by it self as an entire Argument to prove the Presbytery we
speak for; the truth as to the use of this passage by Presbyterians in this
controversy is this. They alleging the instance of the Church of Jerusalem
for a pattern of more Congregations than one, under one governing Presbytery,
and for making out this, alleging that Scripture holds forth. 1. That Church
to consist of more Congregations then one. 2. That yet these are called one
Church. 3. That over these Congregations called one Church was one
Presbyteriall Government in common: To prove the last of these points whereof
the Argument consists, alleging that the Scripture mentions the Officers
of that Church as meeting together in common for acts of Government, they bring
this place for one instance of an act of Government for which they were met,
viz. to take charge of the Churches goods, and of the due distribution thereof,
See Jus Divinum of Church Govern. part 2. page 210. Now see we his answer if it
has any thing to infringe that for which this is indeed alleged.

The Apostles though they had a capacity over many Churches, yet then there
were not many Churches, when this was done. Ans. Yes, Sr, there were many, more
than one Church, I mean more particular Congregations, even in Jerusalem, see
this proven as by sundry others, so particularly by the Assembly of Divines in
their third proposition concerning Government, and their answers to the reasons
of the Dissenting Brethren, and by the Authors of Jus Divin. 2. part page 193,
194, 195, 196. and seq. and the exceptions brought to the contrare by your
strongest heads fully cleared. I wonder the Author should so contemn his
Readers, as to obtrude his bare Assertions upon them, in a matter concerning
which he knows so much reason has been brought, as is extant, to the contrare
of what he affirms. If he has any new exceptions against the proofs of that
particular, which has not been brought by these of his side before him, he
would done best to have produced the same; Or let him do it yet, and we shall
take them into impartial consideration.

2. And this capacity (to wit, that the Apostles had over many Churches) was as
they were Apostles, and not as ordinary Elders. Answ. That a capacity, to act
acts of Church Government over many Congregations, simply, was competent to
them only qua Apostles, and so not competent to ordinary Elders, is a maine
part of the Question in hand, and should not be begged or nakedly affirmed, but
proven.

And in this matter they did an extraordinary thing, because the Officers fit
for this work were not yet ordained. Answ. What is this? And was the Apostles
receiving and ordering these alms, the doing of an extraordinary thing? Sure it
was not extraordinary in the nature of the acts: For then it should not be an
act competent to any ordinary Officer in the Church, which is confessedly
false, it being an ordinary act which may be, and is daily done by ordinary
Officers. Nor yet can it be said to have been an extraordinary deed as done by
such Officers, the Apostles: The Author indeed imports this in his reason.
Because the Officers fit for this work were not yet ordained, so he would say
the Apostles were not fit Officers for that work, and therefore their doing of
it was extraordinary, but either they were not fit Officers in point of
qualification and endewment requisite to manage that work, and this I think the
Author will not say: Or they were not fit in point of vocation to exercise such
an act; But as little reason has he to say this, because, although that business
was not the proper act of their Apostolic vocation and office, nor the maine
and principal work thereof, and therefore say they, Act. 6. 2. It is not
reason that we should leave the Word of God and serve tables: And therefore it
was necessary some Officers should be ordained who is more proper and chief work
it might be to see to that business: Yet certainly the Apostolic office,
containing in it eminently, the power of all inferior Officers in the Church,
it was an act formally belonging to their office, and no Question even after
these ordinary Officers were appointed particularly to attend that business,
yet the Apostles did not then altogether cease from joining in acting
thereanent, where they might conveniently without hindering their main work, the
preaching and spreading of the Gospel.

But in all this where are joint voices and suffrages of Officers, Elders and
Brethren of diverse particular Churches, commissionated to this work to make up
this Presbytery, we speak of. Answ. There was joint acting of Officers of more
Congregations than one, the many Congregations whereof the Church of Jerusalem
did consist (whether they were distinguished and fixed, in Members and
Officers, or not, is all one) and these Officers, Elders to these Churches, the
Apostles, who as they were Officers, so were Elders too, and acting as Elders
because in a matter competent to ordinary Elders, and jointly. 2. Brethren not
Officers, may be present in such a Presbytery and speak and give their
consultative judgment orderly: But as no constituent parts of this Presbytery
in our judgment, nor according to the truth. 3. When the Presbytery of more
Congregations than one is made up of all the Elders of these Congregations
assembled together personally, a particular commission for that is not
necessary. Indeed in such Presbyteries as all the Elders of the several
Churches meet not personally, but by some of their number delegated, it is (as
in Synods) necessary that these who make up such a Presbytery be commissionated
from their several Churches respective: Yet by that commission, they get not
power simply to act, the acts of Government therein; (that they have by their
ordination to their office) but a particular warrant and call to act that power
hic and nunc for the good of the Churches in the combination.

viz. 25. from what he has answered to the former passage, he labors to answer
other two places. 1. That Act. 6. 3, 4, 5, 6. about the choosing of Deacons and
their ordination. To which his answer is. The Apostles as extraordinary persons
laid hands on these; But what appears from hence of such an Eldership,
excerped and commissioned from several Churches, as Presbyterians now assert
and use, is yet to find. Answ. 1. I wonder that Mr. Lockier should obtrude upon
us such a naked Assertion, that the Apostles did lay hands upon and ordain
these Deacons as extraordinary persons. i. e. as Apostles and not as Elders,
without making the last essay of answer to that reason brought by the Reverend
Assembly of Divines against the dissenting Brethren asserting the same. Ans. to
the reasons of the Dissenting Brethren, page 52. I present it here in their own
words, that the Reader may consider if it be not of such weight as Mr. Lockier
had cause to take it unto consideration if he had not thought fitter to dictate
to, then by light of reason to convince the judgment, of his Readers. As for
that ordination, Act. 6. we doubt not to say that in it they did act partly as
Apostles, partly as Elders: In constituting an office in the Church which was
not before, they did act their Apostolical authority: But in ordaining unto
that office men whom the Church had chosen, they did act as Presbyters; And we
doubt not but that our Brethren will herein concur with us: For if they will
not say that they did herein act partly as Apostles, and partly as Elders, they
must say they acted either only as Apostles, or only as Elders. If only as
Elders, thence it will follow that all Elders have power not only to ordain
men, but to erect new Offices in the Church: If only as Apostles, then hence is
no warrant for any Elders, so much as to ordain men unto an office. But I yet
wonder so much the more at this Assertion of Mr. Lockier here, remembering what
he had delivered before, SECT. 10. where he draws an Argument from ordination
of Elders performed by the Apostles for regulating the ordination of Elders in
Churches now, and thereupon alleging (tho groundlessely) that the Apostles in
ordination took in the people to concurrence with them, concludes, that now
also they ought to concur formally in that act. If they had acted as
extraordinary persons, as Apostles, the people could not concur jointly with
then in such an act, nor could it been an Argument brought as a pattern in
ordinary. Now if they acted not by their extraordinary office and power in
ordaining Elders, what reason is there to say, that in the ordination of these
Deacons, they acted in that way? 2. As to that, but what appears from hence,
etc. We say, supposing that the Church of Jerusalem was made up of many
Congregations, and these Congregations were one Church (which are proven from
other Scriptures) we find from hence, for proving such a Presbytery as we speak
for, Officers of these Congregations meeting together for Government, and
joining in an act of Government, ordination of Church Officers, viz. The
Apostles doing this, and that as Elders, which is the thing it is brought for
by Presbyterians; Which tho-by it self makes not a full medium to prove that
Presbytery, yet with the other suppositions taken with it, makes very much to
prove it.

Acts 20. 28. The Elders there are showed not to be Elders of many Churches
which Paul sent for, but the Elders of the Church, v. 17. of one Church, of the
Church of Ephesus, and charging them to attend to the stock, and not to flocks,
ver. 28. here is no joint veice of various commissioned Elders. Answ. To pass
that some of his own, the Dissenting Brethren in the Assembly, once in their
Reasons against the instance of the Church of Ephesus, make these, both Elders
and flocks, to whom the Apostle speaks, to be of all Asia (and not only of
Ephesus) where no doubt there were more particular Churches; To pass this,
because indeed these same Authors a little after, when it may serve their turn,
they confine them to Ephesus: We grant it is true they were Elders of one
Church, the Church of Ephesus: But withal, we say, that one Church, was not
one single Congregation, but made up of more then one, and consequently was one
Presbyteriall Church. This is proven by sundry Learned, particularly by the
Reverend Assembly of Divines in their instance of the Church of Ephesus, and
all the Reasons of the Dissenting Brethren brought to the contrare fully
discussed in their Answers threunto. As for the Authors Grammatical Argument,
they are called Elders of the Church in the Singular Number, not Churches, and
they are bid attend the flock, not flocks, Ergo, it was but one single
Congregation, 'tisfilly, and might well be said among Children, but may blush
to come out before understanding Men. By this Argument when our Savior says,
upon this Rock will I build my Church. And the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. He has set
in the Church, First some Apostles, etc. And Ephesians. 5. He loved his Church and
gave himself for it: Because it is in the Singular Number, Church, not Churches
in all these places: Therefore it must be only one single Congregation meant in
all of them. When as it is indeed the whole Catholic Church, and not any
particular singular Congregation. So the name flock in the Singular Number, why
may it not be taken collective for such a flock as contained in it diverse
particular flocks, as Genesis 33. 13. yea and in the very present Metaphorical
sense (...) Luke 12. 32. little flock, and (...) John 10. 16. one Sheep fold,
tho both in the Singular Number yea, and in the latter place, with the
Cardinal number added to it, one, signifies the Church Catholic, and so
comprehends many particular Flocks, Folds, and Churches. As to M. Lockiers
last words in this Sect. here is no joint voice. etc. indeed we grant that in
that meeting there was no joint voting of Elders: Because these Elders then
were not meet to act in Government, but had been sent for by Paul, to receive
direction from him concerning the managing of their charge: But supposing that
which is proved from other places, that there were more single Congregations in
Ephesus then one, we find here these Congregations held forth to be one Church,
and there were many Elders over these many Congregations as one flock, one
Church. And that is enough for our purpose.

The next place he meets with and which he calls one of the most weighty
(indeed it is so weighty to the purpose we are on, that it crusheth the new
supreme Independent Tribunal erected by our Brethren in single Congregations)
is that concerning the Synod, Act. 15. 28. To this the Author Answers, 1. Here
(says he) is an Eldership of several Churches (indeed) met: But as touching
the coercion of their power, as such excerped Eldership enforcing their results
upon other Churches, this is the other thing to be brought in to make up the
business we Dispute against. Answ. First. it is well Mr. Lockier acknowledges
that was an Eldership of several Churches, even a Synodicall Presbytery, a
Synod, as himself calls it afterward, Sect. 29. Some of his side have said
otherwise, the Dissenting Brethren in their Reasons against the Assemblies
allegation of Acts 15. for subordination of Synods. That Ass. was not a formal
Synod but only a reference by the particular Church of Antioch, unto this
particular Church of Jerusalem and no other. But we think Mr. Lockier speaks
the truth that it was a Synod. 2. We must here again note his invidious
misrepresenting of our Doctrine. We do not ascribe to that or any other Synod,
a power of coertion to enforce their results upon any, but an authoritative
juridicall power to enjoin authoritatively their determinations agreeable to
the Word of God, and to censure the disobedient and disorderly with mere
spiritual censures, as admonition, Excommunication, which import no
enforceing, ^ propriety of speech. Nor do we say, that, that or any other Synod
has power thus authoritatively, to enjoin their determinations, upon other
Churches, we say they have this power only in relation to these Churches
associated in the Synod and none other. So not that which Mr. Lockier says,
but this is the other thing to be brought in to make the Presbytery we speak
for (what ever it be that he Disputes against, which oftentimes is his own
fiction) an juridicall power authoritatively enjoining its determinations, and
which may censure with spiritual Ecclesiastic censures the disobeyers and
disorderly. And this, we doubt not, will be found in this place, Act. 15.

Hocker has also, Survey, Part. 4. c. 1. 1, That the Apostles tho they were
extraordinary Officers, yet in this meeting they did not act as such, because
they joined with them ordinary Churches (what ordinary Churches is
contradistinguished unto, I know not well) and Officers, and all Disputed, and
enquired. And so here was left a samplar to all succeeding generations. In this
we agree with him. Only by the way we note, that we see not why he should have
said before, Sect. 25. that in the ordination of Deacons the Apostles acted as
extraordinary persons, seeing there also they joined the Church with them, in
the election of the persons to be ordained. His 2. premisse is, that the
sentence decreed in that Synod was not Scripture because they decreed it, as
still it was when the Apostles moved by the proper Spirit of their Apo^olicall
station, according to that, 2 Pet. 1. 21. but what they decreed was by debate
found out to be either express in Scripture or undenyably deduced from thence:
So by one of these ways, was found to be Scripture, and was therefore decreed
and enjoined by them upon others. And then goes out a while in clearing this,
which we need not insist on. And to pass other things that might be noted in
this second premisse granting both, what would he infer hereupon? That in the
close of Sect. 28. So that what they produced, by debate was materially binding
for as much as what they produced was, for the matter of it, no other but the
will of God, but not formally as the result of such a Collegiat Eldership.
Answ. This last follows not upon any thing in the former premises: For tho
their decrees were not Scripture because decreed by them, but decreed by them
because found to be Scripture, or agreeable to general rules of Scripture, and
therefore injoined by them to the Churches: It follows indeed that their
primary and fundamental obligatorinesse, is material: And were they not such,
they could not formally, as decrees of the Synod, be obligatory or binding: But
it does not follow that, simpliciter they are not binding formally, as decrees
of the Synod. The obligatorinesse of decrees of a Synod formally as decrees of
a Synod is secundary, subordinate, and regulate, but for that, it is not no
obligatorinesse at all. Yea one of his own contradicts him in terminis, in
this, Mr. Cotton speaking of the decrees of this very Synod: Keys, c. 6. this
binding power is not only materially from the weight of the matters imposed
(which are necessary, necessitate praecepti from the word) but also formally
from the Authority of the Synod.

Answ. he brings it in by way of reply to an Object. Had then this Synod no
authoritative power at all? For what end then is the Ordinance? This indeed is
a pertinent Question propounded by the Author to himself. And if he, asserting,
as but in his immediately preceding words he has done, that the decrees of this
Synod, were binding only materially, as matters revealed in the Scripture, and
not formally, can withal Answer this Question affirmatively that this Synod
had an authoritative power as such an Ordinance, as a Synod, Erit mihi magnus
Apollo, nay, I shall say Mr. Lockier can make contradictories agree well
enough. See we then his Answ. to this. A foreign Eldership rightly constituted
has particular authority, (i.) a power of preheminent and prevailing counsel,
though not a power of jurisdiction to constrain their results to be practiced,
or to censure. Ecclesiastically, in case persons, who have the result of things
produced by them, do not follow them. They have as an Ordinance of God, a power
of preheminent and prevailing counsel: That is, their result ought to be
preferred and prevail more upon our hearts, then what Interpretation other
single persons, and ordinary helps, ordinarily afford. Answ. First here ere I
come to the main business, note shortly some few things. 1. We never
attributed authority to a foreign Eldership, over any persons or Churches. Mr.
Lockier here saying that a foreign Eldership has peculiar authority (if his
meaning be according to his words* if he understand authority indeed) that is
an Eldership extrinsecall to Churches, yet has peculiar authority over them,
goes farther then ever Presbyterians did, and indeed goes clearly contrary to
truth, and in terms, speaks very like the Prelatick way, which attributed to
a foreign Eldership, the Prelate and his Cathedral, authority over all the
Churches in the Diocaese. But indeed his words and his sense agree not: For his
peculiar authority, is no authority, as we shall see anon. 2. We say yet it is
but an odious feigned description of that power of jurisdiction, we attribute
to Synods and other associated Presbyteries, when it is called a power to
constrain their results to be practiced, as we have discovered it before. 3. It
is yet a grosser misrepresentation, that we attribute unto such Presbyteries a
power to censure persons Ecclesiastically in case they have the result of
things produced by them and do not follow them. Did ever any Persbyterian say
such a thing as this, that a Synod or Presbytery has power to censure persons
who have their results by them and does not follow them. For example, that a
Synod in Scotland has power to censure persons, in England or France, that
have their results by them and does not follow them, or that any Presbytery
has power to censure persons of the Church within the bounds of their
association, who, may be, have their result^ by them and not follow them? If
this has been said out of a mistake and ignorance we pity it, and wishes the
Author to know our Doctrine better, ere he take upon him to represent it to
others. If it has been of purpose to render our Doctrine odious, let his own
conscience judge what sort of dealing this is.

Lockiers clear and plain answer, at last to this place of Act. 15. 28. is that
that Synod exercised no power of jurisdiction, but a power of counsel or
advice only; He calls it indeed a peculiar authority. But when he makes it to
be but counsel, that is to give it a bare name, for credits sake; And to deny
it the thing of that name. Counsel or advice is but an act of charity, and (if
good) of wisdom and prudence, and not of authority. It Is no other act but that
which one man may do to a Church, one brother to another, one woman to another,
yea as Mr. Rutherfurd says, Abigail to David, a maid to Naaman. That the
Author says it is a power of preheminent and prevailing counsel, that it
ought to prevail more upon our hearts than the interpretation of single persons
and ordinary helps, avails not: For preheminent counsel is still but
counsel, and so that which is attributed to the Synod differs no ways from
that which is competent to any single persons to do, or one sister and equal
Church to another, but only gradually. And suppose a company of Christians,
Pastors or others met together, not Synodically, being persons of known piety
and understanding in matters of Religion, their counsel would be such a
preheminent and prevailing counsel, that it ought to be preferred and prevail
more with our hearts then the interpretation of single persons. So hereby there
is no peculiar authority, or power granted to that Synod, as such an Ordinance
of God. If yet it shall be said that their counsel is preheminent and
prevailing, ought to prevail more upon our hearts, etc. not only upon this
ground, that they are many, pious and understanding men, and liker to find out
the mind of God in his Word then single persons: But also because they are
such an institute meeting, a Synod. To this, I cannot see how Mr. Lockier can
say this, having but now told us that the decrees of the Synod bind materially,
as being the will of God, but not formally, as the result of the Presbytery.
For what else is it to say, that their results ought to prevail more upon our
hearts, because the result of such men as a Synod, but that they are binding
formally as the results of the Synod. 2. If there be a preheminency or power of
prevailing in the decree of a Synod, so that there is an obligation upon our
hearts to be more prevailed with, over and above that preheminency and power of
prevailing which is in the couns^l of a company of pious and understanding men,
met occasionally not in a Synod, (which certainly ought to be preferred and to
prevail more with our hearts then the interpretation of single persons) I would
ask what is that different power, if it be not a juridicall power: and
consequently of censure upon disobedience? For if it shall be said it is not
juridicall power, but only dogmaticall or doctrinall, then I say this is
competent to every single Pastor; For a truth of the Gospel taught and
delivered by a single Pastor, ought to be believed and obeyed, i. e. binds to
obedience and faith, not only because it is Gospel, but because it is
doctrinally taught by a Minister, and so that preheminent and prevailing power
shall differ from the power of a single Pastor, but only gradually, and is the
very same in kind, and so no peculiar authority or power of a Synod, as such
an Ordinance of God. But now whereas Mr. Lockier asserteth that this Synod at
Jerusalem, Act. 15. had not, nor did exercise a juridicall power, but only a
power of counsel or advice: We assert the contrair, which is abundantly proven
by sundry learned Writers treating upon this subject, and maintained against
all Objections made to the contrair by Opposites: We refer the Reader for
satisfaction, to these, namely, Mr. Gillespy Assert. of the Govern. of the
Church of Scotl. Part. 2. c. 8. Aarons Rod, Book 2. c. 9. Arg. 21. Papers of
the Assem. of Divines. Ans. to the Reas. of the Dissenting Brethren against the
instance of the Church of Jerus. Jus Divin. of Church Govern. by the London
Ministers, Part. 2. c. 14. Mr. Rutherfurd due Right of Presbyteries, page 355.
At length treating upon this place. Spanhem. Epist. ad David Bucan. class. 3.
rat. 3. There is so much said by these to this purpose, that I need not
increase the bulk of this Book by setting down any Reasons here against Mr
Lockier, if he will be pleased to take unto his consideration what is already
said by them, he may do well. Come we to his Reasons brought to prove that this
Synod exercised only a power of counsel, not of jurisdiction. Of four brought
by Mr. Hooker, Survey Part. 4. c. 1. page 13, 14. he borrows two.

1. Is made up of two processes, the first whereof is this. These decrees are
said to bind these to whom they are sent: But they were sent to all the
Churches of the Gentiles. This is evident says Mr. Lockier, Acts 21. 25. as
touching the Gentiles that believe, we have written and concluded that they
observe, etc. Ergo, they did bind all the Churches of the Gentiles. Answ. To
this 1. for the Major, where is it so said? I cannot remember any place of the
story where this is said. If he and Hooker, from whom he has this, mean, that
we say and confess this, that the decrees of the Synod bind all these to whom
they are sent, that we never said; If it be understood of binding as Synodicall
decrees. A Synod in one Nation may send their decrees unto Churches of another
Nation (as was ordinary to do in the Primitive times) yet we say not, that the
decrees of a Synod of one Nation, binds the Churches in another Nation, though,
may be, the matter of them binds them. 2. For the minor: If the meaning be, (as
it must be, that the Argument may speak to the purpose it is intended for) that
they were sent by way of Synodicall decrees to all the Churches of the Gentiles
(as certainly they were to some) we deny it, the place cited, Act. 21. 25.
proves it not: For it speaks of the Gentiles indefinitly, and clearly relates,
to the Letter written, Act. 15. where the very inscription bears, that so they
were sent only to the Gentiles in Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia v. 23. It Is true
Paul and Barnabas delivered the decrees to others as they went through the
cities, Act. 16. 4. but it is not said that they were sent to them by way of
Synodicall decrees, as they were to these other Churches. But grant that one
way or other they were sent also to the rest of the Churches of the Gentiles,
that is, that it was the will and intention of the Synod, that as occasion
should serve they should be delivered to them, and we shall also grant the
conclusion of this first process in some sense, that they did bind all the
Churches of the Gentiles. See we what Mr. Lockier will infer upon this in his
next process.

Now these (says he) (i.) all the Churches of the Gentiles had no
Commissioners delegated to that Synod: Therefore what the Synod did could not
bind them by way of authoritative jurisdiction, because where is no delegation
of Commissioners there is no right of jurisdiction; They did bind them only by
way of counsel and materially, as things clearly held forth in the Word of God
Answ. If Mr. Lockier when he says, now these had no Commissioners there, etc.
if he mean this Universally, that none of the Churches of the Gentiles had
Commissioners there, it is clearly false. If he mean only that some of them had
no Commissioners there, it is true, and we grant that the decrees of the Synod
did not bind these Churches by way of jurisdiction and formally as decrees of
the Synod, but materially. But hence it follows not that they did not bind at
all, nor any, by way of jurisdiction. For some Gentile Churches had their
Commissioners there, and were Members of the Synod, Antioch, Syria, and
Cilicia, (these two last, if they had not, yet they might and ought to have
had, and it is most probable they had) and so these Churches might be bound by
them by way of jurisdiction and formally, for ought that is brought in this
Argument, and they did so bind them as is abundantly proven in the Authors
cited before.

Hooker casts this last process, that Mr. Lockier has borrowed from him, in
the place of his Survey last cited. The 1. is this. The decrees of a Synod bind
only such by Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, who delegate messengers to the
Synod: But the decrees of this Synod bind more then these who delegated
messengers to it, to wit, all the Churches of the Gentiles. Therefore it did
not intend to bind by Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. Truly it is a pity to see a
Godly man beguiling himself in such matters, with such illogicall silly
Arguments. I will not stay to exaggerate this to the full, who sees not the
gross peccancy of this: And if the Author would have concluded formally and
right upon his premises, the conclusion should have been this: Therefore the
decrees of this Synod did bind more Churches then such as it did bind by
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. And this he shall have granted by us without
contradiction, but also without any advantage to his cause. His second mould
(which he says is more plain) is this. These who send the decrees of the
Synod to such Churches who never sent their Commissioners thither; They send
only by way of counsel. But this Synod sent their decrees to all the Churches
of the Gentiles, who never sen^ their Commissioners thither: Ergo, they sent
only by way of counsel: This is as louse for matter, as to his point in hand,
as the former was peccant in form. For as to the Major: The Synod which send
their decrees to Churches who never sent (at least ought to have sent) their
Commissioners thither, send only by way of counsel to these Churches, true
indeed: But if the meaning be, that that Synod which sends their decrees to
such Churches as never sent their Commissioners thither, send only by way of
counsel to all to whom they send them, this is as easily denied as it is
affirmed: and I believe it shall be long ere we hear a proof of it. Then to the
Minor, That this Synod of Jerusalem sent their decrees to some Churches of the
Gentiles that never sent their Commissioners thither, let it be granted: Yet it
is as certain, some, to whom they sent them, bad their Commissioners there as
members. And so for the (...), it may be granted that this Synod sent their
decrees to (...) only by way of counsel: But from nothing in the Argument does
(...) follow, that they sent them only thus, to all to whom they sent them.
Having briefly noted thus upon Mr. Hookers two Syllogismes, we return to our
Author.

That here they did acquiesce, (viz. in ^inding the Church^ to which they sent
only by way of counsel and materially) and did not further meddle with any
juridicall process upon them, appears by these pacifick words, which would
they were written not with ink and pen, but with the spirit of the Lord upon
all Presbyters hearts who are so turbulent in these (...). From which if you
keep your selves you shall do well. Ans. Mr. Lockier is here in a great
mistake, while as he insinuates, that if the Synod did not meddle with
juridicall process ( viz. as I conceive, to censure) upon them to whom they
sent the decrees, that it must then be said, they acquiesced in mere giving of
couns^ll; (...) Court or Judicatory had no other act of authoritativ^
Jurisdictio^, but processing persons to censure; When as the making (...)
authoritative imposing of constitutions (which indeed makes persons liable to
censure in case of disobedience) is an act of juridicall Authority, though
there be no processing person^ ^o censure presently joined therewith. And that
(...) this (...) and authoritatively (I mean Ministerially) impos^ (...) ^tions
upon the Churches, the they went (...) to (...) any of them, h^s been abunda^ly
proven by the Autho^ (...) 2. Yea they did actually put ^orth a (...) the (...)
schism and disse^ (...) Teachers, by stigmati^ (...) Teacher^, and (...) them,
by decl^ring them (...) the Church, ^o^tters of souls, and ^acitely (...)
words, unto whom we gave no such (...) ^o ^e (...) of the Apostles and Elder^
of Jerus^, (...) to Preach this Doctrine: The (...) of censure, and ^ended to
more, if they (...) incor^igible and obsti^ ^. But (...) good ear^est, when as
he says, (...) of the Synodicall Epistle to (...) Church^, (...) to these
matters, (...) give counsel (...) Churches, and wish that for the purpose they
(...) Wr^en not with (...) and (...), etc. as if for^ooth, because the Syno^
and their decrees in an Epistle (which was a respectfull way) because they
recommend the practice and obedi^ of them by the goodness th^reof; this did
necessarily impor^ they did not enjoin them by authority, but only advised them
by way of Christian counsel: Verily such reasoning, ^red with such a
^hetoricall wish, Would they were Written, etc. I think may bl^sh in the
present of any intelligent man. As for that bitter ^ccu^tion the Auth^r gives
in against all Presbyters (he me^ Presbyteri^ns not Presbyters of his own way,
sure) as turbu^ent persons, we wish the Lord may lay it to his conscience, but
not to his charge. For ou^ selves, it being cast upon us for no other cause,
but for standing to the maintenance and avowing of the Cause of Jesus Christ,
and the due authority of his Ordinances, we shall ^ntly (...) our selves with
that of his, Blessed are ye when men (...) you -- and shall say all manner of
evil against (...) for my sake -- so persecuted they the Pr^phe^s which were
before you.

The con^roversie decided in this Synod being between the Church of Antioch and
some Judaizing T^achers, it is evident that one side in the Synod was a party,
to wit, them of Antio^h: Now for these who were a party, and ^ontested against
their opposites, to be judge in their own cause, and to be juridicall upon
their Antagonists by their own power, cannot equi^ably or conscionably be
imagined. It is (says Hooker) against rule. Answ. I remember this very
objection is one of the grounds of the Protestation and Declinator, made by the
Remonstrants against that (...) Reverend Synod of Dort. Because (to wit) a
great part of the Members of the Synod were their adverse party, had by
Preaching and Writing before condemned their Doctrine (...) error, and that
the Law of Nature does not permit, that (...) be judge in their own cause:
Which (...) unanimous suffrage of the (...) ^ull; and the reasons whereupon
they did (...) it (which are to be seen in the acts of the Synod, ^ess. ^9.) do
abundantly refuse this reason alleged to prove that this Synod (...) did only
exercise a power of counsel and (...) authoritatively determine the matter
(...) Not being willing to fill up much paper with transcription^, I (...) the
judicious Render to the suffrages of these reverend and learned Divi^
themselves for more full satisfaction. For the present brie^, it is a gross
mistake of our Author and Mr. Hooker from whom ^e has it, that these
Commissioners of the Church of Antio^h, members of this Synod, if the Synod did
ju^dically and authoritatively judge and determine in the matter that was before
them, did judge in their own cause, (if he mean their own proper private cause)
the ^ter of their judgment was not the proper private cause (...) any member
of the Synod, but the public cause of GOD and his Church; the doctrine of
justificati^ which the Juda^ing Teachers did corrupt, and the peace of the
Church which they disturbed. Now the persons cannot be both an adverse party
and Judge in their own private cause which concerns themselves, yet in a
public cause this may be. Even in civil matters this may and must be in some
cases: The persons that constitute the supreme Judicatory of a Nation (suppose
the Parliament) they are both adverse party and Judge in public causes, as in
matters of treason, etc. Especially this exception, from that Ma^ime which is
alleged, that persons cannot be both adverse party and Judge in their own
cause, must not have place in matters and controversies of Religion, otherwise
there could be no judicial way at all for condemning false and haereticall
Teachers: For certain it is that all Ministers of Jesus Christ are oblidged by
their Calling and the Commandment of God, not only to teach and instruct the
people of God positively in the truth; ^ut also to re^ute the errors, and stop
the mouths of opposers and adversaries of the Truth, so that when any broach
and vent errors in the Church of God, the Ministers of Christ must not stand
neutrals and indifferent, but must and ought both by word and wri^ re^u^e and
(...) them, and be an adverse party to t^m. Must they therefore because they do
their duty in opposing Teachers of errors in their several particular
stations, be incapable in an Assembly to judge and condemn these errors and
abettors of them judicially? Verily this were nothing else but to proclaim
(...) to (...) spirits in the world, to teach and spread (...) without any
controlement in an Ecclesiastical way. And ve^ly this principle, That persons
that are an adverse party to false Teachers in matters of Religion, cannot be
Judge^ on the controversy between them and these Teachers, was very far from
the the thoughts of the Churches of God, in the times of these famous ancient
Councels of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, Chalcedon, wherein, as in many
Provincial Synods of these times, it is well known, Orthodox Divines, that had
publicly and zealously appeared before, against the Haereticks of these times,
did unquestionably sit and vote as Judges in the very controversies they had
appeared parties in. But yet to put this matter closser ^ome to Mr. Lockier;
Suppose in one of his Independent Congregations, one or two or more members
should vent Haereticall Doctrine, and labor to instill it into, and infect
therewith, their fellow members, I think he will not deny but the Elders of
that Congregation, yea and every particular member ought to contend against
them for the truth in private, refute and condemn their errors and their
Schismatic practices. Now I think he will not deny (except he will deny
altogether, that there can be any Ecclesiastical Judicature to condemn errors
juridically and authoritatively) but these Elders and private Christians,
though a contrair party to the supposed erroneous persons, yet may in the
meeting of the Congregation assembled as a Judicatory and Court, sit and vote
as Judges upon the matter in controversy with their antagonists. If this may be
in a Congregationall Judicatory, and yet not against equity nor conscience nor
rule, why may it not be so in a Synod too.

Lockier meets with, and says is frequently used by the Presbyterian
Brethren, is 1 Timothy 4. 14. to which place he says that he has spoken somewhat
before on the first Assertion, which he repeats here: That it was not an
ordinary Eldership because of the reason he gave there, and adds, that being
an Eldership of extraordinary Officers, not praecisely from such and such
particular Churches, but such as were equally of all, as of any one, 'twill not
amount to the nature of a pattern and binding praecedent to build upon. Answ. 1.
This place is not so frequently urged, as Mr. Lockier pretends, for this
purpose, to prove an associate Presbytery over more Congregation^ then one. The
thing it is usually urged for, is to prove that the Government of the Church,
whereof Ordination is a principal part, is in the hands of Officers, and not
in the body of Professors: and this it does clearly prove. Yet 2. We conceive
considerable grounds may be brought that it was a Presbytery, not only not of
one Congregation (this Mr. Lockier himself acknowledges) but also of ordinary
Elders for the most part, of several particular Congregations: For 1. There is
not an example can be brought from Scripture of the Eldership of one
Congregation performing Ordination, nor any rule that may warrant such a
practice, when association with other Congregations may conveniently be had:
And there is in Scripture example of Ordination by a Presbytery over diverse
Congregations, as in the Church of Jerusalem, where were many Congregations, as
has been often demonstrated against all exceptions that has been alleged. That
that Presbytery which ordained in Jerusalem, was the Apostles, extraordinary
Officers, is nothing to the contrair; Because therein they acted not as
extraordinary Officers, but as ordinary Elders, as has been showed before. 2.
Guliel, Apollon. reason to this purpose, Consider* of certain Controv. Cap. 6.
9. 2. is very considerable. This ordination of Timothy seems to have been
done in the Church of Lystra, as the Belgic Interpreters observe upon the
place from Act. 6. 1, 2, 3. it is said there that Paul would have him to go
forth with him, v. 3. viz. to serve with him in the work of the Ministry of the
Gospel: And v. 1. it is said he had a good report from the brethren of Lystra
and Iconium: what else could that report be but a testimony of his piety and
understanding in the Scriptures? (of which the Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy 3. 15.)
which the Apostle requires of a person to be called to the Ministry, and
seems there to be mentioned as given in relation to Timothi^s calling
thereunto: And in this we see the brethren of Derb^ and ^ium, with these of
Lystra concurring as actors, under whom are included also the Churches of the
Region ro^nd about, as may be gathered from Acts 14. 6. The consideration^ are,
I conceive, of some weight, to incline us (...) think this Presbytery, as i^
was not Congregationall, so was not extraordinary. As (...) M^. Locki^r
alleges to the contrai^, i. e. to that ^e (...) Assertion 1. We answered it
sufficiently the, (...) Reader back to our 5. SECT. 2. To the little thing
added here, we say; Albeit the Officers making up this Presbytery, were not
precisely from such and such particular Churches (as I conceive his meaning)
were not fixed and appropriated Officers of particular Congregations (which yet
cannot be proven) yet they might have been a Presbytery of more Congregations,
such as we stand for. Fixednesse of Presbyters to several particular
Congregations is not necessary by any positive divine institution. Again,
though all the members making up a Presbytery, were extrordinary Officers, and
so such as were of all Congregations as well as of one (which yet was not the
case of this Presbytery) yet joining in Collegio, in an ordinary act, as
Ordination; they might be a pattern and binding pracedent to build upon, else
from that Ordination, Acts 6. can no warrant be deduced for Ordination of
Officers by the Elders in ordinary. Hitherto we have seen and considered Mr.
Lockiers pursuing of his first Medium, used against authoritative Presbyteries
over more Congreg^tions then one: Let the Reader judge how he has made it good,
by what we have answered, and what we have referred to, for further
satisfaction in others.

SECTION IX. Examination of his 2d. Medium pursued in his SECTION 34, 35, 36,
37.
Medium is, that such a Presbytery opposes the word. His Argument here comes to
this much in sum. The Scriptures give in their testimony; not one or two but
in plenty, that what power of jurisdiction or ruling an Eldership has, it has
it in the same extent it has its Pastoral power, and no further; Yea, that an
Officers Pastoral power, exceeds in extent his Ruling power, rather then e
contra: Therefore a Presbytery over more Congregations then one, which extends
the Pastors ordinary ruling power beyond the extent of his ordinary Teaching,
does oppose the Word of God. Answ. When a^ this Argument, which is but a limme
of that first large ^re brought by the Dissenting Brethren against the
Assemblies third Proposi^on co^c^ning Presbyteriall Government, and all the
confirmation^ thereof brought by these same Brethren, has already received so
considerable answers from the Assembly of Divines in their Papers extant to the
World; I wonder why Mr. Lockier should present it again to us here so barely,
without taking these answers to consideration, or assaying to infringe them any
ways; Unless it has been his purpose to de^pise all his Readers. Well, we
refer the Reader to these Answers of the Assembly for full satisfaction, and
for the present say only in brief. 1. If all that is said in this Argument
were granted* yet would it not conclude simply against an Eldership Ruling more
Congregations then one, but only against an Eldership made up of Elders fixed
in their Teaching to several particular Congregations: But nothing against an
Eldership consisting of Officers no^ fixed to several particular
Congregations, but Teaching and Governing in common the several Congregations
associated under their one Government: And likely it is, that so it was in the
Church of Jerusalem and others these first Churches; Certainly the contrair
cannot be proven; And we think so it may be at thi^ day, as it is indeed in
some Reformed Churches without repugnancy to any positive Divine institution.
But, 2. granting that the Scriptures do testify, that the ordinary Ruling
power of Elders is not extendended beyond their ordinary power of Teaching (for
that which Mr. Lockier adds that the Scripture holds forth that rather the
Teaching power exceeds in extent his Ruling power, we desire proof of it, for
he brings none) we say that it is a mistake which is alleged, that the
Presbytery we speak for, Ruling over more Congregations extends the ordinary
Ruling power of Pastors beyond the extent of their ordinary Teaching power: It
does only extend the ordinary exercise or actus secundos of the one, beyond the
ordinary exercise or actus secundos of the other, having herein a call to the
one and not to the other, which is no incongruity, nor does oppose any part of
the Word of God. As for the Scriptures alleged by the Dissenting Brethren in
that forecited Reasons, and from them here by Mr. Lockier, we still affirm,
with the Reverend Assembly in their Answers, none of the^ proves the contrary,
they only show that all these things belong to their Office, and that this is
the usual practice and work of Elders where their work lies: But none of them
prove it prohibited of God or unlawful, for an Elder upon a call to do or
exercise one of these, where they have not occasion and a call to do the rest.
Any thing that Mr. Lockier says to the contrary of this is but his mere
assertion, but no proof from the words of the Texts, for which I appeal to the
judgment of any understanding man reading and considering the Texts
themselves: Let any man show me out of these Scriptures any thing bearing this
much, Elders rule these particular Congregations only, which you do ordinarily
teach: So we shall not need to insist upon them particularly, only a note upon
somewhat said by him upon some of them.

Act. 20. 28. That there were many Officers belonging to this Church of
Ephesus, herein we join with him, and that it is manifest here was but one
flock, on this we join also, as to the word one flock: But that it was one
single flock, or Congregation only, as he means, we utterly deny, and affirm
it was an associate flock or Church, made up of several single particular
Congregations; For proof and satisfaction herein we refer the Reader to the
^ssemblies Answers to the Dissenting Brethrens reasons against the instance of
the Church of Ephesus. And here again I must crave leave to say Mr. Lockier
exceedingly contemns his Readers, when as such considerable Answers being
given and extant against all that could be alleged by these ablest men of his
side, to prove that there was not many, but one single Congregation in Ephesus,
he without any assay to infringe these Answers, obtrudes (...) bare naked
Assertion, that it was but one. What? Must (...) to him, a^ Pythagoras
Disciples to captivate their judgment and acquiesce with (...)?

Medium, he propounds an Objection as one of our Arguments, Sect. 36. and
Answers it, Sect. 37. Obj. Elders may Preach in this Church and that, and many
particular Churches; Therefore they may, according to this you have said, rule
over many particular Churches. To which he Answers, it is not occasional
Preaching which one Church by consent and desire may admit to another, that the
Scriptures forementioned make the bound of rule; But where men's fixed call and
work (he must mean the work of Preaching) properly lies. To where I am called
to Preach (he must mean ordinarily) this bounds, commensurates and proportions
my power as an Officer to Rule, so that to go beyond this, is to go beyond the
Word, to oppose the Word. Ans. 1. Albeit from what you have said, viz. that the
power of Preaching and the power of Ruling are commensurat and of equal
extent, it should not follow that if Presbyters may Preach to more
Congregations then one occasionally; Therefore may Rule over more Congregations
then one ordinarily. Yet it will follow they may rule over more Congregations
then one, in such a way as they may Preach to them: For say ye their Preaching
and Ruling are commensurate by Scripture; Yea further, if Elders may Preach to
more Congregations then one, not only occasionally but ordinarily, which they
may (as suppose in a City where are many Congregations, the Ministers be not
fixed to them severally, but teach them in common, as they may do without
violation of any Divine institution, and that de facto it was not so in the
first Churches, nothing can be brought to demonstrat) it will follow such
Elders may Rule over mo^e (...) out. 2. We do not make the occasion^ (...) more
Congregations then one (...) r^aso^ (...) ^hey may rule over more then one
ordin^rily (...), a Minister by Christ's institution and (...) Office, ^s a
Minister, and has that office habit (...) to the Universal Visible Church of
Jesus Christ, (...) singl^ Congregation (see ^his abundan^ly (...) the Learned
Mr. Hudson, Vin^ic. of the ^ss^ (...). c. 6. page 138. and seq*) and so may and
(...) O^fice and any part thereof in relation to (...) Church, (i) particular
Congregation o^ (...) according as (...) promoving of the good of the whol^
(...) and h^ (...) particular call there (...) and (...) of Preaching be
bounded (...) yet his (...) Ru^ng may be ordinar^y (...) Congregation have a
call thereunto* by (...) that Congre^tion and (...) the^ together ^or (...) and
(...) association (...) obliged to ^ter (...)

These. ^. ^ (...) that labor among you* (...) compared with, (...) that
^uring to be in the Wor^ and (...) These (...) says he, ^eacheth that fixed
(...) and (...) Ruling go togeth^r. Answ. These plac^ (...) teach, (...) here
(...) Preach ordinarily, over these (...) also (...) not that ove^ (...) only
they rule. Mr. Loc^ier (...) but proves not, no^ ^an prove from the words. The
Author has it, 1. 17. I will not say but it may be an escape of the Printer.
Only it is to be noted, that the place is ^ust so Printed in the Reasons of
(...) Dissenting Brethr^n against the Ass^mblies 3. Proposition concerning
Presbyteriall Government* (whence the ^thor ^orrow^ i^ ^re) 1 Timothy 1. 17. where
I doubt not but ^he (...) been the Printers.


It is not bare laboring in the Word in a place the (...) Elder (^a^ I
conceive, that formally constitu^ and (...) one a^ Elder) but being over them
fixed and (...) such a station over them; And then where this is pi^ched (...)
^is ^nds his work of conduct and discipline. (...) the it is not bare laboring
in the Word in a place, (...) constitu^, and denom^tes an Elder or Minister
((...) ^he Word in a place, such laboring (...) no^ called to that work, And
(...) of Christ) but it is as true, that n^ (...) is, (...) commissioned to
such a station (i.) to such (...) that notes him or constitutes him a Min^ster.
(...) is, which notes, and constitutes a Minister (...), according to the order
instituted by Christ, (...) with Off^ce to (...) the Gospel, and to dispense
(...) Which Off^ (...) ^ally (...), is in (...) ^ely: And ^is fi^ing to (...)
not make him a Minister, bu^ onl^ (...) ^o ^u^h a Congregation for the const^
and (...). See this we say (...) ^dantly demonst^ (...) H^dso^* Vindi^ of the
Ess. and Vniti^, etc. c. 6. page 138* (...)

The third thing he bri^geth is the (...) Key^ (viz. of Doctrine and
Discipline) (...) distinguis^ed, ye^ (...) divided, Christ (...) ^oined and
(...) together: But to (...) where w^e are (...) is to divid^ (...) ^ow ^ell
Christ ^ll ^ke (...) how well men* (...) s^verall hundred (...) ^ars in blood
and tyranny, has sh^w^d (...) A^sw. 1. The Key^ o^ Doctrine and Discipline are
not so (...) ^on from another, as the Author by his big words would (...) his
Readers in hand. 1. In the very (...) or actus prim^* they are separated; The
Ruling Elder ^ath the Key of Jurisd^ction or Discipline, and exercises it, but
not the Key of Doc^ine. 2. Eve^ where they are ^oyned together in habit, they
are divided and separated in act* The Pastor of a Congr^gation when he ^cheth
does not e^cise Discipline, nor when he exercises Discipline or Jurisdiction
does he at that same time teach: Yea further; H^ may and does teach alone, but
he (...) J^diction alone, but in combination and in colleg^ with others. Obj.
But they are divided in regard of the object by the Presby^erian way. The
Pastor in the associate Presbytery (...) ^urisdiction over them whom he does
not teach; And Ch^i^ (...) joined them together in thi^ relation, that t^ one
(...) ^cised toward any, but to (...) the oth^ is also (...) Author indeed
says so, that Christ ^th appointed (...) brought a place of Scripture (...)
The places by him here (...) put home this to the Author (...) can exercise
rule only in relation (...) where he is fixed to preach ordina^y; B^ause (...)
to divide the Keys which he alleges to ^e even in the (...) ^o tied togethe^
a^ ^e has said. But I ask him, (...) preach the Gospel (...) other^ then of
his own (...) by going (...) admitting the to (...) to the (...) the Lords
(...) to (...) ways? (...) this, he denies wit^ (...) of Christians, (...) of
these of one single (...) public Ordinanc^ of Jesus Christ; if he grant it,
then he div^des the Keys which (...) ^yes Christ has tied together.

qui non perfric^it fronte^, can say, it is a way of it self inclinable to
that, when as the very constitution of it, is to (...) to persons alleging
themselves wronged, (and possibly wronged indeed) by the sentence and judgment
of a smaller Judicatory, a way of recognition and relief by a larger associated
Judicatory. If this be a way in it self inclinable (...) ^anny, I confess I
see not, but we may as w^ll say that ^ard is d^ward, and dounward is upward.
But now to w^ the exercise o^ the Keys so together and in so narrow b^und^, as
Mr. Lock^: would have them: That is to say, so^ (...) of ^n Eldersh^p of a
particular Congregation, together wi^h their people ((...) be 7, 10, or 20,
persons) that they are made the (...) Ecclesiastica^ on earth, and there may be
no (...) of the Churches of Christ in an authoritative (...) any wrong
whatsoever they may do, (...) and Truth in their dogmaticall det^rm^ations, o^
in t^eir (...) censures upon persons, if this be no^ a wa^ (...) tyranny, yea
and looseness, and con^usion (...) let any man of common sense judge: (...)
proof even a few years has given of the (...) ^ell: Who man (...) see it, and
what tru^ Chri^ (...) it without b^e^ng heart and weeping eyes, (...) a^ this
day.

SECTION ^ Examination of Mr. Lockiers 3d Medium, pursued in SECTION 38, and 39.


These sojourning Eldership^ (sojourning Elderships we know not what, nor where
(...) many associating Co^ (...) in common) while thus pret^nding (...) like
the la^wing ^aw off (...) their young, my meaning is, (...) it takes off people
(...) that which (...) groun^ may warr^ (...) a riddle to (...) What (...)
pronoune their, relate^ (...) to the lapwing, or to the peop^ (...) of them be
said I cann^ (...) Again, for that which (...) etc. Wh^ (...) Congre^tion
(...) ^terie tak^ (...) of (...) Or in (...) busine^ of comm^ (...)
contraver^ed, (...) and that not to (...) And ^ow (...) Author (...) ends (i.)
(...) then (...) of (...) on to (...) follows.

have many (...) which are (...) then (...) of a Congr^ion, (...) of (...) take
(...) people, (...) with ot^ers of greater part and so is (...) here yet and
the for^ riddle^ cleared. But to (...) 1. That there may be more able (...)
then a particular Congregation^ I think (...) will (...) ^eny: And surely it
cannot ^e denied in (...) th^re this is a ground, whereupon (...) it is (...)
that besides the Presbytery of a (...) Congregation, there should be such more
ample Presbyteri^ (...) unto wh^ ^course may be had in case of supposed (...)
of the Eldership of a particular* Congr^gation^ and to which, particular
Elderships, may themselves^ (...) cases or cases controversall amongst (...)
such particular Elderships (...) subject ^no Supe^iour authorit^ (...) hold
forth the plurality (...) Presbytery above the Presbytery (...) as an object
or ground to (...) ^all, that were ^deed to (...) ^old it forth (...) a more
(...) ^ght determi^tions in matters (...) the holding (...) of flesh, (...) but
(...) that (...) necessity of the (...) 4. p^g. 2. and if it (...) ^orth (...)
of (...) thoritative Synod^ (...) as held forth so (...): But (...) ^dicious
(...) to (...) Congregation^ (...) 60. or 40. (...) p^sons) subject to the jud^
(...) trial (...) of no^ (...) Ecclesiastic^ (...) ^rth, be not (...) s^are to
(...) greater ^oth, and ^eader to (...) flesh (...) to hold forth unto them
(...) a single Congregation* (...) particular Congregation^ (...) Let judi^ious
(...) to license, to do (...) out being lya^ to be (...) say, which of these is
likest to prov^ a gaudy and taking snare upon flesh and blood.

Let Ministers, Doctors, etc. men of never so great Lear^ing be in a sojourning
(we say associate) Presbytery; Yet the Persbytery (...) Congregation is like in
reason to be more learned in the b^inesse of their particular members which
offend, then strangers; Because they are eye witnesses of persons and things;
and have by intimate conversation advantage to Judge of Men and matters
concerning them more then others. Here ^deed lies the (...) (such as it is) of
the thing that the (...) would have said, to make out his 3. proof against
Presbyteries over more Congregations then one, viz. that they destroy and elude
the end of Church power and jurisdiction to which they pretend. For Answ. 1.
This reason if it have truth and force in it, is as much against any Synod
whatsoever, even their own consultative (...) as against authoritative Synods
and Presbyteries o^ (...) Congregations. For thus I may well reason against the
use of such consultative Synods upon the same very supposit^ ^dged by Mr.
Lockier here. Consultative Synods, are no (...) of God, but a dev^e of man,
because they elude the end where^ they pretend* to wit, finding out more clear
and satisfactory ^ght conce^ning difficult matters in particular Congregation^:
Nay; Because let never so many able Ministers, Elders, and other Christians be
in such a Synod, yet the Presbyter^ of the particular Congregation is like in
reason to be more learned in the business of their particular members then,
etc. And so are more able to give light and resolution it such matters, then
strangers in a Synod can do. But 2. This Argument runs upon sundry ^acit and
suppressed false suppositions and mistakes. As, 1. it is supposed that the only
matter which Synods can ha^ to co^os^ upon, and determine, are businesses of
the exercise of Dis^p^e about particular members of particular Congregations:
This is a great mistake: For besides businesses of the exercise of Discipline
about particular members of Congregations, there are first matters of faith and
of the Worship of God, to be defined from the Word of God; And contrary ^rrors,
heresies, and corruptions to be condem^ed and declared against. Secondly, there
are matters of external order and policy, which are determinable by the true
light of nature, right reason, and general Rules in the Scripture, about which
is exerted that power which is called Diatactick; there are also trials and
ordinations of Ministers. Now I do not think that Mr. Lockier will take it upon
him, to aver, that the Elders of a single Congregation are like in reason to
be more learned, and so more advantaged to judge in matters of this kind, then
all the able choice men, Ministers, and Elders from many Congregations
assembled together in a Synod, or in a Classical Presbytery. 2. He insinuates
also this supposition, that in businesses of Discipline about particular
persons there is no other matter to be cognosced and determined, but Questions
of mere fact; For, he speaks of such matters as are known and discerned by
sense, and whereof men are eyewitnesses. This is another mistake. For often
times in such businesses are involved intricat Questions of Law or (Juris) as
frequent experiences in the exercises and processes of Discipline, prove daily.
As, suppose the physical being, or doing of an act alleged upon a person, as
scandal, be found proven, for example, that he has eaten Swines flesh before a
weak believing Jew: Yet there may be this Question of Law whether such an act
so circumstantiat, be under the kind of a scandal: Upon resolution of which
does depend the convicting of a person guilty of a scandalous fact. And again,
suppose a person be found unquestionably guilty of a scandalous fact, yet there
may be Question of the demerit and weight of it in relation to censure: Now
although it be true, that the Presbytery of a particular Congregation is like to
be more Learned, as to matters of mere fact in businesses of particular
members; Yet it can hardly be said in reason, that it is like they will be more
learned in Questions of Law involved therein, then many choice able men from
many Congregations. 3. He insinuates also a supposition that the Eldership of
a Congregation being more learned or understanding in the business of their
members (which yet can reasonably be supposed only for matters of fact) that
there can be no other ground of convenience and expediency to bring their
matters to be judged by a more ample Eldership over more Congregations; Which
also is false: Where as a Classical Presbytery or Synod is not like in judging
to be so liable to personal prejudice against the accused, nor so likely to be
swayed with fear or favor, o^ ^mister respects. And as for the learning and
knowledge that the Elders of the particular Congregation have or may have in
the business of their members, more then other Elders, may not all that by
them be communicate to a Classick Presbytery and Synod, themselves being
included in it as a part? 4. I add but this, suppose the Eldership of a
Congregation may be more learned in the businesses of their members, yet I
suppose (that which is not unusual to fall out) there may be differences among
the Elders, or between the Elders and the people (who, according to Mr.
Lockier, may have as much hand and more, in the jurisdiction, as the Elders) or
both may be divided in their judgments, that nothing can be concluded amongst
them: What will you have done in such a case? By all these may sufficiently
appear the weakness of his first ground to prove that associat Elderships of
more Congregations destroy and elude the end of Church power and Jurisdiction.
Come we to the second.

it is good to enquire wisely into this matter, as Solom. says, what is an
institution of God into such an end. Who would not look for some great matter
here; Let Us see then the product of this wise inquiry. If the power at home in
the particular Congregation be the institution of God for its own affairs, this
shall discern better, and judge better, and heal better, then all the Learned
Assemblies in world, which people little look after, whilst this great noise is
made with men of so great parts and worth, which sojourning Presbyteries
assemble withal. Parturiunt montes, etc. Answ. If this reason have any force,
it also militats as well against all Synods, even consultatory as well as
juridicall. It shall follow, it was a wrong course they of Antioch took, to
carry their controversy to the Synod of Jerusalem. Why? By Mr. Lockiers
theological reasoning here, the power at home in the particular Congregation
of Antioch (if it was a particular Congregation, as these of our Authors mind
may suppose it to have been) being an institution of God for its own affairs,
it could discern better, judge better, and heal better their controversy then
all the learned Assemblies in the world, and so then that at Jerusalem, etc. 2.
But what if the matter to be discerned, judged and healed be not the particular
Congregations own (i.) proper affairs; but common, equally concerning other
Congregations also. 3. But the grand, and I may say too, gross sophisme, here
is a clear petitio Quaesiti, a begging of the thing mainely in Question, that
only the Judicature of a particular Congregation is of Divine institution, and
an associate Presbytery Classical or Synodicall is not of Divine institution,
unless this be supposed, the consequence is null. One Ordinance instituted of
God for one end does not make void and useless, another Ordinance instituted
for that same end: But we say that an associate Presbytery of more
Congregations is instituted of God, as well as that of a particular
Congregation. The contrary of this, Mr. Lockier should have proven, and not
barely supposed, and upon that supposition alleged that the power in the
particular Congregation being instituted of God, shall do better then any
Presbytery of that kind.

Thirdy (says he) in the nature of the the thing, it is a course which casts
those which subject to it upon a multiplication of appeals, and references
forth and back from the Session to the Synod, etc. and whether this looks like
Scripture Ordinance, or like the thing it pretends to, an effectual removal
of burden and offenses, whilst it thus hurryes poor people up and down, let
Christians judge: This is ne quid detrimenti capiant capita Ecclesiae: -- it
may be, the cries of this and such like, is come up into the ears of the Lord,
and ah alas, that good men should be deaf. Answ. 1. This reason what ever it
says, says nothing against the being of Presbyteries over more particular
Congregations, the unlawfulness of which is the thing Mr. Lockier in his
Assertion undertook to prove, but against the subordination of the lesser
Presbyteries unto the greater. 2. Neither says it any thing to purpose
against this point: But in effect, is rather a cavillation then solid
reasoning. The subordination of lesser Presbyteries unto greater, as of
Congregationall to Classical, of both to Synodicall; Presbyteries, in the
nature of the thing casts not persons upon needless multiplication of
appeals, nor Judicators upon needless multiplication of references. But
provides a course for relief to persons, when they are, or may be probably,
wronged by the sentence of a lesser Presbytery, by appeal to the cognition and
judgment of a greater: And an help to lesser Presbyteries, by having recourse
by reference to the judgment and authority of a greater; When such help is
needful for them, as when they and difficulty in their affairs, either
through darkness or weightinesse of the matter, or through differences or
divisions amongst themselves, or through power and prevalency of persons with
whom they have to do in the exercise of their authority: And if this be not
more agreeable to Scripture, and a way more likely to remove offenses out of
the Church of Christ, then to put such an Independent power in the hands of a
single Congregation (may be, of 50. or, 40. or, 20. or fewer persons) ^at if
they shall Excommunicat a person, and so deprive him of ^he fellowship of all
Churches in the World, or determine, maintain, and teach Idolatry, and
grossest Heresy; There shall be no power on earth in an Ecclesiastical
authoritative way, to cognosce upon and redress what they do amiss; Let all
Christians judge. But that way of subordination of lesser Presbyteries to
greater, and of appeals is very agreeable unto, and warranted by the Scriptures
of God, has been sufficiently demonstrated, and vindicat against all the
exceptions of opposers, by sundry Learned Writers See Mr. Gillesp. Asser. of
the Govern. of the Church of Scotland, Assemblies Answ. Jus Divin.
, that we need not insist more on it, till we hear more from Mr. Lockier then
is said against it here. As to that, this is ne quid detrimenti, etc. we say
plainly it is but slandering, not reasoning. We acknowledge no capita Ecclesiae,
but one head, Jesus Christ, and that all his Ministers, are pari consortio
praediti and honoris and potestatis. And I beseech you Sr. what is the
emolument, that any Ministers may reap by the subordination of lesser
Assemblies or Presbyteries unto greater, in regard of which they might be said
to receive detriment, if the Government were otherwise, to wit, Independent in
single Congregations? Indeed if they should look to their temporary emolument,
they might see much reason to embrace the Independent way, as that which were
the fittest means ne quid detrimenti caperent, as any body may easily discern,
and I conceive some knows well enough by experience. As to that which is
spoken in the end of this Sect. against this way of Ecclesiastic Government
allowing appeals from lesser Presbyteries to greater, as raising cries that
have come up into the ears of the LORD, we shall say no more but this, if any
men, at any time, or any where, in managing that Government, have entangled and
perplexed persons rather then extricated and issued their distress, and
thereby raised cries into the ears of the LORD, by oppression of persons, that
is nothing against the thing it self. Sinful men will abuse even the best of
Divine institutions, and may be, there are not wanting cries coming up to the
ears of the LORD by oppression of persons in managing of the Independent power
of Congregations: Sure I am, it is more apt an hundredth fold to cause such
cries. It Is a remarkable Story Mr. Caudrey has to this purpose, in his Epistle
before his Vindic. Vindicia. in the fourth instance of mischievous consequences
of the Independent way, I need not transcribe it, but refers the Reader to the
place: But now seeing Mr. Lockier directs this bitter charge against the
thing it self in its own nature (so he propounds in the beginning of his third
Reason) we shall comfort our selves in this, that it is no new thing and ought
not to seem strange to us, that sin is imputed to the truth and pure Ordinances
of God, by adversaries, and Gods anger alleged to be drawn on by cleaving to
the same. We remember how Hezekiah was upbraided upon this account, Is. 37. 7.
10.

SECTION XI. Examination of Mr. Lockiers 4th Medium, pursued from his SECTION
40, to 47.
the larger Elderships, then larger Elderships are useless; But every
particular Congregation rightly constitute and complete has sufficiency
within it self, etc. Therefore, etc. Answ. Ere I reply particularly, first we
would understand, what the Author does understand by the compleatnesse of a
particular Congregation, and what may be understood, by having sufficiency
within it self to exercise all the Ordinances of Christ: for the former, I
conceive the Author means a particular Congregation to be complete in its
constitution, when as beside, the body of private Prosessours, there is in it
an Eldership made up of all the integrall parts thereof, Pastors, or one
Pastor, Teachers, or one Teacher at least. and some competent number of Ruling
Elders, three at least, so many Officers, according to our Brethren, make up a
complete Eldership for a Congregation. For the other we would consider, that by
sufficiency to exercise the Ordinances of Christ, we must understand not only
a competencie of gifts and abilities of wisdom and understanding for
exercising such and such acts; But also, power and authority by a divine
warrant, institution and call. A private gifted man may have the competencie of
gifts for Preaching the Gospel, Administration of Sacraments, yet he has not
simply sufficiency to exercise that Ordinance, because he has not power and
authority by calling from God to do it: These premised, for Answ. 1. The major
Proposition is a gross non-sequitur, and injurious to the wisdom of God in his
Ordinances: for there may be for a certain end a mean appointed of God, which
is by it self sufficient for effecting that end simply, and another mean
appointed of God for that same end, and yet this is not useless because the
other is sufficient; Because this may be for the better, more easy, more safe
effecting of it. Manifold instances might be given of this, the promise of
salvation or of the blessing of Believers, is of and by it self sufficient
enough to give assurance to the Children of God of the immutability of Gods
counsel and purpose of their salvation: Was therefore the oath added to the
word of promise useless. God forbid it should be said, it is added of
superabundant good will that we might have the more abundant assurance and
consolation, Heb. 6. 17, 18. So the Preaching of the Gospel is of it self a
mean sufficient of faith and salvation: Are therefore the Sacraments, and
Discipline, useless? God has appointed, in his Church, means for his
spiritual works therein, not only sufficient but abundant, not only for their
esse simpliciter, but also for their been esse, yea for their optimum esse. So
that although a particular Congregation have sufficiency to exercise all these
Ordinances of Christ, yet larger Elderships of more Congregations associated
together, may be of much and singular good use, for the better, or best
performance or exercising of them, for exercising them with less danger of
erring and miscarying, with the more authority, and to the begetting of the
more reverence, respect and obedience in people. So Mr. Lockiers major which he
neglects to prove, but supposes as if it were without Question, is rotten and
false, and consequently the whole frame of his Argument by this false to the
ground, so that we need not insist upon the minor or assumption: But 2. here I
would ask Mr. Lockier. What if a particular Congregation be not complete, have
not an entire Eldership of its own, I suppose, Pastor and Teacher be removed,
the Ruling Elders only remaining, or all of them being removed, in this case
whether has the particular Congregation sufficiency in it self to exercise
these ordinances, to Ordain, to Excommunicate? If he Answer yes, as it is most
absurd and contrary to the Scriptures of God to make a Church exercising the
public Ordinances of Christ without the Officers and Ministers of Christ: So,
if so, what needed him propound the Argument of a Congregation complete? If he
Answer no; May not a Classical Presbytery be of use here? Else how shall their
ordinances be exercised to them? For certainly there will be a necessity of
exercising some of them, of Ordination at least. But see the minor also,

A particular Congregation rightly constituted and completed (as was expounded
before, having with the body of Professors a Pastor, Teacher, and a competent
number of Ruling Elders, three may be the number, has sufficiency in it self
to exercise all the Ordinances of Christ, to Ordain, to Excommunicate, by it
self, without foreign, we say, larger associated Presbyteries. Ans. 1. We
conceive that a particular Congregation may be complete in Mr. Lockiers sense,
i. e. having an Eldership intier in all parts thereof, such as is an Eldership
consisting of one Pastor, one Teacher, and three R^ing Elders, five in all,
who, may be, have not sufficiency of abilities, as is requisite for due and
safe exercising these Ordinances, of Ordination and Excommunication. But 2.
Suppose they had competency of gifts for managing the exercises of these
Ordinances: yet we say they have not sufficiency in themselves to exercise them
without an associate Presbytery where they may conveniently associate, because
they have not authority and warrant from God in his Word to do it. I say, where
they may conven^ntly associate: For we deny not but a particular Congregation,
being in such a case that it cannot enjoy association with other Churches,
through a physical impossibility or impediment, in this case of necessity,
may, as it is alone, exercise such acts of Government: but particular
Congregations, where they can conveniently associate together, they are
oblidged by the rule and warrant of Gods Word, to associate under common
Presbyteries, Classical and Synodicall: and in this case, that a particular
Congregation ought not, nor may, by warrant of Gods Word, exercise these acts
of Government of public and common concernment, as Ordination and Deposition
of Ministers, Excommunication of persons, by it self alone: But these acts
ought to be done by the common Presbytery Classical or Synodicall. And that a
particular Congregation ought not, nor may not, by warrant of Gods Word,
perform any act in matters particularly concerning themselves, so without the
common Presbytery of the association, but that there should be liberty of
appeal to the common Presbytery: And that the common Presbytery may juridically
and authoritatively cognosce, and judge upon their proceedings and actings: In
a word, it may do things of Government particularly belonging to it self in and
by it self, but with subordination, to the larger and common Presbyteries,
these things have been abundantly proven by sundry learned men, as Mr Gill^sp.
in his Assert. of the Government, etc. Mr. Rutherfurd. Gull Apollon. in his
consideration of sundry controversies. Jus Divin. The Ass. of Divines, come we
to see what Mr. Lockier brings for the contrair.

It is granted by our Brethren (says he) that such a Church has this
sufficiency in the exercise of some Ordinances, as Preaching, Administration of
Sacraments, without seeking the consent or help of the Classes: Nor were the
Church to neglect these. Whence he concludes that it may also exercise the
other, Ordination and Excommunication. And gives for a proof of the consequence
upon that grant. If they may do the greater surely they may do the lesser, and
there is no dispensation of so choice an excellency as Preaching, as Paul
witnesses, making it the chief part of his errand. I was sent to Preach the
Gospel, not to Baptize. -- Answ. 1. It Is true, we grant that such a Church, i.
e. a particular Congregation having all its Officers has sufficiency in it to
exercise these Ordinances of Preaching and Administration of Sacraments. i. e.
the Pastors of a particular Congregation may Preach the Word, and Administer
the Sacraments without special consent or help and concurrence, of the
Classical Presbytery to every act, nor were he to neglect or cease from these,
if the Classis should forbid, I mean without just cause; Yet it may be, and it
is so indeed by the warrant of Gods Word, that the particular Congregation
cannot have, in the ordinary way of the Church in a settled and constitute
state, the Pastor to exercise these Ordinances but by the consent and
potestative mission and Ordination of the Classis, or some associate
Presbytery, and tho the Pastor of the particular Congregation his exercising
these Ordinances be not dependent upon the actual concurrence in the several
individual acts; Yet therein he is subordinate to their Ministerial
Authority, to try and judge his Preaching according to the Word of God, and, if
they find just cause, may forbid him to preach, and they forbidding, he must
obey. But 2. Its a gross non-sequitur, a particular Church, or the Pastors in
a particular Church, have sufficiency or power to preach the Gospel, and
administer Sacraments, without the help or concurrence of the Classical
Presbytery. Ergo they may also exercise these other Ordinances, Ordination and
Excommunication, without their concurrence; And the proof of it is invalide,
because that is greater, and if they may do the greater alone by themselves,
they may also do the lesser: For by that same reason it should follow, A Pastor
has sufficiency and power by himself alone to preach the Gospel, to Baptize
without the help and concurrence of his fellow-Elders in the Congregation. Ergo
he may also by himself alone Ordain and Excommunicate, without their help and
concurrence. Why? That is the greater* and if he may do the greater alone, he
may also do the lesser. The Author himself will not, I conceive, admit the
Consequence here. The truth is, the interest of persons to exercise this, or
that, or the other, Ordinance is not to be attended or determined, according to
the greater or lesser excellency of the work: But according to Christ's
commission, institution, and grant of power to them. The exercise of
Ecclesiastical power in some things, (which is commonly called power of order)
as Preaching of the Word, Administration of Sacraments, is given to Christ's
Ministers, severally and a part, considered as single Pastors. So a Pastor may
preach the Word and administer Sacraments alone, without concurrence, or
special consent, either of the whole Church, or other Rulers to every act: But
in other things (these of the power, called the power of jurisdiction) the
exercise and power thereof is not given to one, but to an unity: To the
community of Governors of the Church united together: not any single Rulers
severally. Therefore tho a Pastor may preach, and baptize alone, yet he may not
Censure nor Excommunicate alone; And if he should do this, the act were
invalide, both in foro Dei, and in foro Ecclesiastico. Now the power of
Ordination and Excommunication being given to a community, the Question is,
whether this community be a particular Congregation, having an entire
particular Eldership, or the Eldership of a particular Congregation, by it self
and independent from a larger Presbytery, this Mr. Lockier says, but his
Argument, grounded upon our grant, to prove it, is impertinent, as we have seen.

The Keys are not divided: The Keys are all given to Peter as personating the
Church of believers in the Gospel, that Kingdom of which Christ said he would
build: And I will give unto [thee] the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and
whatsoever [thou] shall bind on earth, Mat. 16. 19. Surely this particular here
used, is not in vain, but to set forth that every Gospel Church, every
particular Congregation of believers, united as a visible organicall body, for
Gods Worship have ability, a power given to it, as to such an end (he means to
exercise all the Keys, alone and by themselves, which he expresses thus) they
have not a lame commission, part of the Keys at their girdle, and strangers
and forrainers carrying another part. Answ. 1. As to that of dividing the
Keys, we have said sufficient before. 2. As to that alleged, the Keys were
all given to Peter, as personating the Church of Believers, etc. we have spoken
also before in the Examination of his first proof of the first Assertion. Now
we add but these things here. 1. I would ask Mr. Lockier what he means by the
Church of Believers in the Gospel? Whether the universal Church Visible of
Believers? Then he must acknowledge a Church Universal Visible individually
one: For certainly the article (the) denotateth a certain singular one thing.
But this, I doubt, Mr. Lockier will grant, A Visible Church Catholic, existing
really one. And however: it is not his purpose here, to allege that Peter
received the Keys, as personating the Universal Church Visible. For the thing
he would be at and must prove, is, that all the Keys and exercise thereof are
given to every one particular Church or Congregation, singly and within it
self. If he say he means a particular Visible Church, I ask which is it, of
Rome, or Corinth, or Ephesus? If any one of these definitely, what then
becomes of all the rest? Nay but will he say, not any one particular Visible
Church definitely, but indefinitely any and every one. But 1. His words are,
that Peter in this matter personated the Church Visible, which in propriety of
speech, seems to me to note a determinate and definite individual, but
passing this. 2. It cannot be a particular Visible Church, whether definitely,
or some certain one: or indefinitely for any one; Because, as Mr. Lockier
himself says, the Church that Peter personated is that which Christ says,
ver. 18. that he would build upon the rock, that the gates of hell should not
prevail against it. But this is not any particular Visible Church, but either
the Church Invisible of the elect and redeemed ones, or the Church Visible
Catholic; Because any particular Visible Church may be prevailed against. 3.
That Assertion, Surely this particular here used (to wit, the Pronoun of the
second person twice in the sentence, thee and thou) is not in vain, but to set
forth that every Gospel Church, etc. is, I may say, an Assertion of such
boldness without proof, as any man of understanding may wonder, that a modest
man should have uttered it, before men that have not sold away their judgments
to be slaves to any man's dictats. What? Must our Saviors speaking to Peter
here, in the singular number, be in vain, unless hereby he intended to set out
every particular Congregation, and surely it must be so, and we must believe it
surely to be so, because Mr. Lockier says it, tho he do no more but say it,
(...), is enough. Is there not another possible Reason to be given of this,
that Christ in this giving of the Keys directs his speech particularly to
Peter, but this that Mr. Lockier devises, so that his speaking to Peter thus
particularly must be in vain, if this Reason be not taken, to make it to
purpose? Know we not that long ago Cyprian in his treatise, de Vnitate
Ecclesiae, has given another reason of this, which I conceive, any judicious
man will think much more purpose-like then Mr. Lockiers, Quamvis (says that
Ancient of this matter) Apostolus omnibus post resurrectionem suam, parem
potestatem tribuat -- tamen ut unitatem manifestaret, unitatis ejusdem originem
ab uno incipientem sua authoritate disposuit, hoc erant utique and caeteri
Apostoli quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio praediti and honoris and potestatis:
Sed exordium ab unitate proficiscitur ut Ecclesia una monstretur. His meaning
is, that Christ at first spoke singularly to Peter in giving the Keys, that he
might set forth the unity of the Church spread throughout the whole World. We
know also that our learned Countryman Camero in his praelect. on the place,
gives yet another Reason of Christ's thus speaking to Peter singularly, which he
very probably confirms by sundry circumstances in the Text, and several
other considerations from other places, which I need not insert here, but
refers the Reader to the Author himself. Yea, I see not reason why it should be
thought that Christ's speaking to Peter in the Singular Number, should be
thought to be in vain unless some mystical signification had been intended
thereby. Christ having asked a Question of the Apostles in common, and Peter
one for all the rest having made the answer, might not Christ i^ his reply upon
the answer, speak singularly to Peter without intending any mystical
signification thereby, but his speaking in such a way behoved to be in vain? I
confess I see not this. 4. Mr. Lockier says here in this Assertion that, this
particular is used, i. e. Peter is particularly spoken to, to set forth that
every particular Congregation of believers united in a visible organical body
for Gods worship, etc. which is as much as to say that Peter in receiving the
Keys personated every particular Congregation united as a visible organicall
body. But then, 1. How consists this with that which he asserted upon the
first Ass. Sect. 2. That the Keys were given at first to Peter not as an
Apostle, nor as as Elder, but as a Believer, and that, in him the Keys were
given to a Church of believers, as believing primarily; and to the Elders, in
the second place as exerted out of that state, and as servants of it. Here they
are given to Peter as personating a Congregation of believers united as an
organicall body and so as personating both simple believers and Elders: There
they are given to Peter not as an Elder, nor representing Elders, but as a
believer and personating believers as believing. 2. If Peter in receiving the
Keys personated, a Congregation of believers, united as an organicall body for
Gods Worship, that is, as now constituted, of people and Officers; Then who
must exercise the Keys, in relation to a Congregation, wanting its own organs,
Ministers and Elders? Go we on.

And for the Key of Excommunication (says he) which is so much denied to the
particular Congregation, the Church of Corinth, is blamed by the Apostle, that
they did not this of themselves without him, and his urging of them, much more
without a Collegiat Church sentence. Answ. True, the Church of Corinth is
blamed that they did not this of themselves: But that the Church of Corinth was
but an single Congregation, and not a Presbyteriall Church, composed of several
particular Congregations, under one Presbyteriall Government, should been
proven, and not barely alleged, or supposed. See the contrary proven by Mr.
Rutherfurd, Due Right. page 460. and seq. the Authors of Jus Divin. page 26.
and seq. upon these grounds. 1. The multitude of believers. 2. The plenty of
Ministers. 3. The diversity of tongues and languages. 4. The plurality of
Churches mentioned therein. 5. A Presbyteriall meeting of Prophets.

If it be said they be fit to Preach and Administer seals, but not to Ordain or
Excommunicat, because the particular Churches cannot make up a sufficient
Eldership. This is the Objection he frames to himself as if it were ours, on
which. 1. We say not they, i. e. the particular Congregation, wholly taken, are
fit to Preach, or may Preach: But we say that any one Pastor rightly called is
fit to Preach and administer seals, his alone 2. We say not simply that the
Eldership of a particular Congregation may not in any case ordain, or
Excommunicate; But we say that when there are more Congregations, to associate
with and when association may be had, they should not perform these acts
alone, but in an associate Presbytery. And we make not the principal ground of
this, that the Eldership of a particular Congregation, is not sufficient ( viz.
for gifts and ability) for exercising these acts (although there be a ground of
necessity of it ordinarily from this; It being seldom that in particular
Congregations there will be found Elderships sufficient for managing these
matters.) For although the Eldership of a particular Congregation were very
sufficient this way, yet we say they ought not to exercise these acts, by
themselves without an associate Presbytery, at least they ought not to do by
themselves independently, without subordination to larger associate
Presbyteries (as Mr. Lockier intends) because the Scripture does not warrant,
Christ has not instituted this, but the contrare. Now his reason following,
being founded upon this mistake in his Objection, which we have cleared, there
is no great need to insist in following it, especially considering it is
nothing else, but, the same in very words with the second reason by the
Dissenting Brethren to prove the minor of their first reason against the
Assembly of Divines, their Proposition touching Ordination, and you have it
fully considered and answered by the Assembly in their answers, see their
Papers page 195. 196. might not Mr. Lockier have read their answer, and either
spared the presenting us with that reason, anew again, or given it with some
new strength against the Assemblies answers to it? exedit miseros crambe
repetita.

If one particular Congregation so constituted, as is before mentioned, be not
sufficient to exercise the full power of the Keys, without a foreign (still
we must bid you correct your nick naming things, and say an associate
Presbytery) then the first Church, to wit, that of Jerusalem, was lame in its
power, till others were erected; And Antioch lame in its power, because but one
Church in association with it, and answerably they made lame work, And other
Congregations which were scattered up and down in Pontus, Cappadocia, etc.
Which in all likelihood by distance of place, and by violence of Heathens,
were in an utter incapacity, to any standing, associate Elderships, were all
lame and could not supply the mortality of their Ministers and Officers, and
so must indeed sink, from a defect intrinsecall, being not able to relieve
themselves without a foreign, an associate power. Ans. 1. From that which is
said by the men Mr. Lockier disputes against it, to wit, that Elderships of
particular Congregations, when they may associate with others have not
sufficiency by divine warrant, to exercise acts of jurisdiction of public and
common concernment, alone, and by themselves, without the concurrence of
associate Elderships, much less, without subordination to them, does not
follow, that the Eldership of one single Congregation, when there is but that
one existing in the world, (such as he supposes that of Jerusalem to have been
at the first) Or if a single Congregation, when though there be others existing
in the Word, yet it is under a Physical incapacity, by some insuperable
impediment, to associate with others (such as he supposes these Congregations
in Pontus, Cappadocia, etc. have been) are so lame and imperfect, that they
cannot in that case when necessity requires, or may not exercise these acts.
It Is granted in these cases they may. Yet this we say withal, a Congregation
in such a condition, though it be not in such a case of absolute imperfection,
that it cannot perform necessary acts of Government for its own preservation,
yet it is not in so complete and perfect a state of Government, as when it may
be and is associate with others, for exercise of Government, this is sufficient
to this reason. Only 2. there is, one or two particulars would be noted. 1.
While as he supposes that the Church of Jerusalem was but one single
Congregation, if he mean all the time till other Churches in other places were
erected, the supposition is beside the truth, as has been proven by the Authors
we referred to before upon this matter. Yet I doubt much if it shall be proven
that at any time when there was a Government in it, that it was but one single
Congregation. 2. As to that he says of Antioch by that one Church wherewith
it was associate, I conceive that he means that of Jerusalem, but first how
will he prove that it was not associate also with the Churches of Syria and
Cilicia. Sure there is great likelihood that it was, at least in that Synod at
Jerusalem, considering that the Synodicall letter is directed to them and it
jointly: again the very Church of Jerusalem, at that time at least, was not a
single Congregation, but a Presbyteriall Church consisting of more particular
Congregations, as the Authors mentioned have proven, and so was Antioch too.
See ^us Divin. of Church Govern. P. 2. c. 13. p. 204. Further, did not Mr. Lock
before acknowledge that meeting at Jerusalem, to be a Synod, oftener then once,
whether it was an association of two Churches or more, this he acknowledged,
that it was a Synod, it is true he would have it to have been only consultative,
and not juridicall: But it suffices my purpose in calling to mind his
acknowledgment, which is to show that he does very impertinently bring in the
Church of Antioch in this Argument, seeing he confesses it to have been in
such an association as made up a Synod, which is an associate Presbytery
superior to a Classical Presbytery.

Lockier would, it seems, say somewhat in the close of this SECT. 44. To say,
that in extraordinary cases, unordinary things may be done, is little to the
satisfaction of a tender heart, especially in divine things, who is apt to
believe, that God has so shaped his public Ordinances, which are injoined to
be used in all places, that places shall not be a standing let to put his
people continually to run beside the instituted rule. To this 1. In
extraordinary cases, to do things unordinary, I mean as to the course appointed
by a positive law, may be with very good satisfaction to a most tender heart,
that is, a well informed and rightly tender heart, and not a superstitious
heart: Have ye not read (says our Savior, Math. 12. 4, 5.) what David did
when he was an hungered, and they that were with him, how he entered into the
house of God, and did eat the shewbread, which was not lawful for him to eat,
neither for them which were with him, but only for the Priests? It was an
unordinary thing for David, or any other men, not Priests, to eat the
Shewbread: Yet in that extraordinary case, when David and his company were
hungry, and no other bread was to be had, let their hearts be never so tender,
if rightly informed, as they did eat, so with good satisfaction they might eat
it. And generally what is not ordinarily to be done by a positive la^, in an
extraordinary case, when necessity requires, may be done, and a tender heart
have good satisfaction in the doing of it, even in things divine. 2. The nature
and constitution of Gods Ordinances is not estimat and defined according to
what shape, the hearts of men are apt to conceive he has put upon them: but
according to what his own word says of his will concerning them. It was
yielding to this aptitude of men's hearts in conceiving Gods shaping of
Ordinances, that baptizing by private persons, and even midwives, did spring
from, into the Church of God. 3. The ordinary and express rule that we speak
of, that single Congregations should not exercise acts of jurisdiction of
public and common concernment, by themselves alone without associat
Elderships, relates to the case when association may be had. But when
association cannot possibly be had, as if a Congregation be in a remote Island,
or divided from all other Churches by some other insuperable impediment of
fellowship, we say that in that case of necessity, it is the ordinary rule to
that Congregation to act as it is, alone by it self: If it shall be said,
seeing when it is that way alone, it may exercise these Ordinances within it
self, then if, other Congregations being in a capacity to be joined with, it
may not exercise them alone, it is abridged off the former liberty it had
before when it was alone by it self. I answ this is no abridgement of its
liberty, but only a strengthening of their power in things of common
concernment; As, suppose there being five Elders in a Congregation, while as
they are only these five, they may act in the Government of that Congregation.
Yet if other fix be added to them, they may not now act without these, yet this
is no abridging of any liberty they had, but a strengthening of their power.
The truth is, that a Congregation in an incapacity of association with other
Congregations, exercises and dispenses all these Ordinances within it self,
not as being one single Congregation, but as being the whole Church. A
Congregation in such a case, is as if there were not another Congregation in
the world, and that is to be the whole Church interpretative. Just as there
being in a Congregation five Elders only, these five act all things belonging
to Elders in the Congregation, not because they are such a definite competent
number, but because they are the whole number; Because if they did act as being
such a definite number, they could not admit any more to join with them in the
work.

it is (says he) confessed by our Brethren that the Judicatures of Classes and
Congregations do not differ specifically, but only in extension: Then if they
differ only in extension, the intrinsecall power of the Elders of the
Congregation, is the same with the Elders of Classes; And then there is no
specificall act that the one puts forth, but the other can put forth too, as
occasion shall require, can Ordain and Excommunicate as the Collegiat Church,
and so is the Congregationall Church complete if the Classical Church be.
Answ. 1. Mr. Lockier is not well enough acquainted, it seems, with the
judgment of all P^esbyterians concerning the difference between
Congregationall and Classical Elderships, when as he says that they confess
there is no specificall or formal difference between them, if he were
acquainted better with them, he would find some to be of that mind, that tho
there be Elders of a single Congregation, yet that there is not a Presbytery of
a single Congregation having power, to exercise Ecclesiastical jurisdiction,
and I confess it is hard to find any pattern in the Word of God of such a
Presbytery. But, 2. When as he says, that in the confession of Presbyterians
they differ only in extension, he mistakes the judgment of the most part of
all Presbyterians, who, and that indeed according to truth, hold that the power
of a Classical Presbytery, as to the exercise of Government, not only reaches
a larger object, i. e. differs in extension, but also more acts of
jurisdiction, as Ordination, Excommunication, which the Eldership of a single
Congregation, as one single Congregation, cannot exercise, and that is to
differ intensive. But I suppose all were granted which is asked here, that
Classical Presbyteries differ not specifically from Congregationall, that
their power of jurisdiction differs only extensive, that there is no
specificall act exercised by the Classical, but the Congregationall may
exercise in it self, when occasion requires, and so that it is complete, this
way, (which is just such compleatnesse, as we mean when we say that a Boy is a
complete Man) tho all this were granted, does it hereupon follow that larger
associate Presbyteries juridicall are useless devices of men? No ways as has
been showed before. Although it were granted that the Eldership of a particular
Congregation may exercise all these specificall acts, there may be many cases,
wherein it may be not only expedient, but necessary that the matter be judged
and determined by an associate Presbytery, as when it is a matter of great
difficulty, when other Congregations are much and nearly, or equally
concerned, when there is division and difference in the Congregationall
Eldership or Church that the matter cannot be agreed upon and determined
amongst themselves, when there is an appeal propter malam administrationem, vel
malam administrationem praesumptam, etc.

If the particular Church had not been complete to do its own work without a
foreign, an associate Eldership, the Apostles, would have mentioned something
of this combineing of Elderships -- and when this might been surely the Church
of Christ durst not neglect the use of it: And yet we find not the one, and do
find the other, -- the Apostle when he took his leave of the Church of Ephesus,
commends it not to associat Elders, but both Elders and people as one flock to
the grace of God, Act. 20. 32. Answ. 1. Let it be so that the particular Church
is complete to do its own work. Yet, 1. Is not every Congregation, as a part of
the whole body of the Visible Church of Christ, to look to the work of fellow
members, and parts, and of the whole, according to its measure and proportion
of power? Should one member say to another, I must see to my own work: Ought I
to care for thee? Are there not matters of public and common concernment? 2.
No particular Church is politically so complete as to do every work of its own
in every case, as has been showed, but it will in this, stand in need of an
associat Superior Eldership. 3. It has been abundantly proven by the Authors
we referred to before, that Scripture is not sil^nt, but often mentions the
thing of associated Presbyteries, and all exceptions made to the contrary
abundantly confuted. 4. What Mr. Lockier has found or not found we know not,
nor stands on it, but he might have found a Presbytery over more Congregations
then one, in Jerusalem, Antioch, Corinth, Ephesus, and he cannot deny but he
has found the Church of Antioch making use of an associate Synodicall
Presbytery at Jerusalem, and that that Presbytery was more then consultative,
even authoritative and juridicall has been proven: But I think what ever he
conceives that he has found of a Congregationall Eldership exercising
jurisdiction, Ordaining or Excommunicating by it self, he shall hardly point us
to the place of Scripture where he found the instance of it, what he says of
the Elders and Church of Ephesus from Acts 20. has been answered before.

SECTION XII. Reply to Mr. Lockiers Answers to some Objections from SECTION 47.
to the end, wherein separation from not only this Church of Scotland, but all
the Protestant Presbyterian Churches, as Idolatrous, is driven at.
Lockier having hitherto gone about, as he could, to maintain that the power of
the Keys and Government of the Church of Christ, ought not to be in the hands
of Officers and Governors set over the Church in the Lord, by the Lord
himself; but in the hands of the whole Church, and that in the hands of every
particular Congregation, independently and supremely without association in or
subordination unto any common Ecclesiastic Government (which how well he has
asserted and maintained we leave it to all understanding impartial Readers to
give their judgment) he applies himself, to Answer some Objections against the
things he has handled, as he says. But what Objections are they I pray? none
of those which are brought directly against the points maintained by him before
this. Likely he found these too hard for him to grapple with, and therefore
thought it his wisdom to pass them rather by in silence. And the Objections
he brings, are only some things which he conceived might been said against his
design in casting this Little Stone at Presbyterian Churches, to drive all
good Christians, if they might be affrighted, to separation from them. A wicked
and shameful design, especially for a man professing Godliness to have set
before him. I mind not here to insist or enlarge myself upon the Question of
Separation from Churches, not only because other learned men have spoken
abundantly and well upon that purpose, namely my Reverend and Learned Colleague
in the Ministry, and Superior in the society wherein I live, Mr. Rutherfurd
in his Peaceable Plea and Due Right: But also because I find nothing brought by
this Author, upon the matter, worth the staying upon, in handling that matter. I
shall only give some few notes upon some things the Author, I think out of
hear of passion, has vented himself in.

etc.) then a supreme Bishop, or Archbishop over the Church in such a Nation
(the Prelaticall Protestants Idol he would say) and then a combination of
Bishops over Churches (hereby meaning an associat Presbytery or Assembly
Presbyteers Ruling more Churches, odiously calling them Bishops) that to him is
also Idolatry. So, that command 2 Cor. 6. 17. come out from one kind of
Idolatry, is come out from all; Or else that rule binds only to separate from
Heathnish Idolatry. What is not warranted by the Word is an Idol -- Answ. We
shall not deny but that whatsoever is practiced in the Worship of God, or set
up as an Ordinance without Gods warrant in his Word, may be comprehended under
Idolatry taking Idolatry in a large sense; but that every thing set up or
practiced in the Worship of God, or in Ordinances, is such Idolatry as is a
ground sufficient to separate from a Church wherein it is practiced, as no true
Church, is a conceit in it self without warrant of the Word, nay directly
contrare to the allowed practice of Gods people in the Word, both in Old and
New Testament. This conceit of Mr. Lockiers, is very Brounisme and rigide
Separatisme ingraine. But of this and the place 2 Cor. 6. 17. see enough in the
Reverend Author whom I last mentioned. But as for association or combination of
Churches, under a common Presbytery, it is warranted in the Word of God, and
so is his Ordinance, as has been abundantly proven, and what Mr. Lockier has
brought to the contrare, we trust has been sufficiently refuted. And therefore
let him consider, his account he has to make to Almighty God, for so atrocious
a calumny as his branding it with the name of Idolatry, and involving all the
Reformed Orthodox Churches of Jesus Christ, in the fearful crime of Idolatry.
And as for his pressing separation from all the Reformed Churches as
Idolatrous, I shall say no more, but bring some Godly men amongst Independents
themselves giving testimony against him. Hear Mr. Hooker, speaking in the name
of the Divines of new England of the Congregations of old England. I would
(says he) entreat the Reader that if he meet with such accusations, that we
nullify all Churches beside our own -- that we are rigide Separatists, etc.
such bitter calumnies, a wise meek spirit passes by them as an unworthy and
ungrounded aspersion. That which that Godly man in name of many other
Independent Brethren with him, entreats may not be believed to be thought or
said by them, accounts it an unworthie and groundless aspersion, Mr. Lockier
with open mouth ownes and proclaims that and worse: Then we see what the
Dissenting Brethren in the Assembly of Divines say of their keeping communion
with Presbyterian Churches, Papers given in to the Honorable Committee, etc.
page 29, 30. holding communion with neighbor Churches in baptizing our
Children (as occasion may fall out in absence of Ministers) in their Churches,
by occasional receiving the Communion in their Churches; Also our Ministers to
Preach in their Congregations, and receiving theirs also to Preach in ours, as
Ministers of the Gospel, as mutually their shall be a call from each other;
when we have any cases hard and difficult for our selves, to advise with the
Elders of their Churches; in case of choice of Elders, to seek the approbation
and right hand of fellowship from Godly Ministers of their Churches; and when
an Ordination falls out, to desire the presence and approbation of their Elders
with our own; In case any of our Churches miscarry through mal-administration,
to be willing upon scandal taken by their Churches, to give an account as unto
Sister Churches offended, and to esteem and account (as we do) a sentence of
non-Communion by them, by Churches, against us, upon such scandals wherein they
are not satisfied, an heavy and sad punishment, and to be looked upon, as a
means to humble us, and an Ordinance of God to reduce us. If those men, pillars
of the Independent way, had accounted, as Mr. Lockier does, Presbyterian
Churches to be idolatrous, would they have professed to hold and retain such
Communion with them? Nay, do they not themselves, allege all these things, as
Arguments to evidence that they are far from the mind of those who accounts
them false Churches. All this (say they) is more, then as if in nothing they
were to be complied with, nor their Churches to be communicated with in any
thing which should argue Church Communion, more is said and done by those who
account them false Churches.

Sect. 49. Answ. Sect. 50. is but a fiction set up by himself, that he may seem
at least, to gain a victory. We use not to reason so, many has been converted
under Presbyteriall Government, does not this seal it to be of God. We know
many have been, and doubts not but some are at this day, converted, under
Papal Government which is very Antichristianisme. But this, Sr, we tell you,
that Presbyteriall Government in the exercise thereof, has been the blessed
means under God of Converting souls, reduceing them from their sinful ways to
God and his Son Christ Jesus, the terror of evil doers, the preserver of his
Church, the Hedge that has guarded the Vineyard of the Lord from Foxes, the
very Hammer of Errors, Haeresies and Haereticks, and therefore is so much at
this day maligned and hated of all such, that, in these lamentable times, has
turned aside unto their loose and erroneous ways. It Is true, Presbyterians
takes it for no good Argument to prove Episcopal Government to be of God, that
many were Converted under it; and believes it was a Government of man's
invention: Yet, Presbyterians never thought of Churches under Episcopal
Government, in which the truth of the Gospel was Preached, and Sacraments
administered according to Christ's institution, for their substance, as you think
of Presbyteriall, that they were false Churches. But something more of this in
considering his next Objection and Answ: thereunto, which fully unbowels the
Authors design against Presbyterian Churches.

But many Godly being in the Presbyterian way, is it not more proper to purge
then to pull down all: To make use of the root, and not up with root and
branch. To which his Answer in sum is: that it was just so objected by the
Godly in England when the Presbyterians would have down with our Episcopal
Church; But it behoved to be up root and branch. So must now the Presbyterian.
The Lords controversy has come about to it, and means the same. And thereupon
he gives his plain and faithful warning to his dear Brethren. Does this man
know of what spirit he is? To speak so Edomitelike of all Presbyterian
Churches. Down with them, raze them to the ground, up with root and branch of
them. Hoc Ithacus velit and magno mercentur Atridae. I think the man has wished
a piece of acceptable service to Antichrist, and his father the Devil. Lord
grant him mercy of it. It Is none of our pleading for the Presbyterian way, that
many godly being in it, therefore simply purging of Presbyterian Churches, were
more proper then rooting up and pulling down all. If any man, Sir, has come to
reason with you, thus poorly for Presbyterian Churches, we doubt not but ere
that time he has dealt treacherously against the truth. We tell you, the
Presbyterian way, is Gods way instituted in his Word, the contrary whereof you,
but beggingly suppose in framing your Objection, but has not, nor ever will
prove. Yet this we affirm, that albeit there be in Churches, corruptions, not
only in the conversations of many persons, but also in some things in the
Worship and Ordinances, yet if they be not such corruptions as everts and
destroys the foundation and substance of Religion: But there is therein, the
substance of the Gospel orthodoxly Preached, the Sacraments for their
substantialls agreeable to their institution, the way to be kept is, purge out
the old leaven. And there is neither in Old nor in New Testament, warrant for
separating from, or pulling down and rooting up such Churches. And as to that
Mr. Lockier alleges, that Presbyterians would have down Episcopal Churches:
Either he has not understood or misrepresented Presbyterians mind in that
matter: Indeed Presbyterians were zealous to have the corrupt office of Prelacy
plucked up, root and branch, because a plant that God had never planted in his
Church, and could not hear of a purging or circumcising of it, that some would
been at, by clipping from them officialls and such other appendicles and
limiting them thus and thus. But that the whole frame of Churches that were
under Prelaticall government should be razed down to the ground, plucked up root
and branch, cast all in a heap of ruin, that out of the ruins thereof, their
should been picked out here and there some stones, to build up new Churches, it
never entered in the thoughts of some Presbyterians. Nay, but on the contrary,
even in the time that Prelates possessed their Government, sound Presbyterians,
as with the one hand they did fight against Prelates, the corrupt Officers; So
did they at that same time with the other hand, against Separatists (with whom
Mr. Lockier here agrees) maintaining the Churches of England to be true
Churches from whose communion it was not lawful to separat. Witness amongst
sundry others, that grave and judicious piece written by sundry non-conforme
Divines jointly, in the times of Prelates, and published by Mr. Rathband, An.
1604.

Lockier in his SECT. 53. goes about to prove that it is not purging that must
be applied to Presbyterian Churches, but they must be pulled down and plucked up
root and branch, or utterly separated from. His discourse in sum comes to
this much. When the form of Churches or their matter is right, tho many things
may be done amiss, then purging may be used, but when matter and form both
are corrupt and naught, as it is in Presbyterian Churches. For form, knit by
situation, and by foreign forinsecall Elderships: For matter three parts of
four naught, profane, Atheists, of Elders and people; So that the Church state
is quite dead; It Is not a man but a carcass, not a Church, but a nest of
unclean birds, a den of thieves: to depart is proper. But to talk of purging
such, the dead, is discourse full of weakness, if not of unwillingnesse to see
and censure our own shame -- ^sw. Verily Sr, I am of the mind that any judious
man that reads your discourse in this Section, will account it such as is full
of that which ye charge on others, weakness and much worse, I will not say the
worst that might be said, but shall rather pray God to be merciful to you in
this matter, so blinded with prejudice and transported with passion, far
otherwise then becomes a man professing, to have the meek and wise Spirit of
Christ. 1. If speaking so broadly, he mean of Presbyterian Churches through the
World (as indeed your discourse here for pulling them down and separating from
them, runs generally without any exception or limitation) that for their
matter, three parts of four are naught, profane atheists, etc. What bold, and
blind conjecturing is this? 2. If ye mean only the Church of Scotland, and that
therein three parts of four are naught, profane, atheists, both Elders and
people: Yet I say, who art thou that judges another man's servant? No doubt
many amongst us are nothing such as they ought to be, and it has been always
so for the most part, in Churches from the beginning: But that they are so many
and so gross, profane, atheists, both people and Elders, for a man that is a
stranger to the most part of our Churches, Elders and people thereof, to
pronounce so peremptorly, is more then he dare answer to God or his own
conscience upon second considerat thoughts. 3. Suppose it were so indeed, that
three of four in Churches, were naught, yet, supposing in Churches, there be
the true Doctrine of the Gospel Preached, the Sacraments, for their substance
and essentialls agreeable to their institution, the acts of worship for matter
pure, must therefore, Gods people separat from those Churches, and the true
Ordinances and Worship of God therein: Or must the Churches be pulled down, and
plucked up root and branch? Show us warrant either of precept or practice for
this in the whole Word of God. Nay the strain of Prophets, Apostles, and Christ
himself are clearly, as the Sunshine, against it. How often was it so with the
ancient Church, that we may say, more then three parts of four were profane
and naught? And yet did not the Godly and the Prophets of the Lord continue in
the exercise of the Ordinances and Worship of God in that Church? Was it not so
in the Church of the Jews, in the time of Christ being amongst them upon earth?
Did ever Christ for that require his Disciples to depart and separat from that
Church? Or did he not himself, never a white the less, continue in the Church
communion thereof? Yea when in glory writing a Letter to the Church of Sardis,
of whom he testifies, that they had a name that they were living, but yet were
dead, and that there were but a few names there which had not defiled their
garments: Yet his wise and meek zeal is not for pulling down and rooting up and
separating from the Church Communion in his Ordinances and Worship. But that is
his direction, v. 2, 3. Be watchful and strengthen the things which remain and
are ready to die. -- Remember therefore how thou have received and heard, and
hold fast and repent. 4. But suppose that de facto, in some Churches the
generality of persons Elders and people were so gross and abominably profane,
that there were no living for godly ones amongst them, is this a good Argument
to prove that the very species and kind must be destroyed and plucked up root
and branch? Unless that Mr. Lockier could show that the way of Presbyterian
Churches of it self, in its very kind, allows Churches to be constitute so, of
persons notoriously profane, and atheists, that will not follow: But if he
shall say this, we will avow it to be a slander. 5. When as he will have our
Churches to be destitute of a right form, because they are not united by way
of their Church Covenant, but are knit together only by situation, and by
foreign forensicall Elderships: And upon this account, will have them no
Churches, but only carcasses of Churches. It is utterly false that we make
situation or cohabitation in place or a foreign Eldership the form of our
Churches. We say according to the Word of God, that the form which gives the
being to the Universal Church Visible, and unto every member thereof, is the
profession of, and entering unto that general Covenant with God in his Son
Jesus Christ, and whereby every Christian is oblidged and engaged to walk in
all the ways of God and perform all duties toward God, and other Christians,
in all their relations, required of them, according as God gives opportunity
and occasion to perform and exercise them. As for Mr. Lockiers Church Covenant,
distinct from that general Covenant with God in Christ, as the form of a
particular Church giving it the being of a Church, and right to the Ordinances
of Christ, it is nothing else but a new device of men, having no warrant of
precept or example in the Word of God either of the Old or New Testament: And
his un-Churching of our Churches for want of such a Covenant as this, is like
many other things in this piece, has more boldness in it then understanding or
reason. Concerning this matter of the Church Covenant. See Mr. Rutherfurd. Due
Right of Presbytery. Caudrey. Review of Mr. Hookers Survey, cap. 4. Gul.
Apollon. Consider. of certain Controversies.

Lockier going on yet more to vent his Brounisticall separation objects to
himself thus, SECT. 54. But will no my protest serve the turn? If things be
corrupt in the Church, and I protest against them, may not I go on with that
Church? As for instance: If they take in corrupt members or admit corrupt or
impenitent communicants; And I protest against those, may I not go on and
partake with these, and yet be innocent, and enjoy as much presence of God in
his Ordinances, as if all were holy and good? To which he answers, SECT. 55.
1. If protesting were only words then such a thing will do. But to say, the
precious should not mingle with the vile, and yet the man does this daily and
continually, is not to protest but to mock, and dissemble; Because here is not
a mere passivenesse in this man, as to the going on in that thing which he
protests against. 2. Again, in practical things, it is not so much a man's word as
his practice, which gives the dislike. If a man of an idolatrous Church, should
stand up and protest against the Mass, and yet still go to Mass, I doubt how
well this would please God, or deliver him from guilt. Naaman implicitly
protests against the idolatry he had practiced, that he would worship no God,
but the God of Israel: and did he continue to bow down? Yes, say some, but he
begs pardon for it. But most aptly in our last English Annot. The word being
rendered in the time past: Pardon that I bowed down. 3. Protesting is a piece
of revenge, which is the vehemence of Repentance, and the clearing of ones
self, which how well this will accord with halting and halving, is worthy of
deep thoughts of heart: Can two walk together, etc. 4. And our Brethren, when
they protest against an Assembly do not submit unto it.

Augustine and Optatus in Donatists, by the first Reformers in the fantastic
Anabaptists. See particularly, Mr. Rutherfurds Learned Disputes on this
purpose, in his Peaceable Plea, and in his Due Right of Presbytery. I shall for
the present note but some few things on that which Mr. Lockier has here.

If things be corrupted in the Church, and I protest against them, may I not go
on with that Church? We own not the affirmative of it. We acknowledge that it
is not lawful to go on with any Church, in the practice of things that are
corrupt in it. 2. We acknowledge further that there may be such corrupt things
in a Church, or a society taking unto them the name and profession of a Church,
as that it is not lawful to go on with such a Church or join with them in
Church communion at all, as where the Worship is grossly idolatrous, or
Doctrine is publicly taught or professed contrary to the very foundation of
Christianity. But bring the case to the particular corruption instanced by the
Author, and then we say, that if in a Church, through negligence or loosnesse
of discipline, corrupt members be admitted, or wicked scandalous persons be
admitted to the Communion, the Godly indeed ought in an orderly way to testify
against such a corruption, to say to Archippus to the Minister and Rulers, take
heed to your Ministry, to mourn for such abuses in the Church: But, ought not
to separat from that Church, and the exercise of the true Worship and
Ordinances of Christ therein: But, may go on and partake with that Church in
warranted acts of Worship, participation of the Sacraments, in the exercise of
all Gods instituted Ordinances, and yet be free of the sin of corrupt fellow
partakers of these Ordinances, and of the sin of Rulers sinfully admitting
such; enjoy Gods presence in the Ordinances, as well as if all joining with
them were holy and good, and to say that other men's wickednesses in abuse of
Ordinances, prejudices or defiles these Ordinances to me using them aright for
my self, and testifying against, mourning for others abuse thereof, is a wild
error contrary to the stream of holy Scripture both in the Old and new Test.
as has been abundantly demonstrated by these I last mentioned.

Lockiers words, a gross supposing or begging of the very thing mainly in
Question, viz. That if wicked persons be admitted to fellowship in a Church, as
to the communion of the Lords Supper, that the thing a Godly Christian ought to
protest or testify against, is all joining in the Ordinance when such wicked
persons are joining therein with them: This is a very begging of the thing in
Question and utterly false. The thing the Godly ought to testify and protest
against, is the wickeds presuming to abuse the Ordinance, and the Rulers
sinful permitting them so to do. But to say he does or should protest that no
Godly person ought to use the Ordinance of God, or perform warrantable
Worship, when wicked persons either thrust themselves in with them, or
negligent Rulers permits them so to do, is to suppose the thing in Question,
and is unwarrantable, yea contrare to the current stream of the practice of
the Godly under the Old and New Testament both, yea to the practice of Jesus
Christ himself in the Church of the Jews. To his second exception. It Is true,
in practical things it is not so much a man's word as his practice which gives
the dislike. But the Question is whether, the performance of a lawful and
necessary duty of worship, or exercise of a true Ordinance of Jesus Christ, for
instance, partaking of the Lords Supper to remember his death till he come
again, when and where wicked and scandalous persons will thrust themselves in
to do it profanely, or are permitted by Rulers so to do, be such a practical
thing as I am oblidged to dislike, as a thing unlawful for me to do, this is
the Question, the negative whereof we hold to be the truth of God held forth in
his Word. The instance produced by the Author for clearing this his second
exception, viz. of a man in an Idolatrous Church protesting against the Mass,
and yet still going to Mass, is so grossly and absurdly impertinent, that one
may wonder how it could be alleged, in this purpose, by an intelligent man.
The Mass is even upon the matter one of the grossest Idolatries that ever was
in the world. And for a man to go to Mass, when he pretends to protest to go
against it, is to add, to commission of Idolatry, mocking of God and sinning
against light professedly. So that Mr. Lockier, needed not make it a matter of
doubting how well such a practice should please God, or deliver the man from
guiltiness. But what is this, to participating of a true Ordinance of Jesus
Christ (for instance, the communion of the Lords Table) in a Church not
Idolatrous, but may be, negligent and loose in the exercise of Discipline, and
permitting wicked scandalous persons to participate in that Ordinance, when the
Godly participating with them, testifies against such abuse in the Ordinances?
Nay, can it be freed, from great rashness, (I will not say that which I might)
to parallel these two together? But yet farther to bring in as a parallel to
clear the business, Naamans practicing of heathnish Idolatry in the house of
Rimmon, amongst a people not so much as professing the true God, but an
Heathnish people professedly, denying the God of Israel, what will intelligent
pious men say to this? To the third exception. Whether Mr. Lockier defines
protesting well, to be a piece of revenge, the vehemency of Repentance, let
Lawyers judge. To my simple apprehension, protesting, in the nature of it, has
nothing to do with Repentance, as not importing guiltiness in the person
protesting, but being an act whereby he testifies against the sinfulness and
unjustice of the dead of some others, that he himself may appear clear and free
from the concurrence in or the accession to it, and preserves himself in a
legal capacity to challenge it before a judge competent, but whereas Mr.
Lockier supposes that a man protesting or testifying against the intrusion or
admission of scandalous wicked persons, into the participation of an Ordinance
of Christ or lawful necessary act of Worship, if he participate in that
Ordinance or Worship, when and where scandalous persons participates therein,
that in this the man halts and halves, he does but beg the thing which will not
be granted to him, and he will never prove. And on begged suppositions to say,
how these will accord, is worthy deep thoughts of heart, favors of contempt of
Readers, if not of somewhat else. To the fourth, when there is a Protestation
against the constitution and very being of an Assembly, it is true there is no
submitting to it by the Protesters: But yet there may be a protesting against
some on or more particular deeds of an Assembly when the constitution and being
of it is acknowledged, and to such an Assembly submission is not refused or
denied by any principles of ours: So there may be a protesting or testifying
against some particular abuses in a Church, and yet communion kept with that
Church in lawful, true, necessary acts of Divine Worship. But if the Author
mean, that if such an abuse be in a Church, as that wicked persons are
permitted in it, or coming to Communion, that in that case, the Godly must
protest not only against the deed, but the very thing of that Church, as no
Church, and therefore must not join therewith, in warranted acts of Worship,
but separate from its Communion altogether, he will not have the simile of
Assemblies and our carriage to them, to go along with him, and it is in it self
without warrant contrare to the warrant of Scripture, and we doubt not to say a
most Schismatic Assertion.

Mr. Lockier in Sect. 56. and 57. brings and answers a new Objection, and
therein raises much dust to small purpose, about the causalitie of Baptism,
as to the constituting a Church. The Objection, is this, Does not Baptism
give the form of a true Church? and you say if the form and foundation be
right, it may be capable to purge it self right. Sir, you are much mistaken, if
you think that we hold Baptism alone to give the form of a true Church. We
say it is the initiall seal and solemn entry and admission of Members into the
Visible Church, so this, is a needless Objection brought in, it would seem to
vent a new conceit borrowed out of Mr. Hookers Survey, part 1. c. 5. of a
Church without Baptism, of which a word shortly upon his Answer to this
Objection: Only here we say this, that which gives form and being to a Church
is the true Doctrine of the Gospel and Covenant of Grace, for substantials at
least, solemnly avowed by the sealing of Baptism, and Preached by a lawful
Ministry ( Lawful Ministry. I say, as to the essentials of a Gospel Ministry)
these three at least are necessary to give the being of a Gospel Church. And
where these are, tho there be many corruptions and defects in the Church, yet
it is capable to purge it self from its corruptions, and to supply its defects,
and to urge unchurching of such a society, and dissolving of it, as no Church,
or total separation from it, is not of GOD.

But come we to speak a little to the Authors Answer to his Objection: Baptism
(says he) does not give the form of Church membership. So say we too:
Profession of the true Christian faith is that which gives the form of
Church Membership de jure, Baptism is the solemn seal thereof. But Mr. Lock.
having in his Objection spoken of that which gives form and being to a Church,
how falls he now to speak of that which gives form of Church Membership? Is
there no more requisite to give form and being to a Church (we are now speaking
of a Church Visible) but that which gives form to Church membership simply?
This is a gross mistake. Profession of the Christian Faith, simpliciter, is
that which adaequately gives the form and being to Church Membership simply.
But to give form and being to a Church, there must be concurring with this, a
Ministerial dispensation of the Doctrine of Faith and Ordinances, by such
means as Christ has instituted them to be dispensed by. A Church existing
without a Ministry, complete in the nature and being of a Visible Church, is a
thing unheard of in the Word of GOD. See Huds. c. 6. vindic.

Lockiers purpose in hand. His aim here in his solution is to maintain that
Baptism is no ways necessary to Churchmembership. We confess it is not that
which gives the form and being of a member or the jus, but yet we say it is
necessary as the solemn seal of actual admission into the possession of
Churchmembership in the ordinary way appointed by Christ: The Authors Reasons
for his Assertion are two. 1. There may be a Church, and so consequently
members of a Church before Baptism. Ministers are before Baptism, and the
Church is before Ministers, for out of it are they made and have their keys,
etc. See this abundantly dashed by Caudry in Mr. Hookers Surv. c. 5. 2. Says
he, The Church was visibleble when there was no seal, neither Circumcision, nor
Baptism, and then how could these constitute a Church? Answ. What a childish
reasoning is this? There was a Church without Circumcision and without Baptism,
when neither of them was yet instituted by God. Ergo, after Circumcision was
instituted to be the solemn seal of his Church, there might yet been a Jewish
Visible Church without it, and now after Baptism is instituted to be a solemn
initiall seal of the Christian Church, there may be a Christian Church without
Baptism: he might as well say that there may be a Christian Church without the
profession and belief of that Article: JESUS the Son of MARY is the CHRIST,
why? the Church was sometime when there was no such Article to be believed.

Besides how much this gratifieth the judgment and practice of Anabaptists,
any one may see, who constitute Church members by baptism, and how much
Presbyterians are against Anabaptists, all their writings show, and how much
they lay to our charge for ushering in, and countenancing this Tenent. Answ.
How we, holding Baptism to be the seal and solemn admission of Visible Church
members, do gratify the judgment and practice of the Anabaptists in that
which is Anabaptism, their excluding of Infants of Christians from Baptism, I
profess my self one that cannot see. The Author would have done well to have
assayed to show us how that any way advantageth their Tenent; Indeed he says
true, that Presbyterians are much against Anabaptists Doctrine. But would
hereby, fasten a piece of dottage upon them: Because that being so much against
that Doctrine, they yet maintain a Tenet concerning Baptism, that much
gratifies it, but let him assay to clear this, for it is not enough to say, any
one may see it. What ground there is to look upon his Tenet concerning the
allowed matter of the visible Church as tending to Anabaptism, we have showed
before in the 1. part of this Examination; But it seems to me, that in this
place the Author does not a little gratify the judgment of the total enemies
of Baptism, and Socinians that accounts it needless amongst Christians. While
as he averres that there may be a Church (he must mean a Christian Church else
he speaks not to purpose) before baptism, and that even before they be
baptized, acting eminent Church acts, as making to themselves Ministers. If
this, to aver that persons may be a Church without baptism, and men may be
Ministers of a Christian Church without baptism, if this Assertion be not
advantageous to enemies of Baptism, I leave it to the Authors second thoughts.

But since this opinion prevailed, we see a vast toleration of all strange and
damnable Doctrines. This indeed is an heavy prejudice against your way, and the
thing in fact is too too palpably true, and you could not here deny it, but
only goes about to extenuat, yea and in a great measure to justify it; and so
much the more sad is this charge against you, that not only has this thing,
eventually, followed, since your opinion has prevailed: But it tends to this in
the very nature of it, while as it attributes to every single Congregation, may
be, of seven or ten persons an Independent supreme Ecclesiastical power in
matters of Religion, so that, if any such Congregation should hold and teach
any Haereticall Doctrine, there is no Ecclesiastic power on earth that can
authoritatively interpose to reclaim or censure them. And for the Civil
Magistrate, he, say you, must take heed how he uses his sword for a weed-hook
in these maculis mentis. But now briefly see we what the Author returns in
answer to this charge.

We are willing to be a terror to evil works, and as unwilling to be a
terror to good: We are not so well skilled in divine things as to tell what
every thing is in the bud: We are patient more then some would have us, till
the bud blossom and bear, and when we see the fruit naught, upon all
occasions, we give our witness against it, by dispute, discountenance, and
otherwise as we understand the Word to warrant us. Answ. Alas! Sr, are you so
ill skilled in Divine things, as that you cannot tell what these many vile
errors vented and taught by many in these lands are? which yet to this day are
permitted without any terror used against them; and think you that terror
enough against such things, to Dispute against them? (as for discountenancing
them, we profess, we can find no discountenancing of any maintaining errors
amongst us more then those that are most orthodox, and for your other ways of
witnessing against them we know not what it is) forsooth, Sr, a bold Haeretick
will care much for all your Disputes, yet I believe it is little testimony even
this way, that this Author has given against the gross errors of the time:
let him show if ever he has moved his tongue, or employed his pen, against
Anabaptism, Antinomianism, Arminianism, Socinianism, and other gross errors,
which he knows abounds amongst his Contrymen both at home and in the Army
in this Land, as (...) has done with much bitterness, against the Government of
the Church of Scotland (which yet is according to the truth of God) and if not
he personally, I know not if Mr. Lockier has taken the Covenant.
yet the supreme Representative of his Nation, and many of the prime Officers
of the Army stand bound by the Covenant and Oath of GOD to maintain and defend.

But (says he) if Tares and Wheat must grow together into the World, till the
end thereof, the Civil Magistrate had need to be wary, how he uses his Sword
for a Weed-hook, in maculis mentis, spots of the mind, lest Presbytery get a
by-blow amongst the rest. Some men's weapons to fight in their quarrels, are to
us as Saul's Armor to David, too heavy, we cannot tell how to wield them;
Because we take a little stone and a sling, when others would take an halter and
a cross, do we then give a vast toleration? Not by might nor by power Civil,
but by Gods Spirit in his Word and other Ordinances, we fight in these
quarrels: Which weapons the not so terrible to look on, yet are mighty through
God to east down strong imaginations of vain men. Answ. 1. They are not mere
maculae mentis, that we think the Magistrates Sword should meddle with: But to
extenuat damnable Doctrines vented to the high dishonor of God and seduceing
of souls from the Truth of God to the destruction of their souls, under the
name of spots of the mind, favors little of the true zeal of God, and to
reckon in Presbytery amongst these is to call light darkness, for which, I
pray God grant the A^thor Repentance. 2. If the Civil Magistrate must use the
Sword to be a terror to evil works, either he must use it as a Weed-hook
against such Haereticall Doctrines, or you must say that Haereticall Doctrines
are no evil works, which is to contradict the Word of God in terminis, Philip.
3. 2. 3. It is but an odious intimation that we would have an halter and cross
taken against the teachers of every erroneous Doctrine. Indeed there be some
blasphemous Doctrines, (and not a few of them in the time) As a halter or a
cross is too little for the obstinat venters of them I have heard with mine
ears, so^e boldly avow that every man anointed with the spirit, is as much a
Christ, as JESUS the Son of GOD.
: but there are others ways whereby the Civil Magistrates might employ their
power for suppressing false Doctrines from being brought forth to the
dishonouring of God, if they were as zealous for Gods honor as they are for
their own interest (...) 4. While as you do here take off the Civil power from
meddling with these strange and damnable doctrines, and allows no other means
of dealing against them but by the Word and other spiritual Ordinances, if you
do not give a toleration to them, let all men of common sense judge, the
Passages of Scripture hinted at by the Author for putting a color upon this
opinion of his, are miserably abused. For the former, the parable of the tares,
I refer the Reader to Mr. Rutherfurd.

For the latter, Zachar. 4. 6. Not by might nor by power but by my Spirit,
says the Lord of Hosts. Certain it is from the whole context, that the Lords
meaning there is this; Because the people lately returned from Baylon and now
employed in the work of building the Temple, were much discouraged in the
prosecution of the work, by the thoughts of the greatness of the work, of the
greatness of the power and opposition of their enemies, and of their own
weakness, he would have them to know, that it was not by the power of the
creature but by his own power, that, that work was to be carried through, and
that therefore they ought not to be discouraged, seeing his power was
sufficient to bear down and remove the greatest impediments and to make the
weakest means effectual to accomplish the work. 5. It is true that the word
and other Ordinances are mighty through God to cast down strong imaginations of
vain men, but is it therefore a good Argument and Consequence, the Word of God
and other Ordinances are mighty through God to cast down such strong
imaginations, as Haereticall Doctrines, Ergo, the Civil Magistrate has nothing
to do to suppress the teaching of them by his Sword and power; If so, then it
will as well follow, he has nothing to do to suppress, or punish the
out-breakings of carnal lusts in adulteries, thefts, murders, etc. Why? For I
believe the Word and other Ordinances of God are mighty through God to cast
down these as well as the other.

The Author adds, Order is but making to in Church and State, and therefore
things are but disorderly in this Nation, Wars make Laws mute. Answ. It Is
well that at last he acknowledges that it is so, that errors are tolerat (for
that is the charge he is answering to) and that this is disorderly (which yet
how it can consist well with what he has now been saying in the preceding
words, I see not) but if the excuse for this be relevant, I leave it to God and
all judicious indifferent men knowing the progress of matters these ten or
twelve years, and what ought to have been done, and might have been done, had
men been willing to have it done, for settling truth, and removing things
contrary to sound Doctrine, as was undertaken by Covenant and Oath to the most
high God to be done.

Finally, Christians, take this answer to all that may be further objected. To
be enquiring is honorable, but to be ever learning and never practicing is
dangerous; It was an heavy curse that Jeremiah wished upon himself, Jerem. 20.
17. It is an heavy curse indeed upon that poor soul concerning whom it may be
said, the womb of truth is always great with him, always in pangs and throws
with him, but cannot bring forth. Forsooth, Sir, you have soon done with it. We
must take this for answer to all that may be further objected against that you
have been pleading for. Stand not upon these Objections, but fall to practice,
down with our Church Government and Churches to the ground (this to my
conception is the scope of these words, else, I confess I understand them not)
sure this man has had a wonderful conceit of what he has been saying in this
debate, that thinks we should all be so convinced hereby of the truth of that
which he has been pleading for, that tho we had twenty Objections more against
it then he has touched (as indeed we have many) yet we should step over all,
and do what he bids us. I will crave leave to say it, I think no man of
understanding beside himself, will have such a conceit of it. As for us, we
tell him, we are not now to be enquiring about the matter he has been Disputing
against, I mean whether it be truth, or if the contrary maintained be him be
truth. We have declared before God, Angels, and the World, that the Religion
established in this Church by the mercy of God, in Doctrine, Worship, and
Government of the Church is the truth of God taught in his Word, and we are
sure it is so, and as we are bound by the will of God, and our vows, and
Covenants, to abide in the profession and practice of this truth: So we trust
that God will establish our hearts with his grace to abide therein. As for such
as are fallen away from it, we lament their case, that if they have been moved
by any of these things presented by this Author, that they should kythed so
ready to be turned about with every wind of doctrine, the God of grace awaken
them to remember whence they have fallen, to repent, and do their first works,
Amen.

APPENDIX. Wherein is Examined what is said in the forementioned letter of the
new Independents of Aberdene, for the Independent Congregationall and against
the Presbyteriall way of Church Government.
Touching Presbyterian Government, indeed when thoughts of Questioning it were
first born in upon us, we did a long time suppress them as tentations: Because
we had so solemnly (though too implicitly) engaged to the maintenance thereof:
Yet afterward, knowing that Truth cannot loss by a search, we brought the
matters to the balance of the Sanctuary: And now after seeking of God, as he
was pleased to give us grace, and using all helps which we could have, we
profess so far as we can see (with reverence to precious and learned men of
another judgment) the Congregationall way comes nearer to the pattern of the
Word then the Classical form. And to us it appears, etc.

Worcester? and how soon thereafter did we hear of them by some of the number,
although others thought fit to suppress them some longer? This may seem to be
ground of searching of heart, which is deceitful above measure. 2. It seems
by the Authors own confession, that the bearing in of these thoughts upon them
at first has been from no good cause or principle; Not from the Spirit of God,
unless they will say, it has been by an immediate impulse or Enthusiasme. For
say they, it was after a long times suppressing of them that they began to
consult with the Word of God about them, for that is, as I conceive, to bring
them to the balance of the Sanctuary. 3. If implicitly they engaged
themselves to the maintenance of the Government desined and settled in this
Church, sure then if they will reflect upon the nature and tenor of the
engagement, they may find themselves to have committed, in the very act, more
sin, than they insinuate here, or I will name. For let them look back again
unto the National Covenant, and they shall find that they not only engaged
themselves to the maintenance of the Religion professed in this Church in all
the points thereof: But also declared and protested themselves under Oath,
after due Examination of their own consciences in matters of true and false
Religion, to be thoroughly resolved of the Truth thereof by the Word and Spirit
of God, and therefore to believe with their hearts, confess with their mouth,
and subscribe with their hands. I do indeed ^ear that many did run unto that
Engagement without such conviction of mind upon clear warrant of Gods Word
found by Examination of the matters. And as to do this with so solemn and
dreadful an attestation of God, that they did it upon conviction of
conscience, was horrible guiltiness: So it may well be apprehended, that God in
his holy judgment, has suffered many, for the discovery of the falsehood of
their hearts (may be in mercy to some, may be in wrath to others) to revolt
from these their former Engagements. I wish from my heart these Brethren (so I
will yet call them, if they will yet be so called by us) if it be true which
they say now, that they engaged implicitly, whereas they protested before God
that they did it upon through conviction, they would consider this, lay it to
heart, and yet again bring their present way to the balance of the Sanctuary.
I have been with others witness of some who having engaged in the cause of God
in these lands, and carried themseves therein for a long time resolutely and
actively, and having afterward foully lapsed into contrary courses, when they
have been brought to Repentance for their backsliding; Have declared that they
found that their backsliding had arisen from this, that their engaging in the
cause at first and going on in it formerly, was not upon conviction from
grounds of the Word of God, but implicitly and for by and extrinsecall
respects. 4. It is not competent to me to question, nor will I question their
diligence in seeking of God when they began to enquire about this matter (tho
it be a thing usual now-adayes, for men to set out naughtiest wares with this
inscription after seeking of God) but as for using of all helps they could have
to be cleared, I think some thing may be questioned: For besides helps of men's
Writings upon this purpose, might they not have used the help of the advice of
the Judicatories of this Kirk and represented the grounds of their doubting to
some of them. Acts of General Assemblies require this, that before men vent
any innovations in matters of Religion, they should first peaceably represent
their Reasons to the public Judicatures: And albeit, they may happily say that
the very matters they were questioning was the Authority of these Judicatories;
Yet humility, if they had not overweening conceits of their own wits above the
judgment of these Judicatures, and charity, if they had so much as they ought
toward the Church, wherein they were born, baptized, instructed, some of them
had been for some years Ministers, and acting in association in the established
Judicatures thereof, might, it seems, led them to so much. But if they
accounted the Judicatures unworthy the consulting with, might they not have
used the help of conference with some of these precious and learned men, whom
they profess to reverence? If they did consult with any of them before they
were determined in the matter, yea before they did vent their new judgment, is
more then I know or can learn. But come we to their determination and the
confirmation of it.

So far (say they) as we can see, the Congregationall way comes nearer to the
pattern of the Word then the Classical form. Here it may be asked why they say
only that the Congregationall way comes nearer to the pattern, and not simply
that it is the way, conform to the pattern of the Word? What, does the
Congregationall way it self come somewhat short of the pattern, and is there a
third way distinct both from it and the Classical, that comes full up to it?
Is there here a reservation for a further light? It may be we may hear somewhat
of this ere all be done. But go we on to their desinition or proposition of the
Congregationall way. To us (say say) it appears that Christ has furnished a
Congregation with their Eldership with complete power of Jurisdiction and
censure within themselves. There are here two things asserted by the Authors
which accordingly they intend to prove by their two Arguments respective,
afterward built upon the passage of Scripture which they cite. 1. That by
Christ's appointment the power of Ecclesiastic jurisdiction and censure is in
the Congregation ( i. e. the body of private professors) and the Eldership
jointly (both being to concur formally in the acting thereof) and not only in
the Eldership. 2. That any one single Congregation with its Eldership has
complete power of jurisdiction and censure within it self, supreamly and
without subordination to any larger or superior Pre^yterie. But for further
clearing of their mind here it were requisite they should explain these two
things to us. 1. Whom they mean by the Congregation contradistinguished from
the Eldership, whether the whole collection of Church Members, or only men and
those of years of discretion. If the former, then Women and Children must be
joint with the Eldership in the power of jurisdiction and censures. If this be
their mind we would know it and they would speak it plainly. If the latter,
then it is not the Congregation, but some part of the Congregation with the
Eldership that has the power of jurisdiction and censure, or else Women and
Children are not parts constituent of the Congregation: and then let them tell
me where shall they find the name of the Church, in all the Gospel in this
notion, taken for the Eldership with the ^ale-professours of adult years,
excluding Women and Children? 2. Suppose the whole Eldership of a Congregation
be scandalous and censurable who has the power of jurisdiction and censure to
exercise toward them? If jurisdiction and censure should be exercised toward
them (as I suppose it should be) who has it, and who must do it? If some other
Ecclesiastical Court, then should not a single Congregation have complete
power of jurisdiction within it self, without subordination to any other
Ecclesiastic Court in point of jurisdiction. If the Congregation
contradistinguished from the Eldership, then the Congregation alone by it self
has power enough of jurisdiction and censure, and then what needed it be said
the Congregation with their Eldership? And indeed this is the way that some
Independents go: In their judgment the Congregation of private believers, does
choose, ordain and make their Eldership, and they may, censure, depose, and
Excommunicat all their Eldership. So that these Authors when, intending a
description of the Congregationall way, i. e. the Independent way, they
attribute the power of jurisdictiction and censure to the Congregation with
their Eldership, if they mean (as their words seems to import, and they must
be understood, unless they minded to aequivocat) that the power of
jurisdiction is given to these jointly, and not to either of them severally,
either they have not been acquainted with the mind of all these of the
Congregationall way, or they have dissembled, the latter of which, I have not
reason to impute to all these Authors. The truth is the Authors of the
Congregationall way are at a great deal of difference among themselves, even to
salt contradictions concerning the subject of the power of Ecclesiastic
jurisdiction, as Mr. Caudry has evidenced in the place cited by us before, P.
2. Sect. Go we on to their probation of their Assertion. They cite one passage
of Scripture first (telling us withal that there are diverse other Scriptures,
which they pass by: But I believe it shall be long ere they let us see them)
viz. Mat. 18, 15, 16, 17, 18. and do build two Arguments on it according to the
two things involved in their Assertion. The former lies thus in their own
words.

The Church there (tell it unto the Church) spoken of, has complete power of
binding and loosing, as is clear from v. 17. and 18. but the Church is not the
Classical Presbytery: But the Eldership with the Congregation: Therefore, etc.
The Assumption is clear, because it is not to be found in all the Gospel, that
a company of Elders, whether of a Classis or a Congregation, apart from the
Congregation is called a Church. Indeed a Congregation with Elders commonly,
yea and sometime contradistinguished from Elders, ay sometime without Elders,
is termed a Church. Act. 15. 4. 22, 23. And Act. 14. 23. Now what an absurdity
were it, to reject the usual acception of the word in the New Test, and
without any color of reason to coin a sense which no where is to be found in
all the Gospel, though the word be most frequently used in it.

Answ. To pass sundry things which might be noted upon this Argument and for
brevities sake to insist only upon that which is material, the drift of this
first Argument tends to the probation of the former part involved in the
Authors Assertion, to wit, that the power of jurisdiction Ecclesiastic is not
in the Eldership or Officers of the Church, but in the community of believers
jointly with the Elders: and the weight of the whole Argument lies upon the
signification of the term, Church. And all which is said is but an old song
that has been an hundred times dashed by worthy and learned men already: See
what we have said already upon the same alledgeance by Mr. Lockier, above, P.
2. Sect. 3.. 2. and 3. For the present I shall say but these things on it. 1.
When as these Authors say that in the New Testament the name of the Church is
taken, sometimes for the Congregation ( i. e. in their sense, the community of
believers) with the Eldership jointly, sometimes for the Congregation as
contradistinguished from Elders, and sometime for a Congregation without
Elders, and asserteth that here, in this place it is to be understood in the
first of these three acceptions, to wit, as it comprehends both Congregation
and Elders, I would gladly know, how, and by what Argument they prove that it
is so to be understood here, and not rather in one of the other two, for the
Congregation as contradistinguished from the Elders, or for the Congregation
without Elders. For that we see only asserted by them, but no proof of it
brought: Only this much they insinuat, that it is commonly so used: But that
will not prove that so it must be taken in this particular place. If they would
assayed to bring any Arguments to prove that the name of the Church here must
be taken, not for the Congregation as contradistinguished from, or without
Elders, but for the Congregation with the Eldership jointly; I doubt not but we
should found them all to be such, as speaks power of jurisdiction and
government in the Eldership as contradistinguished from the rest of the
Congregation. 2. What though the word Church, be no where else in the New
Testament used for the Elders or Governors of the Church as
contradistinguished from the body of believers; yet this is but a very weak
Argument to prove that it is not so to be understood here, so be that the
genuine grammatical signification thereof be such, as may well be applied (as
indeed the word answering to it in the Hebrew is frequently in the Old
Testament applied) to signify a College or Society of Judges or Governors as
contradistinguished from the people. See Mr. Hudson. Vindic. of the Essence and
Unity, etc. It Is some rashness in the Authors to call this sense of the word a
coined sense. Even profane Greek Authors have used it in such a sense, I mean
for a meeting of Rulers. Demosthenes used the word (...) proconcione magnatum.
It is yet more then rashness, I may say it is a great impudency, that they
say, it is without any color of reason taken in this sense in this place.
These Authors said before that they have used all helps they could have upon
this controversy. Now let them tell us did they never read in any Writers upon
this controversy of Church Government, who expones the word Church, of the
Eldership or Governors of the Church so much as any color of reason brought
by them for expounding the word in that sense? How can they hold up their face
and say this? Did they ever read Beza his Annot. on the place: Or, Mr.
Rutherfurds Peaceable Plea, c. 8. Surely the help of these Authors they easily
might have had? Sure I am, if they have read these, to mention no more, they
might have found some color, at least of reason brought for the
Interpretation. Nay, let them but read the latter of the two over again, and I
believe they shall find such reality of reason brought for it, as they shall
never be able to avoid. Verily whether we take the word Church here in a
different signification from that whereby it signifies the society of Visible
Christians generally, comprehending private Professors as well as Rulers, or
not, yet that not all and every one comprehended under that signification
otherwise, but only the Rulers are intended as the persons to whom the public
acts spoken of in the place, receiving of public delations of scandals, and
inflicting of censures does belong, is here invincibly demonstrate because
otherwhere in the New Testament these acts, as all other acts of Ecclesiastic
authoritative Government, are committed and attributed unto the Officers of the
Church, as such, Math. 16. 18. John 20, 21, 22. 1 Timothy 5. 1, 19. Tit. 1. 13. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. Heb, 13. 7, 17. 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2. and accordingly to them, as
contradistinguished from the body of Professors, are given names importing
Government and authority: But no where in the Scripture of the New Testament,
shall any man show us, either name or thing of Government given to private
Professors. We proceed to their second Argument whereby they would prove from
that same place that any one single Congregation with their Eldership has power
of jurisdiction Independent and Supreme, and to take away all juridicall
Ecclesiastic Courts larger than, and Superior to a Congregation, Classical
or Synodicall.

The Church (say they) spoken of in this Text, which has compleet power of
binding and loosing, is the first Ecclesiastical Judicatorie to which
belongs judicial cognizance of offenses: For if private admonition do not
gain the offender, then the command is, tell the Church: But our Classical
Presbytery is not the first Judicatorie to which appertains judicial
cognizance of offenses: For first they come to Sessions, and only by refers
from the Sessions to Presbytories. Therefore this Church here spoken of, as
having complete power of binding and loosing, cannot be the Classical
Presbytorie, but the Eldership with the Congregation. No where do we read in
the Gospel, of jurisdiction in relation to censure committed to Classical
Presbytery.

Ans. 1. To the Assumption or second Proposition, it seems these Authors have
not well understood, or been acquainted with the state and way of Presbyteriall
Government settled in this Church, and therefore have been too rash and hasty
in condemning it or arguing against it, before they understood it. For 1. It Is
not only false which they say, that the Classical Presbytery is not the first
Judicatorie to which appertains judicial cognizance of offenses, but that
first they come to Sessions, etc. If this be meant Universally of all offenses.
Indeed, offenses committed by particular persons, settled members of particular
Congregations, and as yet abiding within the bounds of the Congregation, comes
first to the Session or Eldership of the particular or single Congregation. But
there are many offenses the judicial cognizance whereof comes not first to a
Session, but to a Presbytery, yea may be a Synod, yea may be to the National
Assembly. When a private person having fallen into some scandalous sin, and
being conveened before a Session, adds refractorinesse against the discipline
and obstinacy to his former offense, this is a new offense, and the judicial
cognizance of this offense belongs first to the Classical Presbytery. So a
Classical Presbytery is the first Judicatorie to which belongs the
judicial cognizance, Of an offense given by a Minister, in the Administration
of his calling, Of an offense given by the Eldership of a Congregation (and
indeed supposing the first part of these Authors Assertion, viz. that the power
of jurisdiction is given to the Congregation with the Eldership jointly, if
they grant not an associate Presbytery to take judicial cognizance of their
offense, they must exempt them from being subject to any judicial cognizance
at all: For they cannot come under the judicial cognizance of another single
Congregation) Of an offense wherein more single Congregations are alike
concerned, and many cases more: I wonder that these Brethren did not rememher
that the first judicial cognizance, of James Grahames offense, of Seaforts,
and many other public Malignant wicked practices, was not by Sessions, and
from them came by reference to the Classical Presbytery, but by the public
Assemblies. 2. It is another gross mistake too that these offenses which comes
to Sessions or Congregationall Elderships to be judicially cognosced upon, and
from them comes to the Classical Presbytery, or to a Synod, that they come
only by r^ferres from the Sessions to the Presbyteries. For they come also by
appeal of the party who is under the judicial cognition of the Session, upon
mal-administration, or supposed mal-administration: They may also and do often
come by way of authoritative visitation of Sessions and their proceedings by
the Presbytery.

such associat Presbyteries or Ecclesiastic Assemblies, may be, and must be
the first Judicatories, in many cases, to which the judicial cognizance of
offenses does belong, But, 2. If the Major be taken in this sense, the Church
having power of binding and loosing is the first Judicatorie, to which, etc.
And it only, taking it with the exclusive note, as it must of necessity be
taken, to infer that negative conclusion, Ergo, a Classical or associate
Presbytery is not that Church; We deny it as utterly false having no proof
from the Text. We say here that the Church invested with authority to cognosce
judicially and inflict censure upon offenses is the Rulers of the Visible
Church Universal, as joined in Collegio, or assembled, whether in the lesser
and Inferior Colleges or Assemblies (as a Congregationall Eldership is in
respect of all others; a Classical Presbytery, in regard of Synods; a
Provincial Synod in regard of a National; this in regard of a Synod of more
Nations, happily associate for Government) to which as the first Judicatory
matters may come for judicial cognizance, or in larger and superior, (such as
is a Classical Presbytery in relation to a Congregationall, a Synod in
relation to a Classical Presbytery, etc.) to which, may be the matter cannot
come at first or as to the first Judicatory having power of judicial
cognizance of it. It Is true, that in such a case as our Savior instanceth in
the Text, when offense is given by one particular member of a Congregation
single and fixed in its constitution and proper Officers (which fixing of
single Congregations under appropriated Officers, is not necessary by any
divine institution: For more Congregations, may be, have been, as it seems,
in severalls of the primitive Churches, and are at this day in some orthodox
Churches served by the same Officers in common without violation of any divine
institution) Christ's command Tell the Church intends that the matter should be
brought to the Eldership of the Congregation as the first Judicature to which
belongs judicial cognizance of it. Like as if the Congregation be not fixed
by its self in its constitution and Officers, that Command intends the bringing
of the matter at first to an Eldership common to more Congregations. As also if
the matter to be judged, be of public and more common concernment then of one
Congregation, that same Commandment, warrands by analogy and proportion, the
bringing of the matter first to some more large Presbytery or College of
Elders, then the Congregational, as the first Judicature to cognosee judicially
upon it: But withal let it be so observed that when Christ instituteth this
order, that offenses when they cannot be removed otherwise, should be brought
to the Church, that is, to an Ecclesiastic Judicature, he says not, that
they may not in any case proceed further for judicial cognition and sentence
upon the matter, then to the first Judicature to which the judicial cognition
of it belongs; Nor is there any ground in his words, whereupon this can by
good consequence be inferred: In a word, there is nothing in this Text either
against the juridicall power of larger Eiderships then Congregationall, such as
are Classical Presbyteries and Synods: Nor against the subordination of
Congregationall Elderships, to the jurisdiction and authority of such larger
Elderships. But upon the contrary, there is in them solid ground whereupon both
have been clearly demonstrat by several Presbyterian Writers, and discussed
all contrary exceptions and reasonings upon the place: for shortness, I refer
the Reader to. Answ. of the Assembly of Divines to, etc. page 178. Guliel.
Appoll. Considerat. of certain Controversies, cap. 6. page 94, 95. and page
127. Spanhem. Epistol. ad Dav. Buchan. Class. 3. Arg. 2. Huds. Vindicat. of the
Essence and, etc. page 156, 157, 158. and page 164, 165. Mr. Rutherfurd. Due
Right, cap. 10. page 310. and seq.

that no where do we read in the Gospel of jurisdiction in relation to censure
committed to Classical Presbytery. Answ. 1. If the meaning be no where in the
Gospel do we read, this power committed, by a formal precept, to Classical
Presbytery by name, or specifically by it self; it may be granted without
prejudice to what we assert (and I pray where will these Authors read in the
Gospel this power committed to the Eldership of a single Congregation,
specifically, and that as they maintain Independently and supreamly?) 2. It is
sufficient for us, if we read in the Gospel this power of Jurisdiction
committed to the Officers and Rulers of the Church as united together in
Collegio, either in one single Congregation, or over more Congregations
combined and associat together as is most convenient for exercise of their
Ecclesiastic communion: And this we read, Mat. 18. 17, 18. for there,
Discipline and Ecclesiastic jurisdiction institute by Christ is committed unto
the Officers and Rulers of the Church as united in Collegio: Not to Officers of
a single Congregation only, as united; but unto the Officers of the whole
Catholic Visible Church of Christ, as united in lesser or larger combinations
even to an Oecumenicall Assembly. Because the power of Jurisdiction and
Discipline Ecclesiastic there is instituted and intended by Christ to be a
remedy against all scandalls and offenses in his Church; but all and every sort
of scandal falling out in the Visible Church of Christ cannot be so remeeded
or removed by the College of Officers in a single Congregation. They can only
be a means for remedying and removing this way scandalls and offenses
concerning their particular Congregation, and therefore there must be
understood, as intended here by Christ, larger Ecclesiastical Assemblies and
Judicatures to exercise Discipline and Jurisdiction for remedying offenses and
scandalls which Congregationall Elderships cannot reach. 2. It is sufficient if
we read in the Gospel approven examples of larger Presbyteries, then
Congregationall, Classical, or Synodicall, authoritatively governing and
exercising Acts of Rule over more particular Churches. We read of such a
Presbytery as we call Classical, in Jerusalem, Ephesus, Corinth, Ruling
authoritatively more Congregations, as has been demonstrat by several Learned
men. See namely, Assembly of Divines in their Answer to, etc. upon the
proposition 3. of Presbyteriall Government. Ius Divin, par. 2. c. 13. We read
also an example of a Synod exercising such power and authority, Act. 15.

All the power we find exercised by the meeting at Jerusalem, Acts 15. is
dogmaticall, the people and Brethren having their interest likewayes, which the
Congregationall Divines willingly yield, all the certificat they use, is, if ye
do these things ye shall do well, but do not threaten those that disobey with
Excommunication. Ans. These things here alleged to elude this place of
Scripture have been often dashed. For the present briefly. 1. These Authors
speak warrily in calling that Assembly at Jerusalem by the general name of a
meeting, and not a Synod; It seems here they remembered that what whereas some
Congregationall men acknowledges it to have been a Synod, as Cotton cited
before, P. 2. and Mr. Lockier; others finding that not so advantageous for
them, deny it, and say only, a reference of one particular Church of Antioch to
one particular Church of Jerusalem, as the Dissenting Brethren in the Assembly
at Westminster. Papers of the Assemb. page 128. and therefore have chosen a
name that might serve both, and so displease neither. But that it was a Synod,
see cleared by Jus Divin. P. 2. C. 14. 2. Suppose it did not exercise a
critical power, or power of censure, yet it follows not that it had not a
power of censure to exercise. On the contrary, the dogmaticall power of a Synod
being of another sort then the dogmatical power which is competent to a single
Pastor, this being only concionall, and an act of the power of order, this is
juridicall and an act of the power of jurisdiction, and of the Key of
Discipline, it carries along a power of censure with it. Tho this be not
always put in actual exercise when the other is: There may be, and ofter is
need of a juridicall determination of a case by a Judicature, when there is not
occasion of exercising of censure by that Judicature, as is evident. 3. It is
contrary to clear truth that all the power that Synod exercised is dogmaticall.
For besides their exercising a dogmaticall power in confutation and
condemnation of the Haeresie taught by the Judaizing Teachers, and vindication
of the truth about the great point of Justification by faith alone, without the
works of the Law. They do also exercise a diatacticall power for healing the
scandal of the weak Jews especially, and their alienation of mind, from the
Gentile Christians who neglected their ceremonial observances, by making and
enjoining a practical canon, ordaining the Gentiles, to abstain from some
things that might any ways occasion their offense. And also a critical power
or power of censure against the schism or (...) raised by the false Teachers,
branding them with the black mark of liers, subverters of souls, and troublers
of the Church: This was a degree of censure, and a virtuall admonition tending
to further censure: But actually to have proceeded further to Excommunication,
at first was not seasonable, prudent nor needful. 4. If people and private
Brethren were in that Synod (as we deny not but they might be) their interest
in the determinations and consultations of the Synod was not by way of
authoritative and definitive vote: But at most consultative and by way of
private consent and approbation, as we cleared before against Mr. Lockier. 5.
That recommendation of obedience to the acts of that Synod from the goodness
and benefit thereof, expressed in the close of the Synodicall letter, does not
argue their constitutions not to have been made and enjoined by an
authoritative power obleiging under hazard of censure. The most authoritative
acts of any juridicall Court, being sent in a respective way, may be so
recommended in such a way. Neither that, that in the constitutions of that
Synod there is not an express and formal threatening of those that disobey
with censure, does import by any necessity of consequence, that the power they
exercised was not authoritative, and such as might proceed to censure.
Juridicall courts do not always add to their constitutions express and
formal comminations of punishment: Here especially it was not necessary, it
being a clear case in it self that those Hareticks and Schismatics who could
by no other means be reduced, were not to be suffered but censured and cast
forth.

only hand of God restrained from being put in execution) and was again by the
good hand of God upon his people in this land, after long oppression under
Prelacie, raised up; has been attested by foreign Divines and Churches as the
true Government of Jesus Christ in his Visible Church; has been always the
hammer to break wickedness and prophanitie, and the hedge to keep out Errors,
Haeresies and Schisms; made this Church against all evil doers and enemies of
truth, terrible as an Army with Banners, which at this day is the eye sore of
all the Sects and Heretics of the times, and the butt of Satan's malice, to
throw down and raze this to the ground (which some of the same Reverend men to
whom they wrote, have through the grace of God, to their praise in all the
Churches, Vindicated against all enemies thereof upon one hand and other, and
stand engaged by solemn vows, and the dreadful Oath of God to maintain and
defend to their lives end) to set up, I wot not what, and I think the Authors
themselves wots not what) and if they do not this, to threaten them with the
streaching out of GODS hand, and to lay upon them the horrid imputation of
being snares to GODS people? O Lord, how terrible are thy judgments in these
times as upon outward things, so upon the Spirits of men, while men are thus
carried about with every wind of Doctrine! What need have these that profess
the Truth* to take heed that they have received it in love, lest they be given
up to believe lies?

That there might be somewhat said from antiquity, that the Government of the
Church was partly Aristocraticall, partly Democraticall, in much of the first
three hundred years, and that the people had no small influence in matters of
Discipline, but that they forbear, as desiring to lean on a surer foundation.
Answ. What they have produced of this surer foundation, i. e. the Holy
Sc^ipture, to lean themselves upon in their departure from the Church of God
in this land we have seen, and how little ground it affords to sustain them,
we have seen too. I wish from my heart they had brought somewhat also, though
it had been but a little, of that which they allege may be said from
antiquity of these ages for their tenent of Church Government, For in truth we
profess our selves to be such as reverence very much, under the Holy
Scriptures (which we lean to only, as the foundation of our faith in all
matters of Religion) the testimony of the Orthodox Churches in these ages. Mr.
Lockier, as we saw before, undertook somewhat of this before, magno hiatu,
under the name of common consent, but what he produced to instruct it, may
blush before all men that has any wit, and are not stark fools: And I am
persuaded what these Authors would have produced, had they assayed it, should
have proven as little to their purpose.



knew this very well: And therefore they have wittily enough expressed this
reference to antiquity, in that, whereas in their two former Arguments, they
affirmed these two points of Independent Government distinctly, now in this
reference to antiquity, they allege only generally and confusedly, that there
was then a mixture of Aristocracie and Democracie, and that the people had no
small influence in Discipline. There is nothing more clear and undeniable in
humane History then authoritative juridicall Governing Assemblies and Synodes
of more Churches in these ages of the Church. Oecumenicall Synod, there were
none (nor could be, because of the evils of these times) after the days of the
Apostles until the Nicen Council, yet the thing it self was acknowledged,
could the benefit thereof been had, as is evident by that of Cyprian, Lib. 1.
Epist. 8. in Pamel. order. Epist. 40. Cum semel placuerit, tam nobis quam
confessoribus and clericis urbicis, item Vniversis Episcopis vel in nostra
Provincia, vel trans mare constitutis, ut nihil innovetur circa lapsorum
causam, nisi omnes in unum convenerimus and collatis consiliis cum Disciplina
pariter and misericordiae temperatam fixerimus sententiam. That Provincial
Synods ( i. e. of many neigbouring Churches having Colleges of Presbyters and
Officers over them) were then in actual use is so clear as cannot be denied.
See the Magdeburgen Cent. 2. Cap. 7. in princip. they say. Duplex atuem
regiminis Ecclesiastici forma (ut hoc saeculo) sese nobis offert consideranda,
quarum prior communem singularum Ecclesiarum Administrationem: Altera vero
plurium aut omnium inter se consociatarum gubernationem complectitur (note here
by the way, that those singulae Ecclesiae, particular Churches, to which they
give privatas Synodos afterward, were not, always at least (as we shall show
after this) such single Congregations as the Independents stand for, which may
meet together at one time in one place, but more ample. Then afterward, p. 135.
De consociatione Ecclesiar. they say, si quando Haereses oboriebantur aut aliae
Quaestiones graviores; Tum conveniebant vel omnes provinciales, aut plerique
Doctores: Et examinata recommuni judicio statuebant, quod vitandum aut
sequendum esset, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 16. Ex Appollinario dicit: etenim fideles per
Asiam multis saepe numero Asiae locis ob hanc causam conveniebant, and nuper
natas Doctrinas examinabant, and profanas pronunciabant, haeresi^que istam
reprobantes Ecclesia ejiciebant and Excommunicabant. I^ ^ike manner Cent. 3. c.
7. titul. De consociatione plurium Eccles. in una aliqua Provincia, p. 158.
Diximus superiori saeculo, Ecclesias ejusdem Provinciae solitas esse plerumque
ad unam aliquam maxim insignem respicere, eamque venerari, and ab ea consilia
and mutua officia petere and recte monitis obtemperare: Ea vero res ut paulatim
in consuetudinem abiit, ita hoc saeculo observata est: Nam in plerisque
Provinciis, caeterae Ecclesiae, eorumque Episcopi and Clerici, se ad ejusmodi
alicujus urbis Episcopum, Doctrina, pietate and constantia insignem, and
sacerdotum Collegium associarunt, ut eorum opera tanquam communium inspectorum
and gubernatorum uterentur. And in the same Cent. p. 163. l. 40. De
consociatione Universe. they say. Si autem graviores Quaestiones aut
controversiae incidebant, aut alia negotia quae non ad unius Provinciae
Ecclesias attinebant sed ad plures, tum Ecclesia etiam in diversis Provinciis
suas operas conjungebant, in petendis aut dandis consiliis, in componendis
schismatibus, in refutandis erroribus, in Congregandis Synodis, in
Excommunicandis Haeretecis and aliis facinorosis. See also after. page 166. l.
22. and seq. See also. Cent. 4. c. 7. p. 517. l. 21. and page 522. l. 8. But
why insist we in this, instances of Synods of this kind, exercising juridicall
power authoritatively (I mean Ministerial authority subordinat to the Word of
God) determining Questions in Religion, condemning Heresies, Excommunicating
Haereticks, Schismatics, and other flagitious persons, in these ages are
notour to all that have read any thing of antiquity. Cyprian alone in his
Epistles affords abundant testimony of this. And as for Classical (as we
call them) Presbyteries, what else were the Bishop with his Presbyterium, or
Collegium sacerdotum Which the Centurists call, Synodos privatas singularum
Ecclesiarum.
, in these times. I shall not contend here whether in these times there were
any single Congregations having a full Presbyterium within themselves, albeit I
think it shall be hard for any man to give any particular instance in these
ages of a Presbyterium of one particular Congregation such as our Independent
Brethren speak for. But certain it is, that the Bishops (who were then but
constant praesidents differing from other Presbyters, ordine tantum non grad^
aut potestate) with their Presbyterium, or Collegium Clericor^ for the most
part were Diaecesan, i. e. over such numerous Church as could not be one single
Congregation, to meet in one place at one time for divine Worship, but behoved
to be made up of many such single Assemblies (which whether they were fixed or
not fixed, we debate not now, nor does the one or the other make any odds in
the purpose we are now upon) and so was just such a Presbytery as we call
Classical: such was Cornelius in Rome with his Presbytery* and Cyprian with
his Presbytery in Carthage, and other Bishops with their Presbyteries in other
populous Cities. Certain it is that these Presbyteries were juridicall
Ecclesiastic Courts: And as certain it is that they were not Presbyteries of
one single Congregation, such as Independents speak of.

sylvis Delphinum: We shall not deny that the people then had an hand in the
election of Ministers, as is evident by many passages of these times, see
especially, Cyprian lib. 1. Epist. 4. in Pamel. Ord. Epist. 68. But election is
no act of Ecclesiastic Authority or Government, nor does it constitute any one
a Pastor, but is only a designation of the person, to be authoritatively put
in that Office by ordination, or to be applied to some particular charge, if he
be one already in Office. Nor do we deny but the people might be present at the
handling of matters of faith in Assemblies, be hearers and witnesses of the
whole proceedings thereanent, give their counsel and advice in consultation,
also testify their assent and approbation to the determinations: We grant also
that Excommunication and loosing from Excommunication of persons was not
performed without at least the tacit agreement and consent of the people. ^hey
are to concur active and executive to both; And therefore when any person was
to be Excommunicat, the grounds and causes thereof were made known to the
people: And when persons Excommunicat were to be received again into the
Church, they were brought before the people to make their (...) public
confession before them, as we do in our Churches now, but none of these, nor
all of them, amounts to an authoritative and juridicall power of Government.
But as for such acts as belong directly to authoritative and juridicall
Government, as Ordination of Ministers, judicial sentencing persons to be
Excommunicat, or absolution from Excommunication, giving of definitive sentence
in public determinations of controversies of faith, or of matters pertaining
to order, and rites to be observed in the Church, let our Authors produce any
testimony, or allowed practice, of the peoples formal influence and
concurrence in these, if they would say any thing from that antiquity for an
Ecclesiastic Government properly Democraticall, either in whole, or in part.

Hierome, who was near these ages, and better acquaint with their way, then
these Authors, tells us in the general, in whose hands the power of Government
was then, in that remarkable and famous saying of his, on the Epistle to Tit.
c. 1. Antequam Diaboli instinctu studia in Religione fierent and diceretur in
populo, ego sum Pauli, ego Apollo, ego vero Cephae, Communi Presbyterorum
consilio Ecclesiae gubernabantur, etc. See what learned Chamier says on this
of Hierome, lib. 10. de Oecumen. Pontifc. 5.. 22. Answering to Bellarmin. his
Arg. Respondeo ad primum etiamsi Aristocratia non sit totidem syllabis
nominata, tamen certo significatam his verbis, Communi Presbyterorum consilio
Ecclesiae gubernabantur, etc. And he adds, bonam autem fuisse id regiminis
formam, inde sequitur, quod ab initio fuisse dicat (Hieronymus) cum in Ecclesia
id sit optimum quod verissimum, id autem verissimum quod primum: Dicit etiam
(Hieron.) fuisse ex institutionis Dominicae veritate And mark in this same
Learned Author whose words I am now citing, that the very thing he undertakes
to demonstrate in that, c. 5. and some following both from Scripture and
antiquity, is that the government as well of particular, as of consociat
Churches was pure Aristocracy, c. 5.. 1.

Jerome in his time. Quid facit excepta ordinatione Episcopus quod non facit
Presbyter? But that ever the people had any formal concurrence in ordination
of Ministers is a thing unknown to antiquity.

Origin. Hom. 7. in Iosuam. tertio admonitum resipiscere nolentem, jubet ab
Ecclesiae corpore desecari, per Ecclesiae praesides. The Centuriators, Cent. 3.
c. 7. tells us that then, Jus tractandi de Excommunicandis, aut recipiendis
lapsis public penes Ecclesiae Seniores erat qui ad eam rem convenire solebant,
and they cite for this, Tertullians Apologetick. The order then observed in
receiving penitents, that had offended by grievous scandalous sins, is most
clear for this, they were first to compear before the Bishop and his Clergy, i.
e. the Presbytery, (wherein the Bishop then differed from other Presbyters,
ordine tantum non gradu) by them the penitents cause was judicially cognosced,
the manner of satisfaction prescribed and enjoined to them; And having
performed that, and made their (...), before the people, they were actually
absolved, by the imposition of the hands of the Bishop and Clergy, or the
Presbytery. Cyprians Epistles are full of testimonies to this purpose. It were
needless labor to insist in citation of them: Only I think it worth the pains
to produce one Passage, whereby it may evidently appear that the way of
absolving and receiving penitents was just as it is now in the Presbyterian
Government, as to the matter and substance. It is in lib. 3. Epist. 11. in
Pamel. Ord. Epist. 46. from Cornelius Bishop of Rome to Cyprian, concerning the
return of some Confessors from the Novatian schism to the unity of the Church
there: Cornelius after he has related how these Confessors, had expressed
their desire of reconciliation, to the Presbyters, and taken with the faults
laid to their charge in a private and extrajudiciall way, he proceeds thus.
Omni igitur actu ad me perlato, placuit contrahi Presbyterium. Adfuerunt etiam
Episcopi quinque qui and hodie praesentes fuerunt, ut firmato consilio, quid
circa personam eorum observari deberet, consensu omnium statueretur. Et ut
motum omnium, and consilium singulorum dignosceres, etiam sententias nostras
placuit in notitiam vestri perferri, quas and subjectas leges. His ita gestis
in Presbyterium venerunt Vrbanus, etc. Et plerique fratres qui se iis
adjunxerant, summis precibus desiderantes, ut ea quae ante fuerunt gesta, in
oblivionem cederent, nullaque eorum mentio haberetur -- quod erat consequens
omnis hic actus populo erat insinuandus ut and ipsos viderent in Ecclesia
constitutos. Having related the peoples expression of their joy he sets down
the confession which the penitents made. Nos errorem nostrum confitemur, etc.
And then adds, ista eorum professione non moveremur? Vt quod apud potestatem
seculi erant confessi, in Ecclesia constituti comprobarent: Quamobrem Maximum
Prespyterum, jussimus locum suum agnoscere, caeteros cum ingenti populi
suffragio recepimus. I need not comment upon the place, it speaks plain enough
of it self what we are pleading for.

ad tempus and in relation to these particular acts which were to be done in
the Synod, and in so far did exempt them e sort, out of the state of mere
private Christians: But that such as were mere private Christians, i. e. were
neither ordinary Ministers, nor had a special calling extra ordinem, concurred
to give definitive sentence in Assemblies, was a thing unknown. See what
Junius, a man well versed in antiquity, says to Bellarm. Cont. 3. lib. 2. c.
25. n. 2. speaking in relation to ancient Councels. Eorum qui Conciliis
intersunt, varia esse genera; Esse audientes qui in Doctrina and ordine ex
auditione informantur: Esse doctos, qui ad consultationem adhibentur: Esse
denique Episcopos and Presbyteros, qui decidunt res ferendis sententiis: And
again, Cont. 4. lib. 1. c. 15. n. 15. qui sine authoritate Ecclesiae adjunt,
eorum alii etiam consultationibus adhiberi possunt, ut docti, praetertim
Ecclesiastici, sed dicere sententiam definitivam non possunt.

Magdeburg. Cent. 2. c. 7. p. 134. coeterum si quis probatos autores hujus
saeculi. perspiciat, videbit formam gubernationis propemodum (...) similem
fuisse. To which may be added that of learned Whitak. Cont. 4. q. 1. c. 1. sic
partim Aristocraticum, partim Democraticum, partim etiam Monarchicum (n. si
velimus Christum ipsum respicere, as he says a little before) est, semperque
fuit Ecclesiae Regimen. Answ. That these Authors called the Government of the
Church, either much like unto a Democraticall, or in part Democraticall, their
meaning and intention was not, that the whole body of private Professors did
formally concur in the exercise of such acts, as are formally authoritative and
judicial acts of Government, (which were requisite to make the Government
formally and properly Democraticall, either in whole or in part) But only
because of such things competent to them, as we have mentioned,. 14. which are
no authoritative or judicial acts of Government. And first for the Magdeburg.
see how they explicate that which they say in the next following words.
Singulae enim Ecclesiae parem habebant potestatem verbum Dei pure docendi,
Sacramenta Administrandi, absolvendi and excommunicandi Haereticos and
sceleratos, and ceremonias ab Apostolis acceptas exercendi, aut etiam pro
ratione aedificationis novas condendi, Ministros eligendi, vocandi, ordinandi,
and justissimas ob causas iterum deponendi -- In these words there are two
things expressly observable to our purpose. 1. That they in explicating the
Democracy they speak of, speak not of the power of single persons as to matters
of Government, but of single or particular Churches. Singulae enim Ecclesiae
(say they) parem habebant potestatem, etc. whereby it may easily and evidently
appear, that while they say that the Government of the Church was much like a
Democracy, they mean this, not to take away the Government out of the hands of
Christ's Officers of the Church, to put it in the hands of the whole people, at
least to join these with them in the formal and proper actings of it; But in
opposition to that authoritative and juridicall superiority of any one
particular Chutch over other particular Churches, as the Prelaticall men
pleaded for authoritative superiority in their cathedral Churches, over all
particular Churches in the Diaecese, and the Papalins for an universal
superiority and supremacy in the Church of Rome over all other Churches in
the world. 2. It is to be observed that among other things which they reckon up
as parts of the Church Government which they say was much like Democracie, they
put in, the Preaching of the Word, and Admistration of Sacraments, which
themselves before say (and no man of sound judgment will deny) are acts proper
to the called Ministers of Christ: Whence also, it is manifest that they mean
not a Democracie properly so called, which puts the formal power and
exercise of Government in the hands of all and every one of the multitude,
which the Independent Brethren plead for. And indeed will any man consider,
what the particular Churches were, to which these Centuriators attribute
private Synods ( Cent. 2. c. 7. page 130.) wherein it may possibly be
conceived, that Democracie could have place especially, and it may easily be
perceived that they were such, as the whole body of the people (for whose right
to concur in juridicall acts, the Independent Brethren pleads) could not
possibly meet together in one, or be present at once, in their Synods when
assembled for exercise of jurisdiction. For most part, at least of them which
they call particular Churches, were of such amplitude, and so numerous, that
such an assembling of their whole body was not possible, and in truth they were
Diaecesan or Presbyteriall Churches, and not such single Congregations, as the
Question between us and the Independent Brethren concerns. For mark it, in
that very place last cited, speaking of these particular Churches and their
private Synods, they bring in the Roman Church for an instance: And who knows
not how numerous the Christians in Rome were become ere that time. Add to
these things that these same Authors, Cent. 3. c. 7. p. 151. say expressly that
jus tractandi de excommunicandis aut recipiendis public lapsis, penes Seniores
Ecclesiae erat, and cite Tertul. Apolog. for it, read also c. 6. ejusdem Cent.
page 129, l. 30. de ritibus circa claves, and you will find that the judicial
power of Discipline was not common to the people but proper to the Ministers,
only some interest therein was for honors sake, given to Martyrs. 2, As to
that cited from Whittaker, that learned Theologue himself in the words
immediately going before these cited, clears in what respect it is that he says
the Government of the Church was always in part Democraticall, when he says.
Si totum corpus Ecclesiae (n. volumus respicere) quatenus in electione
Episcoporum and Presbyterorum suffragia serebat, ita tamen ^t (...) semper a
Presbyteris servaretur, Democraticum. So then he calls it partly Democraticall,
in this respect that the people had vote in the election of their Ministers,
which we grant the people ought to have, and if any will in this respect call
the Government of the Church in part Democraticall, we shall not contend about
the name, only we will say that the election of Ministers, being no more but
the nomination or designation of a person to the Ministry, is no proper or
formal act of authoritative power.

The other Objection made use of is from Cyprian. Lib. 1. Epist. 1^. in Pamel.
Ord. Epist. 6. Ad id vero quod scripserunt mihi, Donatus and Fortunatus,
Novatus and Curdius solus rescribere nihil potui^; quando a primordio
Episcopatus mei statuerim, nihil sine Consilio vestro, and sine consensu
plebis, Pam^meae, privata sententia.
mea privatim sententia gerere. Answ. How far that grave, pious and zealous
ancient was from the Independent way of Church Government, amongst many places
in his Writings, that one famous Passage in Lib. 1. de Vnitate Ecclesiae, does
abundantly demonstrate, and clears as with Sunshine. Loquitur Dominus ad
Petrum: Ego dico tibi, etc. to these words. Hanc Ecclesiae unitatem. And again
a little after from these words, quam unitatem firmiter tenere, etc. to these,
quomodo Solis multi radii. This place as it hews down the Antichristian Papal
Monarchy, so it is a clear testimony against popular and supreme Independent
Government in a single Congregation; while as therein the Author so clearly
asserteth the power of the Keys to have been given by Christ and put in the
hands of the Apostles, in an equal society of honor and power. 2. That there
is one Catholic Visible Church, and that this Catholic Church, is but one
charge. Vnus Episcopatus cujus a singulis in solidum pars tenetur. And that,
unitatem hanc firmiter tenere and vindicare debent Episcopi qui in Ecclesia
praesident, ut Episcopatum quoque ipsum, unum etque indivisum probent. Then
which nothing could be said more forcibly, against that crumbling of the Church
into so many single Congregations, Independent in themselves and without all
union and conjunction in point of Government. But to the place in hand, cited
from Epist. 10. lib. 3. Gulartius and Junius Notes on the place, clear the
matter well for us. Nempe agebatur de aliqua electione, quam Cypriano quidam e
Presbyterio suggessera^, eo quod Ecclesia ex persecutionibus, part sui
Presbyterii destituta esset. Respondet nihil se in hac causa unquam facere
voluisse, quin and Presbyterii Consilium and plebis consensum adhiberet. But
what is the place and part of the people in election, we controvert not. Nay,
we say with the same Ancient, Lib. 1. Epist. 4. Quando ipsa plebs maxim habeat
potestatem vel eligendi dignos sacerdotes, vel indignos recusandi. And as he
says afterward; Eligendus Episcopus immaculatus and integer praesente plebe,
etc. But show me a place in that Writer ascribing to the people formal
concurrence with the Officers of the Church in any juridicall, authoritative
Acts of Government, as, in Ordination of Ministers, sentencing persons to
censure, to Excommunication, and absolving from Excommunication, judicial and
definitive determination of controversies in Religion. But now this Book having
grown to bigness beyond my intention at first, I will insist no further, but
leave these Brethren I have been last speaking with my hearty desire to God on
their behalf, that he would show them mercy to remember from whence they have
fallen, repent and do their first works.

FINIS.

