THE Fall of Babylon. OR, Seasonable REFLECTIONS ON THE Novelties of Rome: WITH
The Rise, Growth, and Final Overthrow of ANTICHRIST now at Hand: Occasioned by
the Preface to a Treatise called NVBES TESTIVM, OR, A Collection of Primitive
Fathers giving Testimony to the Faith once delivered to the Saints, Being (as
the Author styles it) A full Discovery of the Sentiments of the Ancient
Fathers in the chief Points of Controversy at present under debate.

Written upon the first coming forth of the said Treatise, (but not permitted
to be then made Public:) For the Benefit of all, Who abominate the Corruptions
of the Great WHORE, AND Would not be partakers of her SINS, or PLAGVES.

By B. W. D. D.

-- (...) (...). -- -- (...) London, Printed for George Powel, and to be sold
by Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall, MDCXC.

TO THE KING OF ENGLAND, And all Crowned Heads, and Sovereign Princes whatever.
IT is the Advice of the Royal Prophet to you his Royal Brethren, Psalm. 2. 10,
11, 12. Be Wise now therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the Earth:
Serve the Lord with Fear, and rejoice with Trembling: Kiss the Son lest he be
angry, and ye perish from the way when his Wrath is kindled but a little,
Blessed are all they that put their trust in him. And the reason of it was,
beeause he that sits in the Heavens, who is so much Superior to the highest
of them all, had set his King upon his holy Hill of Zion, ver. 6. and as the
result of his Eternal Decree, had bid him ask of him, and he would give him the
Heathen for his Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for his
Possession, ver. 7, 8, and as the Effect of that his Royalty, he should break
them with a Rod of Iron, and dash them in pieces like a Potters Vessel.

Now the time seems to draw on, when this is to befully accomplished; and is it
not the duty of the Watchman to give the warning before it is too late? For
what will it advantage to be told of Danger, when it will not be in your Power
to prevent it? To be minded of the Approach of Christ's Kingdom, when his Iron
Rod shall be shaking over you, and your Power, your Interests, your Alliances,
your Glory, your Wealth, and Kingdoms all dashing in pieces against one
another? For if you chance to be of those, who give your Power to the Beast,
this will unavoidably be your Fate, both yours and Babylon's in one Hour to
come to Confusion, Rev. 18. 10.

For the preventing whereof, this following Treatise is here with all humility
presented; and may it among those many Voices and Trumpets which have of late
sounded to the World, have that good effect to awaken your most Serene
Majesty's, to what alone is your true interest of State, and that is, to hate
the Whore, and make her desolate and naked, Rev. 17. 16. for otherwise there
can be nothing better expected, than to partake of her Plagues, Rev. 18. 4.

Would you (Sovereign Princes) as it befell Nebuchadnezzar, your Golden Head, as
he is called, Dan. 2. 38. be contented, it should be be said to you, the
Kingdom is departed from you, and they shall drive you from amongst Men? Dan.
4. 31, 32.

Would you be contented to see the Hand put forth before you, and MEAN MEAN,
TEKEL written on the Walls of all your Palaces, as it was to Belshazzar, when
he lifted up himself against the Lord of Heaven, Dan. 5. 23? etc. If not, then
vouchsafe to take the Warning, and submit in time to that Kingdom, which, it is
said, the God of Heaven should set up in their Days, and in the days of those
other Monarchies which were to succeed in the World, Dan. 2. 44. For it was not
for nothing, that so much Scorn and Contempt was thrown upon those mighty
Monarchs; Monarchs, who were so indeed; for they wanted no Allies, or
Confederates to support them; for they were Kings of Kings, Dan. 2. 37. and all
People, Nations, and Languages trembled and feared before them, whom they would
they slew, and whom they would they kept alive; and whom they would they set
up, and whom they would they put down, Dan. 5. 19. Believe it (great Sirs) it
was not for nothing that such memorable Examples were set forth, it was for
your Admonition, upon whom the Ends of the World are come; as it is 1 Cor. 10,
11. 'Twas that after Ages might grow Wife, as knowing there is no resisting
that Sovereign, who is higher than the highest; no withstanding that Power
which can so easily break in pieces, and consume all other Kingdoms, but it
self shall stand for Ever, Dan. 2. 44.

It has in Effect done all this already, the Babylonian, the Persian, the
Greek Monarchies have already been utterly destroyed by it, and the Roman so
far, as to stand upon its last Legs, (or rather to express it in the words of
the Vision, Dan. 2. 33.) to have both its Legs and Feet so broken, as to stand
only on some of its Toes; Some of those ten Kings I mean, which after the
taking of Rome, became the parts and support of that Empire.

And as Daniel said to Nebuchadnezzar, Thou art this Head of Gold, Dan. 2. 38.
So to you, O Kings, may it be said, you are those Toes; it is on you subsists,
what is still behind, of the last Monarchy, as it has been divided into
several Kingdoms; and of how great concern must it be to you to be rightly
informed how you may perpetuate your Royalty, and so establish your Thrones,
that you may not be of those, whom the Stone cut out without Hands, shall smite
and break in pieces, Dan. 2. 34?

Think let Men, what they will, of the outward Weakness of Christ's Kingdom, of
the little Assistance it has, or is like to meet with in the World; let there
be no Hand seen to cut out this Stone, no humane Strength or Policy, that is
ready to contribute toward the forming of it, yet it will grow into a great
Mountain, and fill the whole Earth, ver. 34, 35. The Gold, the Silver, the
Brass, the Iron, and Cley must all give place to it; it is a goodly Image
indeed, which these make in Nebuchadnezzar's Vision, but it is but an Image,
and must vanish before this Stone, as the Dream, that first prefented it.

Be Wife now therefore, let me again repeat it, O ye Kings; be instructed ye
Judges of the Earth; let nothing draw you from what is your true Interest, let
none of the Allurements, none of the Sorceries of the great Whore, of her, who
has glorified her self, and lived deliciously, who has said in her Heart, I
sit a Queen, and am no Widow, and shall see no Sorrow, but whose Plagues
notwithstanding shall come in one Day; let no tenderness for her, with whom any
of you have lived deliciously make you pity, bewail, and lament her, lest your
Judgment too come in one Hour with hers, Rev. 18. 7, 8, 9, 10. No; stand as far
off as you can, for fear of her Torment; hasten away, hasten away, that the
Ruins of her Fall reach you not.

You see how certainly all is foretold, you see how much of this is already
begun; what is behind, for your Kingdoms, (and what should be more dear to you
than your most glittering Crowns,) for you Souls sake dread, and avoid.

But who can hope to be so happy as to be heard on this Subject, when what is
here written, like the Religion she teaches, must be to many of you in an
unknown Language, and were it worthy to speak in your several Tongues, would be
sure to find all the Tricks and little Policies of corrupt Courtiers employed
in keeping it from your Knowledge: Every thing that is imaginable, to bespeak
your dislike both of Work and Author to be insinuated into your Royal Ears.

Is any thing that is new, offered; what a proper Topic is here to traduce the
Man, as one who is Forward, Pragmatical, and Self-conceited?

Is it deep and Mysterious? How much better were it to let alone such
unprofitable Speculations, and not be overbusie in what our wiser Forefathers
were content to be Modest and Ignorant.

Is it serious, and does he who presumes to Adress you, bespeak your Royal
Audience with the Sense of his greater Authority, from whom he brings the
Message, is not this to make too bold with ones Superiors, and exceed the
limits of that Humility which becomes a dutiful Subject?

Is the Style in which he writes, grave, and plain; then shall all presently be
dull and insipid, not fit for a refined Courtier, much less for a Prince to
lose his time in.

Is it on the contrary, what the most accurate Critics cannot so easily carp
at? Is the Author in his Education and Studies one who has had as great
Advantages as others, and has endeavored to employ histime to as good purpose
as the highest of their fine Wits? Then much Learning shall have made Paul mad:
He is a little Cracked, or Enthusiastical, or any thing else that may blast an
honest Man.

Or if his Fame be too clear to be directly struck at; yet may he not be pitied
to Death? and out of pretense of high Compassion to a Man of such abilities,
may it not be represented as a great Unhappiness, that he should have made so
ill a choice of his Subject to treat on? That in any thing else he would have
done better, and how great a Misfortune it is, that his Talent was not
otherwise employed?

Or if nothing else will murder his Reputation, and neither he, nor the Work
be otherwise liable to Exceptions, yet shall it not be whispered, that he is
none of Caesar's Friends? That your Crowns and Royal Dignities themselves are
not safe, if it shall be allowed to every Pen to vent such Anti-monarchical
Doctrines, as have been brought into the World under the pretense of carrying
on the Kingdom of Christ, and advancing its Power and Triumphs: Was not that
the very Reason St. Chrysostom gives, as is particularly observed p. 16. of
this following Treatise, why St. Paul speaks so Enigmatically, and Obsourely of
this Matter in his Epistle to the Thessalonians, chapter 2 2. v. 5, 6, etc. Why
then should any be so Presumptuous to meddle with such great Mysteries?

Unhappy Princes to be thus Treated! and yet what Court almost is there, or
has ever been, where such base Whisperers and Parasites have not made up great
part of the Attendants?

Unhappy Princes too! who must neither see with your own Eyes, nor hear with
your own Ears, but are subject even in what is of highest moment to be misled
by the slanders of those, whose greatest Merit it is, to depress such, whose
Sincerity and Plain-dealing aims at nothing so much, as to establish you upon
those Foundations, which only can stand.

And were you at leisure to read all your respective Histories; who in all Ages
would be found to be the truest Friends to Monarchy? those, who flattered your
Predecessors into Ruin, or those who were so hardy, as at their greatest Peril
to endeavor to recover them from it?

Or if your great Affairs will not permit such a particular research, let me
have leave to give it you in an Instance out of that History, which you are all
concerned to be acquainted with, it is that we have upon Sacred Record, and in
the Truth and Moral of it, is beyond all Exception; you have the relation of
it, Kings 1. 22. Ahab King of Israel, and Jehoshaphat King of Judah, were going
out to Battle against the Syrians, and Jehoshaphat said unto the King of
Israel, Enquire I pray thee at the Word of the Lord to Day: Upon this the
Prophets are gathered together, about four hundred Men, (a full Convocation)
the question is put, shall I go against Ramoth Gilead to Battle, or shall I
forbear? and they said, Go up, for the Lord shall deliver it into the hand of
the King; only Micaiah has no Summons sent him, he had in all likelihood been
traduced as one who favored not the Royal Cause; I hate him says Ahab, for he
does not Prophesy good concerning me, but evil: However at the Instance of
Jehoshaphat he is sent for, and what is the Issue? at first he bids him too
(the Messenger sent for him had prepared him for it) Go, and Prosper; but upon
the King's adjuring that he tell nothing but what is true in the Name of the
Lord; he then plainly and honestly acquaints him with the danger, is huffed for
it by the Court Prophets, imprisoned by the King, and left there to expect the
farther effects of his Displeasure, when he should return in Peace; he never
returns in Peace, but is slain, to fulfill the Words of the honest Prophet, he
had disgraced.

Now who were here the most Loyal? Those Prophets who said to Ahab, go up to
Ramoth-Gilead and prosper, the words of whom declared good to the King with one
Mouth, and thereby betrayed him to the sad Fate, which so soon overtook him, 1
Kings 22. 12, 13. Or Micaiah, who showed him Israel scattered upon the Hills,
as Sheep that had no Shepherd, v. 17. Who showed him the Lord sitting on his
Throne, and all the Host of Heaven standing by him on his Righthand, and on his
Left, showed him too leave given to the Lying Spirit to persuade him? v. 18,
19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Who I say of these were then most Loyal (I wish it were not
too much the Parallel of what seems to be doing in the World; for is it not (as
may be seen in the Explication of the sixth Vial, chapter 16. p. 127, 128.) by the
three unclean Spirits coming out of the Mouth of the Dragon, of the Beast, and
false Prophet, that the Kings of the Earth, and of the whole World, are to be
gathered to the Battle of that great day of God Almighty?) to their Prince? let
the Issue speak: who now the most Faithful, who the most Dutiful, the Event (it
seems not to be far off,) may e're long declare.

Besides, because the insinuating the want of Loyalty, and just Reverence to
Majesty, is the likeliest Engine to undermine the best of designs, (it was this
Crucified our Lord himself, and gave the great hindrance to that Work he came
into the World for, John 19. 12, 13. 'Twas this was the accusation they charged
his Disciples with, Acts 17. 7. Acts 25. 7, 8. This too that every day robs
Princes of the Services of the best of their Subjects; had I not long trod in
Court, and seen the worthiest of Men run down by such Artifices, I should not
have so touched this Topic: But because this so often happens, (the base and
unworthy have no other Arts to uphold themselves by); let me beg Pardon (Mighty
Princes) for it is your Interest is herein pursued, if I farther represent to
you in the Reigns of those, who formerly sat on the Thrones you do, who they
were, who were still the best Friends to Majesty.

Whether those fine Gentlemen who are always making their Court, the constant
Attendants at the Levees and Couchees of their great Masters, still pressing on
to be in the Eye of the Prince, and like the Sun-flower look gay, and hold up
their Heads bravely, whilst all shines on them, but as soon as the Shadows
begin to appear, humbly made their Leg, begged their Conge, and with as good a
Grace wheeled about to the Presence of the rising Sun, and it may be were as
busy, and officious there, as if every one of them had been that Phosphorus
which opened the Day for their Rise. Were these now the better Subjects, or
those who when they saw the Storm approaching, in all Humility forewarned them
of the Danger, but had nothing but the Bread of Affliction, and the Water of
Affliction for it; like solitary Micaiah many times were ordered to Prison till
they returned in Peace, though to return in Peace (had they hearkened to the
despised Messengers it might have been so,) was never their Lot: It was
otherwise decreed, as in Ahab's Case; and Micaiah, with all the Ignominy they
cast on him, was in the mean time the Favorite of a much better Court, the
Secretary of their greater Prince, of God himself, to declare it.

And now judge you (Dread Sovereign) whom you ought to preser in your Thoughts?
Whether those false Sycophants, Men made to undo Princes and Courts, and then
to desert them; or those who must always be steady, as that Truth, with which
they are entrusted? Who cannot but do what in them lies to prevent those
changes, which the others are no farther concerned in, than to make good their
Post in them who ever falls? Who really mourn for the Sins that bring them on,
and whatever be the Fate of the Prince, make it so far their own, as to lament
both his, and the Misfortunes of the Public, which cannot but suffer with him?
Who is the best Subject, he who with his Prayers, with his Tears, with those
warnings he thinks he is in Conscience-bound to Administer to you, follows you
in every Change; Or he who cares not what becomes of your Persons, your Crowns,
your Kingdoms, your Souls, provided he can but secure that Mammon of
Vrighteousness, to which alone he is a true Homager?

For if it be not so, how has it come to pass, that your Predecessors have
been Betrayed, and Murdered some of them by their greatest Favorites? Others,
however adored whilst living, so deserted at their Deaths, as scarce to have
found a charitable Hand to lay them in the Grave? and those who have gone off
the Stage with the greatest applause, soon forgotten amidst the gratulations
and glories of the next Reign?

So unhappy of all Men are you in this, (Great Princes) and how almost should
it be otherwise? Such being the Arts by which Men rise, such the designs of the
Ambitious, (a name that is big with all that is ill,) so much falsehood, so much
Envy, so much Pride, so much Intemperance, so much (not to dissemble,) Vice of
every sort, that, like the mixed Multitude coming out of Egypt with the
Israelites, is always to be found in your Retinue: Not that this is, what is
therefore presently to be reflected on your Majesty's, but on the Corruption of
humane Nature, and those great Bodies you govern, which like great Vessels
cannot be without great Dregs.

But this is still your Unhappiness, that you can make Men no better; that when
you have employed your best Care and Circumspection, Mankind will be still
Mankind, and the wickedness of a false Heart will not always be concealed.

Not that I would be so dis-ingenuous, as not to acknowledge, what is due to
those brave and worthy Men, that have in all Ages been bred up in, or Retainers
at Court; I know there were, and are the Saints in Caesar's House, Philip. 4.
22. And it is great Pity, where Virtue and Honor are so much Professed, there
should be any others; it is great Pity, (for it is to you Christian Princes
this is chiefly addressed) where Religion and the Gospel are owned, what is so
contrary to both should be so much entertained; but most of all unhappy, that
Religion, that the Gospel, at least the high Pretensions to both, should
produce these Effects: For is not this the case, that it is the Holy Man, the
Confessor, the Zealous Bigot, he that talks of nothing so much as of the
Church, and the Veneration due to its Laws and Authority, who is the worst of
Sycophants? Are not these the Men who get into your Secrets, and are factoring
for another Court, whilst they tread in yours? Are not these the Men who Cabal,
and Consult, and never rest satisfied till Prince and People do them their
Homage? But it is to be hoped, this will not always be; it is to be hoped, (let
me use the allusion of that name by the succession into whose Authority they
pretend to all this, Luke 5, 6, 7.) the greatness of Peter' s Draught may at
last break the Net, and their Ships and themselves sink with it.

But then (for I must not forget what gave the occasion to these Remarks) who
shall have the Honor, who the Hardiness to speak such Truths? Or must they not
be received at Court, because they flatter not, because they show you what is
your present danger, What your greater Unhappiness still behind, if you shall
after all think it a matter of State and Majesty to be above the Address of the
Sincere?

For my part, if I Perish I Perish, but it shall not be in being one of those
(the worst Disloyalty toward you and your Crowns,) who shall flatter you into
that Ruin, which cannot but attend the most mighty of you all, if you should
be so miserable as to be found with the Beast, and false-Prophet, when to be
cast into the Lake of Fire burning with Brimstone, Rev. 19. 19, 20.

For what will it then signify to have been buoyed up with an Opinion of your
mistaken Greatness? What to have been pushed on in your mighty Projects to
declare for your Glory, and make that consist (it may be) in enslaving your
own, or others Subjects? For thus the Beast, and the false-Prophet are too apt
to prompt their Votaries: It is the Language of the Dragon themselves speak,
Rev. 13. 11. and nothing they so much delight in, as to propagate his
Cruelties. 'Twere not difficult to show this in those Harangues, with which
Men, whose Function and Character, one would think, should inspire them with
more Moderation, have ventured, and that in the most solemn manner, as speaking
for themselves, and the whole Body of the Clergy, and that Religion too they so
highly cry up, to warm the Ears of the greatest Princes; as what Colors cannot
false Rhetoric put on any thing? What is so foul and odious, that the glozying
Encomiast cannot make matter even of Applause and Admiration?

But what will this signify, when the greatest Monarch must be divested of all
his Pomp, as Lucian describes the Philosopher in Charon's Boat, must lay aside
their Pride and Haughtiness, as a weight that would otherwise sink them, must
thoroughly disrobe themselves, and stand before the great Tribunal, as naked as
the meanest of their Subjects?

And can you now, Dread Princes, be displeased with him, who by telling you
Truth now, is but showing how you may retain even your Royalties there, and be
as high in that future Kingdom, as you are in what you at present enjoy?

Can you (Gracious Monarchs) resent it, that any has so just a Duty and
Reverence for your true Greatness, as to remonstrate to you, how treacherously
you are dealt with by those, who would blow you up till you Swell and Burst? by
putting you upon what is so unsuitable to the Divine Character, he, whose
Vicegerents you are, has imprinted on you? For how unlike to the Deity is
this, to despise, were your Subjects (what your Sycophants are still filling
your Ears with,) the meanest of your Creatures? For is it not the highest Glory
of Heaven to look down upon, and relieve the Oppressed? To be still scattering
its Bounty, and magnifying its Mercy toward us Dust and Ashes? It is said of
him, under whom you Reign, that he does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the
Children of men, Lament. 3. 33. And can the blackest Cruelties add Luster to
your Crowns? Let Abaddon, or Apollyon, a Destroyer, be a Style for him, and his
wicked Substitutes, who Rules in the Children of Darkness; to be the Preserver
of Men is the Glory of the Almighty: And it is only Weakness, the greatest
impotency of Mind that can tempt those, who are otherwise high and mighty in
the Eye of the World, (as Princes are, and ought to be,) to those mistaken
Triumphs of insulting over the miserable, and calling that their Glory and the
enlarging their Territories, which is only wider Solitude, and professed De
population.

Let it be Treason in your Subjects, whatever in their very Thoughts they
imagine against you, but that, and all their overt Actions are nothing to what
your selves do, whilst thus acted to the unkinging and deposing your selves:
For where is that Glory that can end in nothing but the greatest Chaos, and
Confusion? Where is the Power and Majesty, that not only lessens it self in the
Outrages committed on the Innocent, in the Ruins it makes, where it pretends to
Rule, but in the certain Doom it must expect from that greater Majesty, whose
Creatures, whose Subjects, it may be, whose Favorites it is still destroying?

Methinks it is a degree of Treason no Monarch should Pardon, to be thus
tempted by any of their Subjects from their Allegiance to Heaven, and with it,
from that only Security, they can hope for to their Kingdoms: None methinks
should suffer their Meekness, their Clemency, their Zeal, or whatever other
imaginary Name, their base Parasites have learnt to blow them up with, to be
thus abused to such vile and unworthy Designs!

For, what is it for a poor Mortal to be buoyed up with the Applause of them,
who have no other way to serve their wicked Ends? To have the People in their
Acclamations Shout to them as if they were Gods, whilst, it may be, the Worms
are already Preying upon them, as upon Herod, who gave not Glory to God? What
to have what is next to Divine Honors done their Statues, to have Lamps
perpetually burning before them, Incense, and a sort of Sacrifice offered to
their Images, if all be but to prepare them and their Idolatrous Crew to be the
greater Victim of Divine Wrath? I would not be bold in my Innuendo's on such a
Subject, as this is; I wish no Reader did understand, or could apply it. Pudet
haec opprobria. --
Vel dici potuisse, aut vix potuisse reselli.


But to pass-by such unroyal Persons, for certainly none can so much Dethrone
themselves, as whoever thus usurps on God, and shall permit such Indignities to
be offered to him, (for there the Abomination terminates) whose Prerogative it
is to set up one, and pull down another.

To pass by therefore such unroyal Persons, (though it is to be hoped none such
are to be found among you) let me with all Duty apply to such among you who are
under another sort of difficulty, as great as the former; and so are such who
suffer themselves, (Oh the Indignity of Crowned Heads!) however high in their
Styles and Character of Majesty to be the Vassals of a foreign Power: who can
submit to the Usurpations of those who by their, and their Predecessors Favors
have risen to what they are?

What a reproach is it to you (Great Monarchs!) to be but part of that
Scarlet-colored Beast on which the great Whore (as the Holy Ghost has
described Rome to be, Rev. 17.) sits? How mean is it for you to be thus rid on?

It Is contrary to the respect due to Sovereign Princes almost but to express
what the Dishonours and Servilities are, this shameless Sorceress blushes not
to put on you.

Is the vein of Blood open in any of your Kingdoms, for whom is it but her you
fight?

Is your Power applied to the executing any grievous Sentence (Oh could the
Cries of Souls under the Altar pierce into your Ears, as they do into his, who
is your Sovereign! Rev. 6. 9, 10. Could you imagine, (but your Greatness, your
Luster, your Glory must not be disturbed with such affecting Objects,) what the
Groans, the Shrieks of those are, who are daily upon the Wrack by any of your
Officers! What the sad and disconsolate Conditions of such who in your Kingdoms
are shut up (let me so express it) under Chains of Darkness, in those horrible
Dungeons, where the Toads and Vipers, and whatever other Venomous Creatures
crawl forth in that constant Night they there feel, are much more merciful to
them, than their savage Inquisitors! But I say,

Is your Power applied, your Authority abused, to the executing any grievous
Sentence? for whom is it all this Drudgery is, but for her, who like that great
Abaddon, or Destroyer, under whom she Acts, Prides herself in the Cruelty? For
her, who if she be as she is, the Woman arrayed in Purple, and Scarlet-colour,
it is the Blood of the Saints that has thus dyed her Robes, Rev. 17. 4. And
what is the Honor, what the part in all this she gives you, but to be only the
Executioners of so great Impiety and Injustice?

But let me (for methinks it is due to your Majesty's to be better treated,
though who can dissemble the Insolences of that Sorceress toward you?) retract
the Imputation; for sure it cannot be with your Royal Consent, that such
Barbarities are acted: No, it is the Design of those who menage such Villainies,
that what they do, may be in the Dark: For who shall say to a King, Thou art
Wicked, and to Princes, Ye ar^ Ungodly? Job 33. 18. Indeed it is not fit this
should be in the least surmised; therefore they who promote such mischievous
Purposes must color all with Zeal and Piety; it is the Cause of God, and the
Church must countenance the Practice.

But oh still greater Impiety! to interest God himself in the Barbarities they
are carrying on! And let it not be admired, the wicked Wretches so boldly crowd
about your Thrones, when they are so hardy toward God himself, as to make his
the Habitation of their Injustice; to entitle the most High and Holy One to all
the villainies of Hell it self.

But cannot God but be Jealous against these things? Imitate then (Royal Sirs)
your Prince, recover his, and your Honor from such vile Parasites; be pleased
to believe that that cannot be of God or Christ, which is so contrary to that
Clemency which is the radiant Diadem in Heavens Crown; let not her being decked
with Gold, and precious Stones and Pearls; let not the Golden Cup in her hand,
(all are but what she has spoiled you, or your Subjects of) tempt you any
longer to the Abominations, and filthiness of Fornication, the Kings of the
Earth are said to have committed with her, Revel. 18. 3. Rather as it there
follows, (take not mine, but the Admonition of God Himself) come out of her,
that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her Plagues,
v. 4.

But are there yet any among you, who are still more dangerously ensnared, and
out of very Conscience (unhappy Conscience to be thus misguided!) countenance
the Romish Interest? who think they do God good Service, I will not say in
Persecuting his Church, but in Propagating that mistaken Faith, which has so
long done it?

It Is, I confess, a glorious Principle to be for Liberty of Conscience; worthy
the most Royal Heart to declare that none shall be Prosecuted for mere
Religion, (and may this Charity cover all other Miscarriages!) But what
recompense can that Church make them, who thus Sacrifice all to it? If at the
same time, what is Zeal and Piety in those, who thus sincerely act in her
Cause, be but color, cheat, and the same design of Cruelty carrying on by Her,
as when with open violence she invades the Peace and Consciences of Mankind?

And, Oh that my Voice or Pen, might reach such Royal Personages, as are most
concerned herein! That they would amongst that hurry and distraction a
tottering Cause (for such Rome's must be, the sentence is gone out against Her,
she is fallen, is fallen, and cannot long stand) gives them, retire a little within
themselves, and consider, what can be the end of Her, who has so long had it
written on her Forehead, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS, AND
ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH?

I would not, it becomes me in my duty, not to press hard on any Prince, but
least of all on such, whom the World may be apt to think, what is last said,
more nearly concerns; but neither dare I upon this occasion so far to temporize
with any, as not freely to premonish of the danger, especially, where it is the
only Interest such can have, either with God, or Man, to desert that Communion,
which has already betrayed to such irreparable mischiefs.

And I most humbly ask leave to offer to such a Prince, whether, to say no
more, (for I may not here enter upon long Argument and Conviction) that
Religion which bests Consults the Honor of God, the Interest of his
Vicegerents, the Security of the People, the Quiet and Peace of Conscience;
that Religion, which in its Precepts is most agreeable to the Principles of
Reason, and the common notions Mankind has of Good and Evil; whether, I say,
such a Religion, or what teaches and acts contrary to all these, be the
Religion he would choose? the Religion fit for Prince or People?

For my part, I would speak to such an one, as I would answer it at the great
day, when Prince and People must all stand naked before God: Were I not as well
assured, that the Romish Church, in the Bulk it now stands, and has for these
several hundred years stood, were that BABYLON spoken of in the Revelation,
that MOTHER OF HARLOTS, AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH, as I am, that 'twas Gods
Holy Spirit that dictated that and all other Scripture; Were I not assured,
that the Romish Church were chiefly concerned in those seven last plagues, or
Vials of the Wrath of God, mentioned, Revel. 15. and 16. Chapters. Were I not
assured, that most of those Vials have been already poured out on her, and that
there is very little behind to complete her full Doom: Were I not assured, that
those who come not out of her, must perish with her, and that their, and her
Fall is near at hand, I should not dare, as I have here done, to appeal to you
(O Sovereign Princes) and thus freely to call you down from your Thrones to
consider what is offered by one, who is the meanest of your Subjects.

But is it I then, or the Truth, that calls upon you? Is it so mean a Subject,
that presses upon your Royal State, or is it your own Royal State it self, your
greatest Interest, that of your Heavenly, as well as Temporal Crown, that here
bespeaks you?

In Compassion, in Compassion to your Royal selves, be jealous at length of
that corrupt Communion, which can preserve you neither in this, nor another
World.

Think not (Great Sirs) that the Dream of Purgatory (an Invention to make men
less careful of their Salvation, while the day is, in which only we can work)
will then relieve you.

Think too, how cruel their Mercies are, who have no better State for their
Votaries, than what themselves tell you that is.

Think not the highest Saints will be able to defend you then, who, when they
have done all they can, are themselves but unprofitable Servants, Luke 17. 10.
and can have done no more than was their duty to do.

Much less think, that Images, Relics, Crucifixes, or whatever other
Merchandise Rome Boasts, can stand in stead in the day of Wrath:

No: Think of nothing but the Blood of Christ, and that Sacrifice offered by
him, our only Advocate and Mediator, but whose True Members Rome has so long
Persecuted.

And let me, in all Humility, beseech you once more to think, and that is on
those who have been using all their Sorceries to deceive you in these weighty
matters, and to rob you and your Subjects of the benefit of that Blood.

Think too (Great Princes) how they have entrenched on your Royal Dignity in
every advance they made toward their Greatness.

It was by taking him out of the way that hindered, that Antichrist, the Man of
Sin, and Son of Perdition, i. e. By the removing the Roman Emperor, that he was
first capable of Exalting himself.

Consider how by their siding one while with the Eastern, another while with
the Western Emperor, (after the Empire ceased at Rome) they made these to clash
against one another, themselves still gaining by the Rupture?

Consider how it was in the Prosecution of this their wicked purpose, they
called in first the Emperor of Constantinople, and then Pepin against
Aistulphus King of Lombardy: And what became of his Territories, and the
Exarchat of Ravenna in the Issue, which instead of being restored to the
Emperor, as was demanded by his Ambassadors were decreed by Pepin to the Pope.

Consider, they are Contemplations worthy your Royal Thoughts, what was their
Design in beginning a new Empire in the West, and clapping the Crown by
surprise, on the Head of Charles the Great, as it is reported to have been done
whilst he was upon his Knees at his Devotion? What indeed but to lessen the
Eastern Empire, and from the Authority Leo the then Pope assumed to himself, to
Found for the future a Right in Creating and Confirming all Princes?

See the Tenure (Great Monarchs) they prescribe for all your Royalties to be
held by! And if, whilst it was to serve them, they call you the Vicars of
Christ; for there was a time when themselves told you this was your Style, yet
how soon did they forget the Allegiance due to it, and under that very Style
since usurpt the Power over you and your Kingdoms?

Will it not be too great an humbling to you (Mighty Princes) to show you no
fewer than seven Emperors, i. e. Henry the Fourth, Henry the Fifth, Conrad,
Frederic Barbarossa, Philip, Otho, Frederic, all almost successively
Excommunicated, some of them deposed, and others brought to that degree of
Submission as to hold the Pope's Stirrup; one having his Crown kicked off of
his Head by him, all spurned and trampled on, as if they had been the vilest
Vassals?

And is it any wonder that Kings and other Princes have the honor to follow
their Emperors herein? Baronius in his Annals, Anno 1162, brings in the Kings
of France and England at once performing the Office of Yeomen of his Stirrup,
and leading his Horse, one by one Rein, the other by the other, till from the
place where they met Him, they had conducted Him to the place of his Reception:
And lest full Homage should not be paid to Him, he gives an account, at the
same time, of a Prince of the Saracens, bowing the knee before him, kissing his
feet, and this in the Name of his Master, the King of the Mahometans: 'twas to
Alexander the third, whom Baronius so much magnifies for his meekness,
moderation, and goodness, Ann. 1177. that these Ceremonies were performed; in
which he likewise joins all Orthodox Kings, and Princes, as crowding in for a
part in so glorious a service.

And the Truth is, your own Records (great Prince) will give you but too many
Instances of that Injustice, that Insolence, those Indignities of all sorts,
with which the Romish See has so often treated the most Royal Persons. Sicily,
Lombardy, Sardinia, Portugal, Spain, France, and indeed almost what Christian
State is there, (for the Eastern Empire has not been free from their
Pretensions,) that yields not Precedents of this Nature? Scarce any War, any
Contest, any Rebellion of Subjects against their Princes, any difference
between Princes, in which they have not been Parties, if not the Promoters:
Scarce any Boat in which this Fisherman, this Peter, (let me use the Style he
pretends to) has not had his Oar, scarce any troubled Waters in which he has
not Fished.

But I must not pass by, what by us of these Kingdoms must not be forgotten,
viz. The treatment of Innocentius the Third, toward King John, by his Legate
Pandulphus; when having interdicted the Kingdom for six Years together; (an
admirable way to propagate Faith; by shutting up the Church Doors, denying the
use of the Sacraments, refusing Christian Burial to all, etc. And in a word,
treating the whole Nation, as well as the King, who had offended him, as if
they were Heathens, or Dogs, excepting such only whom the purchase of their
Money, i. e. the Mammon of Unrighteousness, had made good Christians:) He
forced him to take off the Crown from his Head, and lay it down at his Feet to
be disposed of as the Pope should please, and taking it up, kept it three or
four Days, not restoring it but upon condition that he and his Successors
should hold the Kingdom of the Sea of Rome at the annual Tribute of a thousand
Marks, viz. Seven Hundred yearly for England, and three Hundred for Ireland;
whereupon they both became subjected to the Pope: To what degree that Exaction
grew, ought to all concerned in either Kingdom to be the lasting Subject of
their Indignation.

To this I might add that great Diminution it is to you in the exercise of your
Royalty in what of your Kingdoms you do enjoy, to rule by the Laws of those who
have so unworthily usurped upon you; the Canon Law I mean, and other their
Constitutions brought in upon some of you, to the subversion of all the ancient
Rights of your Countries, I was going to say, to the dis-inherison of you, and
your People: And how are those of you in effect deposed, whilst you still
seemingly sit on your Thrones, where the Inquisition, (a name at which Humanity
startles,) is made the standing Law of your Kingdoms, or where the Decrees of
Draco are recalled, and whatever can drain your Subjects of their Wealth, or
Blood, made the false Eulogies of flourishing Kingdoms?

Says St. Paul, Let no Man deceive you by any means, speaking with reference to
Antichrist, that Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition, 2 These. 2, 3. And let me in
all humility make the same Address: It is too long already, that this great
Impostor has been so audaciously enterprizing upon you; wait no longer (Royal
Sirs) for the decision of the point, it is manifest, and you have but too many
Demonstrations of it, who is this Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition, viz. He who
thus has opposed and exalted himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped, so that he, as God sits in the Temple of God, showing himself
that he is God. It is of you (Dread Sovereigns) it is said in the Scripture, Ye
are Gods, Psalm. 82. 1. 6. John 10. 34. It Is of you all that is Worshipped, (...),
the Style of most August is to be understood: It is of one usurping to himself
all Power in the Church, to bind or loose, to pardon or damn, sitting as God in
the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God is most aptly Construed; and
it is not hard now to point out the Beast by his own Mark:

You have seen what has been his aim from his first Rise:

What the Principles and Maxims by which he acts,

What the Scorn and Contempt, he has been for so many Ages together casting
upon you:

You have seen what changes and interruptions, what Faction and Sedition, what
turmoils, what stirs and troubles he has been fomenting in your Kingdoms: How
precariously he would have you hold your Crowns; what Power he usurps over you,
and your Subjects here, and in case you refuse him that Obedience, that
Vassallage he expects, what power he invests himself with, of shutting the
Gates of Heaven against you hereafter.

Your Histories will inform you, what your Royal Progenitors, and Predecessors
have done for him; what the Designs and Projects he has put them upon; what
the Dangers they have so often incurred, and how he has returned the
obligation, your selves are best able to Judge.

And what is it now at last he and his busy Agents require from you, as the
Complement of that Zeal, that has been so much abused? What is it they would
requite all you have done for them with, but (let me use the Words of the
Holy Ghost in the sixth Vial, (under which I doubt not we now are) in gathering
you to the Battle of that great day of God Almighty, Rev. 16. 14. That Battle
in which none can engage and prosper?

And let me upon the Prospect of what that portends, once more repeat it, Be
wise now therefore, O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the Earth.

But there are among you (Great Sovereigns) who seem not to be so much
concerned in this; those I mean, who having left the corrupt Communion of the
Church of Rome, yet have not fully pursued or acted agreeable to that
Reformation, which is to bring on, or succeed the Fall of Babylon. To such is
it, I have to add, that they would please to consider, it will not suffice,
that you are contented to be called Protestants, and enjoy the Interest of that
Name, unless you are what that Name speaks: And it is your highest Concern so
to be; the time growing on, when Success and Victory shall go along with Truth
and Piety.

Have you been so happy to throw off her Yoke, to disclaim her Errors, to
despise her Usurpations, let then none of her Principles, none of her Practices
mix with your Politics; act, (Glorious Princes,) act bravely and openly for
God and that Religion you Prosess; It is but to lessen your Strength, to think
when God is doing his own Work, that nothing but the Arm of Flesh can save you:
Why should you think he cannot defend his own Cause, without listing his
Enemies in the Service?

Is it not he, who has said, not by Might, nor by Power, but by my Spirit
says the Lord of Hosts? Zechar. 4. 6. No, let Princes and People consider,
that it is the holiness, and purity of Religion God will establish in the
World; let them consider, how hitherto in all the signal Deliverances of his
People, himself has stepped in, and asserted the Glory of the Success, and let
them but reform to that Holiness, that Purity, there needs no farther force to
beat her down, for where these are, Babylon is fallen. Amen.

For the Reverend D. W.
L. Mart. 7. 1686. Reverend Sir,
I Return you many Thanks not only for the Honor, but the benefit of perusing
your Learned Tract, and am sorry I must make so unsuitable a Requital, as to
trouble you with my Excuse for not Licensing it: However, I hope when you have
considered it, you will allow it to be reasonable. I will not allege, (though
I might do it) that I have all along declined meddling with Discourses of this
Nature, which have been offered me by those, I had great reason to esteem. But
the Truth in short is, that a large Book on this Subject, and a very accurate
one, as I am told, was lately, not for the performance, but the Matters sake,
sent back from hence without an Imprimatur. I believe you have hinted the
reason out of St. Chrysostom, where he says that St. Paul would not plainly
say, what the (...) [that which withholdeth] was, that was to be taken away,
lest he should incurr unnecessary Enmity, and unprofitable Danger. The
predicting the Fall of the Roman Church now, may be as ungrateful those, to
whose Interests are engaged in it, as the foretelling the Ruin of the Roman
Empire could be then, and the Cases being so like, it may perhaps be thought
seasonable to observe the same Rule that St. Paul then did. Sir, I hope you
will take this freedom in good part from one, who to the utmost of his Power is
desirous to approve himself

Reverend Sir, Your most faithful and Humble Servant.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
WHAT it was that has so long made these Animadversions abortive, will appear
by the Letter on the preceding Page; and therefore without any farther appeal
to other Witnesses, to show that what is here published, is no more done to
serve a turn now, than it was then written for it; What I have to request from
every Beader, is, that it may be received with the same Sincerity with which it
was first Penned; which was in the retirement of a long Sickness, when I was
sequestered from my family, (the best part of it being upon other occasions
absent from me,) and had only God, and his good Spirit, and my own Conscience
to confer with; that Conscience, which notwithstanding the Prejudice with which
some then, and since have loaded me, as if I had been less sound in our Holy
Reformed Religion, suffered me not then to temporize with those who sat at the
Helm, (to the greatest of whom, I could have had as easy access, as any others
of my Brethren,) that Conscience I say, which suffered me not then to
temporize, and I thank my God, makes me still above all sordid Flattery; and I
desire to bless his Holy Name, (I hope what I shall here publish will be the
freer from all carnal Interest,) who has in his Providence made me in some
degree a Martyr, both then, and now.

For if I have since suffered, as I am sensible I have, for being thought to be
one whom my Great Master then favored, I suffered no less then, for being
thought what I was, and shall always endeavor to acquit my self therein, one
of the most firm and unshaken Protestants: No, I am bold to say, whatever other
Opinion that great Prince had of me, he never thought otherwise of me, than as
one (let it be called Stiffness, Moroseness, Pride, or whatever other name ill
Men have for those, who turn not with every Wind, I am little sollicitous) who
knew neither how to dissemble or fawn. But whatever either then, or since has
befallen me, I have this to comfort my self with, that nothing has, nor I hope
ever shall alienate my Zeal from that Truth, for which I have desired always to
appear: I have done it at Court, in the University, City, and wherever else
it lay in my way.

And if I had nothing else to plead for my Sincerity, I think the Dedication of
that Sermon to his Majesty, presented to him on that very Day, and at the very
point of time, when the Zealous Bigots of the other Religion were hurrying him
to his first public appearance at their Worship, the Dedication I say of that
Sermon alone, in which the Superstitions of Rome, and the Impieties of the
Jesuits, (who were then the prevailing Faction) are so highly declared against,
might be alleged for a sufficient proof; I am sure it was what was most
heinously resented by the Party, and the Author, (as appears by what was
afterward published against him, in a Pamphlet of theirs, called Good advice
to the Pulpits, p. 61.) had the Honor to be fonnd in that good Company, to
whieh none I think will deny the style of the Best of Protestants. But if the
Cry be once raised, what is mistaken at Court, shall be doubly so in the City,
and from thence soon ecchoed into the Country, and the most innocent Person
forthwith made the mark of popular Outrage; for it is but dressing up the
Martyr in Beasts Skins, and every dog will be snarling and barking at him: nay,
even those, who in their great Understanding know not what it is to be Papist,
or Protestant, nay, would it may be, be hard put to it, if they were to prove
in what it is themselves are distinguished even from Brutes, shall however in
their great Zeal run away with the Cry, as if they were the only Skilled
Professors in Divinity, and Men who have spent all their time in hard Study,
and made it their Business to live up to that Divinity they profess, shall not
be thought worthy to offer Sense or Reason to such mighty Sophies.

And if after all, they chance to find their Error, what is the Amends is to be
made for all, beyond this? That the Person they thus run on, is the most
mistaken Man in the World! But who bid them thus mistake, who bid them first
take up an Error, and then use all the rudeness untaught nature is guilty of,
to defend it?

But what must a Man say then, to remove such a Scandal? Will it avail to say I
Sucked in the greatest detestation of Popery with my Mothers milk, that ever
since I was able to use my Tongue, I forbore not to do it in the abhorrence of
its Superstitions, and Idolatries? Will, if nothing else, this following
Treatise say any thing for its Author in this matter? What shall I take (O
Posterity judge thou of this depraved Age, wherein such Apologies are needful!)
to testify the indignation I cannot but have to be thus Traduced? A favourer
of Popery! Do I believe a Hell, a Devil? Let Popery and these be loved at once!
No, be it not my Presumption, O my God, but thy Grace that draws the Profession
from me) may I, if ever Thou bring the Wheel over thy People in this Nation,
be the first Witness in this thy great Cause.

But I am ashamed there should be occasion for any thing of this Nature, nor
should I have troubled the World with it, were it not, that those who appear
in Print, at the same time set themselves up, as Marks to be shot at, every one
spending his Verdict, and accepting, or rejecting the Work, according to the
respect he has for the Author.

But most especially thus it happens in Subjects of this nature; for how can
any one pretend to, or hope that the World should believe, that be entirely
gives up himself (and yet certainly without it, there can be but little
probability of his steering well in it,) to the conduct of Heaven, if at the
same time he has any covert Dissimulation, not to say Coldness in the
Argument, whereof he treats?

Can a Papist in Masquerade (succeding Ages will wonder at the Style) decry
Popery, discover all the abominations of it, fix the Judgment declared against
it, and besatisfied that the seven last Plagues are but so many degrees of that
Ruin, which is foretold to belong to the Beast? These I think are
Incongruities, that no wise, no good Man can imagine to be consistent, and
therefore taking for granted that all is defamation, and but the effects of
downright Malice, and Ignorance; I will suppose the veil to be taken off, the
Cloud vanished, and my self to be a much better Protestant than those, who out
of design, or from the want of being better informed, have raised, or
entertained the Scandal.

It may not be altogether improper to mention to whom the Dedication was first
intended, and that was to my gracious Master, King James the Second, (whose
late Royal Favors toward me possibly might be one Reason, why that Scandal I
have been wiping off, was cast upon me; but no time ought to blot out my
grateful Sense of what was designed, though without effect as well as without
my seeking it,) And I hope it may still find that good effect with him, (if it
has the lot to come to his Royal Hands) which his most humble, and Dutisul
Servant and Subject then designed it to; I am sure he knows in his highest
Prosperity, I never was of those who flattered his Greatness, and I am sure he
has that good Opinion of me, to believe that in his Troubles, I never can be a
Shimei. And therefore my Hopes are, he will in the first place judge me Sincere
in that Loyalty I owe to him who is King of Kings, and in the second, I owe to
those who rule under him, to whom I am sure I could never have aquitted my
self, had I not (which is the business of this Treatise) represented Rome in
its true Colors to them; that Rome which has so long usurpt upon their
Royalties, and can no longer subsist, than by the diminution of their
Majesty's, they contribute to it.

I now proceed to speak of the Work it self, the occasion whereof is best seen
by the Title Page; and whether, and how far it has answered its Title will
appear by that time the Reader shall have perused its Contents, in which I hope
he will not think his Time altogether lost; many of the notions he shall there
find being wholly new, and what none else hitherto has touched at, and all of
them coherent as between themselves, so with the whole: And if sometimes more
than one single Event be offered for the Explication, or rather Illustration of
the respective Points, I think that is a liberty of Prophesying, (let me so
express it) no good, or wise Man will Condemn, as being but agreeable to that
variety of Sense, in which all allow the Scripture to abound: Besides, were it
only for the resreshing the Reader, that a Variety is sometimes given, it is
certainly what at least might be excused, that his Curiosity and Pleasure are
but hereby served.

And as for the Author of Nubes Testium, whose Preface chiefly occasioned these
Reflections, I hope he will not look upon it as an improper Answer to his whole
Book, to show how those Corruptions we blame in the Romish Church came in; how
the Romish Church it self grew to that height, at which it is, or has been in
any time of the Reign of Antichrist; for what will it avail to urge Authorities
of Fathers, Men subject to Errors as our selves, for those Corruptions, (were
they in their testimony all with him) if it be proved, that those points he
brings them to confirm, are part of those Corruptions, for which she is so
highly to be Condemned?

I would do all the Right imaginable to Antiquity, but there is a great
difference between what bears the title of such, and what really is true
Antiquity. The Fathers themselves have they not been corrupted by the crafty
Forgeries of temporizing Hypocrites? Or if they had not been corrupted, is it
not enough to abate their Credit, that in what the Author brings them against
us, they either differ from themselves in other parts of their Writings, or,
what is much more, they differ from the Holy Scripture? The Holy Scripture I
say, which must be allowed to be the Judge in this Case.

Nor will it serve their Turn, what they usually answer us with here, that by
giving thus much to Scripture, and making every one Judge of the Sense of it,
we put all upon the Issue of a private Spirit: For we make no private Person
any more a Judge here, than they do; we suppose to be able to reach the sense
of Scripture, all means must be used for the attaining it; only this we are
sure, whether this, or the other Person hit it, or no, yet it is the true sense
of Scripture ought to prevail beyond the Authority of Councils, Fathers, or any
other Doctors whatever. And whatever the Person be, who is so happy as to show
most Reason for the Sense he gives of it, this is He, whose Opinion ought to
obtain.

It Is true indeed, with respect to any private Person, at the first View, the
names of Councils, and Fathers, and the like, seem to carry with them a notion
of what is more public, in Opposition to a private Spirit; but all this is but
Fallacy, and no way the Inference, that ought to be made from that which is
urged in this matter, viz. That no Prophesy of the Scripture is of any private
Interpretation, Pet. 2. 1. 20. For that is not the meaning of that Place, that
one Person is more private than two, than a whole Council, than all ancient
Writers whatever; but that he, and they too are Private, and their
Interpretation is such, if it agree not with the Analogy of Scripture, and the
sense of the Holy Spirit himself: It Is this Sense, taking it without respect to
any Persons, makes it not to be private; and so the antithesis there lies, for
the Prophecy came not in old time by the Will of Man; But Holy Men of God
spoke, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. It is not the Will of Man, the
Decrees of Councils, the Sentiments of Fathers, the pretended Infallibility of
any Chair, (all this is but the Will of Man,) if they concur not with what the
Holy Ghost has spoken.

And as for what I differ from others in, who have given up themselves to the
same sort of Studies, I hope it will not be imputed so much to an affected
Singularity, as to the force of Truth; I having industriously avoided to
consult the Hypotheses, or Explications of others, whilst this was Writing,
that so I might not be drawn to lean to any humane Authority, and served my
self only with such general Notions, as were before imprinted on my Mind,
without any particular applying my self to such, who might have been apt to
lead me. The Reverend Mr. Mede's Writings I confess I had long since been
acquainted with, and Napeir's ingenious and methodical Treatise, I had many
Years ago perused, and was extremely quickened by them to a desire of being
better acquainted with these excellent Mysteries; Brightman I had not so great
a Reverence for, and therefore in a manner wholly declined spending any of my
Thoughts or Time on him; and as for any thing that is more Modern, I studiously
declined it, as not being willing to tincture the Glass, through which I hoped
to take the Prospect of so fair a Country. Only Monsieur Jurieu's Books I could
not well avoid the perusing, they being in the hands of an Ingenious, and
Learned Protestant French Minister, who then did me the favor of spending some
time with me at my House, and would be often speaking of him; to him I had
communicated some of my Thoughts on these matters, and had the opportunity of
discoursing over some of the Arguments of Monsienr Jurieu's Chapters,
particularly that of his seventh Chapter, Tom. 1. Concerning the number of the
Beast, in which I could no way agree with that worthy Person, as I could
neither with Potter, or any other I have met with on that Argument, upon which
occasion I wrote these following Reflections in the Margin of the Book, he put
into my Hands, which I shall give in the same Words I then wrote them.

Vereor ne toto hoc capite nimis incertis conjecturis abduci se passus sit
Doctissimus vir, nec ergo aliquid istis reponens, inquirendum relinquo, an non
potius ad Hildebrandum, sive Gregorium VII Tota res referri possit, in quo
compleri videntur, quaecunque de homine peccati, vel filio Perditionis,
praedixerit Paulus ad Thessal. 2. 2. 3. etc. Et ne dubitemus, quin ille
designetur, Spiritus Sanctus quasi digito indicat Apocal. 13. 10. Qui ducit in
Captivitatem, in captivitatem ducetur, qui occidit gladio, occidetur gladio,
hic est patientia, and fides Sanctorum: Quod sic quoque praefatur, v. 9. Si
quis habeat aurem, audiat; quorsum autem ista? Nisi magnum quid esset, quod
indigitaret? at quid illiud magnum, nisi Captivitas illius, qui duxit
Captivitatem? Quis autem ille, qui duxerat Captivitatem, nisi Romanus
Imperator, qui ipse capta Roma, quod contigit Anno Christi 410, (Imperante tunc
in occidente Honorio) in captivitatem duci intelligatur? Cepit tum Romam
Alaricus Rex Gothorum; post quod tempus sic imminui coepit Romanum Imperium, ut
nihil ejus, nis nomen, and plane umbra permanserit; a quo tempore, quippe ut
praedixerat Apostolus amoto illo, qui obstitit, Homo peccati, and filius
perditionis coepit revelari; atque a revelatione illius, numera 666, quem
Spiritus Sanctus dicit esse numerum Hominis aeque ac animalis, sive (...) (quo
summa imperia a Daniele pridem designabantur) and devenies in annum quartum
Hildebrandi sive Gregorii VII, Christi scilicet 1076, quo ille primus
Imperatorem excommunicavit, and potestatem Imperatoris constituendi sibi
arrogavit. En numerum Hominis! hoc est, illius, qui astu, and sapientia humana
huc se, succesioresque suos provexit! En numerum (...), sive bestiae, i. e.
Illius, qui Imperium summum, per Bestiam quartam scilicet denotatum, jam ad se,
successoresque suos plene transtulerat: Vide hic nascentem Antichristum, vide
ad (...) assurgentem, vide quoque potentiam dantem primae Bestiae! Quippe per
Papam, quam postea Imperator exercuit, obtinuit Potestatem, Apocal. 13. 12. Sed
vide tantum imaginem potestatis ipsi restitutam, v. 14. Nec enim ab illo
tempore recuperavit unquam Imperator plenum, and absolutum Imperium: vel vide
Imaginem Imperii ad Papas translatam, i. e. Eos in similitudinem Imperatorum
pleno frui Imperio, sibique arrogare, quae habentur, v. 15, 16, 17, etc. quod
autem additur v. 18. Hic est sapientia, annon iterum observare jubemur aliquid
magnum, and prae caeteris egregium? Quid autem tale, nisi in quo totus
Apocalypseos cardo vertitur, in quo autem magis, quam in exploratione, and
declaratione magni illius Antichristi verti ille judicetur? Vis iterum
recognoscere, unde ortus Antichristi, sive Bestiae in (...) sua numero 666
designatae, sumendus? Respice Apocal. 12. ubi Draconis, i. e. Romani Imperii
Paganici immicitia adversus Christum, and ejus Religionem, Bellum, and exitus
describuntur, cui tamen sub sinem dicitur Terra, i. e. Terrestris potestas opem
tulisse. Contigit hoc, quum Imperatores Decretis suis rescindebant Haereses
(fluvium illum, quem serpens projecerat ex ore suo post foeminam sugientem in
desertum) quibus polluere Ecclesiam voluerat; quod nescio, annon satis commode
reseratur ad Constantini tempora, qui Ecclesiae pacem primus restituit, vel ad
generalia Concilia Imperatorum potestate indicta, quibus Haereses istae tam
enormes damnabantur; quod tempus si excedat tempus captae Romae, adeoque non
concurrat penitus cum ortu Antichristi, id ex eo contigisse observandum, quod
ad fugam Faeminae, quae Regno Antichristi contemporanea est, extendere se
debeat. I am afraid lest this most learned Man in this whole Chapter has
suffered himself to be drawn away by Conjectures that are too uncertain; and
therefore without replying any thing thereto, I leave it to be enquired,
whether the whole Matter may not rather be referred to Hildebrand or Gregory
the seventh, in whom seems to be fulfilled, whatever Paul in his Epistle to the
Thessalonians 2. 2. 3. etc. has foretold of the Man of Sin, or the Son of
Perdition; and that we no way doubt but that he is there designed, the
Holy Ghost as it were points with the Finger at it, Rev. 13. 10. He that
leads into Captivity, shall go into Captivity, he that kills with the
Sword, must be killed with the Sword. Here is the Patience and the Faith of the
Saints: which he likewise thus prefaces, v. 9. If any Man have an Ear let him
hear. And why all this, unless it were some great thing he thereby pointed at?
But what great thing, but the leading him into Captivity, who led into
Captivity? But who was it, who led into Captivity, but the Roman Emperor, who
himself, at the taking of Rome, which happened in the Year of Christ 410,
(Honorius then being Emperor in the West,) may be understood to be led into
Captivity? Then it was Alaricus King of the Goths, took Rome, after which time
the Roman Empire began to be so lessened, that nothing thereof besides the Name
and Shadow was left remaining; since which time, as the Apostle had foretold,
he being taken away who hindered, the Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition began to
be revealed: Now from the Revealing of him, reckon 666, which the Holy Ghost
says is the number of a Man, as well as of the Beast (whereby the chief
Empires were long ago designed by Daniel,) and you will come upon the fourth
Year of Hildebrand, or Gregory the Seventh, viz. of Christ 1076, in which he
first Excommunicated the Emperor, and arrogated to himself the Power of
constituting the Emperors: See the number of a Man, i. e. of him who by humane
Craft and Wisdom did thus advance himself and his Successors? See the number of
the Beast, i. e. of him, who had transferred to himself and his Successors, the
chief Empire, held out by the fourth Beast. See here the Birth of Antichrist,
see him rising up to his full Maturity, see him also giving Power to the first
Beast! For now it was the Emperor obtained that Power from the Pope, which he
ever after exercised, Rev. 13. 12. But see only the Image of Power restored to
him, ver. 14. for from that time the Emperor recovered a full and absolute
Empire; or see the Image of the Empire transferred to the Popes, i. e. them,
after the likeness of the Emperors, enjoying full Empire, and arrogating what
we read, ver. 15, 16, 17. etc. whereas it is added, ver. 18. Here is Wisdom.
Are we not again bid to observe some great and eminent thing? And what is it is
so, but that on which the Hinge of the whole Apocalypse turns? And in what can
this be more than in the searching out, and declaring that great Antichrist?
Would you again know whence the Rise of Antichrist designed in its Maturity by
the number of 666, is to be taken, turn to Rev. 12. where the Enmity of the
Dragon, i. e. the Roman Pagan Empire against Christ, and his Religion, his War,
and its Issue are described, which a little before the end of the Chapter, the
Earth, i. e. The Earthly Power is said to have helped. Now this happened when
the Emperors by their decrees abolished Heresies, (i. e. That River, which the
Serpent is said to have cast out of his Mouth after the Woman flying into the
Wilderness,) with which he would have corrupted the Church; which I cannot
tell, whether it may not be well applied to the times of Constantine, who first
restored Peace to the Church, or else to the General Councils, summoned by the
Power of the Emperors, whereby those so enormous Heresies were Condemned; which
time, if it exceeds the time of the taking of Rome, and so does n^ altogether
agree with the Rise of Antichrist, it is to be observed that that happened
hence, viz. Because it was to extend it self to the flight of the Woman into
the Wilderness, which is Contemporary with the Reign of Antichrist. This,
however it dropped from my running Pen, I presume to give as I then set it
down, and as it will appear to be the great Hinge, on which all turns in the
Explication of the Apocalyptical Writings, and what I have pursued in the
following Discourse.

I reasoned also with the same Person, viz. Monsieur Desgallesnierres, formerly
Minister of Man's in France, now of one of the French Churches in Westminster,
on some other Heads, in which I found my self so much to differ from that
Excellent Person (his worthy Countryman Monsieur Jurieu I mean,) particularly
as to the sense of the first Vial, which he makes to consist in the Corruptions
that then broke forth in the Romish Church, whereas I am apt to think, it ought
rather to be applied to the Plague that was sent as the Punishment of such
Corruptions, in the Irruptions of the Saracens: As also in the fourth, sixth,
and seventh Vial, I cannot but differ from that great Man, as may be seen in
the following discourse; that I fall in with him in the second, and third, is
but agreeable to my Notion on the first, in which if the Saracens infested the
men that had the mark of the Beast in their own Country, the men that had the
mark of the Breast are in judgment permitted to attempt the revenging the
Injury in the Country, or Territories of the Saracens, under the second and
third Vial. And if in the same time, I farther offer the great Plague that the
Waldenses, and Albigenses at that time were to those who had the mark of the
Beast, I hope 'twill be no darkning of knowledge, to leave it to the choice of
the Reader, which he thinks fittest to pitch on.

That I have consulted with other Authors, such as the Fathers, Histories,
Councils, and other Writers, that was but necessary for the informing my self
of the State of the Romish Church, the Romish, Greek, and Mohammedan Empires,
with the Histories of the several Princes, and Countries in any of these, in
order to the knowledge of those great Events and Circumstances of all sorts,
that might conduce to the Explaining these Important Truths: But that I have
not every where mentioned my Authorities, was at present to ease my self, and
the Reader, as not knowing, but that a discourse of this nature, if it should
happen to find acceptance in the World, might draw farther enlargements from me
hereafter; in which it would be requisite to be more exact as to the Quotations.

There are I confess some other Discourses on this Subject, which I cannot say
I have not seen, though it was long after I had in effect finished this
Treatise, and as I before said, I was unwilling to peruse any thing that might
Prejudice, or be a Bar to my own free Thoughts; and it is but late that they
came into my Hands, and that upon the occasion of some Notions communicated by
me to the Learned, and my worthy Friend, Monsieur Allix, who thereupon spoke to
me of Dr. Cressener's, and Mr. Beverly's Books, both of them very ingenious
Men, but utterly differing in their notions from what I here present: As also
he has given me very high Expectations of what the profoundly learned Bishop
of St. Asaph has, or is preparing on these Subjects, but found me still under
that Stiffness, that believing what I have here written to be of a Piece, I was
unwilling so much to be acquainted with what that Excellent Prelate has to
make the World happy with, when he shall please to make it public. Only having
as I before said, received Mr. Beverly's Book, I could not but be very much
pleased to find him, though upon different Grounds from what I go on, fix in a
manner the same Period for the Ruin of Antichrist, he fixing it in 1697,
without saying what part of the Year it is in which he fixes it, whereas my
Computation makes it to be either in the later end of 1696, or the middle of
1697, for I place it in 1697, and a half after the substraction of the odd Days
in the different Computations, or if the fraction of Hours be taken out about
the end of 1696, no great difference of Calculation, though the Foundation on
which we go be altogether different. And I cannot but adhere to my own, his
notion of the Months spoken of in the Prophecy, being Jewish Months, seeming
to be a little precarious, and the number he sets of 475, not being so proper
to the time of the ten Kings or Horns rising up, as 455, or thereabout, on
which I pitch. For though on the supposition he goes, it may well enough point
to the Cessation of the Empire, it will not so well agree to the rise of the
Beast, and the ten Horns with it.

But I will not too much controvert the matter with that Zealous Person, I
cannot but rejoice to see his Assurance that the Event will Correspond with his
Calculation, nor can I be dissatisfied that it falls in with mine.

I shall not need to say much more by way of Preface, only I wish his
particular Applications to any private Prince may not be as far from the Mark
as Mr. Mede's was of Gustavus Adolphus. But it may be, for I would lessen no
Man's Labors on this Argument, what is severally, and in so different a manner
performed by us, may be but like several Arrows shot by several Hands at the
same Mark; if we all, or any of us hit, may that which ought to be the Mark of
all our Studies, Crown all, viz. The Glory of him, who is the God of Prophecy,
and who, if he commanded St. John in one place to Seal those things which the
seven Thunders, uttered, and write them not, as being obscure and mysterious,
and to be kept as such when first revealed, Rev. 10. 4. Has likewise commanded
in another, not to seal the Sayings of the Prophecy of this Book: for THE TIME
IS AT HAND. Revel. 22. 10. Amen, Amen.

Introduction.
WHEN I first entered on this Work, I had it in my thoughts to have replied both
to Preface and Book, but through a very great and long Indisposition in Health,
I was not able to make that speed I intended in the Design, and was greatly
pleased to find my self prevented in several parts of it, by the Learned Pens
of those who had so successfully engaged therein: Nor did I question, (what
has since happened) but that a very little time would produce a full answer to
every thing that was material, in the whole Collection, though should there not
have been a Syllable more offered in the Controversy, than what the Author had
given me occasion to speak to from the Preface, I am apt to think, there would
be little reason to boast his Monuments of Antiquity; the Gibeonitish Craft of
old Sacks upon their Asses, of old and rent Wine-bottles, of old and clouted
Shoes, of old Garments, and dry and moldy Bread: Joshua 9. 4, 5. whereby
('it is easy to make out the Allusion) those, for whom he writes, are so much
concerned to hide all their Cheats, will be but a poor proof of their coming
from a far Country (let me so express the remote and distant Ages of the
Church) unless they bring with them, what the Gibeonites did not, Truth and
Sincerity.

For is there not some Standard by which Antiquity it self must be tried? For
however, error can never be quid primum, yet it may be quid antiquum; we know
it is as ancient, as the Fall of Man: Nay, more than that, as the Fall of
Lucifer: So that the pretense of Antiquity alone, were all granted which is
brought for such, would not be sufficient to establish matters in Debate,
unless what is urged as antiquum, or what is ancient, be proved likewise to be
primum or first, i. e. to be the same with that Truth, which obtained, before
the Ancients either glossed on, or witnessed to it; which whither it be or no;
will appear by that time we shall have reflected on the Preface.

To begin therefore where the Author does, viz. That Novelty in Faith is so
great a scandal to any that lay claim to the Truth of Christianity, that
wheresoever it is effectually proved, there all pretenses immediately fall to
the ground, and there can be no Truth in that Society, beside the noise of it,
and the Name, I am very ready to grant, and shall only consider, that we may
come plainly to the matter in Debate, these two things.

1. What Novelty in Faith is?

2. Whether the Collection of the Primitive Fathers giving Testimony to the
Faith, once delivered to the Saints, as it is here pretended, will justify
those, the Author pleads for, from Novelty?

CHAP. I. What Novelty in Faith is?
1. NOvelty in Faith is, whatsoever is brought in, how early soever it be,
contrary to the Rule of Faith, as once delivered to the Saints, i. e. to the
Holy Church, as then Established in its Purity, and Perfection by Christ and his
Apostles: For that is what must be understood by that Phrase, as it is found,
Jude v. 3. it being the greatest absurdity to imagine, that the Apostle should
speak, as he there does, of his giving all diligence to write unto them that
were Sanctified of the common Salvation, or exhort them earnestly to contend
for the Faith, which was once delivered unto the Saints, if the necessary
Principles of that Salvation, had not been already made common, sufficiently
given forth, and published; or the Faith it self not fully delivered, for which
they were so earnestly to contend. I am sure St. Paul thought so, when he
exhorted Timothy, 2 Timothy 1. 13. to hold fast the form of sound words (...), the
model, or delineation, the short prescript, and certain Rule of wholesome
Doctrine, he had heard of him, and more at large, in the third Chapter of the
same Epistle, v. 14, 15, 16, 17. required him to continue in the things which
he had learned, and been assured of, knowing of whom he had learned them, and
that from a Child be had known the holy Scriptures, which were able to make him
wise to Salvation, through Faith which is in Jesus Christ: All Scripture is
given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works: And St. Peter prefers its
Evidence before any Collection of Testimonies whatsoever; for he prefers the
Evidence of the written Word before a voice from Heaven, 2 Pet. 1. 19. For we
have a more sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto you do well that you take heed,
as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the
Day Star arise in your hearts, knowing this first, that no Prophecy of the
Scripture is of any private Interpretation, for the Prophecy came not at any
time by the Will of Man, but holy men of God spoke, as they were moved by the
Holy Ghost. To these, we may add St. John speaking of it, As what they, i. e.
the Christians had heard from the beginning, 1 John 2. 24. What was the word of
life, 1 John 1. 1. what was theTruth, 1 John 1. 8. But we have a better Witness
than all these, even our Lord himself promising his Apostles before he left
them, that the Spirit of Truth should guide them into all Truth, John 16. 13.
i. e. as himself enlarges it, chap. 14. 26. should teach them all things, and
bring all things to their remembrance, whatsoever he had said unto them: And as
it is in that forecited, Joh. 16. 13. should show them things to come; which,
what was it, but to assure them, that whatsoever was needful to be known either
of the Precepts or Mysteries of the Gospel; whatsoever for the comfort of the
Church was needful to be foretold, should be th^rowly revealed to them:
Nothing, that was matter either of Faith or Practice, should be left to
uncertainties; the Spirit, which was to come down in so miraculous a manner, as
he did on the Apostles on the day of Pentecost, would declare to them the
wholewill of God; would not leave them as Orphans, without sufficient
instructions in the Gospel they were to Preach, without comfort and assistance
in those things they were to suffer as Martyrs for it.

And was not this effectually wrought by him? For

1. What are the Gospels, but the things that Christ did and taught, brought to
their Remembrance?

2. What the Epistles written by St. Paul, and others of the Apostles, but the
teaching them all things, fully informing them, and by them the Church, in all
matters of Faith and good Life, which were less clearly laid down in the
Gospels?

3. What the Revelation of St. John, with those other Predictions scattered
abroad in the Writings of the other Apostles, but the showing them things to
come? And if so: If there were so full a discovery of Truth made to the
Apostles, that all that our Lord promised herein, was actually made good to
them, whilst in their Ministry here on Earth, and by them to the Church, which
is, and can be built only upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets,
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner Stone, Ephesians. 2. 20. If not only
St. Peter, 2 Epist. 3. 2. makes this the whole of the Christian to be mindful
of the words, which were spoken before by the Holy Prophets, and of the
Commandment of them the Apostles of the Lord and Savior: But St. Jude himself,
(from whom the Author takes the Argument of his Collection, as it is to give
Testimony to the Faith once delivered to the Saints) v. 17. gives this as his
weighty Caution, that they should remember the words, which were spoken before
of the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, 'twill leave it beyond all doubt,
what it is we are to understand by Novelty in Faith, viz. Whatsoever has at any
time, since the Delivery of the Gospel, and Sealing the Canon of Scripture,
(for it is that, as has been showed, which must contain the Faith once
delivered to the Saints) been broacht contrary to the sound Doctrine therein
contained: For it is not a Day, or a Year, or an Age, or indeed, ever so many
Ages, make the difference; that is as much a Novelty in Faith, which any way
tended to the corrupting of it in the Apostles days, as what has ever since
tended to the same, be it 15 Ages after, or in any Age whatever the World has
to continue.

The Mystery of Inquity which did then already work, when St. Paul wrote to the
Thessalonians, 2 Epist. 2. 7. was a Novelty in Faith, as well as when in all
the degrees of it, it should be finished in the time of Antichrist: And it is
but the same Novelty continued, and improved by the Devil, and his Instruments,
that has in every Age set up it self against God, v. 4. i. e. How different
soever the ways have been, which it has wrought; How various soever, and
multiform the Errors, which have been levelled against Truth, all are but the
several Heads of the same Hydra, the same Monster multiplying and increasing
against all the Endeavors of those, who have at any time set themselves to
resist the Innovation, i. e. To contend for the Faith once delivered to the
Saints.

Which being observed with respect to the stating what Novelty in Faith is,
it is to be enquired in the second place,

2. Whether the Collection of the Primitive Fathers, giving Testimony to the
Faith once delivered to the Saints, as it is here pretended, will justify that
Society, the Author pleads for, from Novelty? Now this will farther branch it
self into a twofold Enquiry, viz.

1. How far the Authority of the Fathers, simply considered, ought to obtain in
Matters of Faith? And,

2. How far, allowing the utmost that can be to their Authority, 'twill be for
their Service, whom they are here brought to countenance?

CHAP. II. How far the Authority of the Fathers, simply considered, ought to
obtain in Matters of Faith?
1. AS to the Authority of the Fathers, simply considered, there is nothing more
certain, than that that can obtain no farther, than what they speak is
agreeable to the Faith they are brought to attest. For, it is not to make Faith,
or to add to the Articles of it, that they are produced; it is only to witness
to what was once delivered, and if they Speak not according to this word, it is
because there is no light in them, Isaiah 8. 20. And if so, 'twill be of little
moment on whose side they speak: I say not this to discredit those great names,
which have so long been renowned in the World, let them have all that is due to
men of that Exemplary Piety and Abilities they were of, but let them have no
more: No more, then themselves ever pretended to, or what in the reason of the
thing can belong to them: As for the purpose.

Can we imagine that they ever pretended, or that in Reason, their attesting
ought should alter the nature of what they are brought to attest? In the
particular matter in debate, will their asserting it make that to be Truth,
which before was Error?

Will their asserting that the Invocation of Saints in Heaven is profitable and
convenient?

That there is a respect and Veneration due to their Relicts?

Will their asserting that praying for the Souls departed, is advantageous to
them, and was the practice of the Primitive Church?

Will their asserting that in the blessed Sacrament is contained the true,
real, substantial Body of Christ, the substance of the Bread and Wine being
converted into the true substance of Christ's Body and Blood, make all these
things to be sound, and Orthodox? if in the mean time from the Letter of
Scripture, and the Analogy of Faith therein contained, it shall be made to
appear that most of these things are highly Superstitious, if not Idolatrous!
Or to join Issue on so much of the other heads, as can concern the points of
Controversy at present under Debate (if at all it does concern them)

Will their asserting that Christ built his Church upon Peter, etc. If that
were to the ends they pretend, advance Him or his Successors to any higher
Title, or Dignity, than Christ himself gave him in his Gospel?

Will their asserting that Traditions are to be received, etc. though all
brought under that head, no way reaches the present Controversy about
Traditions?

Will their asserting, lastly, that the making the sign of the Cross, the
keeping Images of Christ, and his Saints was the practice of the Primitive
Church, be a Reason, either why Traditions should be of equal Authority with
the Scripture, or the sign of the Cross, or Images should have Divine Honor
paid to them? For otherwise, they come not up to what is at present under
Debate: Though had they said all this (for I am contented he make the best of
his Argument) what is this, or whatever else they would have the Fathers speak
for them, if at the same time they speak against themselves? i. e. against what
they have delivered directly contrary to it, in any other of their writings;
And what is much more, against Christ, i. e. either against the direct Rule of
Scripture, or the purity of that Religion themselves so Zealously professed?

This as to the first, viz. How far the Authority of the Fathers, simply
considered, ought to obtain in matters of Faith? and that can be no farther
than they speak agreeably to that Faith they are brought to attest; neither
they, nor any men, as St. Paul gives the Rule 1 Cor. 11. 1. being to be any
farther followed, than they are the Followers of Christ.

The Author indeed suggests other Topics, from whence their Authority may be
lessened, Pref. p. 3. in these words: It Is true, it cannot be denied, but many
things in the Ancient Fathers are Obscure; their Names have been prefixed to
Books, of which they were never the Authors, Additions have been made to some
of their Writings, besides the diverse mistakes of Transcribers in the
Publishing their Works: To which I might add, which alone is more than all
this, that Horrible abuse of the Indices Expurgatorii, by which so many
Additions, Defalcations, and alterations of all sorts have been made in them:
But this he hopes to blow away at a Breath, by telling us, that all this and
more, (the greater their shame who have contributed to it, and whither they in
whose Defense he writes, have not, let Sixtus Quintus, and Clemens Octavus
their Editions of the Bible bear witness) may be with Truth affirmed of the
sacred Volume of the Bible, whose Authority notwithstanding stands firm and
unshaken, and in spite of all such like Objections, is the pure Fountain of
Life: But the Comparison will very little advantage his Cause, till he can show
too.

1. That the Divine Providence is equally concerned in preserving the Writings
of the Fathers entire, as it is in preserving the Sacred Volume of the Bible.

2. That there is the same help to be had in comparing the Writings of any
Father among themselves, as there is in comparing the several parts of the
Bible, as it is 1 Cor. 2. 13. in comparing Spiritual things with Spiritual. Or,

3. That there is the same Demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power, going
along with the one, as there is with the other; 1 Cor. 2. 4. which, with many
others that might be reckoned up, are all of them very material differences,
and such as will no way serve to ease the difficulty under which the Author
labors in this matter.

But it is not my business to disparage the ancient Fathers in what they are
thus liable to be abused, but rather, and that I am sure is the nearer way to
Truth, to Establish the Foundation, on which they and every wise Builder must
depend for Strength and Security, and that is, as I before laid it down, as
what they are produced for, is agreeable to the Faith they are brought to
assert. I proceed to the second Enquiry, viz.

2. How far, allowing the utmost that can be to their authority, 'twill be for
their Service, whom they are here brought to countenance?

CHAP. III. How far, allowing the utmost, that can be to the Authority of the
Fathers, 'twill be for their Service whom they are here brought to countenance?
NOW that can be no farther than they,

1. Are a Collection of Primitive Fathers; for those only they are, the Author
amuses us with.

2. Speak directly to the matters under Debate, and

3. What they speak of them, is agreeable to that Primitive Truth, which alone
can give credit to any Cause: And

1. That they are not a Collection of Primitive Fathers, needs no farther
proof, than to consult the Authors own Index, which gives us so many of his
Authorities after the 5th Century, the time himself sets in his Preface. p. 4.
for what is to be received as Primitive. And it may be, there are some others,
whose Judgment ought to prevail in this matter, who will not allow that style
to all, whom he there produces, before the first 500 Years of the Church: But
it was necessary to amass Testimonies, and be they what they will, they must be
called Primitive, though they come down to the 1546th Year after Christ; an
Age, in which I doubt very little either of Primitive Truth or Purity will be
found amongst them. As also

2. That they Speak not directly to the matters under Debate, will be clear, by
stating

What the Controversies between the Donatists, Gnostics, Marcionites,
Valentinians, and the Orthodox were, with

What those between Vigilantius, Aerius, Berengarius, the Iconoclasts, and
those who opposed them were, and

What those are which at present are between them, whom under these names he
endeavors to render odious, and those, for whom he writes: In which, at
present I am bold to say the Author is not in the least Ingenuous, and if what
others have replied on the several Heads be not a full satisfaction in the
Case, I dare promise (if it be called for, and God shall give me Life,) to show
him wherein he has mistaken the true state of these Controversies, and most
injuriously transferred their Errors to those, whom he insinuates to be meant
by such fictions. And then Thirdly, Whether

3. What the Fathers are here produced to speak for them, is agreeable to that
Primitive Truth, which alone can give credit to any cause, must be tried by
comparing the Testimonies themselves, with that which in this matter must be
the firm, and unshaken Rule to them, and us, i. e. the Faith it self once
delivered to the Saints, as it is recorded, and is to be received, as Divinely
inspired in the Holy Scripture: For is it the name of the Writer, or the Reason
of the thing; the Honor due to the person of any ever so Celebrated an Author,
or the Necessary, and unalterable Truths, with which Faith ought to be
supported, must turn the Balance? And in this I am willing to own the
Ingenuity of our Author, who tells us pref. p. 2. that these, i e. the Fathers,
are not supposed to have had the Assistance of the Divine Spirit, like the
Evangelists, and yet some of those he quotes were Popes. (It seems he had
forgot the Infalibility some ascribe to them) and Pref. p. 3. that the
Authority of the Sacred Volume of the Bible stands firm, and unshaken, and is
the pure Feuntain of Life: From whence I frame this short Argument, that if the
Bible be the pure Fountain of Life, if the Penmen of it had the Assistance of
the Divine Spirit, why should we trouble our selves with lesser Authorities, or
why should we not prefer (...) that Religion, which has no one point in
Controversy, with those, for whom this Author pleads, which is not altered by
this first record of Truth, before that which is so unhappy, as to have no one
point in Controversy, which is plainly laid down in, or confirmed by it?

But notwithstanding all this, the Author will still have his Collection to be
a convincing Argument of the Doctrine of their Forefathers; and a Test whereby
to examine, how far each point under Debate may be truly stamped with Novelty,
Pref. p. 4. But, suppose their Forefathers were in Error, will its being their
Doctrine make it Orthodox? Or how can that be a Test to examine, how far each
Point under Debate may be truly stamped with Novelty, which it self is not free
from Innovation, or at least is wrested to prove that (which I question not
will appear to be the Case in a very great measure: When the Testimonies here
made use of, shall be more strictly looked into,) to which it was in the first
intention of the Writers themselves never designed?

Nor will it serve the turn what he goes on with Pref. p. 4. viz. That to
suspect them in any of the following Points, wherein so many of them agree,
speaking as it were with one Mouth, to suspect them in things for which
Antiquity never questioned them; which no Church, or Prelates then in being, or
succeeding, ever Censured, or Condemned them; to suspect them in things, which
never any Man yet in all the intervening years has Preached against, or
publicly disowned, but what has been branded, as an Innovator; to suspect them
I say in these Points, is to proceed with Passion, rather than Reason, and to
pass sentence not according to the merits of the thing, but as the Cause, and
Party require.

1. For, it is not the speaking of so many with one Mouth, were that granted,
that can exempt them from suspicion, if what they speak do not do it, i. e. If
that it self, which is the matter in trial, be not agreeable to the Faith once
delivered to the Saints. And then

2. As to their never having been questioned by Antiquity, neither by any
Church or Prelate then in being, it is sufficient to observe, that many of the
Corruptions in the Fathers (a matter very easy to be proved) were foisted in,
long after the times in which the Authors flourisht, and therefore it is
unreasonable, they should have then been called in question, preached against,
or publicly disowned: As also,

3. That de facto, the points, which they are here brought to maintain, have
been Preached against, and publicly disowned, the Corruptions which were so
foisted in, have been discovered and exploded, and for their being branded as
Innovaters who did it, 'twill very little advantage the Cause of them who so
branded them, unless it shall appear, that what they did herein, was agreeable
to that Faith they pretend to defend: For if all that was herein done, was but
the holding the Truth in Unrighteousness, Romans 1. 18. a powerful possessing
themselves of the outward show, and name of Christianity, and an uncharitable
Anathematizing all, who would not run with them, this will give them but small
Reason to triumph in the Case, unless it be so, to be Entitled to the Character
of Antichrist; for to him it belongs to oppose, and exalt himself above all
that is called God, 2 Thessal. 2. 4. to think none equal to him, none fit to be
listened to, or tolerated in the Church, who cannot submit all to his
Infallible Chair. But upon the same account must Christ himself have been an
Innovater, his Apostles and Disciples thus branded too, because what they
taught was contrary to them, who were in Moses's Chair, and thereby possessed of
the Right to Teach, and Comment on the Law; it is not men's being Censured or
Persecuted is the Evidence of their being Innovators, for then what would
become of the Blessedness our Lord declares to belong to such? Matthew. 5. 10,
11. Nor will it on the other hand free others from the Imputation, that they
are able to carry it with a high hand, to Censure, and Condemn all who dissent
from them, for then what would become of the Woes our Lord denounced too
against the Scribes and Pharisees? What of the blot of Hypocrisy, he so often
charges them with? Matthew. 23. 13, etc.

But still there is a farther scruple troubles the Author, and it is what I
confess my self to have had chiefly in my Eye, when I began these
Animadversions: Now thus he frames it, Pref. p. 4. Had Christ or his Apostles
foretold us of a total Eclipse his Church was to suffer for a thousand years,
that the assistance of the Holy Ghost was to be wanting to the Faithful, their
Overseers and Prelates, from the year 500 to 1500; and that in all this time,
there was to be neither Reason, nor Zeal, nor Knowledge, nor Conscience, nor
care of Salvation in any of the Believers, for them, nor their Children, I
should then with ease begin to suspect the Corruption both of Faith and Fathers
in this miserable time, and receive neither the one nor the other, but upon a
good Reformation.

To which it may be replied,

1. That 'twas not necessary a total Eclipse of the Church should be foretold,
etc. to the inferring of that Corruption of Faith, and Fathers, which may here
be supposed.

2. That had a total Eclipse obscured the Church, be it ever so great, yet an
Eclipse does only hide, not destroy the body that suffers it; that 'twas not
necessary, that it should proceed so far as that there should be neither
Reason, nor Zeal, nor Knowledge, nor Conscience, nor care of Salvation in any
of the Believers for them, nor their Children: For as in Israel, when the
Prophet thought that he had been left alone, there were seven thousand which
had not bowed to Baal, 1 Kings 19. 18. So here too, how universal soever the
Apostasy might seem, there might be still left of those, who were not revolted
from the Purity of the Gospel, as it is Revel. 7. 8. no fewer than one hundred
forty four thousand Sealed.

3. That (seeing he will put it upon us to make it out) a very great Eclipse
there was, the Church, at least a great part of it, was to suffer. And to that
I shall add, (that I may say what may satisfy his Curiosity in the Point)

When this was to be?

How long 'twas to continue?

How to clear up again?

Which if I shall be able in any degree to demonstrate, I hope it will open
their Eyes, who have been hitherto in the Cloud, and show another sort of
Evidence, than any Collection of Primitive Fathers, who themselves were not
incapable of being guilty of mistakes, or when they are not so, may have their
Writings mistaken, or misapplied.

I begin with the first of these, viz. That a very great Eclipse there was, the
Church, at least a great part of it, was to suffer, and this shall be the
Argument of the next Chapter.

CHAP. IV That a very great Eclipse there was, the Church, at least a great
part of it, was to suffer.
NOW this is no more than Christ and his Apostles have foretold: For, first,
Does not our Lord himself foretell, that it is impossible but that Offenses will
come, Luke 17. 1.

That there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great
signs and wonders, insomuch, that if it were possible, they shall deceive the
very elect: Behold, I have told you before, Matthew. 24. 11, 24, 25.

And after him St. Paul, Acts 20. 29, 30. For I know this, that after my
departing shall grievous Wolves enter in among you, not sparing the Flock. And
1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times
some shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and
Doctrines of Devils; speaking lies in Hypocrisy, having their Conscience
seared with a hot Iron: forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from
meats, which God has created to be received with thanksgiving of them which
believe, and know the Truth. And again,

2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. This know also, that in the last days perilous
times shall come, for men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous,
boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy,
without natural affection, trucebreakers, false-accusers, incontinent, fierce,
despisers of those that are good, Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of
pleasures more than lovers of God; having a form of Godliness, but denying the
power thereof. And does not the same St. Paul tell us, 2 Thessal. 2. 7. that
the mystery of iniquity did already work, that there must come a falling away,
and the man of sin, the son of Perdition be revealed? Does he not (of which by
and by) tell us, what this shall be, and what it was that at present hindered?

Thus likewise St. Peter, 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3. But there were false Prophets also
among the people, even as there shall be false Teachers among you, who privily
shall bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and
bring upon themselves swift destruction: And many shall follow their pernicious
ways, by reason of whom the way of Truth shall be evil spoken of: And through
Covetousness shall they, with feigned words, make merchandise of you, whose
judgment now of a long time lingereth not, and their damnation slumbreth not. A
farther Character of whom is given, v. 12, 13, 14, 15, etc. And

2 Pet. 3. 3. Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days
Scoffers, walking after their own lusts, etc. which St Jude repeats, v. 18.
minding them, That the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ had told them, there
should be mockers in the last time, who should walk after their own ungodly
lusts.

And is it likely they should so preserve the Testimony of the Ancients, as to
make them convincing in the chief points of Controversy, either at present, or
indeed almost in any points under debate, whose great study it should be to
corrupt all the principles of the Christian Religion, to seduce and destroy
Christ's Flock? To bring in Doctrines of Devils, and speak lies in Hypocrisy?

Is it likely they should be the Instruments to preserve the word of Truth and
Salvation, who are so zealous to bring in damnable Heresies, 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3.
Read over their Character again, 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. and see whether
that looks like the Character of such, who in all Ages were to be the Guardians
and Champions of Truth?

Is it probable those, who are ready to deny the Lord that bought them, will
stick at any thing to advance their Covetous, Ambitious, and Carnal Designs?
No: If such there were to come, it is not to be questioned but they would be
indifferently zealons to hold the Truth in Righteousness; it is not to be
expected the Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition, should scruple at corrupting
Truth in the Channels, who makes it his greatest gain and interest to stop it in
the Fountain.

So that we see there wants not sufficient Prediction of a very great Eclipse
the Church, or at least great part of it was to suffer; and that such an
Eclipse as while it lasted, there was little hopes, (...) of so preserving the
Testimonies of the Ancients, as to make them convincing in the chief points of
Controversy at present, or indeed almost in any points whatever under debate.

The next Enquiry is, when this was to be?

CHAP. V. When this Eclipse, which the Church, at least a very great part of it
was to suffer, was to be?
Says St. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. The Mystery of Iniquity does already work. And
St. John, 1 Ep. 2. 18. Little Children it is the last time, and as you have
heard that Antichrist, (...) (he that is more eminently and notoriously so)
shall come, even now are there many Antichrists.

It seems there were not wanting from the first beginning of Christianity, who
endeavored to oppose the Truth, and draw others from it, as it is described,
Revel. 12. 1, 2, 3. No sooner is the Woman clothed with the Sun, traveling in
Birth, and pained to be Delivered, but behold the great red Dragon stands
before her to devour her Child, as soon as it was born: Attempts there were
from the first birth of Christianity to destroy it; but however, it is not of
those we are to understand the forecited Predictions: No: As St. Paul gives the
Caution, v. 3d and 4th. of that second Chapter of the second Epistle to the
Thessalonians, there must come a falling away first, (...), some great and
notable Apostasy, or Revolt, and that man of sin be revealed, the Son of
perdition, (...), who opposes, sets himself as an avowed and restless
Adversary, and exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped, so that he as God sits in the Temple of God, showing himself
that he is God.

And when that was to be, he farther declares, by showing, what it was that at
present hindered his coming, v. 6. And now ye know what withholdeth, that he
might be revealed in his time; where he speaks of it, as what was no secret
among the Christians, what was sufficiently foretold, and made known to them;
and then he goes on, v. 7, 8. For the Mystery of Iniquity does already work,
only he who now lets, will let, until he be taken out of the way, and then
shall (...), that wicked, lawless one be revealed.

But still this it may be is not plain enough to fix the Epoch, the just date,
and time of the Rise of Antichrist; to consider this therefore a little more
particularly, who was it that withheld that he might be revealed in his time?
Who was it who did let and would let, until he were taken out of the way?
Hear St. Chrysostom on the place (...). What is it therefore which withholds
that he should be revealed, i. e. that hinders it? Some, (says he) say it is
the Grace of the Spirit; others that it is the Roman Empire, (...), to whom I
chiefly agree. And he gives his Reason: For if, (says he) the Apostle had
meant the Spirit, (...), he would not have spoken obscurely but openly, for now
the Grace of the Spirit, i. e. his Gifts withold him, but he must have come
in another manner, if he was to come when the Graces of the Spirit should fail:
But because, (...), he speaks this of the Roman Empire, in all likelihood he
speaks enigmatically, and obscurely; because, as he goes on, he would not incur
unnecessary Enmity and unprofitable Dangers. For if he had said, that in a
short time the Roman Empire should be dissolved, they would have buried him
alive, as a most Pestilent Wretch, and all the Faithful (or Christians) as
those who were to live and War under him. And a little after more clearly, Only
he who now lets will let, till he be taken out of the way, (...), i. e.
when the Roman Empire shall be taken away, then he will come, (...); And with
good Reason, for as long as there shall be the dread of this Empire, none will
suddenly be subject to him, (...) but when that shall be dissolved, he will
usurp upon the occasion of the Anarchy, (...), and will attempt to snatch to
himself the Power (the Rule, and Government, or Empire) both of Men and God:
(...). For as other Kingdoms were dissolved before him, as that of the
Babylonians by the Persians, that of the Persians by the Macedonians, that of
the Macedonians by the Romans, (...): so that of the Romans by Antichrist, to
which he adds, (but of that afterward) (...), And he by Christ: (...). And
this (says he) Daniel delivers with the greatest clearness; it is Dan. 7. in
his Vision of the four Beasts, where he tells us, v. 8. that among the Ten
Horns of the fourth Beast, there was to come up another little Horn, (which is
generally agreed to be understood of Antichrist) before whom there were three
of the first Horns plucked up by the Roots; and behold in this Horn were eyes
like the eyes of a Man, and a Mouth speaking great things, see v. 24, 25, ibid.

I shall not heap up other Testimonies in this matter, the Fathers generally
concurring in this opinion of Antichrist's being to succeed to the destruction
of the Roman Empire: And Cornelius a Lapide, in their names, makes it the
common sense they had of this place, that Nero and the Roman Emperors were to
withold, and when they were taken out of the way, tunc revelabitur ille
iniquus Antichristus, then should be revealed that wicked Antichrist, on 2
Thessal. 2. 6.

Now, that we may come a little closer to the Matter in hand, When was that?
when was it the Roman Emperors were taken out of the way? (For if that be made
out, especially so as to point any thing near the time he mentions, I suppose
the Author will no longer look upon those 10 Centuries of Sleep, and Corruption
in the Church (as he phrases it, Pref. p. 5.) to be no more than a Dream of the
Reporters, but both He and every serious Reader will be awakened to see through
his Nubes Testium, at least to own that there was such a Cloudy time, such an
Eclipse, as his own Metaphor is, Pref. p. 4. The Church was to suffer; I do not
say with him for 1000 Years, neither more, nor less, but for a Period in which
He and Those for whom He writes, will be equally concerned to free themselves
from the charge of many Novelties). When, I say, was it, the Roman Emperors
were taken out of the way? And methinks it should not be difficult to answer
the Query, especially the Holy Ghost himself having in a manner herein expressly
directed us, it is in the 13th of the Revelations, v. 10. He that leads into
Captivity, shall go into Captivity; He that kills with the Sword, shall be
killed with the Sword: And to make it the more remarkable he calls up our
Attention with that Eminent Saying of our Lord, so often made use of by Him in
the Gospel, when He had some great, and notable Lesson to recommend to his
Auditors, If any man have an Ear, let him hear, v. 9: and closes it with no
less a note of Attention in the following words, Here is the Patience, and the
Faith of the Saints.

Now who was it, who led into Captivity?

Was it not the Roman Empire, that had enslaved the Nations round about? Was it
not the Roman Empire, which had so insolently triumphed over the Christians; and
made them its Vassals?

Who was it was the great red Dragon, having seven Heads, and ten Horns, which
stood before the Woman clothed with the Sun, which was ready to be delivered
for to devour her Child, as soon as it was born? Rev. 12. 1. 5.

Was it not the Roman Empire, whilst Heathen, which by its furious Persecutions
endeavored to root out Christianity? So that it is not to be doubted, who is
here to be understood by Him, that leads into Captivity?

But then, How is it He was led into Captivity?

Consult their own Annals, and you have the Answer: For, Was not Rome taken
first by Alaricus the Goth in the 410 th year after Christ? and again in the
year 455 by Gensericus? Or,

If not the taking of Rome, but the Captivity of the Empire it self be to be
understood hereby, when could this be better verlfied, than, when the Empire
was torn in pieces, and divided into several Kingdoms, (those ten Horns of
which both Daniel, and St. John speak) by the Goths, Vandals, and Hunns? And
when happened that? but in or about the same Period of 455 or 456?

Now then, if in either of these Periods, viz. of 410 or 455, or thereabout, we
grant to be the time, when He that led was taken out of the way, it will
unquestionably follow, that,

'Twas then that wicked, lawless One was revealed:

Then was the Birth of Antichrist, i. e. of Him, who was more eminently to be
so:

Then the time from whence in such a Latitude may be dated that great Eclipse,
which the Church was to suffer; And beginning with either of these, we fall
upon what, in the Event, will extremely well answer the Prediction.

For if we reckon from 410, then will 666 bring us to the Year 1076, which was
the Fourth of Hildebrand, or Gregory the Seventh; who, as it is Rev. 13. 13.
made fire to come down from Heaven on the Earth, in the sight of Men, i. e. (as
we shall afterward show it to be the sense of that Phrase) so openly, and
solemnly Excommunicated the Emperor: which if considered in all its
Circumstances, will be but too plain a Description of that Man of Sin and Son
of Perdition, who was to oppose and exalt Himself above all that is called God,
or that is worshipped; so that He as God sits in the Temple of God, showing
himself that He is God. 2 Thessal. 2. 3, 4.

For what is it to exalt Himself above all that is called God; and that is
worship, but to assume to Himself an Authority over those Higher Powers which
God has ordained, those Gods, as Princes are styled in Scripture, Psalm. 82. 1.
Joh. 10. 34, 35?

What as God to sit in the Temple of God, showing Himself that He is God? but
to take to Himself the Power of Saving or Damning men, as He shall think fit;
to say that he cannot Err, which is the Incommunicable Attribute of the divine
Nature, and arrogate the setting up one, and pulling down another, which can
belong only to the Supreme Governor of the Universe? where, not to take notice
of any thing done by Him, before he was Pope, by which, as I may say, He seemed
but to be preparing himself for the great Service he was to do the Chruch, when
advanced to the Pontifical See, his carriage in the difference between the
Emperor, and the Saxons, is what I shall first pitch on; wherein the Bishops
revolting from the Emperor fly to Hildebrand, present their Complaints against
the Emperor; the Pope greedily embraces the Quarrel, and so far pursues it, as
to cite the Emperor to appear at Rome, and in case of his refusal, threatens
Him Excommunication: The Emperor terrified herewith, sends his Ambassadors to
divert Him from his resolution; But contrary to the Law of Nations (however
Baronius labors to contradict this), He Imprisons his Ambassadors, and having
almost destroyed them with Hunger, Thirst, and Cold, sends them out of Rome
with the greatest disgrace.

Upon this, the Emperor calls a Council at Worms; and in return hereof, cites
Hildebrand, to appear, imagining the Pope to have been thereby disabled to
Publish his threatened Excommunication: And having written a Letter to the
Archbishop of Cologn, another to Hildebrand Himself; and a third to the Clergy
and Laity of the whole Roman Church, and obtained not only of the Germans, but
of some of the Bishops of Italy to concur with Him in the Sentence against
Hildebrand; when the Day came, that the Emperor was cited to appear, Rulandus a
Priest of Parma, brings the Emperor's Letters, and without any title of Honor
given him, thus bespeaks him, Tibi Imperator verae Religioni addictissimus, and
Sanctissimi Italiae, Galliae, Germaniaeque Episcopi praecipiunt, ut Te munere,
quod astu, Pecunia, gratia occupasti, abdices: The most Religious Emperor, and
most Holy Bishops of Italy, France, and Germany Command, that Thou abdicate thy
self from that Office, which by Craft, Bribery, and Ambition thou have Usurpt.
Non enim verus Pastor, neque Pater, neque Pontifex es; sed Fur, Lupus, Latro
and Tyrannus: For thou art not a true Pastor, nor Father, nor Priest, but a
Thief, a Wolf, a Robber and Tyrant.

Whereupon the Pope having most bitterly inveighed against the Emperor,
proceeds to Excommunicate Him; the Form in which this was done being in a
peculiar Style; I shall presume to insert it; 'Twas this which here follows.

Beat Petre Apostolorum Princeps, inclina quaeso aures tuas, and me servum
tuum exaudi, quem and ab infantia educasti, and usque ad hunc diem ab
inimicorum manibus vindicasti, qui me pro mea in Te Fide oderunt, and persecuti
sunt, Tu mihi testis es Optimus, and pia Jesu Christi matter, and frater tuus
Paulus, tecum Martyrii particeps, me non sponte, sed invitum Pontificatus
gubernacula suscepisse. Non quod rapinam arbitratus sim, sedem tuam legitime
conscendere: sed malebam vitam meam in Peregrinatione degere quam locum tuum
pro fama and gloria tantum occupare: fateor Ego, and merito quidem, mihi, tua
gratia, non meritis meis, populi Christiani curam demandatam esse; commissamque
ligandi and solvendi potestatem. Hac itaque fiducia fretus, pro dignitate and
tutelae Ecclesiae tuae sanctae, Omnipotentis Dei nomine, Patris, Filii, and
Spiritus Sancti, and Henricum Regem, Henrici quondam Imperatoris Filium, qui
audacter nimium and temerarie in Ecclesiam tuam manus injecit, Imperatoria
Administratione, regiaque dejicio, and Christianos omnes Imperio subjectos
juramento illo absolvo, quo Fidem veris Regibus praestare consueverunt. Dignum
est enim ut is dignitate careat, qui Majestatem Ecclesiae imminuere conatur.
Praeterea vero monita mea, immo tua, ad sui ipsius, populorumque salutem
pertinentia contempsit: and se ab Ecclesia Dei, quam seditionibus pessundare
cupit, separavit, eum Anathematis vinculo colligo, certo sciens Te esse Petrum,
in cujus Petra, ut in vero fundamento, Rex noster Christus aedificavit
Ecclesiam suam.

O Blessed Peter Prince of the Apostles, incline thine Ears, I beseech Thee,
and hear me thy Servant, whom thou have brought up from my Childhood, and to
this day have delivered me from the hands of my Enemies, who have hated and
persecuted me for my Faith in Thee; Thou art my best Witness, and the Pious
Mother of Jesus Christ, and thy Brother Paul, who suffered Martyrdom with Thee,
that 'twas not of my own accord, but against my will, that I took upon me the
Government of the Popedom, not that I thought it Robbery lawfully to mount thy
Chair; but I had rather pass my Life in Pilgrimage, than possess thy place only
for Fame, and Glory; I confess, and deservedly, that the Care of Christian
People was committed to me, and the Power of binding and loosing granted me by
thy Grace, and not by my Merits. Relying therefore on this confidence, For the
Dignity and Defense of his Holy Church, in the Name of Almighty God, the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, I depose King Henry, the Son of Henry formerly
Emperor, who too boldly, and rashly has laid his hands on thy Church, from the
Imperial and Kingly Administration; and all Christians, Subjects of the Empire
I absolve from that Oath, by which, they are used to bind themselves to be
faithful to true Kings. For it is fit that he should want all Dignity, who
endeavors to lessen the Majesty of the Church; Besides, he has contemned not
only mine, but thine Admonitions, which pertain to his and the Peoples
Salvation, and has separated himself from the Church of God, which he desires
to subvert by Seditions; therefore I bind Him with the Bond of an Anathema,
assuredly knowing, that thou art Peter, on whose Rock, as on a true Foundation,
Christ our King has built his Church.

And what was the effect of this Excommunication? that we may see how Gregory
exalted himself above all that is called God: Why, the next year, before the
Sentence was to take effect, in the midst of the Cold Winter, with a slender
Train, the Emperor hastens into Italy, (taking part of his Journey on
Horseback, part on Foot) to give the Pope a Meeting, and addresses to have his
Excommunication taken off: The Pope requires He deliver up his Crown, and the
Ensigns of Royalty, and when He came to the Castle, where the Pope was, which
was at Canusium, He makes him wait barefoot a first, second, and third day; on
the fourth day being admitted, He is at last absolved on these Conditions, viz.
That at what time, and place the Pope should appoint, He should render Himself,
and answer such things as should be charged against Him, and as He cleared, or
not cleared himself, He should retain, or lose his Kingdom: and that till the
Matter were heard, He should retain nothing of Royal Attendance, or Ensigns;
and if restored, He should be subject, and conformable to whatever the Pope
should require; and if He failed in any of these particulars, then this
Absolution to be void: And his acceptance of all this was to be confirmed by
Oath: And upon his stay in Italy after this, the Pope writes to the Princes of
Germany, that they would choose Rodolphus Duke of Suevia for their King; to
whom He sends a Crown with this Inscription, Petra dedit Petro, Petrus Diadema
Rodolpho. The Emperor coming into Germany tryes to recover his Crown from
Rodolph, and is a second time Excommunicated: The Form of which
Excommunication, being much of the same style with the former, I shall ask
leave likewise to insert; which was this.

Beat Petre Apostolorum Princeps, and Tu Paul Gentium Doctor, vestras,
quaeso, aures mihi paululum praebete, meque clementer exaudite: Nam veritatis
Discipuli estis, and Amatores: quae dicam vera sunt: Hanc causam suscipio
veritatis gratia, ut fratres mei, quorum salutem exopto, mihi obsequentius
acquiescant, sciant, intelligant, quod vestro auxilio fretus post Christum, and
Matrem ejus semper Virginem, flagitiosis, and iniquis resisto: Fidelibus autem
praesto adsum, and auxilium fero. Non enim libens, and volens hanc sedem
conscendi, sed invitus and lachrymans, quod me indignum judicabam, qui tam in
excelso throno sederem: Haec autem dico, quia non Ego Vos, sed Vos me
elegistis, and gravissimum pondus humeris nostris imposuistis. In me autem
vestro jus^u montem ipsum conscendentem, clamantem, and annunciantem populis
eorum scelera, and filis Ecclesiae peccata, membra Diaboli consurrexere, and ad
Sanguinem usque manus suas in me conjecere: Astiterunt enim Reges Terrae, and
Principes seculi, cum his conjurarunt Ecclesiastici quidam, and Vulgares in
Dominum, and nos Christos ejus, dicentes: Dirumpamus vincula eorum and
projiciamus a nobis jugum ipsorum: Hoc autem fecere, ut me vel morte vel exilio
mulctarent, quorum de numero fuit Henricus, quem Regem vocant, Henricus,
inquam, Henrici Imperatoris filius, qui cornua and calcem contra Ecclesiam Dei
superbe nimium erexit, facta conjuratione cum multis Episcopis Italici,
Germanici, Gallicique nominis, cujus superbiae vestra adhuc restitit Autoritas,
qui fractus potius quam ad sanitatem redactus, ad me in Cisalpinam perveniens,
absolutionem Anathematis suppliciter quaesivit; Hunc Ego, quem ad poenitentiam
venisse credideram, in gratiam recepi: huicque tantummodo communionem reddidi,
non tamen in Regnum, e quo eum in Romana Synodo depuleram, restitui: nec Regni,
ut ad Fidem redirent, concessi. Hoc ideo feci, ut si redire in gratiam cum
finitimis suis, quos semper vexaverat, differret, reddereque tum res
Ecclesiasticas tum profanas, ex foedere abnueret, cogi ad Officium
Execrationibus, and armis posset. Hac opportunitate adjuti quidam Germaniae
Episcopi and Prineipes, ab hac fera Bestia diu vexati, in locum Henrici suis
Flagitiis regno cadentis, ducem suum Rodulphum deligunt: qui regia modestia and
integritate usus, statim nuncios ad me misit, a quibus intelligerem se coactum
regni gubernacula suscipere; non esse tamen adeo regnandi cupidum, ut non malit
nobis, quam regnum pollicentibus obtemperare; futurum se in Dei potestate
semper, ac nostra, idque ut arbitremur nos facturum, filios obsides pollicitus
est. Stomachari tum Henricus coepit, and nos primo quidem precari, ut Rodolphum
ab occupatione Regni execrationibus propelleremus. Dixi me velle videre, cui
jus competeret, and eo missurum nuncios, qui rem omnem resciscerent, meque
deinceps judicaturum, Uter ipsorum in causa potior habendus esset. Vetuit
Henricus, quo minus Rex a Legatis nostris decerneretur, multosque tum
Seculares, tum Ecclesiasticos interfecit, Ecclesias diripuit, and profanavit,
atque hoc modo Anathematis vinculis sese illigavit. Hanc ob rem fidens in Dei
Judicio, and Misericordia inque Patrocinio beatae Virginis, fultus etiam
autoritate vestra; ipsum Henricum, ejusque fautores, vinculo Anathematis
colligo, atque iterum Regiam potestatem ei adimo, interdicoque Christianis
omnibus illo juramento absolutis, quo fides Regibus dari consuevit, ne Henrico
ulla in re obtemperent, Rudolphum in Regem suscipiant, quem multi provinciae
principes abrogato Henrico, in Regem Optimum sibi delegere. Eternim par est, ut
sicuti Henricus ob superbiam and contumaciam, facultatibus suis privatur, ita
Rudolphus omnibus gratus, pro sua Pietate, and Religione, regia dignitate, and
potestate donetur. Agite igitur Apostolorum Sanctissimi Principes, and quod
dixi, vestra autoritate interposita confirmate: ut omnes nunc demum
intelligant, si potestis in coelo ligare, and solvere; in terra quoque imperia,
regna, principatus, and quicquid habere mortales possunt, auferre and dare non
posse. Si enim quae ad Deum pertinent, judicare potestis, quid de his
inferioribus, and profanis censendum est? Et si Angelos dominantes superbis
principibus vestrum est judicare, quid in servos illorum vos debet facere?
Ediscant nunc Reges hujus Exemplo, and omnes seculi principes, quid in coelo
possitis quantique apud Deum sitis, ac deinceps timeant Sanctae Ecclesiae
mandata contemnere: Hoc autem judicium cito in Henricum exercete ut intelligant
omnes iniquitatis filium non fortuito sed vestra opera e regno cadere. Hoc
tamen a vobis optaverim, ut Poenitentia ductus in die judicii vestro rogatu
gratiam a Domino consequatur.

O Blessed Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and Thou, O Paul, Doctor of the
Gentiles, afford to me your Ears a little, I beseech you, and mercifully hear
me; For ye are the Disciples, and Lovers of Truth, the things I shall speak are
true: This Cause I undertake for truth's sake, that my Brethren, whose
Salvation I earnestly desire, may be the better satisfied in their Obedience to
me, may know, and understand that relying on your assistance, next unto Christ,
and his Mother always a Virgin, I resist the flagitious and unjust; but that to
the Faithful I am always ready to give aid: For I did not by my own choice, or
willingly mount this Chair, but unwillingly, and with Tears, because I judged
my self unworthy to sit in this high Throne: Now these things I say, because I
chose not you, but ye have chosen me, and laid this most heavy burden on our
Shoulders. However against me ascending to this high Place by your Command,
Proclaiming and telling their People their Wickedness, and the Sons of the
Church their Sins, the Members of the Devil have risen up together, and laid
hands upon me to Murder me. For the Kings of the Earth stood up, and the Rulers
of the World, and with these some of the Churchmen, and the People have
conspired together against the Lord, and against us his Christ's; saying, Let us
break their Bonds asunder, and cast away their yoke from us: and this they have
done, that they might bring us to Death or Banishment; of which number was
Henry, whom they call King, Henry, I say, Son of Henry the Emperor, who has
too proudly lift up his horn and heel against the Church of God, entering into
Conspiracy with many Bishops of Italy, Germany, and France, whose Pride
hitherto your Authority has resisted, who being broken rather, than restored
to a sound Mind, coming to me on this side the Alps, humbly begged Absolution
from Excommunication. Him, whom, I believed to have come Penitent, I have
received into favor, and restored to Him Communion, but not his Kingdom, from
which I had deposed Him in a Synod held at Rome; nor did I grant leave to the
Tributaries of the Kingdom to return to their Fealty. This I therefore did,
that if he should delay to be reconciled to his Neighbors, whom He had
aggrieved, and should refuse to restore both their Ecclesiastical and Civil
Rights, He might by Execrations or Censures, and Arms be compelled to his Duty.
Being assisted by this Opportunity, some Bishops, and Princes of Germany, who
had been long aggrieved by this wild Beast, into the place of Henry, who by his
great wickedness and forseited the Kingdom, chose Duke Rodulphus, who with that
modesty, and integrity which becomes a King, forthwith sent Messengers to me,
by whom I might understand that He was forced to undertake the Government of
the Kingdom; but however that He was not so desirous of Reigning, but that he
had rather obey us, than those who had promised the Kingdom; that He would be
always in the Power of God and us, and that we might believe that He will do
this, has promised to give his Sons Hostages. At this Henry began to be
incensed and to beseech us at first, that by Banning.
Cursings we would hinder Rudolphus from seizing the Kingdom; I said, I would
see to whom the Right belonged, and for that Reason would send Messengers, who
should take Cognizance of the whole Affair, and would judge thereupon, whether
of them had the better Cause? Henry forbad, that our Messengers should declare
him King, and slew many of the Clergy and Laity, Robbed, and Profaned several
Churches, and by this means bound himself the faster with the Bonds of an
Anathema, or Excommunication denounced against him. Wherefore trusting in the
Judgment; and Mercy of God, and the Patronage of the Blessed Virgin, and
supported also with your Authority, Henry himself, and his Abettors do I bind
with the Bonds of an Anathema, and the second time deprive him of Royal
Authority, and forbid all Christians, absolved of that Oath, whereby Fealty is
used to be Sworn to Kings, in any thing to obey Henry, and that they accept
Rudolphus for King, whom many of the Princes of the Province (or Empire)
rejecting Henry, have chosen to be their good King. For it is fit, that as Henry
for his Pride and contumacy, is deprived of all his Privileges, so Rudolphus,
who is acceptable to all, should for his Piety and Religion be endowed with
Royal Dignity and Power. Go to now therefore, ye most most Holy Princes of the
Apostles, and what I have said, interpose your Authority to confirm, that all
men at length may understand whether you can bind and loose in Heaven, and also
on Earth are not able to take away or give Empires, Kingdoms, Principalities,
or whatever else mortal Men can enjoy? For it ye can judge those things which
belong to God, what are we to think of inferior and profane things? It it
belongs to you to judge the Angels who rule over proud Princes, what does it
become you to do to their Servants? Let Kings and all the Princes of the World
now learn by the Example of this [Henry] what your Power is in Heaven, and how
great you are with God, and let them hereafter dread to contemn the Commands of
Holy Church: And this Sentence forthwith execute ye on Henry, that all may
know, that it is not by mere chance, but through your Assistance, that the Son
of Iniquity has fallen from the Kingdom: Only this I would request from you,
that being led to Repentance, He may through your intercession obtain Grace in
the Day of Judgment.

And now,

And now, Whether this be not to have a Mouth speaking great things, and
Blasphemies?

Whether this be not to speak as a Dragon, let the World judge? Nay, I was
going to say, the World has already judged it: For so Aventinus tells us, l.
5. p. 352. Annal. Boior. that upon: this, and the great outrages thereon
committed by Rudolphus and his Adherents, most Men openly as well as privately
began to cry out against so great a Villainy, in public to curse Gregory, and
wish all Mischief to this Hildebrand; publishing, that 'twas out of Malice, and
an intemperate lusting after Rule, that he was thus hurried on Headlong, and
declaring him to be Antichrist. Nay, farther yet, He has herein judged
Himself: For was it not hereupon that He undertook to foretell that before the
Feast of St. Peter (and he did all He could to verify what he had foretold by
tampering with Assassines to murder him) Henry should die, or lose his Kingdom
(this He did publicly in a Sermon to the people, ascending the Pulpit of St.
Peter's, and in his Pontifical Habit) adding, that He would no longer be
accounted Pope if this Prophecy should fail: as Benno is cited to attest it,
Histor. Magd. Cent. 11. cap. 8. p. 435.

Show any thing like this in any other History, whether Civil or
Ecclesiastical, besides that of Rome, and we will give up the Cause, and allow
any to be Antichrist, besides Him, whom this concerns: we will strike
Hildebrand out of the List, and He shall not be so much as thought of, neither
He, nor any of his Proud Successors, in the day when Babylon is to come into
remembrance, Rev. 16. 19.

It may seem a long Digression what we have here run, but it being of so high
import toward the clearing up so great a part of the Book of the Revelation,
as what relates to Antichrist in his Rise, Progress, and full Growth, is, I
could not well pass by what is here said of Hildebrand, especially considering,
How at the same time (that we err no longer in the Person) it is decreed by the
third Roman Council under Him, (Ut Papae nomen Unicum esset in Universo orb
Christiano, nec liceret alicui seipsum, vel alium eo nomine appellare:) that
there should be but one who should have the Name of POPE in the whole Christian
World, and that it should not be lawful for any other to call himself, or any
one else by that Name: so then, here is the mark of the Beast, the Name, and
Number of his Name all concurring in One, Anno 1076. For then it was, viz. in
the same Council in which Hildebrand and deposed the Emperor, that this Name
was thus appropriated to the Bishop of Rome: As Longus a Coriolano relates, p.
317.

And it is very observable what we meet with to this purpose in Aventinus,
Annal. Boior. l. 7. p. 420, 421. where the Covetousness, Luxury, Strife,
Hatred, Envy, Ambition, etc. of the Romish Chair is most highly inveighed
against, in opposition to the Humility, Meekness, Patience, Charity, which the
great Shepherd of our Souls gave as the Rules of his Religion, and was Himself
the great Pattern of them; And in particular this Hildebrand, of whom we have
been speaking, is pitched upon, as most guilty of the contrary Vices, and that
under the express style of Antichrist, the Person who there charges Him, is the
Chief Priest of Juvavia, his words are, Hildebrandus ante annos centum atque
septuaginta primus specie Religionis Antichristi imperii fundamenta jecit. Hoc
bellum nefandum, (speaking of what opposition the Emperors had constantly found
from the Popes after Hildebrand, says he) primus auspicatus est (viz.
Hildebrandus), quod per successores huc usque continuatur, Hildebrand an
hundred and seventy years ago, was the first, who under the show of Religion,
laid the Foundations of the Empire of Antichrist; this nefarious War which has
hitherto been continued by his Successors, he first began: 'Twere worth the
while to transcribe the whole Speech, as it is there related, But I can only
refer the Reader to the Author, and so I return to our Business, which is to
consider farther, what we may serve our selves with in this Argument, from the
second taking of Rome, Anno 455.

And if we well weigh what then happened, will it not go a great way toward
what we have to make out, viz. that before the year 500 Antichrist was born.
For,

Is it not about this time, that we find Leo Magnus taking to Himself the style
of Universal, or Ecumenical Bishop, and behaving Himself (for that is the Air
that runs through all his Writings) with that disdain of all others, as to
rescind not only what other Bishops, but what a Council had determined, (He did
it in the Case of Eutyches) because not first advising with Him, or submitting
all to his Confirmation. He that reads his Sermons on the Anniversary of his
Humility, (that is his usual Phrase) being advanced to the Culmen, onus, munus
Pontificis summi, will see enough of this aspiring humor, which likewise runs
through several of his Epistles; and it is worth our enquiring thereupon, whether
this may not be a fit Epoch from whence to date the certain Birth of
Antichrist? of which we shall have occasion to make use in the following
discourse.

Baronius in his Annals seems to have settled this Point for us, and that not
far from this very Period; For Anno 452. He asserts Him to have been vested in
the title of Oecumenicus Episcopus by the Synod of Chalcedon: and whereas
Gregory afterward says, Nullum Praedecessorum suorum eo nomine usum esse,
that none of his Predecessors used that style; Ita quidem (says Baronius)
intelligendum est, ut nemo illorum eo titulo ex solenni ritu semper, and in
omnibus usus sit Inscriptionibus, vel sub Rescriptionibus; it is indeed to be
so understood, as that none of them did in any solemn manner always, and in all
Inscriptions or Subscriptions, make use of it; but for the Right they had to
it, He cites Leo Epist. 54. ('it was the year after the Synod of Chalcedon) thus
stiling himself, Leo Episcopus Romanae and Universalis Ecclesiae, Martiano
Augusto: and he that shall read that Epistle, will need go no farther to look
for one, who began at least to exalt Himself, as St. Paul had foretold of
Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.

And much good may the style do them; (...) that very style, which Gregory
afterward (and I hope his Auth^ity will not be questioned by them) declares to
be the very Character of Antichrist, Ego fidenter dico, quisquis se universalem
Sacerdotem vocat, vel vocari desiderat, in Elatione sua Antichristum
praeourrit, quia superbiendo se caeteris praeponit, l. 4. Epist. 30. I boldly
say, whoever calls himself Universal Priest, or desires to be so called, in his
Haughtiness is the forerunner of Antichrist, because in thus Priding it, he
prefers himself before others. And to the same purpose may be seen, l. 4. Ep.
32. 38, 39. as also, l. 6. Ep. 2 24. 28.

So then, here are two Periods which both of them answer to the letter of the
Text, viz. He that leads into Captivity, shall go into Captivity, etc. and
may respectively be applied for the clearing up the matter in hand; The first
taking of Rome, Anno 410 gives us a Date, from whence if we reckon 666, we are
led to One, who has as fairly put in for the style of Antichrist, had as much
of the mark of the Beast, and the number of his Name, as whoever be the Other
that can be pitched on, to vie with him among all the Children of Pride: And, as
for

The second taking of Rome, Anno 455, that gives us another Date, (and that is,
as I shall afterward show, in a manner confined to this matter,) from whence
to begin the whole Reign of Antichrist.

The first is a Date that speaks Him not to be risen, but rising: As it is not
to be expected that in a moment of time he should leap into his Greatness.

The second is a Date, that shows Him risen, and beginning at least to have the
marks of Antichrist upon him; like those, that are stricken with the Plague,
the Spots may be upon them, though the Disease not yet come to the height, nor
ripened to all the degrees of its malignity.

And it is not unusual in Scripture to predict things in such a Latitude, as
that we may be able to serve our selves with any part of the several Periods,
whereby to reconcile the Prediction and the Event; We have an instance of this
Dan. 12. v. 11, 12: And from the time that the daily Sacrifice shall be taken
away, and the Abomination that makes desolate set up, there shall be a
thousand two hundred and ninety days; Blessed is he, that waits and comes to
the thousand three hundred and five and thirty days.

In the sixth Verse, the Question had been put concerning the Events which had
been there foretold, viz. How long shall it be to the end of these Wonders? And
the Answer given by the man clothed in linen, was, that it should be for a
time, times, and an half, this was the certain time (for it is confirmed by a
most solemn Oath) for him, of whom the Holy Ghost had been speaking, chapter 11.
31. to accomplish to scatter the power of the holy people: But Daniel is still
in a doubt, and professes himself not to understand this, when he heard it, and
therefore he puts the Question again, v. 8. O my Lord, what shall be the end of
these things? To which the return is, v. 11. And from the time that the daily
Sacrifice shall be taken away, and the Abomination that makes desolate set up,
there shall be a thousand two hundred and ninety days. Blessed is he that
waits, and comes to the thousand three hundred and five and thirty days.

Now what is the reason of this difference in the reply? To me it seems to be
this; the former question is put by one Angel to another, who were no ways
concerned in hastening or deferring the event, and therefore the certain time
in Gods Calendar is there prefixed. The latter question is put by Daniel in
behalf of the Church, to whom good things are promised, and Evils threatened
under the conditions and measures of God's dealing with his people; i. e. so as
to take effect according to the Repentance, or Impenitency of those therein
concerned; according too, to the several degrees by which great Events are to
be accomplished, that so the Faith and patience of the Saints may be
accordingly (as I may say) working with Providence, and preparing them for what
in his Wise Councils, an Allseeing God has so suited to that variety there is
in humane affairs; and therefore not without a latitude for their beginning or
ending: And so the Rule is, Habakkuk 2. 3. For the Vision is for an appointed
time, but at the end it shall speak, and not lie, though it tarry, wait for it,
because it will surely come, it will not tarry.

But then, if Antichrist were come before the 500 th year of Christ, what was
there did then appear in the World, which could in any sort answer the black
Character the Apostle gives of him, 2 Thessalonians. 2. v. 4, 8, 9, 10? To this, I
answer, That as the Apostle tells them, to whom he there writes, That the
Mystery of Iniquity already works, there is no doubt, but that he was born:
(This Mystery had not been so long conceiving to bring forth Nothing) however
he had not then attained the mature age of this Man of Sin, and Son of
Perdition.

And there will be little reason to think otherwise, if we consider, that
agreeable to the three Names, by which the Holy Ghost sets out the Reign of
Antichrist, I mean of Sodom, Revel. 11. 4. of Egypt, Revel. 11. 8. and of
Babylon, Revel. 17. 5. the first to signify that Corruption of Manners, the
second that Tyranny, the third that Superstition and Idolatry, which was then
to obtain; there was something of all these to make out that Apostasy, or
falling away, which was to precede his coming.

And here not to lead the Author beyond his own Collection of Primitive
Fathers, I could show him St. Augustine, St. Hierome, St. Chrysostom, with many
others, giving Testimony in this matter, in their several Invectives against
those Enormities, which were so predominant among the Clergy, with those many
burdensome Rites and Ceremonies, which were introduced, with the Adoration and
Intercession of Saints, and the like, sufficient to discredit the Purity of the
Church; and at least, Evidence that Antichrist was at hand.

I could show, where St. Hierome gives Rome no other Name than that of Babylon,
and reproves her for the sins of Sodom, viz. Pride, Fullness of Bread, and
abundance of Idleness, and a refusing to strengthen the hand of the poor and
needy, Ezekiel. 16. 49. and some degree, at least, of an Egyptian Tyranny, (what
has been already observed of Leo Magnus, will go a great way in the proof
hereof) in that high hand, with which she began then to carry things in the
Church.

How far they were gone in Superstition and Idolatry, Theodoret, whom the
Author so often appeals to in his Collection, will sufficiently inform us, in
his eighth book de Graec. Affect. Curat. where it is his professed business to
invite the Heathens to change the worship of their Pagan Heroes, and Deified
Persons, into that of the Martyrs.

To this I might add the Testimony of Lactantius, Antonius Eremita, Hilarious
and Epiphanius, with Salvian, and many others: For it is no difficulty to make
good the Charge.

Only the advantage the Author hopes for from it, is, That it being so early,
may justify him in urging this it self as matter of Antiquity; the Use we make
of it, is to satisfy Him, that these Errors, and Enormities did so soon
obtain, not that because they so soon obtained, they were therefore the more
justifiable.

So then, there is no question, but Antichrist was then born, though not arrived
to the adult, and mature age of the Man of Sin:

For that, as we before observed, was to be reckoned from another Epoch, viz.
That of the first taking of Rome, Anno 410. And but reasonable it should be so,
He, who let, being to be taken out of the way, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. before the other
Beast (as He is styled Revel. 13. 10.) could come up out of the Earth: For,
'twas the Anarchy, as St. Chrysostom expresses it, that should make way for his
Usurpation, as de facto it did, the Bishop of Rome still holding his own, and
indeed gaining by the common Calamity:

Nor is there any thing, which the Holy Ghost himself has more clearly pointed
out, then this very Epoch: For what are those reflections, I took notice of
before, viz. If any man have an Ear, let him hear, Revel. 13. 9. and, in the
close of the tenth verse, Here is the Patience, and the Faith of the Saints,
which sets the Period to the Roman Empire, and the Sufferings of the Christians
under it, but to quicken our attention, as to what is thereby immediately
ushered in, so to lead us on to a more strict Observation of what follows?
which being the Description of Antichrist, that other Beast, which was to grow
up upon the Ruins of the Roman Empire, and being in effect the same, with what
is foretold of him in that forementioned 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7, 8. cannot (especially
the Holy Ghost again pointing to it, v. 18. in these words, Here is Wisdom,)
but guide us to some notable Epoch of his Reign to be calculated from thence:

And what was that, but the very time, when He should, (as St. Paul had
foretold, and I have before taken notice of) exalt himself above all that is
called God, or that is worshipped ((...)) the very style of the Roman Emperors)
so that He, as God, sits in the Temple of God, showing Himself, that He is
God; which how, eminently He did it, Anno 1076. has been already showed.

But it is his Birth, not his mature Age we are now speaking of; And there is
another note of Direction the Holy Ghost has supplied us with, Revel. 17. 12.
which in a manner confines it to the very Period of 455. or the second taking
of Rome; it is that of the ten Horns, or ten Kings, which when St. John wrote,
had received no Kingdom, but were to receive their Power one hour with the
Beast; They and He to commence their Reign at the same time, and to have the
same continuance, and Duration with one another.

And now to settle the Synchronism, when was it, they, who where thus to be
contemporary with the Beast received their Kingdom? Was it not in or about 455
or 456, which immediarely succeeded the second taking of Rome by Gensericus,
that the Division of the Empire was made into so many several Kingdoms?

And whereas these ten Horns or ten Kings are said Rev. 17. 13. to have one
mind, and to give their Power, and strength unto the Beast, What is that, but a
Confirmation of the means whereby Antichrist should arrive at the height of
his Usurpation, exercising, as it is Revel. 13. 12. all the Power of the first
Beast before Him, and causing the Earth, and them which dwell therein to
worship the first Beast, whose deadly wound was healed; i. e. Princes and
People to pay their Homage which was due to the first Beast, viz. the Emperor,
to Himself? in whom, as to the continuing the same Sovereign Power, which
before was in the Emperors, though under another (...) name, the deadly wound,
i. e. the blow given by the Goths, Vandals and Hunns to the Roman Empire, was
healed: [not but that there is another sense in which this may be understood,
of which afterward.]

And to show how 'twas He gained this, it follows, v. 13. And He does great
wonders, so that He makes fire to come down from Heaven on the Earth in the
sight of Men; which what can that relate to, but to that forementioned
Excommunication thundered out against the Emperor, called Fire from Heaven,
because 'twas from the Church, or under the pretense of that Spiritual Power
therein lodged, called Heaven in this Book, this Fire proceeded? and on the
Emperor, called Earth, because of that Earthly or Secular Power committed to
him it came down?

And having advanced so far, which, as I likewise have before remarkt, falls in
with the Year 666. it follows, v. 14: And deceives them that dwell on the
Earth, i. e. the Inhabitants of the Roman Empire, by the means of those
Miracles which He had power to do in the sight of the Beast, saying to them
that dwell on the Earth, that they should make an Image to the Beast, which had
the wound by a Sword, and did live, i. e. having thus prevailed against the
Beast, the Roman Empire, He sets up a Power like it in Himself, making the
People (who were thus deceived by the means of those Miracles which He had
power to do in the sight of the Beast, those Excommunications, and other
Methods, I mean, by which He had so much lessened his Soverainty) to assist in
setting up his Image, in that show, or rather real representation of Soverain
Power, He had transferred to Himself.

Whereupon it is added v. 15. that He had power to give life unto the Beast,
Breath says the Margin of the English, (...), says the Original, a Spirit, or
Spiritual Being unto the Image of the Beast, (For it is by Spiritual, or
Ecclesiastical Censures the Beast thus recovered exercises his Jurisdiction)
that the Image of the Beast should both speak (as He does with a Witness in
these Anathema's, Thunderbolts of Excommunications, as they are called, or Fire
from Heaven) and cause that as many, as would not Worship the Image of the
Beast, should be killed; which de facto happened in the Persecutions raised on
those, who could not submit to the Novelties introduced: And He causes all,
both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a mark in their
Right hand, or in their Foreheads, and that no man might buy, or sell, save He
that had the mark, or the name of the Beast, or the number of his name; None to
hope for any Preferment in the Church, no, nor yet for any Temporal Advantage;
to be so much as permitted the benefit of common Traffic, and Commerce, that
did not by receiving his mark either in hand, or forehead, by his having the
name of the Beast, profess himself entirely to be his, (For that is done by
receiving name from any other) or the Number of his name, i. e. after such a
time at least that the Beast should have attained such a Number, wholly resign
to His Will; which Number is set down in the next Verse, and a Note prefixed to
show that 'twill concern us to know, when He arrived at this usurpt Power,
which the Holy Ghost had been describing: And that, as I before observed, must
be, by looking back to the taking of Rome, Anno 410, and from thence reckoning
to 1076 the very point, when as it has been said, Fire came down from Heaven
on the Earth in the sight of Men, i. e. Gregory the 7th, who presided in the
Church, or Heaven thundered out his Excommunication, on the Earth or the
Emperor, and that in the most public and solemn manner, i. e. in the sight of
men.

I could not well say less, than I have on these Points, and being by the
discourse brought again to mention this great Epoch in the Reign of
Antichrist, I cannot but take notice, that as the Holy Ghost here so manifestly
directs us to it, so other Writers, and among them Baronius, (however in the
dark as to this light that is here given us in it,) are not sparing to talk of
the Power, and Prevalency of Antichrist about this time: The place in Baronius,
is Anno 1106: Quod vero pertinet ad Antichristum, fuit quidem Opinio non
vulgarium Virorum eum hoc fore saeculo revelandum, and inter alios Norberti,
viri temporis hujus fama Celeberrimi, a quo id se audivisse testatur S.
Bernardus, Epistola ad Gausredum Carnotensem Episcopum. The Report was so
strong, that Paschalis stopped his Journey upon it, says Baronius, ibid.
Paschalis Papa rogatus a Conventu Moguntino in Galliam Cisalpinam properare,
itineri se committens, ob sparsam famam de proximo Antichristi Adventu,
Florentiae substitit. And before Anno Christi nongentisimo, Indictione tertia,
novum inchoatur saeculum, quod sui Asperitate, ac boni sterilitate ferreum,
malique exundantis deformitate plumbeum, atque inopia Scriptorum appellari
consuevit Obscurum: And again 1001. Anno Christi millesimo primo, quo novum
saeculum inchoatum est, etc. 'Twas the Opinion of some, that Antichristus
adveniret, and non longo post tempore Universale Judicium succederet; and He
says, the many Prodigies which happened the year before seemed to foretell it;
and then, which I rather take notice of, adds, Sed and ad ista credenda de
Adventu Antichristi, and Fine mundi, satis esse videbantur Romanae Ecclesiae
tot saepe iterata a naufragia; necnon Corruption morum, quam magnam valde in hoc
tempore fuisse in hominibus, praesertim Ecclesiasticis, Glaber ea videns
deplorat: Insuper and quod ferreum hoc Saeculum ob malorum excrescentiam,
Auctore Ditmaro and diceretur, and revera esset; quod videlicet, ut ait Glaber,
deficeret Religiositas Pontificum, and marcesceret districtio regularis
Abbatum, simulque Monasterialis Disciplinae vigor tepesceret, ac per illorum
Exempla caetera plebs Mandatorum Dei praevaricatrix existeret. And if (not to
depart from the Explication that is before given of those words in Rev. 13. 13.
But only farther to illustrate the matter in hand,) we may understand the
coming down of Fire from Heaven on the Earth in the sight of men, in the sense
our Lord speaks, Luke 12. 49. of his coming to send fire on the Earth, never
was any Age in which it was so much kindled, no time, wherein what by the
intemperate Heats between the Popes themselves, as well as between them, and
the Emperors, the World was in a greater Flame.

And if those of the Romish Church will give others leave to speak after them
in this cause, can there be any more memorable testimony than what we find to
this purpose, p. 71. De l'Histoire generale des Eglises Vaudoises? etc. the
Title of the Chapter is, Eschantillon de la Doctrine des Vaudois expliquant,
leur Sentiment touchant l'Antichrist, 'twas in the year 1120 that what is there
quoted was first Published, the Learned Mede mentions the MS. under this title,
Qual Cosa sia l'Antichrist, en datte del An Mill cent and vigint, una cum
Symbolo tali, sicut fumus praecedit ignem, sic and gloriam Christi tentatio
Antichristi: And then goes on to give a brief Extract of it in these words, viz.

In this Book the Faithful are admonish't, that that great Antichrist was
already come, that 'twas in vain now to expect him any longer, that by the
Permission of God He was grown up to full maturity:

That the present State of Ecclesiastical Affairs, consisted in the Government
of false Prophets, and Ministers of Lies, together with the People subjected to
it is Error:

That those who are armed with both Powers, and are furnished with all other
Helps to found Error, and propagate it abroad, under the specious Title of the
Spouse of Christ, and the vizard of Christian Worship and Holiness, with their
fraudulent Errors, and damnable Doctrines oppose the way of Salvation by Christ
revealed to the World, derogate from Christ's Merits, and the Grace, and Office
of a Mediator, ascribing to themselves, to Creatures and the Works of Men, what
things are due only to God, and Christ, worshipping Saints of both Sexes, as if
they were Deities, and giving Divine Veneration to Relics, and Images, Adoring
the Eucharist for God, and Christ Jesus himself: In a word, under the title of
Christianity, they do in reality practice Idolatry: Lastly, they rage with
Hatred and Persecutions against those who love God, and are the true Members of
Christ:

That this State of Men (not one single man) is Antichrist, The Whore of
Babylon, the 4th Beast of Daniel (namely in his last state as it is said) that
Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition, who is extolled above every God, so that He
sits in the Temple of God, i. e. in the Church, showing Himself as if he were
God: Who is now come in all manner of Deceivableness, and lies in them that
perish:

Wherefore that they ought, as God commanded, both inwardly and outwardly to
depart from this Mystery of Iniquity, and to exhort all to whom the great, and
good God has revealed the same Truth, to do the same that they do, that they
would join themselves to the Holy City Jerusalem, to the Truth of Christ, and
his little Spouse:

To which purpose they now make known to the world, what manner of Society
theirs is, and what causes they have of departing.

This is the sum of that Writing, which by the Providence of God the Remainders
of the Waldenses, who Inhabit the Alps, have preserved to our times, from whom
Joannes Paulus Perrin having received the Ancient Manuscript of it, has
published it in Print in his History of the Waldenses and Albigenses, by him
written in French: See his first Book, Chapter the 7th and Third part, which
treats of the Doctrine, and Discipline of the Waldenses: The whole MS. for its
Curiosity is such, that for the Satisfaction of them who understand any thing
of the style in which it is written, or are willing to take it in the French
Translation, I shall not scruple to insert it here, at large, in the same
manner as I find it in the forementioned L'Histoire generale des Eglises
Vaudoises ou des Eglises des Vallees de Piemont par Jean Ledger, Pasteur and
Moderateur des Eglises des Vallees.

Ce livre est datte de l'an 1120. Voicy le titre qu'ily met devant le traite de
l'Anti-Christ.

En ayma lo fum vay derant lo fuoc, la battailla derant la victoria, en ayma la
tentation de l'Ante-Christ derant la gloria. C'est a dire, comme le fumee va
devant le feu, le combat devant la victoire, ainsi la tentation de
l'Anti-Christ va devant la glory. Et puis il suit de la sort.

Que c'est que l'Anti-Christ.
Ante-Christ es falseta de damnation aeterna cuberta de specie de la Verita, e
de la Justitia de Christ, e de la soa Sposa: contrapausa a meseime la via de
Verita, de Justitia, de Fe, d'Esperanza, de Carita, e a la vita moral, e a la
verita ministerial de la Gleisa, menistra per li falls Apostols, e defendua
opiniosament de l'un e de l'autre bras: o Antichrist es engan rescondu de la
verita de salu de cosas substantials, e ministerials, o es fraudulenta
contrarieta de Christ and de la soa Sposa, e a un chascun mambre fidel. Non une
person particuliere.
Et enaymi, non es alcuna special persona ordena en alcun gra, o uffici, o
menestier, e aizo regardant universalment. Ma meseima la falseta, pausa contra
la verita quilli se cuebre, e se orna de belleza, e de pieta, de fora de la
Gleisa de Christ, enaima de Christ, enaima de Nom, de Officies, de Scripturas,
e de Sacramens, e de motas autras cosas. La Iniquita d'aquesta maniera com li
seo Ministre majors, e menors, cum li seguent ley de maluas cor e cec, Ses Noms.
aital congregation ensemp presa es appella Anti-Christi, o Babylonia, o quarta
Bestia, o Meretrix, o home de pecca, Filli de perdition.

Et de ses Ministres.
Li seos Ministres son appella falls Prophetas, Maistres mesongers, Ministres de
tenebras, Sperit d'error, meretrix Apocalyptica, maire de fornication, niolas
senza aigua, arbres auctomnals morts and arancas per doas vez, undas del crudel
mar, errans, Balaamitiens, e Gissiptiens.

Pourquoy dit Antichrist. Sa Livre.
El es dit Antichrist, emperco ca cubert o orna sot specie de Christ, e de la
Gleisa, e de li seo fidel membre, contraria a la salu faita per Christ, e
aministra verament en la Gleisa de Christ; e participa de li fidel per Fe, per
Esperanca, e per Charita: en liqual modo el contraria per sapientia del mond,
per falsas Religions, e per enfeinta bonta, per podesta spiritual, per
tyrannita secular, per riguessas, honors de degnetas, per delicancas e per
deleit del mond, e contraria per aquesti modi.

Quant manifest.
Per aizo sia manifest a un chascun que per neun l'Ante-Christ non po esser,
compli, ni venir, sinon quant aquestas cosas nommas foron conjointas ensemp per
far parfect hypocrita e falseta, zo es cum li Savi del mond, Religios,
Pharisios, Ministres, Doctors, la potesta secular cum lo poble del mond foron
ensemp conjoint. Adonca feron l'home de pecca ensemp e d'error entier. Car al
temp de li Apostol, ja sia zo que l'Ante-Christ era ja conceopu, macar essent
enfant, mancava de li debit membre interiors e exteriors. Emperzo, el se
conoissia, a se destruia, e se excommunicava plus legierament enaima rostic e
grossier, el era fait mut: Car el manque de sapientia rational, sensativa,
definitiva, car el manque de li sols Ministres senza verita, e de li statut
humans, manque de li religios de fora. Emperzo el era vengu en l'error e al
pecca, ma non hac cum liqual el pogues cubrir la sozura o vergongna de las
errors o del pecca, cum el manque de riquezas e de dotations, non poc conduire
alcun Ministre per si, ni non poc multiplicar, conservar, defendre lor: car el
manque de poissanza o poesta secular, el non poc forcar, o costreigner neun de
la verita a la falseta. Car el manque de mot, el non poc scozar ni escandalizar
neun per li seo soleniament. Et enaima essent trop tenre e frevol non poc
obtenir en la Gleisa. Ma creissent en li seo members, zo es en li Ministre cec
e hypocrit, e de li sois del mond, e el meseime creisec entro a Baron parfait
en pleneta daita, zo es cum li spirituals e seculars, e li amadors del mond,
cec en la Fe, son multiplica en la Gleisa com tota poesta essent mals. Volent
esser ora e honra en la cosas spirituals, e cubrir la soa propria magesta,
malitia, e peccas, a abuza de Sains e Pharisios, a aizo, enaima es dit de
sobre: Car maxima iniquita es cubrir e ornar la iniquita digna de
excommunication, and voler esser per aizo que non es dona a l'home, ma conven
al sol Dio, e a Jesus Christ tant come Mediator. Qu'il ravit ^ Christ l'honneur
qui luy appartient.
Ostar aquestas cosas a Dio fraudulentament per rapina, e traportar sobre si e
las soas obras, es vist esser maxima felonia, enaimi regenerar, perdonnar li
pecca, distribuir las gracias del Sanct Esperit, confeitar Christ, e enaimi de
las autras. E cubrir se en totas aquestas cosas de mantel d'authorita, e de
forma de parolas, e enganar per aquestas cosas lo poble rostic, seguent lo mond
Pardonnant les peches.
en aquestas cosas que son del mond, e de departir de Dio, e de la vera Fe, de
la reformation del Sanct Esperit' departir de la vera penitentia, de la
perseveranza al ben, departir de la Carita, de la patientia, de la pauvreta, de
la humilita, e zo ques plus peissime de tot, departir de la vera speranza, e
pensar ley en tot mal, e en la vana speranza del mond, servir a tuit li
menestier a aquestas cosas, Faisant adorer les images, les Saints, les
relics, etc.
far idolotrar lo poble, servir fraudulentament a las Idolas de tot lo mond,
sot lo nom de li Sanct, e a las reliquas e a li menestier de lor, enaimi que lo
poble errant peissament de la via de verita pense si servir a Dio e far ben,
escommou aquel poble a odi, e a ira, e a malici^ contra li fidel, e encontra li
amant la verita, e fay moti homecedi, e enaimi l'Apostol dis verita. Qual es
home de pecca compli, e que el se esleva sobre tot zo ques dit Dio, e zo ques
collu, e quel contraria a tota verita, e quel seo al templi de Dio, zo es en la
Gleisa, demonstrant se enaima el fossa Dio, e quel ven en tota seduction a
aquilli que perisson, e si aquel felon ja venc perfectament, el non es de
querre, car el es fait per permission de Dio ja veil, e que el descreis ja* car
la soa potesta e authorita es amerma, e que lo Seignor Jesus occi aquest selon
per lo Sperit de la soa bocca, en moti home de bona volunta, e trames potesta
contraria a si e a li seo amador, e decipa li seo luoc e possessions, e depart
aquesta Cita de Babylonia en laqual tota generation trac vigor de malicia.

Quals son las obras de l'Ante-Christ?

La premiere oeuvre de l'Anti-Christ, bannir la verite du monde.
La prima obra de l'Ante-Christ es toller la verita e combiar ley en falseta e
en error e en heresia. La seconda obra de l'Anti-Christ es cubrir la falseta de
la verita, e de las errors, e provar e confermar ley par la Fe, e per las
vertus, d'intremenar la falseta en las spirituals al poble soget, o sia en li
Menistre, o sia li Menestier, o sia en tota la Gleisa. E aquestas doas obras
contenon perfecta e complia malicia laqual non pogron far neun tyran, neun
poissant del commencament del mond entro en li temp de l'Anti-Christ. Ma Christ
non hac alcuna vez aital ennemic devant aquest que pogues enaima pervertir la
via de verita en falseta, e la falseta en verita, non semeillantament lo
coltivador de l'un e de l'autre, de la verita, e de la falseta. Enaimi que la
Sancta Maire Gleisa cum li seo very Fill li es tota squalqueia en las veritas,
specialment en las Menisterials de li very Menistre en verita, e de li
Menisteri, e de l'usar de lor, e de li Filli participant, illi plora
plorilvoment per lo parlar, e per lo plaint de Jeremia disent: En qual maniera
se sola la cita del poble Pagan e non circoncis? illi es faita vesva, zo es de
verita del seo Spos. La Dona de las gens per subjection de las errors, de li
pecca, Princessa de las Provincias per departiment del mond, e daquellas cosas
que son al mond. Plora e veias plus enant, e atrobares ara totas cosas complias
per lo temp: car la Sancta Gleisa se sia e es tengua per Synagoga. E la
Synagoga de li malignant, es predica per maire ben cresent en la Ley. La
falseta es predica per la eygaleza, la non justitia es predica e tengua per li
justitia, lo error per la Fe, lo pecca per la virtue, la messognia per la verita.

D. Quals obras procedon de las premieras obras?

Respond. Aquestas. La premiera obra es que el convertis lo coltivament de
Latrie, propiament propi al sol Dio, a si, e a li seo fait, a la pavra creatura
rational e non rational, sensible e non sensible. Rational, enaima li home,
Sanct, o Sanctas trapassas d'aquest mond, e a las imagenas de l'or, galas,
reliquias. Li fait de luy so li Sacrament, specialment lo Sacrament de la
Eucharistia, que el col per Dio, e per Jesu Christ simellantament, col las
cosas benitas e consacras, e proibis adorar lo sol Dio.

La 2. de ravir a Jesus Christ son merit.
La seconda obra de l'Ante-Christ es quel oste e tol de Christ lo merit de
Christ, con tota la sufficientia de la gratia, de la justitia, de la
regeneration, remission de li pecca, de la sanctification, de la confirmation,
e de l'esperitual nuriment, e lo deputa, e lo tribuis a la soa authorita, a las
soas obras, e a li Sanct, e a la lor entercession, e al fuoc de Purgator^, e
depart lo poble a aquesta cosas ja dictas, que el non quera aquellas de Christ,
ni per Christ: ma solament en las obras de las lors man's, e non per la Fe viva
en Dio ni en Jesu Christ, e al Sanct Sperit, ma per volunta e obras de
l'Ante-Christ, enaimi que el predica tota la salu constar en las soas obras.

La 3. la Foy morte.
La tersa obra de l'Ante-Christ es que el attribuis la reformation del Sanct
Sperit a la Fe morta de fora, e bapteia li Enfant en aquella Fe, e enseignant
esser a consegre per ley lo Baptism, e la regeneration, e presta e dona en ley
meseima li Orden, e li autre Sacrament, e fonda en la tota la Christianita, que
es contra lo Sanct Esperit.

La 4. l'introduction des traditions hum. and des Ceremonies Judaiques and
Payennes.
La quarta obra de l'Ante-Christ es laqual ensemp bastic, e edifiqua tota
Religion e sanctita del poble en la soa Messa; e ensemp ha teissut varias
ceremonias el Judaicas, e de li Gentil, e de li Christian. A laqual conducent
la congregation e lo poble a auvir ley, lo priva de l'espiritual e sacramental
manjament, e lo depart de la vera Religion, e de li Commandament de Dio, and se
osta de las obras de misericordia per li seo offertori, e per aital Messa
alogue lo poble en vana speranza.

La 5. la simonie.
La quinta obra de l'Ante-Christ es quel fai totas las soas obras que el sia
vist, e que el obra la soa non sazivol avaritia, enaimi quel aya totas cosas
vendablas, e non faza alcuna cosa senza symonia.

La 6. La connivence aux vices.
La sexta obra de l'Ante-Christ es, quel dona luoc a li pecca manifest, sensa
sententia Ecclesiastica, e non excommunica li non penitent.

La 7. l'usurpation de l'anthorite temporelle.
La septima obra de l'Ante-Christ es quel non regis, ni defend la soa unita per
lo S. Sperit, ma per potesta secular, e ensemp pren lei en adjutori de las
spirituals cosas.

La 8. La persecution des fideles.
La octava obra de l'Ante-Christ es, quel eyra, e per sec, and acaisonna, roba
e mortifica li membre de Christ. Aquestas cosas son quasi las plus principals
de las obras de luy, lasqual el fai contra la verita, lasquals per neun modo
non pon totas esser numbras ni scriptas. Ma baste al present d'aver deita
d'aquestas quasi comma plus generals, per lasquals cosas es cuberta aquesta
enequesta.

Que l'Ati-Christ couvre son iniquite. 1. par une confession de Foy Chretienne
en appearance.
Premierament e maximament, per la confession de fora de la Fe. De laqual cosa
di l'Apostol: car illi confessan lor aver conegu Dio per parolas, ma illi lo
denegan per fait.

2. Par l'antiquite and la multitude.
Secondariament, per la longueza de temp, e per manteza de li Savi, de li
Religios, de li Vergeno, and Vergenas, de las Vefvas, e de las honestas Fennas.
E lo poble non numbrivol, de loqual es dit en l'Apocalyps: E poesta so dona a
lei en tot tribu, e lenga, e gent, e tuit aquilli que habitan en la terra
adoraren lei.

3. Par la pretendue authorite Spirituele and Apostolic.
Terzament, per authorita spiritual de li Apostol, contra liqual di l'Apostol:
nos non poen alcuna cosa contra la verita, e poesta non es dona en destruiment.

4. Par les miracles.
Quartament, per moti miracli fait daqui entro aqui, de laqual cosa di
l'Apostol: l'Advenament del qual es second l'obra de Sathanas, en tota virtue e
enseignas, e maravillas messongieras, e en tot engan d'enequita.

5. Par saintite apparente.
Quintament, per sanctita de fora e orations, e dejunis, vigilias, e almonas:
contra aizo di l'Apostol: havent la semblenza de pieta, ma denegant la virtue de
lei.

6. Par l'abus quelques paroles de J. Christ.
Sextament, per alcunas parolas de Christ, e per li escrit de li Antic, e per
li Concili, losquals illi gardan entant quant non destruon la mala vita e
volupta de lor.

7. Par ses Sacramens source d'erreurs.
Septimament, per l'administration de li Sacrament, per liqual illi vomen la
universita de las errors.

8. Par belles Predications.
Octavament, per correptions, e predications verbales de li vici: car illi dion
e non fan.

9. Par la vie austere de plusieurs.
Nonament, de liqual alcuns fan enfeintament, e alcuns verayament e maximament
per vita vertuosa. Car li esleit de Dio ben vollent e ben fazent, detengu aqui
enaima en Babylonia, son enayma or per loqual lo felon Ante-Christ cuebre la
soa vanita, loqual non suffer far lo very coltivament al sol Dio, ni tenir la
speranza al sol Christ, ni entendre a la veraia Religion.

Aquestas cosas e motas otras son enaimi mantel e vestiment de l'Ante-Christ,
con lasquals el cuebre la soa mesongiera malicia, quel non sia reprova tant
coma Pagan, e eu lasqual el po proceder deshonestament, e a las meritrix.
Necessite de se separer de tell Antichrist.
Si lo Christian es entengu per commandament departir se de l'Ante-Christ, lo
es dit, e es prova del Veilli e de Novel Testament: car lo Seignor dis, Esaia
52. Depart vos, depart vos, issi d'aqui non voilla tocar la soza, isse del
mez de lei, vos liqual porta li veissel del Seignor, sia munda: car vos non
issire en la rumor, ni non vos appropriare a la fuga, etc. E Jeremia 50. Fuge
del mez de Babylonia, saille de la terra de li Caldei, e sia enaima cabri
devant lo grez. E vevos, yo amenarei grand congregation de gent de la terra
d'Aquilon en Babylonia, e seren appareilla en contra d'aquienant sere presa.
Nom. 16. Depart vos del mez de la congregation azo que yo destrua e perda
aquisti viazament. E dereco: Departes vos del tabernacle de li felon, e non
voilla tocar aquellas cosas que apartenon a lor, que vos non sia enveloppa en
li pecca de lor. Levitico. Yo soi lo vestre Seignor Dio loqual departic vos de
li autre poble. Donc vo departire dereco lo jument mund del non mund, e loissel
mund del immund, e non sozare la vostras armas en las bestias en li oisel, e en
totas aquellas cosas que son moguas en terra, e lasquals yo mosteri a vos
sozas. Item Exodi 34. Garda que unqua non conjongnas amicitia cum li habitador
d'aquella Cita, laqual sia en tu en ruina. E dedins: non far pact cum li home
d'aquella Region, que cum ille auren forniga cum li lor Dios, e auren adora las
simulacras de lor, alcun apelle tu que tu manges de las cosas sanctificas a
lor. Ni non penres moiller de las Fillas de lor a li teo Filli que en apres cum
ellas auren forniga zo es Idolatra, non fazan fornigar li teo Filli en li Dio
de lor. Levit. 15. Donc vos enseignare li Filli disent que illi squivon las non
mundicias, e non moran en las lor sozuras que illi auren soza lo mio
tabernacle. Ezech 2. Ma lo cor loqual vay per offendament e per las soas
offensions, yo pauseray la via d'aquisti a lor cap dis lo Seignor. Deuteronomy. 20.
Quand tu seres intra en la terra laqual lo teo Seignor Dio donare a tu, garda
que tu non volhes resimeillar las abominations d'a quellas gens: Car lo Seignor
ha totas aquestas cosas en abomination. E per li pecca d'aquesta maniera el
sfacare lor al teo intrament. Tu seres perseit e senza macula cum lo teo Dio.
Aquestas gens de lasquals tu possessires las terras auvon li Arguriador e li
devin, ma tu sies ordena autrament del teo Dio. Ma del Novel Testament es
manifest. Joan. 12. Que lo Seignor venc e so passiona per zo quel ajostes en un
li Filli de Dio. Car es per aquesta verita de unita e depart depart de li autre
ohel dis en Matthew 10. Car yo venc departir l'homme encontra lo sio Pair, la
Filla encontra la soa Maire, e la Nora conla soa Socra, e li domestic de
l'homme son ennemic de luy. E command esser departi, dizent: Si alcun non
laissare lo sio Pair e la Maire etc. Item: Garda vos de li falls Prophetas
liqual venon a vos en vestimentade feas etc.Item: Garda vos del levam de li
Pharisio. Item: Garda vos que alcun non vos engane: car moti venren al mio Nom
enganaren moti. Et adonca si alcun dire a vos. Venes Christ es aizi, o aylai,
non o voilla creire, non voilla anar en apres lor. E en l'Apocalyps: admonesta
per propia vouz e commanda lo fio poble issir de Babylonia, dizent: E auvi vous
del Cel, disent a mi. O lo mio poble, issi de lei, e nonsia parzonnier de li
pecca de lei e non receba de las plagas de lei. Car li pecca de lei pervengro
entro al Cel, e lo Segnor se record de las enequitas de lei. Co meseime di
l'Apostol: Non voilla amenar jouc cum li non fidel; car qual participation es
de la justitia cum l'iniquit^, o qual compagnia de la luz cum las tenebras, ma
qual convention de Christ al Diavol, o qual part de li fidel cum li non fidel,
o qual consentiment del Temple de Dio cum las Idolas? per laqual cosa isse del
mez de l'or, e sia departidis lo Seignor, e non tocare lo non mund, e yo
recelarey vos e serey a vos en Pair, e vos sere a mien fillis e en Fillas di
lo Seignor tot Poderos. Item Ephesians. 5. Non voilla esser fait parzonnier de lor,
car vos eras a la via de tenebras: ma ara se luz al Seignor. Item 1 Corinthians 10.
Yo non voil vos esser fait compagnons del Demoni. Vos non poe esser fait
parzonnier de la taule del Seignor, e de la taule de li Demoni. Item 2 Thessalonians.
3. O Fraires nos anuncien a vos al nom de nostre Seignor Jesus Christ, que vos
guard de tot fraire anant deshonestament, e non second las costumas lasquals
vos receopes de nos. Car vos meseimes sabe en qual maniera conventa resimeillar
nos. E dedins: si alcun non obedire a la nostra parola nota aquest per
Epistola, e non sia ensemp mescla cum luy que el sia confondu. Item Ephesians. 5. Non
voilla vos accompagnar a las obras non fructuosas de tenebras. Item 2 Timothy 3.
Ma sapia aizo. Car perillos temps istaren en li derrier an. E dedins: havent la
semblanca de pieta, ma denegant la virtue de ley, squiva aquisti. De las cosas
notas desobre se demonstra manifestament la malitia de l'Ante-Christ, e la soa
perverseta, etc. Car lo es commanda del Seignor de departir se de luy meseime
dedins e defora. E. conjoingner se a Jerusalem Sancta Cita. Donc nos
conoissent aquestas cosas, lo Seignor revelant per li seo serf, e eresent
aquesta revelation josta las Sanctas Scripturas, e nos ensemp admonesta de li
Commandament del Seignor, nos fazen departiment exterior e interior Les Vaudois
rotestent le leur separation l'avec l'anti Christ.
de luy, loqual nos cresen Ante-Christ, e aven uni compagnia, e unita de bona
volunta, e de dreita entention, de pur e simple perpausament deplaser al
Seignor, e asser salva: lo Seignor ajudant, e la verita de Christ, e de la soa
Sposa, enaima pechinita de l'intellect po sostenir.

Causes pour lesquelles les Vaudois se sont separes de l'eglise Roman.
Donc nos ordennen notar quals sian las causas del nostre departiment, e encara
de la nostra congregation, afin que si lo Seignor aure dona aver aquesta
meseima verita: port ensemp cum nos l'amor en let meseima. E si peraventura
non fossa ben enlumena, recepia ajutori per aquest menestier, lo Seignor
arrosant. E si lo es dona plus a alcun, e plus autament, nos desiren esser
enseigna plus humilment, e saber meilli de luy, e esser corregi en li nostre
deffect. Donc aquestas cosas que ensegon son causa del nostre departiment.

Sia manifest a tuit e a sengles, la causa del nostre departiment 1. Pour
maintenir la verite essentielle.
esser ista, aital per la verita essential de la Fe, e per la interior
conoissenza d'un very Dio, e unita de essentia, en tres personas, laqual non
dona carn ni sang. Qui consiste en la vraye connoissance and service deu a Dieu
seul.
E lo cultivament convenivol al sol Dio, l'amor de luy meseime sobre totas
cosas, la sanctification e l'honoration de luy sobre totas cosas e sobre tuit
li nom: Speranza viva per Christ en Dio, le regeneration e renovation interior
per Fe, per Esperanza, e per Charita: lo merit de Jesu Christ cum tota
sufficientia de gratia e justitia: la participation o la communion de tuit li
esleit: la remission de li pecca: la sancta conversation, e lo fidel compliment
de tuit li commandament en la Fe de Christ: la vera penitentia, e la final
perseveranza, e vita eterna. Et les verites ministerieles, and en quoy else
consistent.
Las veritas Ministerials son aquestas: la congregation exterior de li
Menistres, cum lo poble suject, en luoc, e en temp, en la verita, per las
menisterials, en la verita toca desobre, amenant, establant, e conservant, per
fidella e sovendiera compagnia; li bon Menistre, per sen de la Fe e de vita,
essent en costuma, e obedientia, e perfacent esveillament la pratiqua e uzanca
del Seignor sobre lo grecs.

Devoir des bons Pasteurs.
Las cosas lasquals li Menistre son entengu servir al poble son aquestas. La
Parola Evangelica, e la Parola de reconciliation, o la ley de gratia al sen o
entention de Christ. Car el deo notificar la Parola Evangelica: lo Sacrament
ajoinct a la parola certi, fica le seo sen e entendament, e conferma
l'esperanca en Christ, e en lo fidel, la communion ministerial a totas cosas
per la verita essential. E si alcunas autras cosas sian ministerials, totas se
pon ja conclurre en aquest dit. Ma d'aquestas singulas veritas, alcunas son
necessarias, essentialment a la salu humana, alcunas conditionalment se
contenon en XII Articles, en l'ajostament de plusiours parolas de li Apostol.
Car l'Ante-Christ es per lo passa ja regnant en la Gleisa per la permission
Divina.

Sommaire des erreurs and impuretes de l'Anti-Christ. 1. Idolatries and
superstitions de plusieurs sorts.
Las errors e las non munditias entreditas per lo Seignor de l'Ante-Christ son
aquestas, varia e non nombrivol idolatria es contra lo Commandament. de Dio e
de Christ, dona a la creatura, e non al Creator, vesibla e non vesibla,
corporal o spiritual, entendivol e sensibla, natural o fabrica, per qual se sia
art sot qualque qual nom de Christ, o de li Sanct, o de las Sanctas, e de las
Reliquias, e de las authoritas, a lasquals creaturas es servi per Fe, per
speranza, per effect, per orations, per peregrinations, per alimosnas, per
offertas, per sacrificas de grand despensas. Laqual creatura illi colon,
adoran, honran, per plusors manieras. Per canzons, proemis, per solemnizations,
e celebrations de Messas, de Vesperas, de completas a lor meseime, per horas,
per vigilias, per festivitas, per aquistament de gratia ista al sol Dio
essentialment, e en Jesu Christ meritoriament, e es aquista per la sola Fe, per
lo Sanct Sperit.

Premiere cause de tells superstitions.
Car lo non es alcuna autra causa de Idolatria sinon falsa opinion de gratia,
de verita, de authorita, d'envocation, d'entrepellation, laqual el meseime
Ante-Christ departic de Dio e attribuis en li menestier, e en las obras de las
soas man's, e li Sanct, e al Purgatori. E aquesta enequita de l'Anti-Christ es
dreitament contra lo premier article de la Fe, e contra lo premier Commandment
de la Lei.

Semeillament lo desordena amor del mond de l'Ante-Christ, es del qual germenan
tuit li mal e li pecca en la Gleisa, de li guiador, de li regidor, de li
officier; liqual pecca istan senca correction, illi son contra la verita de la
Fe, e contra la conoissenca de Dio lo Pair. Testimoniant Joan, loqual dis:
Aquel que pecca non conois ni non ve Dio. Car si alcun ama lo mond, la Charita
del Pair non es en luy.

La 2. iniquite de l'Anti-Christ, la confiance es creatures.
La seconda enequita de l'Ante-Christ es l'esperanca de perdon, e de gratia, e
de justitia, e de verita, e de vita eterna, non reposta en Christ, ni en Dio
per Christ, ma en li home vio, e mort: e en authoritas, e en menestier
Ecclesiastic, en benedictions, en sacrifications, en orations, e eniami de las
autras sobre nombras, ni per vera Fe, laqual obra penetentia per charita, e per
adjostament al ben. Istablament e principalment l'Ante-Christ enseigna non
sperar in aico, la regeneration, la confermation, la spiritual refection, o
communion, la remission de li pecca, la sanctification de vita aeterna: ma per
li Sacrament, e per la soa simoniaca, pravita per laqual lo poble es scarni, e
avent totas cosas vendablas, atrobe varias ordonnanzas anticas e novas sot
obtennement de pecunias, permettent si alcun aure fait aizo o autre; dit o
autre fait, vel qu'aital aquistare gratia e vita. E aquesta dobla eniquita es
appella propriament en las Scripturas, adulteri e fornication. Emperzo aitals
Menistres regent lo poble bestial, en aquellas errors son appella meretrix
Apocalyptica. E aquesta eniquita es contre lo second article, e dereco conira
lo second e lo ters Commandament de la Lei.

La 3. iniquite de l'Antichrist, l'etablissemant du merit des ^uvres.
La terza eniquita de l'Ante-Christ es quel atroba autrament que es dict,
falsas Religions, and Reglas, and Monestiers, en Gleisas per aquistament.
d'esperanza. Enaimi quasi alcun fovendeirant auvire devotament Messas, e aure
usa de li Sacrament, ^ sere confess (ma rarament contrit) e satisfazent per
dejunis e despoillament de borsa, ^ si sere ista, o sere membre de la Gleisa
Romana, o si el sere dona, o liora a la Regla, o a la cappa, illi afferman
contra tota verita dever. E aquesta enequita de l'Ante-Christ es dreitement
contra l'oyten article del Symbolo: Yo creo al Sanct Sperit.

4. La iniquite de l'Anti-Christ es beaux titres don't il se couvre.
La quarta eneqiuta de l'Ante-Christ es, car el meseime essent la quarta bestia
devant Scripta per Daniel, e meretrix Apocaliptica, se orna de nom de
authorita, de potesta, de degnetas, de menestiers, d'officis, de Scripturas, e
se aigala e compara a la vera e Sancta Maire Gleisa, en laqual menisterialment
es salu, e non autrament, en laqual es la verita de la vita, e de la Doctrina,
e de li Sacrament. Car si non qu'illi se cubres enaimi, e li seo Menistre
erronic, e manifest peccadors, conoissua, seria abandonna de tuit. Car li
Emperador, e li Rey, e li Princi estimant ley ^sser semblant de la vera Sancta
Maire Gleisa, ameron ley meseima, e la doteron contra lo commandament de Dio. E
aquesta eniquita, de li Menistre, de li soject, de li ordenna en error, e en
pecca, es dreitament contra lo noven. Yo creo la Sancta Gleisa. Aquestas son de
la prima part.

Secondament, car li participant a las solas cosas defora en las costumas,
ordenas a attrobas humanament, creon, o esperan De l'onction and tonsure
superstitieuse des pretres and Moines and de ses effets.
lor participar a la verita de li offici pastoral, e de la cura, cum si quilli
sian tondu enaimi aquel, e sian oinct a modo de las pares, e sian benaizi
tocant lo libre e lo calici com la man, confessan lor esser ordena dreitament
Sacerdots. Semeillatament (enaima es dit de sobre) lo poble soject, communicant
per parolas, per segnals, per exercitations de fora, e per li lor souvent
diverse fait, pensan ja lor participar a la verita traita d'aqui meseime. E aizo
es contra l'autra part del noven article: Yo creo la communion de li Sanct. Lo
es de issir de la pessima communion de li Monach, a la participation de laqual
amenant li home carnal, pois fan lor sperar en cosas de nient per l'avaricia,
sian quals se sian o luxurios, o avars, solament quilli donan a lor meseimes
dison lor participar a lor meseimes dison lor participar a la lor pavreta e
castita.

La 5. iniquite de l'Anti-Christ, la presomption de pardonner les peches.
La quinta eniquita de l'Ante-Christ es quel promet enfeintament perdonnanza e
remission de li pecca a li peccador non contrit verament, e non cessant
istablament de las malas obras: ma premierament remission de li pecca en la
confession auricular, e en l'Absolution humana, en las pelegrinations per
avaricia. E eaquesta niquita es contra l'onzen article de la Fe. Yo creo la
remission de li pecca. Car illi es en Dio authoritativament, e en Christ
ministerialment, per Fe, per Speranza, per Penitentia, per Carita, per
Obedientia de parola, en l'home participativament.

La 6. iniquite, de tromper avec prestiges.
La sexta eniquita es eneoquilli servon, a speranc a entro a la fin de la vita
per las devant ditas cubertas enequitas, per li manifest peccador, e
specialment per la extrema onction, e lo Purgatori soina, enaima que li home
rustic de la verita perseveron en error, e son absout de li pecca de liqual
unqua non se departiron per libra volunta que illi speressan la remission
avenador e vita aeterna. Et aquesta eniquita es dreitament contra l'onzen e lo
dozen article de la Fe.

Que c'est que l'Anti-Christ.
L'Anti-Christ est faussete de damnation eternelle, couverte de l'apparence de
la Verite, and de la Justice de Christ, and de son Epouse: oppose a la meme
voye de Verite, de Justice, de Foy, d'Esperance, de Charity, and a la vie
morale, and a la verite ministeriele de l'Eglise, administree par les faux
Apotres, and deffendue opiniastrement par l'un and l'autre bras: ou bien
l'Anti-Christ est tromperie, laquelle cache la verite du salut des chooses
substantielles and ministerielles: on bien c'est une frauduleuse contrariete a
Christ and a son Epouse, and a chaque membre fidele. Non une person
particuliere.
Et par ainsi ce n'est point aucune speciale person ordonnee en aucun degree,
ou office, ou ministere, cecy est considere universellement. Mais c'est la
faussete meme opposee a la verite, qui se couvre and s'orne de beauty, and de
piete, horse de l'Eglise de Christ, comme des Noms, des Offices, des Ecritures,
and des Sacremens, and de pleusieurs autres chooses: l'Iniquite laquelle est de
cette maniere, avec tous ses Ministres grans and petis, avec tous ceux qui les
insuivent de mauvais coeur, and aveugle, tell congregation prise ensemble est
appellee Antichrist, Ses Noms.
ou Babylone, ou quatrieme Beat, ou Paillarde, ou homme de peche, Fills de
perdition.

Et de ses Ministres.
Ses Ministres sont appellez faux Prophets, Maitres mensongers, Ministres de
tenebres, Esprit d'erreur, paillarde Apocalyptique, Mere de fornication, nuees
sans eau, arbres automnals morts and arrachez par deux fois, ondes de la
cruelle mer, etoiles errantes, Balaamites, and Egyptiens.

Pourquoy dit Antichrist. Sa Livre.
Il est dit Antichrist, pour ce que couvert and orne de la Livre de Christ,
and de son Eglise, and de ses fideles menbres, il contrary au salut fait par
Christ, and administre vrayement en l'Eglise de Christ, auquel participent les
fideles par Foy, par Esperance, and par charity: en tell maniere contrarie-il
par la sapience du monde, par fause Religion, and par bonte simulee, par
puissance spirituelle, par tyranny seculiere, par richesses, honneurs, and
dignites, par delicatesses and les delices du monde.

Quant manifest.
Et pourtant qu'il soit manifest a un chacun que l'Anti-Christ ne peut venir
en fasson quelconque sinon que toutes ces chooses cy-dessus mentionees soient
conjointes ensemble, pour fair une parfaite hypocrisy and faussete, savoir
est avec les Sages du monde, les Religieux, Pharisiens, Ministres, Docteurs, la
puissance seculiere avec le peuple du Monde, joint ensemble. Ainsi tous
ensemble ont fait l'homme de peche and d'erreur tout entier. Car encore que
l'Antichrist fust deja conceu au tems des Apotres, parce qu'il estoit encor
comme en enfance, il luy defalloit des members interieurs and exterieurs. Et
pourtant on le connoissoit, and le distruisoit and excommunioit plus aisement
comme estant plus rustique and grossier, il estoit devenu muet. Car il n'avoit
la sapience, ni la raison pour l'excuser, pour definir and prononcer Sentence.
Il n'avoit point encor des Ministres sans verite, and les traditions humaines
defailloient, and au dehors il n'avoit point de Religieux. Et pourtant il
estoit tomb en l'erreur and au peche, mais il n'avoit point de quoy pouvoir
couvrir sa vilenie ou vergonge des erreurs ou du peche, n'ayant point de
richesses ni de dotations, il ne put lors attirer a soy aucun Ministre pour son
service, and ne put multiplier, conserver, ni deffendre les siens: car il
estoit destitue de puissance ou pouvoir seculier, and ne put forcer ni
contraindre aueun de la verite a la faussete. Et d'autant que plusieurs chooses
luy manquoient, il ne pouvoit souiller ni scandaliser aucun parses tromperies,
and par ainsi estant encor tender and foible, il ne put obtenir place en
l'Eglise. Mais croissant en ses members, savoir est en ses Ministres aveugles,
and hypocrites, and en suiers du monde, il est cru jusqu'a l'homme parfait, en
plenitude d'age, assavoir lors que les amateurs du monde, spirituels and
seculiers, aveugles en la Foy, se sont multipliez en l'Eglise avec toute
puissance. Eux estans mauvais, voulans estre priez, and honorez aux chooses
spirituellez, ils ont couvert leur propre majeste, malice, and pechez, se
servans des Sages du Monde, a cet effet, and des Pharisiens, comme il a este
dit cy-dessus. Or c'est une grande mechancete decouvrir and ornir l'iniquite
digne d'excommunication, and de se vouloir etablir par le moyen de ce qui ne
peut estre ottroye a l'homme, ains convient au seul Dieu, and a Jesus Christ
entant que Mediateur. Qu'il ravit ^ Christ l'honneur qui luy appartient.
Oster ces chooses a Dieu frauduleusement and par rapine, and les transporter
sur soy and ces oeuvres, semble etre une grande felony, comme lors qu'on
s'attribue de pouvoir regenerer, Pardonnant les peches.
de pardonner les peches, de distribuer les graces du S. Esprit, de fair
Christ, and autres chooses semblables. Et en toutes ces chooses, se couvrir du
manteau de l'authorite and de la parole, en trompant par ce moyen le peuple
grossier qui suit le monde, en ces chooses qui sont du monde, se separant de
Dieu, and de la vraye Foy, and de la reformation du S. Esprit, s eloignant de
la vraye repentance, def l'operation vertueuse, de la perseverance au bien, se
retirant de la charity, de la patience, de la pauvrete, de l'humilite, and ce
qui est pire que tout, se departir de la vraye esperance pour la poser en tout
mal, and en la vain esperance du monde, servant a toutes les ceremonies qui
font pour tells chooses, Faisant adorer les images, les Saints, les relics,
etc.
faisans idolatrer le peuple frauduleusement aux Idols de tout le monde sous
le nom des Saints, and aux relics and service d'iceux, en sort que le peuple
errant mechamment de la voye de verite pense servir a Dieu and fair bien,
emeut ce peuple a haine and courroux contre ceux qui aiment la verite, fait
plusieurs meurtres and comme dit veritablement l'Apotre. C'est cet homme de
peche accompli qui s'eleve sur tout ce qui est dit Dieu, ou qui est servi, and
qui contrary a toute verite, lequel est affis au temple de Dieu, c'est a dire
en l'Eglise, se montrant comme s'il estoit Dieu, lequel est venu en toute
seduction pour ceux qui perissent; and puis qu'il est vrayement venu, il ne le
faut plus attendre, car il est deja vieil par la permission de Dieu, voire il
diminue deja, and sa puissance and authorite est deja amoindrie: car le
Seigneur tue deja ce mechant par l'Esprit de sa bouche par plusieurs persons
de bonne volonte, envoyant une puissance contraire a la sienne, and de ceux qui
l'aiment, and dissipant son lieu and ses possessions, divisant cette Cite de
Babylone en laquelle toute sort de malice est en vigueur.

Quelles sont les oeuvres de l'Anti-Christ?

La premiere oeuvre de l'Anti-Christ, bannir la verite du monde.
La premiere oeuvre de l'Anti-Christ est d'oter la verite, and la changer en
faussete and en erreur and en heresy. La second oeuvre de l'Anti-Christ est
de couvrir la faussete de la verite, and de confirmer and prouver le mensonge
par la Foy and par les vertus, and d'entremeler la faussete parmi les chooses
spirituelles au peuple, qui luy est assujeti: soit par le moyen de ses
Ministres, ou par le Ministere, ou soit en tout ce qui est en l'Eglise. Or ces
deux manieres de proceder contiennent une parfaite and accomplie malice, tell
que n'a pu fair aucun Tyran, ni Puissant, depuis le commencement du monde
jusqu'au tems de l'Anti-Christ. Et n'a encor eu aucun ennemy avaunt cetuy-cy,
qui put ainsi pervertir la voye de verite en faussete and la faussete en
verite, ni pareillement qui eust perverti ceux qui font profession de l'une ou
de l'autre; assavoir de la verite and de la faussete. En sort que la Saint
Mere Eglise avec ses vrais Enfans est toute foulee aux pies, specialement en la
verite, and cause du vray service en la verite, and du Ministere, and de son
vray usage, and des Enfans qui y participent: elle pleure amerement es terms,
and par les plaintes de Jeremie, disant: comment es-tu seule cite du peuple
Payen, and incirconcis? elle est faite vefve, c'est a dire, destituee de la
verite de son Epoux. La Dame des nations a cause de la subjection des erreurs
and du peche. Princess des Provinces par le partage du monde, and des chooses
qui sont au monde. Pleure and regard plus avaunt, and tu trouveras que
maintenant toutes ces chooses sont accomplies en ce tems: Car la Saint Eglise
est reputee Synagogue. Et la Synagogue des malins est reconnue pour Mere de
ceux qui croyent bien en la Loy. La faussete est prechee pour verite,
l'injustice est tenue pour la justice, I'erreur pour la Foy, le peche pour la
virtue, le mensonge pour la verite.

D. Quelles oeuvres procedent de ces premieres?

Respon. Celles-cy: La premiere oeuvre est qu'il convertit le service de
Latrie, qui n'est proprement deu qu'a un seul Dieu, a luy, and a ses faits, a
la pauvre creature raisonnable ou irraisonnable, sensible ou insensible.
Raisonnable comme a l'homme, aux Saints ou aux Saints trepassez de ce monde,
and aux images, charognes, ou relics. Ses faits sont les Sacremens,
specialement le Sacrement de l'Eucharistie qu'il adore comme Dieu, and comme
Jesus Christ, sert aux chooses benites and consacrees, and defend d'adorer le
seul Dieu.

La 2. de ravir a Jesus Christ son merit.
La II. oeuvre de l'Anti-Christ est qu'il ote and ravit le merit de Christ a
Christ, avec toute la suffisance de la grace, de la justice, de la
regeneration, remission des pechez, de la sanctification, de la confirmation,
and de la nourriture spirituelle, and l'impute and attribue a son authorite, a
la form des paroles, a ses oeuvres, and aux Saints, and a leur intercession
and au feu de Purgatoire, and separe le peuple de Christ, and le conduit aux
chooses sus-dites, afin qu'il ne cherche point celles de Christ ni par Christ:
mais seulement es oeuvres de leurs mains, and non par la Foy vive en Dieu, ni
en Jesus Christ, ni au S. Esprit, ains par la volonte and oeuvre de
l'Ante-Christ, ainsi qu'il preche que tout le salut consiste en ses oeuvres.

La 3. la Foy morte.
La troisieme oeuvre de l'Anti-Christ consiste en ce qu'il attribue la
reformation du S. Esprit a la Foy morte exterieure, and baptize les Enfans en
cette Foy-la, enseignant que par elle on doit avoir le Bapteme and la
regeneration, and en elle il prete and done les Ordres and les autres
Sacremens, and fond en elle tout le Christianisme, ce qui est contre le S.
Esprit.

La 4. l'introduction des traditions hum. and des Ceremonies Judaiques and
Payennes.
La quatrieme oeuvre de l'Anti-Christ est en ce qu'il a constitue and mis toute
la Religion and saintete [du peuple en la Mess, and a confu ensemble plusieurs
ceremonies don't les unes y sont Judaiques, les autres des Gentiles, and des
Chretiens. A quoy amusant la congregation and le peuple, le prive de la
manducation spirituelle and sacramentale, and le separe de la vraye Religion,
and des Commandemens de Dieu, and le retire des oeuvres de misericorde par son
offertoire, and par une tell Mess il a loge le peuple en vain esperance.

La 5. la simonie.
La cinquieme oeuvre de l'Anti-Christ est en ce qu'il fait toutes ses oeuvres a
ce qu'il soit veu, e ce qu'il rejouisse son insatiable avarice, a ce qu'il
puisse mettre en vente toutes chooses, and ne face rien sans simonie.

La 6. La connivence aux vices.
La sixieme oeuvre de l'Anti-Christ est, qu'il done lieu aux pechez
manifestes, sans aucune Sentence Ecclesiastique, and n'excommunie point les
impenitens.

La 7. l'usurpation de l'anthorite temporelle.
La setieme oeuvre de l'Anti-Christ est en ce qu'il ne regit, ni defend son
unite par le Saint Esprit, mais par la puissance seculiere, and joint a son
aid les chooses spirituelles.

La 8. La persecution des fideles.
La huitieme oeuvre de l'Anti-Christ est, qu'il hait and persecute, and
poursuit, pille and met a mort les members de Christ. Ces chooses sont quasi les
principales des oeuvres qu'il fait contre la verite, lequelles ne peuvent estre
nombrees en sort que ce soit, ni ecrites. Mais il suffit pour le present
d'avoir marque ce qui est de plus general, and par lequelles est couverte cette
iniquite.

Que l'Ati-Christ couvre son iniquite. 1. par une confession de Foy Chretienne
en appearance.
Premierement and principalement par la confession exterieure de la Foy. De
laquelle chose l'Apotre dit: qu'ils confessent qu'ils ont connu Dieu, par
paroles, mais ils le renient par oeuvres.

2. Par l'antiquite and la multitude.
Secondement il couvre son iniquite par la longueur du tems, and par la
manutention de quelques Sages and Religieux, de certains Vierges, and Filles
Vierges, and par certaines Vefves and honnetes Femmes. Et est maintenu par un
peuple innombrable, don't il est dit en l'Apocalypse. Et puissance luy fut
donnee sur toute tribut, langue, and nation, and tous ceux qui habitent en la
terre l'adoreront.

3. Par la pretendue authorite Spirituele and Apostolic.
En troisieme lieu, il couvre son iniquite par authorite spirituelle des
Apotres, contre lequels l'Apotre dit: nous ne pouvous rien contre la verite,
and puissance ne nous est point donnee en destruction.

4. Par les miracles.
En quatrieme lieu par plusieurs miracles par-cy par-la, de laquelle chose
l'Apotre dit: l'Advenement duquel est selon l'oeuvre de Satan, en toute virtue,
and signs, and merveilles de mensonge, and en toute tromperie d'iniquite.

5. Par saintite apparente.
En cinquieme lieu, par saintete exterieure, par prieres, par junes, vigiles,
and aumones: contre lequelles chooses l'Apotre dit: Ayant l'apparance de piete,
mais en ayant renie la virtue.

6. Par l'abus quelques paroles de J. Christ.
En sixieme lieu, il couvre son iniquite par certaines paroles de Christ, and
par les ecrits des Anciens, and par les Conciles, lequels ils observent, entant
qu'ils ne detruisent point leur mauvaise vie and leur volupte.

7. Par ses Sacramens source d'erreurs.
En setieme lieu, par l'administration des Sacremens, par lequels ils vomissent
le general de leurs erreurs.

8. Par belles Predications.
En huitieme lieu, par corrections and par predications en paroles contre les
vices: car ils disent and ne font pas.

9. Par la vie austere de plusieurs.
En neufieme lieu, par la vie vertueuse de certains qui vivent avec feintise,
autres veritablement. Car les eleus de Dieu qui veulent and font le bien, sont
la detenus comme en Babylone, and sont comme l'or duquel le mechant Antichrist
couvre sa vanite, ne souffrant point qu'ils servent au seul Dieu, ni qu'ils
ayent leur esperance au seul Christ, ni qu'ils entendent a la vraye Religion.

Ces chooses and plusieurs autres, sont comme un manteau and les vetemens de
l'Anti-Christ, avec lequel il couvre sa mensongere malice a ce qu'il ne soit
rejette comme Payen, and sous lequel il proceed deshonnestement, and comme la
putain.

Necessite de se separer de tell Antichrist.
Or est il montre tant par le Vieil, que par le Nouveau Testament, que le
Chretien est tenu par le commandment qui luy en est fait, de se separer de
l'Anti-Christ: car le Seigneur dit au 52. d'Esaie: Retirez vous, Retirez vous,
sortez de-la, ne touchez point a chose souillee, sortez du milieu d'elle,
Nettoyez vous, vous qui portez les vaisseaux du Seigneur: car vous ne sortirez
point en haste, and ne marcherez point en fuyant, etc. Et Jeremie au 50. Fuyez
horse de Babylone, and sortez horse du pais des Caldeens, and soyez comme les
houcs qui vont devant le troupeau. Car voi-cy je m'en vay susciter and fair
venir contre Babylone, une assemblee de grandes nations du pais d'Aquilon, qui
se rangeront en bataille contre elle, don't elle sera prise. Au 16. des Nombres:
Separez vous du milieu de cette assemblee and je le consumeray en un moment,
and derechef: Retirez vous du tabernacle des mechans, and ne touchez a aucune
chose qui leur appartienne, que vous qui leur appartienne, que vous ne soyes
enveloppes en leur peche. Levit. Je suis le Seigneur votre Dieu, qui vous ay
separes des autres peuples. Et pourtant vous separerez la beat monde de
l'immonde, and ne souillerez point vos ames aux betes, ni aux oiseaux, ni en
toutes chooses qui se meuvent sur la terre, and montre qu'elles son souillees.
Item en l'Exod. 34. Gardez que vous ne fassies amity avec les habitans de
cette Cite-la, qui te soit en ruin. Et plus bas: Ne fait point d'accord avec
les hommes de cette Religion-la, de peur que quand ils auront paillar de apres
leurs Dieux, and auront adore leurs simulacres, ils ne t'appellent, ils ne te
convient a manger des chooses qu'ils leur aurent dediees. Ni vous ne prendrez
point Femme d'entre leurs Filles, de peur qu'apres qu'elles auront paillarde,
c'est a dire, Idolatre, else ne fassent aussi paillarder tes Enfans apres
leurs Dieux. Levit. 15. Et pourtant vous enseignerez vos Enfans, and leurs
direz qu'ils se gardent de leurs souillures, and qu'ils ne meurent en else,
quand ils auront souille mon Tabernacle. Ezech. 2. Mais le coeur qui va apres
leurs infametes and leurs iniquites, je rendray leur train sur leur tete, dit
le Seignour. Deuteronomy. 20. Quand tu seras enter en la terre que le Seigneur ton
Dieu te donnera, guard que tu ne faces selon les abominations de ces gens-la:
Car le Seigneur a en abomination toutes ces choses-la. Et a cause de tells
peches il les effacera lors que tu entreras en leur pais. Tu seras net and sans
tache avec ton Dieu. Ces gens-la dequels tu possederas les terres entendant les
Augures and Devins, mais ton Dieu en a ordonne autrement pour ton regard. Or
est-il maniseste au Noveau Testament Joh. 12. Que le Seigneur est venu, and a
souffert mort and passion, afin q'uil unit en un les Enfans de Dieu. Et c'est
pour cette verite d'unite, and de separation des autres, qu'il dit en St.
Matthew. 10. Car je suis venu diviser l'homme de son Pere, and bander la Fille a
l'encontre de sa Mere, and la belle Fille a l'encontre de sa belle Mere, and
les Domestiques de l'homme sont ses propres ennemis. Et il a command certe
division, disant: s'il y a quelqu'un qui ne laisse son Pere and sa Mere etc.
Item: Gardez vous des faux Prophets, qui viennent a vous en vetemens de
brebis. Item: Gardez vous du levain des Pharisiens. Item: Gardez vous qu'aucun
ne vous seduise: car plusieurs viendront en mon Nom, and en seduiront
plusieurs. Et lors si quelqu'un vous dit: Voicy Christ est icy ou la, ne le
croyez point and n'allez point apres eux. Et en l'Apocalypse il admonete par sa
propre voix and command aux siens de sortir de Babylone, disant: Et j'ouy une
voix, du Ciel, disant: O mon peuple sortez d'icelle, and ne participez point a
ses pechez, que vous ne receviez de ses plays. Car ses peches sont parvenus
jusques au Ciel, and le Seigneur se souvient de ses iniquitez. L'Apotre dit le
meme: Ne vous accouplez point sous un meme joug avec les infideles; car quelle
participation a la Justice avec l'iniquite, ou quelle compagnie de la lumiere
avec les tenebres, and quelle communion de Christ avec le Diable, ou quelle
part a le fidele avec l'infidele, ou quel consentement du Temple de Dieu avec
ler Idols? Et poutant, sortez du milieu d'elle, and separez vous, dit le
Seigneur, and ne touchez aucune chose souillee, and je vous retireray, and vous
seray au lieu de Pere, and vous me serez pour Fills and Filles, dit le Seigneur
tout-Puissant. Item au 5. des Ephesiens: Ne participes point avec eux, car vous
esties en la voye de tenebres, mais maintenant vous estes lumiere au Seigneur.
Item en la 1. aux Corinth. 10. Je ne veux point que vous soyes faits compagnons
des Diables. Vous ne pouvez participer a la table du Seigneur, and a la table
des Diables Item en la 2. aux These. 3. O Freres! nous vous annoncons au nom de
notre Seigneur Jesus Christ, que vous vous gardies de tout Friar allant
deshonnestement, and non point selon les coutumes lequelles vous aves receu de
nous. Car vous memes savez en quelle maniere vous nous devez resembler. Et plus
bas: s'il y a quelqu'un qui n'obeisse a notre parole, notes-le par Epitre: and
ne vous entremleez point avec luy a ce qu'il soit confus. Item Ephesians. 5. ne
communiquez point aux oeuvres de tenebres qui sont infructueuses. Item 2 Timothy
3. Or saches cecy qu'es derniers tems il surviendra des tems facheux. Et plus
bas: Ayans l'apparence de piete: mais en ayant renie la force, detournetoy de
tells gens. Par les chooses notees cy-dessus, paroit manifestement la malice de
l'Antichrist, and sa perversite. Aussi est-il command par le Seigneur de se
separer de luy, and de se joindre a la Saint Cite de Jerusalem. Et pourtant
nous qui avons connoissance de ces chooses, le Seigneur nous les ayant revelees
par ses serviteurs, croyans a cette revelation suivant les Saints Ecritures,
estans admonetes par les Commandments du Seigneur, Les Vaudois rotestent le
leur separation l'avec l'anti Christ.
nous nous departons interieurement, and exterieurement de luy, parce que nous
croyons qu'il est l'Antichrist, and avons fait compagnie and unite de franche
volonte, and en sincere intention, nous estans proposes purement and simplement
de plaire au Seigneur, and etre sauves; moyennant l'aide du Seigneur, nous
tenans fermes a la verite de Christ, and de son Espouse, quelque petite qu'elle
soit, and ce autant comme notre intelligence peut porter.

Causes pour lesquelles les Vaudois se sont separes de l'eglise Roman.
Et pourtant nous avons delibere de montrer quelles sont les causes de notre
separation, and qu'elle est notre congregation, afin que si le Seigneur done
la connoissance de cette meme verite: ceux qui l'auront receue l'aiment avec
nous. Et si d'adventure ils ne sont suffisamment illumines, ils recoivent
secours per ce Ministere, and soient arroses par le Seigneur. Que s'il en est
plus abondamment done a quelqu'un, and plus hautement, nous desirons d'estre
enseignes d'autant plus humblement, and apprendre mieux de luy, pour estre
corriges de nos defaus. Ce sont donc les chooses qui suivent qui sont causes de
notre separation.

Quil soit manifest a un chacun en general, and en particulier 1. Pour
maintenir la verite essentielle.
que la cause de notre Separation est tell, assavoir, pour la verite
essentielle de la Foy, and pour l'interieure connoissance d'un vray Dieu, and
unite d'essence en trois persons, laquelle connoissance la chair ni le sang
ne done point. Qui consiste en la vraye connoissance and service deu a Dieu
seul.
Et pour le service convenable deu a un seul Dieu, par dessus toutes chooses;
pour la sanctification and pour l'honneur qui lui est deu sur toutes chooses,
and par dessus tout nom: pour l'Esperance vive par Christ en Dieu, pour la
regeneration and renouvellement interieur par Foy, par Esperance, and par
Charity: pour le merit de Jesus Christ avec toute suffisance de grace and
justice: pour la participation, ou communion avec tous les eleus pour la
remission des peches: pour la saint conversation, and pour le fidele
accomplissement de tous. Les Commandemens en la Foy de christ: pour la vraye
repentance pour la perseverance jusqu'a la fin, and pour la vie eternelle. Et
les verites ministerieles, and en quoy else consistent.
Les verites ministeriales, sont celle-cy, la congregation exterieure des
Ministres, avec le peuple sujet, en lieu, and en tems, en la verite par le
Ministere, en la verite mentionee, cy-dessus, amenant, etablissant and
conversant les dits bons Ministres fidele and frequente compagnie, tendant a la
Foy, and a l'integrite de vie, en suivant les coutumes, and l'obeissance, and
s'addonnant courageusement a la pratique, and aux faits pratiquez par le
Seigneur sur le troupeau.

Devoir des bons Pasteurs.
Les chooses que les Ministres sont obliges de fair pour le service du peuple
sont celles-cy. La Parole Evangelique: les Sacramens joints a la Parole,
lequels certifient quelle a este l'intention, and l'intelligence, confirment
l'esperance en Christ aux fideles la communion ministeriale a toutes chooses par
la verite effentielle. Et s'il y a quelques autres chooses ministeriales, else
peuvent estre toutes rapportees a ce que dessus: Mais de ces singulieres
verites, les unes sont necessaires essentiellement au salut des hommes, les
autres conditionnellement, else sont contenues aux XII articles de la Foy, and
en plusieurs propos des Apotres. Car l'Anti-Christ a deja regne par le pass en
l'Eglise, par la permission Divine.

Sommaire des erreurs and impuretes de l'Anti-Christ. 1. Idolatries and
superstitions de plusieurs sorts.
Les erreurs and impuretez de l'Anti-Christ defendues par le Seigneur, sont
celles-cy, assavoir, diverse and inombrable idolatry contre le Commandment de
Dieu and de Christ, service rendu a la creature, and non au Createur, visible
and invisible, corporelle ou spirituelle, ayant intelligent ou sensible,
naturelle ou fabriquee, par quelque ar^ and sous le nom de Christ, ou des
Saints, ou des Saints, and des Relics and des authorites, laquelle creature
est servie par Foy, par esperance, par actions, par oraisons, par pelerinages,
par aumones, par offrandes, par sacrifices de grande depense. Laquelle creature
ils servent, adorent, honorent en plusieurs manieres. Par chansons, harangues,
solennites, and celebrations de Messes, de Vesperes, de Complies aux memes
creatures, par heures, par vigiles, parfetes, par acquisition de grace,
laquelle est en un seul Dieu essentiellement and en Jesus Christ meritoirement,
and est acquise par la seule Foy, par le S. Esprit.

Premiere cause de tells superstitions.
Car il n'y a aucune autre cause de l'Idolatrie que la fausse opinion de grace,
de verite, d'authorite, d'invocation, d'intercession, laquelle cet Antichrist
a oste a Dieu pour l'attribuer a ces ceremonies, authorites, oeuvres de ses
mains, and aux Saints, and au Purgatoire. Et cette iniquite de l'Anti-Christ
est directament contre le premier article de la Foy, and contre le premier
Commandment de la Foy.

Semblablement l'amour defordonne du monde, laquelle est en l'Anti-Christ, est
celuy duquel germent tous les maux and les peches qui sont en l'Eglise, aux
conducteurs qui la regissent, and a ses officiers qui pechent sans aucune
correction, ils sont contre la verite de la Foy, and contre la connoissance de
Dieu le Pere. Temoin S. Jean qui dit: Celuy qui peche ne connoit ni ne voit
Dieu, car si aucun aim le monde, la charity du Pere n'est point en luy.

La 2. iniquite de l'Anti-Christ, la confiance es creatures.
La Second iniquite de l'Anti-Christ gist en l'Esperance qu'il done de
pardon, ne grace, de justice, de verite, and de vie eternelle, comme n'estant
point en Christ ni en Dieu par Christ, mais es hommes vivans ou ja decedes, en
authorites, en ceremonies Ecclesiastiques, en benedictions, en sacrifices, en
oraisons, and en autres chooses cy-dessus mentionees, non point par vraye Foy;
qui produit repentance par charity, fait que l'on se depart du mal, and que
l'on s'addonne au bien. Or l'Anti-Christ n'enseigne point d'esperer fermement
tells chooses, assavoir la regeneration, la confirmation spirituelle, ou
communion, la remission des peches, ni la sanctification eternelle: mais
d'esperer par les Sacremens, ou par sa mechante simonie, par laquelle le peuple
est trompe, tellement que vendant toutes chooses, il a invente plusieurs
ordonnances anciennes and nouvelles pour attraper de l'argent, permettant que
si quelqu'un fait cecy ou cela, il acquerra grace and vie. Et cette double
iniquite est appellee proprement es Ecritures, adultere, and paillardise. Et
pourtant tells Ministres qui conduisent le peuple brutal en ces erreurs-la, sont
appellez la paillarde Apocalyptique. Et cette iniquite est contre le second
article, and derechef contre le second and troisieme Commandment de la Loy.

La 3. iniquite de l'Antichrist, l'etablissemant du merit des ^uvres.
La troisieme iniquite de l'Anti-Christ gist en ce qu'il a invente, outre ce
qui a este dit, des fausses Religions, and reigles, and des Monasteres, donnant
esperance d'acquisition de grace a cause de la construction de certaines
Eglises. Comme aussi en cecy, assavoir, s'il oit souvent and devotement la
Mess, s'il a participe aux Sacremens, s'il s'est confess (mais rarement
contrit) and si on a satisfait par junes, and vuidement de bourse, ou si on a
este, et est membre de l'Eglise Roman, ou si on ne s'est point done, ou voue
a quelque reigle, ou cappe, ou froc, ils affirment contre toute verite qu'on y
est oblige. Et cette iniquite de l'Anti-christ est directement contre le
huitieme article du Symbol. Je croy au S. Esprit.

4. La iniquite de l'Anti-Christ es beaux titres don't il se couvre.
La quatrieme iniquite de l'Anti-Christ gist en ce que combien qu'il soit la
quatrieme beat cy-devant decrite par Daniel, and la paillarde Apocalyptique, il
s'orne neantmoins de l'authorite, puissance, dignite, du ministere, des
offices, and des Ecritures, and s'egale and compare a la vraye and Saint Mere
Eglise, en laquelle est le salut ministeriellement, and non autrement, en
laquelle est la verite de la vie, and de la doctrine, and des Sacremens. Car
s'il ne se couvroit ainsi, and ses mechans Ministres etans reconnus pour
pecheurs manifestes, il seroit bandonne d'un chacun. Car les Empereurs, and les
Rois, and Princes, estimans qu'il estoit semblable a la vraye and Saint Mere
Eglise, l'ont aim, and l'ont dote contre le Commandment de Dieu. Et cette
iniquite des Ministres, des sujets, de ceux qui sont ordonnez en erreur, and en
peche, est directement contre le neufieme article, Je croy la Saint Eglise.
Voila ce qui regard la premiere party.

Secondement, d'autant que ceux qui participent aux seules ceremonies
exterieures, ordonnees par inventions humaines, De l'onction and tonsure
superstitieuse des pretres and Moines and de ses effets.
croyent and esperent participer a la verite des offices Pastoraux, and des
Cures, pourveu seulement qu'ils soient tondues comme agneaux, and oincts comme
parois, and soient benits en touchant le livre and le calice avec la main, ils
publient qu'ils sont ordonnes Sacrificateurs comme il faut. Semblablement
(comme il a este dit cy-dessus) le peuple qui leur est assujeti, communicant
par paroles, par signs, par exercices exterieurs, and par leurs diverses
actions, estiment qu'ils participent a la verite tiree de la meme. Et cecy est
contre l'autre party du neufieme article, Je croy la communion des Saints. Or
faut il sortir de la tres-mechante communion des Moines, a laquelles sont
attirez les hommes charnels, les faisant esperer en chooses de neant par
avarice, voire encore qu'ils soient luxurieux, ou avares, seulement qu'on leur
done, and lors ils disent qu'on participe a leur pauvrete and a leur chastete.

La 5. iniquite de l'Anti-Christ, la presomption de pardonner les peches.
La cinqueme iniquite de l'Anti-christ gist en ce qu'il feint and promet pardon
and remission des pechez aux pecheurs, qui ne sont point vrayement contrits, ne
cessant de perseverer en leurs mauvaises oeuvres: and ce en premier lieu il
leur promet remission de leurs peches a cause de la confession auriculaire, and
de l'absolution human, en leurs pelerinages par avarice. Et cette iniquite
est contre l'onzieme article de la Foy: Je croy la remission des peches. Car
elle est en Dieu authoritativement, and en Christ ministerialement, par Foy,
par Esperance, par repentance, par Charity, par obeissance de parole, and en
l'homme participativement.

La 6. iniquite, de tromper avec prestiges.
La sixieme iniquite est en ce qu'ils servent and esperent jusqu'a la fin de
leur vie aux sus-mentionnees iniquites couvertes, and specialement jusqu'a
l'extreme onction, and le Purgatoire resve, en sort que les ignorans and
grossiers perseverent en leur erreur, leur donnant a entendre qu'ils sont
absous de leurs peches, quoy qu'ils ne les quittent jamais de franche volonte
pour esperer la remission des peches, and la vie eternelle. Et cette iniquite
est directement contre l'onzieme and le douzieme article de la Foy.

CHAP. VI. How long this Eclipse the Church, or at least great part of it, was
to suffer, was to continue?
IN answer to this Enquiry, it must be considered, that the Rise and Growth of
Antichrist must be taken in, to make up the full Period; For it is not
concerning his Continuance, or Duration after he came to his Maturity, but
concerning the whole time, or Age of Antichrist, that we here put the Question:

Now there is Nothing, wherein the Spirit seems to speak more expressly, than it
does in this Matter; I mean in those places, where the Reign of Antichrist is
foretold (And 'twas by his Reign this Eclipse was to happen to the Church: Thus
Dan. 7. 8. We are told, that the little Horn that was to come up among the ten,
(by which it is on every hand agreed Antichrist is to be understood) and before
whom there were three of the first Horns plucked up by the roots, i. e.: as it is
explained, v. 24, 25. that other King (for by Horns He tells us so many Kings
were to be understood) that should rise after the Ten, and be diverse from the
first, and subdue three Kings, and speak great words against the most High, and
wear out the Saints of the most High, and think to change times, and laws,)
should have these given into his-hand, until a Time and Times and the dividing
of a Time: That same Period, which Revel. 12. 14. and almost in the very same
terms, is assigned to the Woman, to whom were given two wings of a great Eagle,
that she might flee into the Wilderness, there to be nourisht for a Time, and
Times, and Half, or the dividing of a Time; and that that we might not mistake,
what we were to understand both by One, and the Other, the same Flight of the
Woman into the Wilderness is said to be for a thousand two hundred and
threescore days; which, taking a Time for a Year, which is usually the Comment
put on it, Times for two years, and half, or the dividing of a Time for half a
year, exactly correspond to each other: A thousand two hundred and threescore
days being the same with three years, and a Half: And both the same with 42
Months, the time allotted for the giving the outward Court of the Temple to the
Gentiles, and for the Holy Cities to be trodden under foot, Rev. 11. 2. Which
is but another Explication of the reign of Antichrist; As also is that thousand
two hundred and threescore days assigned to the two Witnesses to Prophecy in
Sackcloth; to denote the mourning State of the Church under the Oppressions,
and Cruelties of Antichrist, sufficiently described in the following part of
that Chapter, and ascribed to the Beast, v. 7. called v. 8. Sodom, and Egypt,
For that gross Corruption of Manners, and barbarous Tyranny that shall be found
in Antichrist, who under the same style, Chapter 13. 4, 5. has power given to Him
to continue 42 Months: And if for the great Tyranny and Impurities of life the
Names of Egypt, and Sodom, so for the Idolatry that should then obtain under
the reign of Antichrist, that of Babylon or the great Whore be likewise given,
Rev. 17. 1. 5. And she as such, said to sit on the Scarlet colored beast full
of names of Blasphemy, having seven Heads and ten Horns, the same beginning,
continuance, and ruin must attend both, i. e. both have for all this the same
Period of 42 Months:

So that there is no doubt but a fixed time for the Continuance of this Eclipse
in the Church, is set; A time as for the Impiety, Tyranny, and Idolatry of
Antichrist, so for the Patience, and Faith of the Saints; for they are but the
several Epocha's of these, I have been mentioning.

I do not suppose this Impiety, Tyranny, and Idolatry of Antichrist in its
heights, the whole time of its duration; For there is as well the gradual
Increase and Wane, as the the total obscurity of an Eclipse: Its arriving to
its (...) or height we observed before from the 13 th of the Revelations,
where we likewise took notice of the mark the Holy Ghost set upon the number of
the Beast, and offered something new (but all from the context) in the
Explication of his Number of 666: And as to its last Period and Determination,
that is, what we suppose to be coucht under these different reckonings of a
Time, Times, and half, or the dividing of a time, of 42 Months, and 1260 days:
And if so, It will then only remain to ascertain, what day: And if so, It will
then only remain to ascertain, what the duration is, of which we are to
construe these several Computations; i. e. whether we are to take a Time,
Times, and the dividing or half a time for 3 natural years, and a half: the 42
Months or 1260 days (which is the same with the former) for so many natural
days, neither more, nor less: Or, whether we are to take them all, i. e. the
days contained in 3 years, and a half, or in 42 Months, or expressly 1260 days,
for so many Prophetic days, i. e. For entire years, according to that of Numb.
14. 34. After the number of the days in which ye searched the Land, even forty
days (each day for a year) shall you bear your Iniquities even forty years: And
Ezekiel. 4. 4, 5, 6. Lie thou also upon thy left side, and lay the Iniquity of the
House of Israel upon it, according to the number of the days that Thou shall
lie upon it, Thou shall bear their Iniquity; For I have laid upon Thee the
years of their Iniquity, according to the number of the days, three hundred and
ninety days, so shall thou bear the Iniquity of the House of Israel: And when
thou have accomplished them, lie again on thy right side, and thou shall bear
the Iniquity of the House of Judah forty days, I have appointed thee each day
for a year. And that it is to be taken for so many entire years or prophetic
days, I think will scarce be doubted, when we shall have examined these
following particulars.

1. Whether to confine the great Events of the Church to so small a scantling
as that of three years and a half, be agreeable to the Description of the
Person, who here avows himself to have received this Revelation from God, and
to give it to his Servants; I mean that of his being Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the ending, the Lord which is, and which was, and which is to
come, the Almighty, Revel. 1. v. 8, and v. 17. of his being the first and the
last, he that lives and was dead, and behold he lives, Amen; and has the
Keys of Hell, and of Death? Why this asserting his own Duration and Power, if
all were but to give them the Prediction of so short a time? Or whether to
suppose this,

2. Would be agreeable to what he bids St. John write, viz. the things which
are, and the things which shall be hereafter? Is it likely that so great a part
of this book, as from the seventh to the twentieth Chapter, (which yet is the
only professed book of prophecy given in the whole time of the Gospel) should
run out in the History of three years and a half?

Or farther, whether

3. Twere agreeable to the answer those under the Altar receive, chap. 6. 11.
upon their expostulating after the ten persecutions (for I take them to cease
there,) How long O Lord holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood
on them that dwell on the Earth?) viz. that they should rest yet for a little
season (little, agreeable to the Divine Goodness, which always expresses the
sufferings of his people in the gentlest terms, that so their Faith might fail
under them: (see 2 Cor. 4. 17.) until their fellow servants also, and their
brethren that should be killed, as they were, should be fulfilled, should
relate only to three years and a half? For if so, then Antichrist must have
then immediately succeeded, i. e. about the year 314, when Constantine
reostored Peace to the Church, and freed her from Persecution, and have had his
period 1375 years ago. Again, let it be yet considered, whether

4. It be agreeable to an Empire in its succession, and such the Beast, which
is likewise Antichrist, is, in its rise, continuance, and fall, to reckon but
three years and a half? Whether such a Duration bear any proportion to the
other Heads of the Beast? Whether

5. It be agreeable to the work the Whore that sits upon many Waters, Revel.
17. 1. (which is one of Antichrists Denominations) was to do, viz.

To deceive all Nations with her Sorceries, chapter 18. 23.

To make so many Kings commit Fornication with her, v. 9.

And make War with the Saints, and to overcome them, and to have Power over all
Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations, chapter 13. 7.

Whether

6. It be agreeable to the degrees by which Antichrist was to arrive at his
highest pitch: The Image he was to make to the Beast, whic had the wound by the
sword and did live: The power he had to give life to the Image of the Image of
the Beast, that the Image of the Beast should both speak, and cause that as
many as would not worship the Image of the Beast, should be killed, etc. chapter
13, 14, 15, 16, 17. and causing all, both small and great,rich and poor, free
and bond, to receive a mark in their right hand, and in their foreheads; and
that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name of the
Beast, or the number of his Name? Could such power be arrived at in so short a
compass of time?

Or whether, lastly,

7. It be agreeable to the several parts of his fall, expressed, whether by the
seven last plagues or Vials of Gods wrath, or by the Angels putting in his
Sickle first for the Harvest, chapter 14. 15. and then for the Vintage, v. 17, 18,
19. by the one to begin, by the other to finish the fall of Babylon, if all
were but for three years and a continuance? Most certainly a longer time must
be allotted for Babylon (which is one of Antichrists names) to fill up her
Iniquity, if in her were to be found the blood of Prophets and of Saints, and
of all that were to be slain upon the Earth, chapter 18, 19. which is added there
as the reason of her ruin, as she, i. e. either Pagan or Antichristian Rome,
was to bear the guilt of all the innocent blood that had been shed from the
time of the first planting of Christianity; agreeable to the sentence that in a
like case was, long before, given on Jerusalem, Matthew. 23. 35. that upon you
may come all the righteous blood shed upon the Earth, from the blood of
righteous Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias the son of Barachias, whom ye slew
between the Temple and the Altar.

So then it is scarce to be doubted, but that this continuance of Antichrist,
was to be for as many years as there are Prophetic days in a time, times, and
half a time, in forty two months, or one thousand two hundred and sixty days.

And now having thus, in what was necessary to be observed concerning the rise
and growth of Antichrist, taken notice as of the several periods the Holy Ghost
has set for either, and the different use we are in this matter to make of the
several Epocha's of the taking of Rome, viz. in 410 and 455, and the division
of the Empire into ten Kingdoms upon the last: and thereto added the Testimony
of other Writers, with some Reasons why a time, times, and half, or the
dividing of a time; forty two months, or one thousand two hundred and sixty
days, which are all the same, cannot be taken for natural, but Prophetic days,
i. e. for entire years, I might fairly take leave of this point, in which I
have been forced to be long, but I hope not tedious: But considering of how
great moment it is that every thing should be clear, and coherent in such a
weighty matter as this is, which has been discoursing, I must farther ask the
favor of the Reader that I may reflect a little on what Daniel in his Prophesy
affords us toward the farther Illustration hereof; and the Place that chiefly
serves to this purpose, is that of his 12th. Chapter, verse. 10, 11. Which may
be applicable, Either

For the fixing the time of the Revelation of Antichrist, i. e. His coming to
his full growth, or Maturity, or

For the settling the Duration of his Reign.

As to the first of these, viz. The fixing the time for the Revelation of
Antichrist, it is to be considered from whence the Calculation is to be taken,
and where to end.

As to the time from whence it was to begin; the Angel tells us, 'twas from the
time that the daily Sacrifice should be taken away, and the Abomination that
makes desolate, set up.

And when was that?

We have the Historical Relation of it, Maccab. 1. 54. Now the fifteenth day of
the Month Casleu, in the hundred forty fifth Year, they set up the Abomination
of Desolation upon the Altar, and builded Idol-Altars throughout the Cities of
Judah, on every side; verse 55. And burnt Incense at the doors of their Houses,
and in the Streets: verse. 56. And when they had rent in pieces the Books of the
Law, which they found, they burnt them with Fire. verse. 57. And whosoever was
found with any of the Books of the Testament, or if any consented to the Law,
the Kings Commandment was, that they should put him to Death; ver. 58. Thus did
they by their Authority to the Israelites every Month, to as many as were found
in the Cities: Which happened to be before Christ, 167 Years. Now, take 167 out
of 1290, and you leave 1123. But as the learned Mede observes, we are not to
take it from the first, but any of the Years of the Profanation of the Temple,
which lasting 6 Years, if we take it from the middle, will fall on 1120, the
very Year when the forementioned Treatise was set out by the Waldenses, or
Albigenfes, declaring Antichrist to be come: Or,

If we understand it of the Time his Reign was to continue, then 'twill not
point out so much to the time of the setting up the abomination that makes
desolate, by Antiochus Epiphanes; as to that time, whereof the other was the
Type, i. e. As we observed before, to the time when Antichrist, (for of him,
Antiochus is generally agreed to the be Type) began to exalt himself, which we
showed to belong to the times of Leo Magnus, and to fall in with the time, the
ten Horns, or ten Kings were to take their Kingdoms, and that was in, or about
455. From whence reckoning 1290, we are brought to the 1745 th. year after
Christ.

But this exceeding 1260, the Years the Angel had before mentioned by 30: If we
take out the said 30, will leave 1715: Concerning which, it may be worth our
while to enquire, whether in likelihood that be not the time for the expiration
of the Reign of Antichrist? (A Period which we are led to from the other
measures of Prophetic time; which we shall have occasion to take notice of in
this following Discourse.)

As, whether with respect to the Jews, for whom Daniel there puts the Question
(a thing never yet taken notice of by any, whom I have yet met with) the Year
1745, be not a likely Epoch for their return to the true Worship of God in its
full Purity? As the other is for the downfall of Antichrist, and the beginning
of those happy Times to them, and the fullness of the Gentiles, which shall be
in very great Glory at this Period. As also,

Whether from thence reckoning the Millennium to ensue, we have not the full
Period of the Worlds duration. Or,

If we take it in the Answer the Angel had before given to Daniel, chap. 8. 14.
Of 2300 Days, reckoning them from the time, when Daniel saw the Vision, which
was, (as Calvisius gives it us in his Chronology) Anno Mundi, 3393: or before
Christ, 555, we fall again upon the same number of 1745, for the time of the
Vision concerning the Daily Sacrifice, and the transgression of Desolation to
give both the Sanctuary, and the Host to be trodden under foot, verse. 14. And
then shall the Sanctuary be cleansed:

Which being, as I have observed, the answer given to Daniel, Sollicitous of
the Welfare of his People, may very well point out the time for their being
called again, and to be received into the Enjoyment of those Glorious things,
which were promised them in the times of the Messiah.

And the Calculation of it is thus, 555 before Christ, added to 1745 after
Christ, gives 2300; the Time assigned for the fulfilling of those things by the
Angel.

And whatever we are to understand by that Phrase, whether it relate to the
Millenium so much spoken of; or the Resurrection foretold, verse. 1, 2, 3. Or
whatever else, I leave it to the more Learned at present to determine; but
whatever we are to understand by that Phrase, it is then, it is promised to
Daniel; That he shall stand in his Lot. verse. ult. But go thou thy way till the
End be; for thou shall rest, and stand in thy Lot at the end of thy Days.

But then this number exceeding the other in the same place of Daniel, viz.
Dan. 12. 11, 12. by 45. If we take out the said 45, will leave us to consider
what may happen with relation to that People in the Year 1700: And the issue of
the Wars that are at present between the Imperialists, and the Turks, with
those other Commotions which may be very shortly expected in the Eastern part
of the World, will in all likelihood explain this.

I would not be too positive in things of this Nature, but who can be silent,
where God speaks? What I have farther to remark hereon, may be seen afterward
in that scene of Affairs, which is offered at, in the Explicatiou of the sixth
Vial, to which I refer the Reader. (...).

The next thing to be spoken to, is,

How this great Eclipse in the Church was to clear up again?

CHAP. VII. How this great Eclipse in the Church was to clear up again?
AND now we are again to follow Daniel in his Prophesy, who tells us, Chap. 7.
27. That the Kingdom, Dominion, and greatness of the Kingdom under the whole
Heaven shall be given to the People of the Saints of the most high, whose
Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and obey him:
Which the Angel thus expresses, Revel. 11. 15. The Kingdoms of this World are
become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall Reign for
ever, and ever: Whereupon the twenty four Elders which sat before God on their
Seats, fell upon their Faces, and worshipped God, saying, We give thee Thanks,
O Lord God Almighty, which art, and wast, and art to come, because thou have
taken to thee thy great Power, and have reigned, verse. 16, 17. Agreeable to
what is ascribed to him, Revel. 19. 12. Allelujah, Salvation, and Glory, and
Honor, and Power unto the Lord our God; for True and Righteous are his
Judgments; for he has judged the great Whore, which did corrupt the Earth with
her Fornication, and has avenged the Blood of his Servants at her hand: And
again, verse. 6. Allelujah, for the Lord Omnipotent Reigns: So, that as to the
clearing up this Eclipse, the delivering the Church from that Cloud, which so
long was over it, 'twill be by the ruin of Antichrist, and Christ's taking to
Himself the Kingdom his Enemy had so long usurped.

What manner of Kingdom that shall be? Whether Temporal or Spiritual, or both?
Whether so, as that himself shall Personally Reign, or only by his
Sub-Administrators, is not my business here to determine; though I think too,
the distinction of Reigning Personally, or by his Sub-adminishrators, (how
great Disputes and Controversies soever it has bred in the World) is very
trifling; for it is his personal Reign, what he now has, it is as He is Jesus,
who was Crucified, that He is made both Lord, and Christ, Acts 2. 36. And it is
the same thing for Him, nay, it may be more effectual to sit as King in his
Throne in Heaven, and from thence influence his Subjects, by encouraging,
strengthening, comforting, and giving Success to what they undertake, as if in
Person He were to appear at Jerusalem, and there begin his Kingdom; to march at
the Head of his Armies, and so go on Conquering, and to Conquer: No, his
personal Reign, in the Sense those who are so much for it, would have it to be,
would be rather to lessen his Kingdom, to confine the Glory of it to his
Presence, as Man, i. e. Where he should choose to reside on Earth, (for every
where He could not be, if He were so to Reign; no, we know when He was here,
Place and Time He was subject to) which, whilst He sits in Heaven at the
Right Hand of his Father, can be no more restrained than that Power and
Majesty, to which he is there admitted. But I may not digress; What manner of
Kingdom soever it shall be, that it shall be introduced with the Confusion of
Antichrist, that it shall bring Freedom and Deliverance to his People, that it
shall be ushered in with binding Satan for 1000 Years, is no doubt, Revel. 20.
1, 2, etc.

Happy Age of the Church, when she shall be so set free from the heavy Yoke of
Babylon, as never to be in danger to come under it again! For so likewise the
Apostle assures us, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. He shall consume him by the Spirit of his
Mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming.

But then are there no other degrees of the fall of Babylon? Is there nothing
more particular, whereon, in the long tract of time, Antichrist is to Reign,
and before he comes so near his Fall, the true Believer may exercise his Faith,
and see that what is promised to be at last thus fully accomplished, has its
Beginning in the mean time, at least some certain Prognostics of His final
Ruin in its due Season? Yes, for that Reason it has pleased Him, who was found
worthy to open the Book with seven Seals, to give us a double Account hereof,
one more general, the other more particular, in the 14th, and 16th Chapters of
the Revelation. And for the better satisfaction of the Author of Nubes Testium,
and all others who are under the same Cloud with him, I shall not think it
tedious to say something on both, and then leave it to Them, and all Mankind to
judge, where the charge of Novelty lies, and how great their danger is, on whom
the Scandal rests.

The more general Account of this is, what we read, Revel. 14. Where having
provided for the security of true Believers, by the Mark of his Father's Name
written in their Foreheads, verse. 1. Thereby directing us to the pure
Profession of the Faith maintained by them, amidst the Corruptions embraced by
those who worshipped the Beast, and his Image, and had received his Mark in
their Forehead, or their Hand, verse. 9. Expressed by their not being defiled with
Women, for they are Virgins; by their following the Lamb whithersoever he
goes, by their having no guile in their Mouth, and being without Fault before
the Throne of God, verse. 4, 5. He proceeds verse. 6. to show what it was, by
which he would advance his Kingdom, and that was the Everlasting Gospel to be
Preached unto them that dwell on the Earth, and to every Nation, and Kindred,
and Tongue, and People; the effect whereof on Antichrist should be, to declare
his certain Ruin in these Words, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great City,
because She made all Nations drink of the Wine of the Wrath or poison of her
Fornication, verse. 8.

This as the general Fate that should attend her, which, with respect to the
several Advances toward it, is farther described verse. 9, 10, 11. By that
constant Succession of God's Judgments on those, who should worship the Beast,
and his Image, and receive his Mark in their Forehead, or their Hand; for the
smoke of their Torment was to ascend for Ever and Ever, (...), one Age after
another, and they to have no rest Day nor Night, never to be in any fixed state
of Ease and Prosperity, till the Divine Judgment, the Hour whereof is said to
be come, ver. 7. Shall be fully executed on them, in their final Ruin: And that
again expressed in the two great Parts of it, when He who sat on the white Cloud,
(all things clear and serene about Him) like unto the Son of Man; having on his
Head a golden Crown, and in his Hand a sharp sickle, shall first thrust in his
Sickle to reap the Harvest, and then to gather the Clusters of the Vine of the
Earth.

The more particular, is what we read, Revel. 16. And that too ushered in with
the great Care God in his Providence has for those, who should have resisted
the Corruptions of Antichrist, who, though they stand on the Sea of Glass,
mingled with Fire, to signify the sharp Trials and Persecutions of the true
Church; yet 'twas so, as to be assured of Victory over the Beast, and over his
Image, and over his Mark, and over the number of his Name, chapter 15. 2. They had
it all the time of their Sufferings, as they were born up against these
Corruptions, should have it at last, as they were to triumph over those their
Enemies, which had thus beset them; which being presented to St. John in his
Vision, he is farther made to hear a great Voice out of the Temple, saying to
the seven Angels, Go your ways, and pour out the Vials of the Wrath of God upon
the Earth, chap. 16. 1.

Which are what are now to be spoken to in their order:

Only before that can be done with that clearness such a Discourse as this
should carry with it, 'twill be necessary we premise some previous Remarks.

CHAP. VIII. Some Remarks necessary to be premised for the clearing up what
will afterward be said of the several Vials.
1. THat as to the time of pouring out the Vials, it cannot be till Antichrist
should be so far advanced, as to have made an Image to the Beast, that had the
wound by the Sword, and did live, Revel. 13, 14. And to have imposed his Mark,
though his name, and number of his name were not then completed; for it is on
those who had received the Mark of his Name, and worshipped his Image, that the
first Vial was to be poured out. Rev. 16. 2.

2. That it is not necessary the Trumpets and Vials (it being their several
Objects, and the distinct Capacities of those on whom they were to take place,
in which they chiefly differ) should be all of them restrained to distinct
times: Some of the Trumpets undoubtedly had sounded before any of the Vials
were to be poured out; but when the time came for these to be poured out, they
might be co-incident some of them with one another. As for the purpose;

The first Trumpet, and first Vial I take to be quite different; as I do also
the second, third, and fourth Trumpets from the Vials; However in the manner of
expressing them, they fall in very much with the second, third, and fourth
Vials: But then for the fifth Trumpet, and three first Vials, I see not why
they may not synchronize.

The fourth and fifth Vials seem to stand by themselves.

The sixth Trumpet, and sixth Vial agree very much in Time, and Subject, though
they differ in their respective Ends: The one being to give the Secular
Antichristian Power its great Blow; the other to bring down the degenerate,
Ecclesiastical or Papal Power, and with both to advance the great work of the
Jews Conversion, and bringing in the fullness of the Gentiles: The seventh
Trumpet, and seventh Vial fully complete the Ruin of all the present Enemies of
the Church, and what is the great Mortification to them all, are to bring in
that Kingdom of Christ in its full Glory and Extent, which from thence is
always to prevail. As also,

3. That we pretend not to be so exact in the several Vials, as if what is
given in the Prediction could suit with no other Events; only where the Series
of things corresponds with the Text, as it seems to do in what we have
assigned, and answers the great end of the Prophecy, we are apt to think what
is offered, ought to be received with the greatest Candor by all lovers of
Truth.

For I will not so insist on any thing of this nature, as to presume that this,
and no other may be the sense of the respective Vials, I know things in
Scripture are delivered according to that of the Psalmist, (Ps. 119. 96. Thy
Commandment is exceeding broad,) with that Latitude, that many times there is
not only a Mystical and Literal, but a general and particular Interpretation of
the same Truth, and as in the Type, what particularly related to Egypt, and its
Plagues, may generally, and in the Antitype be verified of all the Enemies of
the Church; As What relates to the whole Church, may likewise be verisied to
every particular Christian; and this is no small part of the Divine Wisdom, (if
I may so say) to give every one his own Portion; nor will I therefore contest
it with any, that those and no other Events, than what I shall point to, can be
understood by the several Vials, but leave it to the Judgment of. every
discreet Reader, whether those that shall be assigned, if they are not
exclusive of all other Interpretations, yet do not themseves however reach the
matter in hand.

And the Truth is, if we are so happy as to be in the right, as to the first
commencing and ending of these Vials, (now the reason of the thing is our best
guide here.)

If we are so happy, as to have given the true rise of Antichrist, An. 455.

If so happy as to have settled the Period for his coming to his height, to
that maturity, wherein he is the Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition, by beginning
to reckon for it at 410.

If so happy as to have hit upon the Period, which must put en end to his
Reign, 'twill be sufficient that in order thereunto, we have pointed out those
Judgments which cannot be denied to have fallen upon him, and that in such
order of time, as to have given to each a due distance, and distinction in the
several ages, wherein they were verified.

And that herein we may give some probable Scheme, it may not be amiss previous
to what we shall offer on the several Vials, which are called the last Plagues,
Revel. 15. 1. In order to a general Comprehonsion of this, whole Book of the
Revelation, and the Predictions therein delivered, so to fix the Scene, as to
show what in probability, was the time assigned for the fulfilling the several
parts of the Revelation.

Begin we then with St. John, at the time when he received the Revelation, viz.
At his being in Patmos, which is supposed to be Anno Christi 94. (For I cannot
see how any thing of Prophecy should look back to what was fulfilled, before
the Vission of it was given begin we then I say, with St. John, at the time
when he received the Revelation; what can the business of the Epistles written
to the seven Churches in Asia be, but what they speak themselves, viz. Messages
to those Churches then in Being, with whom it was to fare, according as they
should behave themselves under the several Dispensations therein mentioned? And
if no particular time be there expressed, for the Events that are foretold, may
not the reason of it be, because what is there said, is intended to any Church,
or any Age of it under the same Circumstances? Or, if in the great Events of
it, it is to look farther than those particular Churches, but so as to be
confined still to those in Asia, and what more particularly own their beginning
from, or any way depend on them, known generally by the Title of those of the
Greek Communion, may not these Epistles more particularly respect the ^ates of
that Church? It Is a Point worth our enquiring into, and possibly what would
receive great light from hence.

Now this is the Subject of the three first Chapters; and there seems to be
this ground administered for what is here offered, that Christ is again
distinctly represented as the Head of the Church, in order to the following
Vision, chap. 4. Which would seem to speak some great Reason for it, and what
better reason can there be, than that as the Vision, so those too to whom it is
represented, should be distinct?

This therefore being first touched on, what times in all likelihood do the
Seals, and Trumpets, and Vials under them point out, that is now to be spoken
to:

CHAP. IX. What times in all likelihood the Seals, and Trumpets, and Vials
under them, point out?
NOW these seem to be in this Order:

The first of these Seals shows us Christ setting forth as a great Conqueror,
and the Conquest that goes out with Him, is to accompany him through all the
other Seals; so that that is fixed to no particular time, but runs through all
the other changes that were to succeed in the Church, until it should with him
be consummated in Glory.

The three next carry us through the ten famous Persecutions, the last of which
was so memorable, that the Egyptians from thence took one of their Aeras,
calling it Era Martymum: 'Twas that begun under Dioclesian, it began in Egypt
on Easter Day, where in one Month seventeen Thousand were Slaughtered. Quippe
certatim gloriosa in certamina ruebatur, multoque avidius tum Martyria
gloriosis mortibus quaerebantur quam postea Episcopatus pravis ambitionibus
appelebantur; Men run in in Crowds into the glorious Conflicts, and Martyrdoms
were more earhestly sought by glorious Deaths, than afterward Bishoprics were
pursued by bafe Ambitions. Of which, Sulpitius Severus thus writes, nullis
unquam bellis mundus magis exhaustus, neque majore unquam triumpho vicimus quam
cum december annorum stragibus vinci non potuimus; The World was never more
Exhausted by any Wars, nor did we ever Conquer by greater Triumph, than when
we could not be conquered with the slaughters of ten Years. Then it was the
Thaebean Legion gained their Honor under Maximian's decimation: Then it was
here in Britanny, there was almost a general excision of all the Christians,
and among them the so famous St. Alban suffered Martyrdom; in a word, the
Persecution was so great throughout all the World, that their Name was well
nigh extinct, and a Coin stamped by Dioclesian, with this Inscription; Nomine
Christianum deleto qui rempevertebant, the name of the Christians being quite
blotted out, who did overturn the Commonwealth.

And how proper an Introduction was this to the next Seal, which shows the
Souls under the Altar, crying with a loud Voice, Revel. 6. 10. Saying, how long
O Lord, Holy and True, do thou not judge, and avenge our Blood on them that
dwell on the Earth?

The effect whereof, I take to be Chap. 13. 10. At the through ruin of the
Empire, but so that in the mean time, a short Triumph is granted to the Church,
upon the overthrow of Maxentius by Constantine, and with him, of Paganism it
self.

And this is, what I take to be the business of the sixth Seal, Rev. 6. 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17. After which, till the first taking of Rome, I take to intervene
that little Season, which the Souls under the Altar are bid to rest, until
their Fellow Servants also, and their Brethern, that should be killed as they
were, should he fulfilled: Which happened in the Persecutions of Julian,
Valens, Valentinian the second, with the many Cruelties exercised on the
Orthodox by the Arrians, etc. in return whereof, the cry of the Souls under the
Altar is fully answered, and the overthrow of the Roman Empire wholly
accomplished, Rev. 13. 10. at least so far, as from that time never again to
make Rome the Seat of it.

It Is true indeed, that the Eustern part of the Empire (for so it happened upon
the Death of Constantine to be divided, viz. into the Eastern and Western
Empire, first under Constantius and Constans, though soon united again, as
'twas again divided under Honorius and Arcadius) was of longer continuance, as
not expiring till the year 1453, or thereabout, though much lessened long
before that time in its extent, viz. from the Year 800. or thereabout; when
Carolus Magnus began the new Empire of the West; soon after which, viz. Anno
805. Aaron, King of the Saracens gave him Mount Calvary, and the Sepulcher of
Christ, which was afterward the occasion of such long and bloody Wars between
the Saracens and the Christians: which I take notice of here, as to point out
from thence the time of the first Plague or Vial, so to be a guide to lead us
to what in Probability we may assign to be the second, and third, which we make
to refer to the two great Expeditions to the Holy Land, and what then happened
to those who had the Mark of the Beast.

But as to the Western Empire, as 'twas Imperium Romanum, the Roman Empire,
that must (not withstanding this new nominal Emperor) be look upon to have
expired at the time, we have above assigned for it.

And as for the time that succeeded between that. and the Rise of Carolus
Magnus or thereabout, (for we fix it not precisely to that Year, but only make
use thereof to show, that it was never more than the Image of the Beast, that
from that time obtained; Carolus Magnus, and his Successors, ^aving no more
than the name, and shadow of that Power, which belonged to the former Emperors)
that seems to be the Season, wherein their Sins were but ripening them for
those Judgments, which upon the sounding of the several Trumpets, were to be
poured on the Empire, as it was then again called, and distinguished from the
Papacy, which was to be the more immediate Subject of the Vials: The Papacy, I
say, for that seems to be the name they so much affected, and it was not long
after, as I before observed, that it was decreed, that Papa, or the name of
Pope, given in common before to other Bishops, should from thenceforth be given
only to One, and that the Bishop of Rome: 'Twas the Decree of Hildebrand, or
Gorgon the seventh, in whom we fixed the number of the Beast.

Nor is it to be wondered, that after this division of the Empire, God's
dealings should be distinct, as the Parts of it were, and their Woes to come
later (not but they had some share in the first three Trumpets with the other)
whose Sins and Provocations did so.

For were they not the the Emperors of the East, that expressly made it their
Business to oppose the worshipping of Images both before and after the second
Council of Nice? The History of the Iconoclastie, and Iconomachi will
sufficiently clear this.

For, if Constantinus the seventh, and his Mother Irene, as also Michael
Curopalata are reported to have been addicted to Image Worship, yet Leo
Isaurus, and Constantinus abusively called Copronynons, and his Son Leo had
successively born their Testimony against them, as did likewise Nicephonis, Leo
Armenius, Michael Balbus, and Theophilus; The Controversy began about the Year
725, from whence to the Reign of the said Theophilus, which ends about 840, is
near six score Years, most of which time the Eastern Empire held up against
this great Corruption; only, as it is before observed, Constantinus, and Irene,
and Michael Curopalata, temporized in this matter.

And for the time wherein the aforesaid, Constantinus Reigned with his Mother
Irene, it is to be observed, that for great part of it, he was in his Nonage,
being but ten years old, when he came to the Empire, in which time, viz Anno
787, the second Nicene Council was held; And as for Michael Curopalata, his
Reign was a little more than one Year: So but that we see, that for near 100
years of this Interval, (for Constantinus his Reign with, and without his
Mother Irene, (for in his tenth Year he deposed her, and restored her again in
his twelfth Year) is reckoned to be about 17 Years; his Mother Irene's Reign
alone, is said to be about 6, and Michael Curopalata's something above one,)
the Eastern Empire bore up against this so gross Idolatry; which, (as we just
now observed) may very well be assigned as a Reason, why their Woes come later
(for in those three Woes proclaimed, Revel. 8. 13. I question not, but they are
to be reckoned to have their share) than those of the Western Empire, and
Western Church.

Besides, it is not to be passed by, what soon after the second Council of Nice
happened in the Synod af Franckford under Carolus Magnus, Anno 794, wherein the
aforesaid Council was condemned, and the Worship of Images rejected; which
joined with what is above observed of the Iconoclastae, i. e. the West herein,
as well as the East, thus far at least witnessing against this so gross
Corruption, leaves it to be considered, whether what occurrs, Revel. 14. 6, 7.
may not be referred to this Matter; the words are: And I saw another Angel fly
in the midst of Heaven, having the Everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that
dwell on the Earth, and to every Nation, and Kindred, and Tongue, and People;
saying with a loud Voice, Fear God, and give Glory to Him, for the hour of his
Judgment is come, and Worship Him that made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea, and
the fountains of Waters.

Now what will better resemble an Angel flying in the midst of Heaven than such
eminent Preachers as the Emperors were? What so much make against the Worship
of Images, as the Everlasting Gospel the Angel is here said to Preach? For is
not the design of this Doctrine, as to fix all Worship to God alone, as he is
the Almighty Creator of all things? So to show what it is that brings on the
Vials of his Wrath, expressed by the Hour of Judgments being come? And the
certainty of their Ruin, who embrace any other Worship? For so we read verse. 8.
And there followed another Angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen: When
once given up to Idolatry, there is nothing can prevent her Ruin: She may for a
while propagate her Corruptions, and Persecute those who will not drink of the
Wine of the Wrath or Poison (for so (...) is sometimes rendered) of her
Fornication, but for all that, the Decree is past, and the Wine of Gods Wrath
too is poured out into the Cup of his Indignation, verse. 10. The Saints may
have a time for their Patience, verse. 12. As it afterward happened in the
furious Persecutions of the Waldenses and Albigenses, and whoever would not
worship the Beast, and his Image, and receive his Mark in his Forehead, or in
his hand, verse. 9. But it is a Patience that shall at last be Crowned, when the
Idol-monger shall be destroyed; for this the One is marked with the name of God
written in his Forehead, ver. 1. As the Other is with the name of the Beast,
verse. 9, 10, 11.

I come now to the Vials themselves, and first of the general introduction to
them, Revel. 16. 1. which I shall treat of in a distinct Chapter, viz.

CHAP. X. Of the general Introduction to the Vials, Revelations 16. 1.
AND I heard a great Voice out of the Temple, saying to the seven Angels, Go
your ways, and pour out the Vials of the Wrath of God upon the Earth.

The Voice out of the Temple speaks it to be from God, and to respect the
Affairs of the Church; and its being said to be a great Voice, shows the
Terror it brings with it, and the certain Success, the things it speaks are to
have, and that it is a Voice that will be heard.

The Angels being bid to go their ways, and pour out the Vials, makes it
evident that it is not the Church in its Purity, (the Temple from whence this
Voice comes,) that is to be the Subject of these Plagues.

The Angels not going on this Errand till bid, demonstrates as their Obedience
to the Commands of their great Master, so their unwillingness to be the
Executioners of Vengeance, till expressly sent.

Their being called Vials, is in allusion to Vessels so called, to fignifie the
definite measure of Divine Judgments, and the manner in which they are poured
out.

Their being Vials of the Wrath of God, shows them to be the Effects of his
Justice on impenitent Sinners, that Justice of his, which he executes not till
provoked to it, but such, as when executed, there is no avoiding.

The Vials full of the Wrath of God being given unto them by one of the four
Beasts, chapter 15. ver. 7. (for this too is here to be taken in) discovers the
high regard God has to his Ministers, and the Prayers of his People (for of
those may be understood the four Beasts, chapter 4. 6, 7, 8.) it being the same
Beast, that gives the Seven Vials unto the seven Angels, which had Golden Vials
full of Odours, which are Prayers of Saints; for of each of them is this
affirmed, chapter 5. 8.

By Earth in this Book I take generally to be signified, what is opposite to
Heaven, so that if Heaven signify the Church, or the Ecclesiastical State,
Earth will signify what is Secular, and properly of this World, i. e. The
Earthly, and Temporal Power, and its Subjects, as these stand in opposition to
the other: But something more seems to be meant by Earth in this Verse, viz. as
it is taken for every thing in this Lower, Material World, and so not only the
grosser part of this great System of Nature, which we call Earth in distinction
from the other parts of it, but the Sea, Rivers, Sun it self, with the
Circumambient Air, are by a Synecdoche of this more eminent part taken for the
whole, hereby to be understood: This I cannot but observe here, because the
Seven Vials, which are afterward said to be poured out on these several parts
of the Universe, (as things are here metaphorically thereby signified) are all
said here to be poured out upon the Earth.

CHAP. XI. Of the first VIAL.
AND the first (Angel) went and poured out his Vial upon the Earth, and there
fell a noisome, and grievous Sore upon the Men which had the mark of the Beast,
and upon them which worshipped his Image. Revel. 16. 2.

By Earth here, as is just now observed, is signified what is opposite to
Heaven, so that if Heaven signifies the Church, or Ecclesiestical State, Earth
will signify what is Secular, and Properly of this World; and if so, it will
intimate this Vial to concern in the first place the whole Roman Empire, the
Secular, Earthly, and Temporal Power there in Being; but so that (as it
follows) it shall in particular fall on those of its Subjects, which had the
mark of the Beast, and which worshipped his Image. And that requires, that we
consider here, 1. what is meant by the Beast? 2. What it is we are to
understand by his Mark? 3. What by his Image? And

1. What is meant by the Beast? Now it is evident that by the Beast is to be
understood that Power, which rose up in the place of what was Imperial: For so
it is prophesied 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7, 8. And so it was represented to St. John in his
Vision, Revel. 13. 11. And I beheld another Beast coming up out of the Earth;
another in distinction from what was before, but a Beast still, to show that
it is the same Power, that is still continued, though with respect to him, who
exercises it, it is but (...) the Image of the former; for so he who was to
come up in his place, viz. the Pope, is: The name of Emperor indeed he takes
not upon him, but he exercises all the Power of the first Beast before him,
ver. 12. i. e. So overrules and controuls the Secular Power, as to make it
subservient to what he has possessed himself of, i. e. To what is spiritual:
He exercises all his Power before him, (...). As it is in his Presence under the
show, and covert of his Authority he does it: As he permits him to have the
name of doing that, wherein he is only his Tool to excute such Sentences, as he
(the Pope) shall first decree; for there is the whole juggle of delivering up
Offenders to the Secular Power, which is to proceed against them without any
farther Trial, or Cognizance of the cause, for which they are thus remitted to
the Civil Magistrate.

And that it is added, He causes the Earth, and them that dwell therein to
worship the first Beast, whose deadly Wound was healed; this must be understood
by considering what his deadly Wound was, Which in all probability was the blow
he received in having Paganism and Idolatry (for to that Worshipping will most
properly relate) beaten down; but not without including also that Supreme
Power, from whence he was cast down at the dissolution of the Western Empire:
Indeed both, i. e. The Imperial Power, and Idolatry under it, went together,
(excepting for the short breathing time Christianity had under Constantine, and
the restoring either or both in their Image, must denote, as the show of Power
to which the Beast again revived after that deadly Blow received by the Goths,
Hunns, and Vandals, so that show of Idolatry, i. e. That other sort of
Idolatry, which under degenerated Christianity succeeded into the place of what
was Pagan, or merely Heathenish; the reason in all likelihood why the outward
Court (whether to be understood of the Territories of Antichrist, or the
outward show of Religion, as it should all along be professed by degenerate
Christians) is said to be given to the Gentiles, Revel. 11. 2. And the Holy
City, (i. e. true Religion in its Purity) to be trodden under foot forty two
Months.

So then it is evident, what we are to understand by the Beast? i. e. the
Supreme Power, as it is now usurped by the Pope, though in the show of it given
to him, who wears the name of Emperor, raised to that Style and Power by the
Pope (for so Carolus Magnus, and his Successors were) and upheld therein in
order to that Power, which he and his followers have from that time exercised
before him. The next thing to be here considered, is,

2. What we are to understand by his Mark?

And that, I question not, is well applied to that Profession of Errors, and
wicked Practices the Pope requires from his followers: The former very properly
said to be the mark in the Forehead, as the latter is, in the Hand. And,

3. As to his Image, we have already touched at that, under the first of these
Enquiries, as it is the Image, whether of Power or Idolatry abolished with the
Roman Empire, properly so called, but restored, as we have above interpreted
it, under the Papacy; for as to both these (...) his Image relates and the
Controversy then moved in the Church about (...), Images, and their worship,
(which is well known to have been the great. Debate about the time, that a new
Emperor was set up in the West,) seems to give us particular light in this
matter.

The Controversy, as is already observed, began about the Year 725, and lasted
till about 840, and gives the fairest Rise imaginable for our Conjecture of
what was the Business of the first Vial, viz. the Judgment that overtook this
great Corruption of the Church, in the Irruptions of the Saracens, the matter
more strictly now to be enquired into.

And for this, methinks we have a very proper Key in what the Holy Ghost
assigns for the Subject of this Plague, as it was to be upon the Men which had
the Mark of the Beast, and worshipped his Image; which if to be understood of
those who had given up themselves to that Idolatry, or Image Worship which then
obtained, will very directly lead us to that Judgment, which in that Age was
poured out upon such: And is it not evident the Irruptions of the Saracens were
so?

For was it not agreeable to the Principles of their pretended Prophet Mahomet,
(one of which was to destroy Idols, as Elmachinus in his Historta Saracenica,
p. 3. informs us (...) destruxitque Idolorum Cultum) to make War upon the
Worshippers of Images?

And was it not at this time they made their great inroads upon them? And it is
very remarkable, (but of that only by the by) that the name of Reproach these
Imagemongers cast upon Leo Iconomachus, was (...), so he is Nicknamed Theophan.
Chronogr. p. 339. as one that was of the same Opinion with the Saracens, and as
such they likewise endeavored to blot others of the Iconoclasts.

And certainly, to come to our purpose, and the words in which the Holy Ghost
has been pleased to express this Vial, nothing can more deservedly be termed a
grievous and noisome Sore, than that was:

For how was it in it self, with respect to that Corruption it brought with it
into the Church, the most putrefying, infectious, abominable sore, that ever
broke out on any body? How with respect to the Applications that were made to
this spreading Leprosy, I mean the Judgments, which so manifestly followed it,
the most painful, fretting wound that men could receive? (...), 'twas
wickedness, and Impiety in the highest was the wound, and Vengeance agreeable
to such Impiety and Wickedness, was the proper attendant thereof.

The Sore, noisome Disease or Infection, began (as is already observed) with
the first rising up of the Beast, and seems to have been confirmed in the
public enacting of Idolatry (so I call it) in the seventh general, or second
Council of Nice, wherein Worship and Adoration was Decreed to belong to Images.

And as for the wound and vengeance agreeable to such Impiety, i. e. the Vial
poured out for it, that may very well be understood of the forementioned
Irruptions of the Saracens, especially what happened between the years 820 and
830; for 'twas then they had possessed Spain, Calabria, Apulia, and most part
of Italy, Petav. Ration. Tempor. part 1. l. 8. p. 389. and could not be driven
thence till about the year 980; i. e. 150 years after the time when the Tails
of these Scorpions (as they are described in the 5th Trumpet, Revel. 9. 10.)
did so thoroughly sting them, as it is said in the Text, for five months which
makes up in Prophetic days the said 150 years.

Now this I doubt not, but may be very well assigned, as the business of the
first Vial, the pouring of it out upon the Earth, supposing the Western Empire,
in the sense we gave of Earth, as applied in this Book to signify the Secular,
or Earthly Power, to be first restored, before it could be the Subject of the
said Vial; as also the Subjects of it to have received the Mark of the Beast,
and to have worshipped his Image, which, with respect to the first could not be
besore the year 800 (for it was then the Empire was restored) with respect to
the second, not well before the aforementioned second Council of Nice; For
however Image Worship had before gained too great Footing, and the Mark began
to be set, yet it could not be well said to be settled till then; the
Consequence whereof must be this, that there, or from thence forward we are to
look for the pouring out the first Vial; and nothing, if considered, as in the
Reason that moved the Saracens to invade them, so in the Mischiefs they were
the Authors of, can more naturally answer the Metaphon of a noisome and grievous
Sore. And therefore till any thing else be offered that may better explain
this, I shall not doubt to rest herein for the Explication of the first Vial.

Only I do not so restrain this to the Western Empire, as not to see the same
Vial, though in a less Degree, poured on some parts of the Eastern Empire; but
that I take rather to be a Merciful Warning to them, who should afterward
suffer more deeply under their Violence, when the the three Woes foretold,
Revel. 8. 13. were to take place.

CHAP. XII. Of the second Vial, Rev. 16. ver. 3.
AND the second Angel poured out his Vial upon the Sea, and it became as the
Blood of a dead Man, and every living Soul died in the Sea.

The Sea is the great Confluence of Waters, and Waters, we know, the Angel
interpreting it to St. John, Rev. 17. 15. signify Peoples, Multitudes,
Nations, and Tongues; which being said to become as the Blood of a dead Man,
and every Soul dying in it, may import very great Saughters, and universal
Bloodshed among those, who are to be the Subjects of this Vial.

Now what can better interpret this, than the Crusado's, or Holy Wars, wherein
so much Blood was spilt? And to this the Series of History naturally leads us;
for if in the pouring out of the former Vial, the Saracens invade the Western
Empire, and those therein (for it is observable, indeed it could not be
otherwise, it being commanded them, that they should not hurt any but only
those who have not the Seal of God in their Foreheads, Rev. 9. 4. That in all
the Invasions and Wars the Saracens or Turks have made, that they have never
bent their Force against those who disclaimed the Idolatries of Antichrist,
those they were, against whom, neither then nor in later times they seem to
have had their Commission) that had the mark of the Beast, and worshipped his
Image, it is but in a way of Retaliation that those who had the Mark of the
Beast, and worshipped his Image, should carry back the War into the Territories
of the Saracens, to revenge their former Incursions, to recover Palestine, with
Jerusalem, and the Temple of the Sepulcher out of the hands of the Infidels.

Accordingly Urban the Second in pursuit of what he knew to have been often
attempted by his Predecessor, Gregory the Seventh, (but wherein he was hindered
by the Factions of Schismatics, and several Wars, (so Baronius tells us Anno
1090,) and at the instance of Alexius the Emperor of Constantinople, whose
Letters had been lately read in the Council of Placentia, declares the first
Expedition in the Council of Claremont called chiefly for this work; the second
Canon whereof was this, Quicunque prosola devotione, non pro, Honoris vel lucri
adeptione, ad liberandam Ecclesiam Dei Jerusalem profectus fuerit, iter illud
pro omni poenitentia reputetur: Whosoever out of mere Devotion, and not for the
getting of Honor, or Gain, shall go to Jerusalem to deliver the Church of God,
let that Journey be accounted in the stead of all Repentance whatever; and for
the farther encouragement of those who should undertake the Expedition, in one
of the Speeches he makes on this occasion, as Malmsburiensis relates it, it is
decreed by him, omnia bona eorum, qui Hierosolymas pergunt, semper and ubique
esse salva in pace, and treuga, quousque redierint: That all the Goods of those
who go to Jerusalem should always and every where be safe, in Peace and Truce,
till they shall return.

And now what hastening is there to this Holy War, in which they should thus
merit the Pardon of all their Sins, and be secure that all their Goods and
Possessions should be kept in safety for them? such (says Baronius) were the
Crowds of those who listed their Names, that 'twas necessary to dehort them
from going, whose Age and Health were not fit for military Service: Very great
indeed were their numbers; Malmsburiensis thinks that if the several Armies had
been entered in one Muster-Roll, they would have made sixty hundred thousand: He
that shall consider this, with the great Recruits that were afterward made in
the continuance of those Wars, and the small number of those who ever returned
to give an account of their great Exploits there, will not at all wonder that
the Holy Ghost should please to express it by a Sea of Blood.

Indeed Urban, as well as his Predecessor Gregory the seventh, (who first
designed the Expedition, though he could never bring it to any effect) and
those of his Successors, who were herein concerned, were well advised in the
Policy of the Design: For what could be more for the advantage of that
exorbitant Power at which they aimed, than to give this diversion to those
neighboring Princes, which they had reason to fear would stand in their way?
Though neither could they do that so effectually, as not at the same to be
necessitated to Wars at Home: what with other Antipopes (as they were set up
sometimes by the Emperor, sometimes be Faction among themselves, sometimes by
other Princes) what with the Emperor, and those other Princes which abetted the
Faction, or for other reasons were at Enmity with the Pope, nothing but Blood
was the effect of this Vial; Blood, like that of a dead Man, and every living
Soul died in the Sea: i. e. Not every individual Person but some of all sorts,
and in all places, throughout the whole Sea, in the Sense we have above given
of it, perished in these Slaughters; so universal as well as fatal was this
Plague to those who had the mark of the Beast, and worshipped his Image.

And herein we place the Business of the second Vial, in distinction from what
the third holds forth to us, which being to be poured out upon the Rivers and
Fountains of Waters, as the other was upon the Sea, seems to denote that Vial
to be of the same nature with the former, but more restrained as to its extent,
and the quality of those, who are to be the Subjects of it.

I know very well there were other very signal Events, which fell out about
those times, which will very well deserve our consideration in this matter, as
being very capable of the Character, that is here given to the first Vial, viz.
of a noisome and grievous sore upon the men which had the mark of the Beast,
and which Worshipped his Image; such were what happened to them from the
Berengarians and Waldenses, or Albigenses, those great Witnesses (I was almost
going to say the two Witnesses) which so long Prophesied in Sackcloath, i. e.
under the Persecutions of the Romish Church; by the former of these, Wernerus
Carthusianus, Fasc. Temp. aetat. 6. circa Annu^ Christi 1064; affirms the
Romish Church to have been for a long time sufficiently afflicted: And Lancelot
de Voysin Poplinerius, Hist. Franc. l. 1. edit. 1581. f. 7. affirms her never
to have been more fiercely resisted than by the latter, i. e. a Waldensibus and
eorum in Aquitania ac vicina regione successoribus, qui ab Albio, Albiensium in
Septimania urbe primaria, Albigenses dicti sunt. Hi invitis Principibus
Christians omnibus, circa annum 1100. and temporibus subsequentibus, doctrinam
suam, ab ea quam hodie Protestants amplectuntur, parum differentem, non per
Galliam solum totam, sed etiam per omnes pene Europae oras disseminarunt: Nam
Galli, Hispani, Angli, Scoti, Itali, Germani, Bohemi, Saxones, Poloni, Lithuani
and Gentes aliae eam ad hunc diem pertinaciter defenderunt; than by the
Waldenses and their Successors, in Aquitain and the neighboring Country, who
from Albium, the chief City of the Albienses in Septimania, are called
Albigenses. These against the will of all Christian Princes, about the year
1100. and in the following times, spread their Doctrine (very little differing
from what the Protestants at this day embrace) not only throughout all France,
but also almost throughout all the Coasts of Europe. For the French, the
Spaniards, the English, the Scots, the Italians, the Germans, the Bohemians,
the Saxons, the Polonians, the Lithuanians, and other Nations, have
pertinaciously defended it to this day. Reinerius the Inquisitor (in his Book
cont. Haeret. c. 4. p. 54. Edit. Ingolstad. An. 1613) goes farther, inter omnes
sectas quae adhuc sunt vel fuerunt, non est perniciosior Ecclesiae, quam
Leonistarum, and hoc tribus de causis; prima est, quia est diuturnior, aliqui
enim dicunt, quod duraverit a tempore Silvestri, aliqui a tempore Apostolorum;
secunda, quia est generalior, fere enim nulla est terra, in qua haec secta non
sit; Tertia, etc. amongst all the Sects which yet are, or have been, none is
more pernicious to the Church, than that of the Leonists (i. e. Pauperes de
Lugduno) and this for three Reasons, the first is, because it is more lasting
than any other, for some say that it has continued from the time of Sylvester,
some from the time of the Apostles; the second, because it is more general, for
there is almost no Country, in which this Sect is not; the third, etc.

And it is observable, that Alexander the Third, in the Canon published against
them, In Synodo Turonensi, Anno 1163. gives it a Name not altogether unlike to
this of a sore and grievous wound, affirming it to spread more Cancri, as a
Canker, etc. and particularly forbids to buy and sell, Revel. 13. 17.

In the Year 1170, he fends one of the Cardinals to make War upon them, and
indeed what is there that could be attempted, that the Romanists have not done
to destroy them, but with no better success than to increase them by this
opposition?

So noisome and grievous, so painsul and fretting has the Sore still been,
which by these fell upon the Men which had the Mark of the Beast, and which
worshipped his Image.

But then, whether this may be reckoned one of the particular Vials I am
something doubtful, it being a Sore that seemed rather to run through them all,
and what either the Berengarians, or the Waldenses, or Albingenses (or whatever
other name is given them) witnessed against the growing Corruptions of the
Romish Chnrch, being rather to point out her Sins, for which the Vials were
poured out: But if a Particular Vial it be allowed to be, it must come in in
the second place, and then the Sea (upon which it is said to be poured)
becoming as the Blood of a Dead Man, and every living Soul dying in it, will
signify that stagnation, if I may so express it, there was in all its Veins,
that mortified State into which the whole Church of Rome was every where
brought, that stop she received in all her Vital Actions, i. e. In that Pride,
Luxury, and Idolatry which were grown predominant, but wherein she could never
receive a more deadly Blow, then what was given her by the Berengarians, and
Waldenses. And if this for thief Reasons be allowed to be the second Vial, then
what we have said of the former Expedition to the Holy Land, and what remains
still to be said of the later, will be the Subject but of one Vial, and that
must be the third. But this, how fairly soever offered, for the reason above
touched at, I choose to wave, and so proceed to the third Vial as before pointed
out.

CHAP. XIII. Of the third VIAL, Revel. 16 4.
AND the third Angel poured out his Vial upon the Rivers, and Fountains of
Waters, and they became blood.

The former Vial is poured out upon the Sea, and is said to become blood: Here
it is on the Rivers, and Fountains of Waters, and those likewise said to become
blood.

And if the Sea and Waters in the Prophetic style signify Peoples, and
Multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues, as we observed from Revel. 17. 15.
Consequently, Rivers will signify but some part of these, as Rivers make but
part of that confluence of Waters, which meet alother in the Sea. And if Rivers
be but part of the Sea, or of the Waters in that larger extent, i. e. be but
some of those many Peoples, Multitudes, or Nations, or Tongues, on whom the
former Vial was poured, Fountains of Waters will in all likelihood be the
Princes of those Peoples, Multitudes, Nations, and Tongues, those being as the
Head, or Spring to the others, who as to the Public and its Affairs, derive
their first Rise and Motion in all their actings from them: They are Princes
which give life to their Subjects, direct the Channel and Course they are to
run in.

Now what can better suit this Prediction, than what happened in the later
Crusadoes, or Expeditions to the Holy Land, which were not so general as the
first, and wherein only some particular Princes were concerned?

The Effusion of blood, though great, yet 'twas but on the Rivers, and
Fountains of Waters, 'twas not that Sea of blood, which in the first Crusadoes
overflowed all Christendom.

But there is another circumstance that must not be past by, and that is, As
this Vial is said to be poured out particularly on the Fountains of Waters, by
which, as is above offered, are to be understood Princes; and how it affected
them, will not be doubted, if besides the loss they sustained in the slaughter
of their Subjects, we shall consider what in the time of the Crusadoes they
suffered too in their Sovereignty.

For was it not then, that the Bishops of Rome taking the advantage of their
absence, whilst in their Expeditions to the Holy Land, contrary to what had
been decreed by Urban (viz. That all the Goods of those, who go to Jerusalem,
should always, and every where be safe in Peace and Truce, till they should
return) so infinitely increased his own Power, and lessened theirs, absolutely
possessing himself of some of their Kingdoms, and making others hold theirs as
Feudatory from him? And this but agreeable to what Urban had Decreed in the
Council of Claremont, wherein he likewise Published the first of these
Expeditions, viz. Ecclesiam ab omni servitute Regum liberam, that the Church
was free from all service to Kings, ac proinde Investituram a clericis
recipiendam non esse, and from thence that no investiture was to be received
from them by the Clergy.

From whence it appears what it was, they were then aiming at, and how far they
effected it, this Vial does sufficiently declare.

And this but as a proper Punishment for their Sins; for if Kings and Princes
be so negligent of his Honor, who set them on their Thrones, as to fall down
before Stocks and Stones, and worship whatever Idols Antichrist shall set up;
how can they expect, but that God should give them up to the Vanities to which
they had prostituted themselves, as it is Psalm. 106. 36. that their Idols they
have served, should be their snare?

As how should they, who are Gods Vicegerents, his Vicars on Earth, (There was
a time, when the Popes themselves could give them that Style) and yet so far
forget him, whose substitutes they are, as to change the Glory of the
uncorruptible God, into an Image made like corruptible man, and to Birds, and
fourfooted Beasts, and creeping things, Romans 1. 23. or any other Image, hope
that he should maintain their Rights, who so highly invade his Prerogative?

This being considered as the Reason of the thing, and the event answering the
observation, I shall only add for the distinguishing those two Plagues or Vials
from each other, the time which I think may very well be ascribed to either;
and to the first I assign that interval of time, which comes in between the
year 1095. (when the first Expedition to the Holy Land was published by Urban
the Second) and 1196, the year when Celestine the Third sent his Legate into
Germany to procure a new Expedition of the Princes to Syria: To the second I
assign the time that from thence succeeded, till the Saracens recovered Syria
from them, which was about the year 1291.

And here I cannot tell whether we may not apply what we read, Revel. 8. 10,
11. in the time of the sounding of the third Trumpet, viz. of a great Star
falling from Heaven, burning as it were a Lamp, and falling upon the third part
of the Rivers, and upon the Fountains of Waters: And the name by which the Star
is called, is Wormwood; and the third part of the Waters became Wormwood, and
many men dyed of the Waters, because they were made bitter.

For what so proper to signify the grand Apostasy of Antichrist, as the
falling of a great Star from Heaven? A Star, in the interpretation of Christ
himself, Revel. 1. 20. being to be understood of an Angel, or Bishop of the
Church, (as Bishops were called in the first times of the Gospel, and therefore
so represented to St. John.) For is it not from the Purity of the Gospel, the
Administration whereof is so often called Heaven in the New Testament, this
great Light, the first Star in the Firmament falls? but so falls too, that as
to his Temporal Eminence, he becomes more illustrious, gaining that in secular
Interest, which he loses in what is Spiritual? therefore said to burn as it
were a Lamp, which speaks outward Splendour, but so that it is burning still,
full of danger and terror to those who are too forward to be meddling with it.
And if its name is called Wormwood. what so fully answers that Metaphor, as the
Wrongs and Injustice which were then done? (For so the Antithesis is Amos 5. 7.
Between Judgment and Wormwood.)

Never indeed were such bitter times, whether for the Rancour of Men's Minds,
the Hatred between the Popes, and Sovereign Princes, or for the Injuries and
Exactions they oppressed them and their Subjects, i. e. Both the Rivers and
Fountains of Waters with.

And the third part of the Waters becoming Wormwood, may signify the extent of
these Usurpations, either with reference to the absolute Vassallage of those,
he thus enslaved in general out of all Peoples, Multitudes, Nations and
Tongues; or be more particularly understood of those three Kingdoms of the ten
which gave their Power to the Beast, (and three is the nearest number whereby
to take a third part of Ten,) which he so entirely usurped to himself, with his
shutting the Gates of Rome by a perpetual Edict, that ne in posterum quis aut
Rex aut Princeps Magistratum ipsum petere aut obire auderet, that for the
future, none, whether King, or Prince, should dare to seek for, or exercise
Magistracy there. It was the Decrce of Nicolaus the 3 d. Qui Senatoriam Urbis
Romanae dignitatem, quam Clemens quartus Regi Carolo dederat, ad se transtulit,
Anno 1278. Who transferred to himself the Senatorian Dignity of the City of
Rome, which Clemens the fourth had given to King Charles.

But there is still one thing more to be taken notice of, it is what we have in
the close of this Vial, ver. 5, 6, 7. And I heard the Angel of the Waters say,
Thou art Righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and wast, and shall be,
because thou have Judged thus. For they have shed the Blood of Saints and
Prophets, and thou have given them Blood to drink; for they are worthy. And I
heard another out of the Altar say, Even so Lord God Almighty, true and
righteous are thy Judgments; which three Verses I take to be a reflection on
the three preceding Vials, and not only to belong to the last of them: Indeed
it seems to be like the answer to the Cry of the Souls under the Altar, under
the fifth Seal, chapter 6. 9, 10. that were slain for the word of God, and for the
Testimony they held, who cried with a loud Voice, saying, How long O Lord, Holy
and true, do thou not Judge, and avenge our Blood on them that dwell on the
Earth? For it is out of the Altar, another Angel says, confirming the applause
the former had given to the divine Justice; even so Lord God Almighty, true and
righteous are thy Judgments.

To the Souls under the Altar, in the sixth Chapter, it was said, that they
should rest yet for a little Season, until their Fellow Servants also and their
Brethren, which should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled; and here
the Judgments and Vengeance those concerned in the Viass, may be looked upon to
have called for, fall on their Murderers; expressed by a grievous and noisome
Sore falling upon the Men which had the Mark of the Beast, and upon them which
worshipped his Image, by the irruptions of the Saracens in the first Vial.

By the Seas becoming Blood, in the vast effusion of it, whereof the People,
Multitudes, Nations, and Tongues were made the Subjects in the expedition to
the Holy Land, under the second Vial: And then

By the Rivers, and Fountains of Waters becoming likewise Blood, in what the
Princes and People jointly felt, (though not so generally as under the former)
under the following Crusade, with the particular reference to the Contest (for
so it is too in the third and fourth Trumpet which carry something paralled to
what we here observe) which not only in the third but in all the three first
Vials there was between the Bishop of Rome, and Sovereign Priuces for the
Supremacy.

All which being heavy Judgments on the Roman Empire, whether in the whole, or
in its Parts, are animadverted on, as the result of that Cruelty, they in any
Capacity had exercised on the Saints; before indeed by the Irrnptions of the
Goths and Vandals and Hunns, he that had led into Captivity was led into
Captivity, Rome taken, and the Calamities, which attend a Captive state,
thereon ensuing; here he is followed with farther Vengeance, and the reflection
the Holy Ghost makes thereon, is to comfort the Saints, whose Patience and
Faith is said to be here, chapter 10. 10. and to assure them that their Blood is
not so spilt on the Ground, but that the Cry of it shall be heard in its just
time against the enraged and bloody Persecutor.

This was the state of the Empire, both in its Civil, and Ecclesiastical
Capacity under the three first Vials, and the reason of it as before is
mentioned, was; For they have shed the Blood of Saints and Prophets, and thou
have given them Blood to drink, for they are worthy.

But then it will be said, what is this to Antichrist? To the Beast? For all
this is but to aggrandize him; to set him upon the Throne, and make the Princes
of the World to submit their Scepters to his Pastoral Staff.

But be it so: For thus he is got into the Chair; yet if it be nothing to the
Beast, if all be so much for his temporal Grandeur, however, certainly they
were Plagues upon the Men who had the Mark of the Beast, and upon them which
worshipped his Image, chap. 16. 2. Plagues too upon the Beast himself, whilst
he is permitted to go on from one Degree of Wickedness to another; it is not
his prospering in his Mischief, makes it the lesser, but the greater Judgment,
as it is the certain tcken of utter ruin that shall attend him, when, as it is
said of the Ammonites, Genesis 15. 16. His Iniquity shall be full.

Only it will be demanded, because I here make the Reflection on the 5, 6, and
7th verses of the 16th Chapter, to be as it were a second answer to the Cry of
the Souls under the Altar, to whom it was said, that they should rest for a
little Season, until their Fellow Servants also, and their Brethren that should
be killed as they were, should be fulfilled, it will I say, be demanded,

1. Who of their Fellow Servants and Brethren had been killed in that Season?
Or,

2. Whether they were then fulfilled?

As to the first, Who of their Fellow Servants, and Brethren had been killed in
that Season? It Is manifest, it was in that Season the Albigenses and Waldenses
were so barbarously Murdered; for it was then Innocent the 3d published the
taking up of the Cross against them about the year 1211. In the managing
whereof, Simon Montford was General, and above a hundred thousand of them then
slain; but in the whole Prosecution of the War, infinite numbers are said to
perish; such was the slaughter of them, that in France alone (unhappy France to
have been so early, and so long the scene of so great Barbarity! But happy
France too! which has brought forth so many faithful Witnesses, who cannot be
so overcome, and killed, but that they are to revive, their Cause, and Interest
at least to be so set up, as to strike Fear, Terror, and Amazement to all that
make War against them! Revel. 11. 7, 11.) If Historians rightly recount, it, no
fewer than ten hundred thousand were destroyed: And

As to the second, it is not necessary to the making good our Observation, that
all should be fulfilled, when it pleased the Holy Ghost to make this
Reflection: it is sufficient, that it is what might very well serve to confirm
the Faith of suffering Christians at present, (for as for the others, to whose
Cry the reply is made, it is manifest, they have their Reward, and are placed in
a state of Triumph, by the white Robes, which are said to be given to every one
of them, Rev. 6. 11.) that they might see that God makes Inquisition for their
Blood, that though there be a final day of reckoning when the Enemies of the
Church shall drink of the full Cup of Vengeance, yet all is not deferred to
that day; but that in the mean time, it shall be known by the Judgments that
are executed on the Earth, that (as it is Psalm. 116. 15.) precious in the sight
of the Lord is the death of his Saints.

CHAP. XIV. Of the fourth Vial, Revel. 16. 8.
AND the fourth Angel poured out his Vial upon the Sun, and power was given
unto him to scorch Men with Fire.

And Men were scorcht with great Heat, and blasphemed the Name of God, which
has Power over these Plagues, and they repented not to give him Glory.

By the Sun, I am apt to think can be meant nothing but Antichrist in his
highest Glory, such is what he arrived at, when, as has been showed in the
preceding Vials, he had so far gained the Ascendant of those in Sovereign
Power, as to make them like the Moon and Stars, to shine only with the borrowed
Light they had from him; i. e. No farther to exercise those relieks of
Sovereignty, which still remained in them, than He thought fit to give way to
it.

And if so, then the Vial poured upon the Sun, and Power thereby given him to
scorch Men with Fire, will be very well interpreted by the continuance of that
high Usurpation and Tyranny, over the secular Powers, and their Subjects, (for
so Men may not unfitly be construed;) but then these Usurpations and Tyranny
being expressed by scorching with Fire, will direct to something that will answer
that Allusion: and nothing certainly more fit to do this, than those
Excommunications, which were so frequent with them, and made use of upon every
occasion to support Antichrist, and his Cause: And Men's blaspheming the name of
God, which has Power over these plagues, upon their being scorched with great
Heat, i. e. fretted and vexed with these Darts, but withal, not repenting to
give him Glory, may very aptly be explained by the great regret, and deep
resentments they had against the Papal Tyranny, but yet so, that whatever their
prejudices against the Pope were, and his Usurpations, they continued still in
the profession of that corrupt Religion, he taught.

For this is, not to give Glory to God; to let the punishment lose the end for
which it was sent, by not being amended by it; which being the condition of
those who had the Mark of the Beast, and worshipped his Image, it is no wonder
the Judgment is still continued on them, and that by the means of the Beast
himself; it being but righteous with God thus to avenge himself on those who
are so stupid, as not to take his former warnings.

Nor indeed could it well be otherwise, it being by such Exorbitances, that
Antichrist was to rise to that height of Impiety, which was at last to be
punished with the final ruin of himself, and all his wicked and incorrigible
Adherents.

But then a little to see, how it was this Sun under this Vial had power given
him to scorch Men with Fire, and what the great Heat was, with which Men were
scorched?

How Fire was brought down from Heaven by Hildebrand, or Gregory the seventh,
we have above touched it, chapter 5. p. 19. With relation to the Excommunications
by him thundered out against the Emperor, and shall now, for the farther
explication of it only add, that there is nothing more familiar with the Popes
themselves, than to express such their Censures by Thunder and Lightning, which
in the propriety of Speech is Fire from Heaven; and if we consider these in the
end to which they pretended to make them serve, was it not to signify the fire
of Gods Wrath, and Indignation, they hereby taking upon themselves to denounce
his displeasure toward Offenders.

It Is true indeed, applying this to Hildebrand, there was something in that
Insolent Usurper that seemed literally to explain this; for so Cardinal Benno
in his Book Entitled, Vita and gesta Hildibrandi, etc. relates it, cum vellet,
manicas suas discutiebat, and in modum scintillarum ignis dissiliebat, and eis
miraculis oculos simplicium veluti signo sanctitatis ludificabat; when he list
he used to shake his Sleeves, and Fire did fly out in mannner of Sparks, and by
those Miracles, as by a sign of Holiness he deluded the Eyes of the simple.

And the Pattern Hildebrand gave in his Excommunicating, as Henry, Emperor of
the West, so Nicephonus, Emperor of the East, (for him likewise he pretended to
excommunicate, Anno 1078) his Followers have not been wanting to transcribe;
thus Calixtus the 2d. Anno 1119, Excommunicates the Emperor at Rhemes; Adrian
the 4th does the same to Frederic. 1159, Innocent the 3d to Philip 1201, and to
Raimond, Earl of Toulouse, 1208, and again to Otho twice, viz. 1210, and 1211,
and Honorius the 3d to Frederic, 1221, which Innocent the 4th renews Anno 1242,
and Anno 1245, deposes him, sends some to kill Frederi. c. 1247; Excommunicates
Conrad 1251; sends Forces against Conrad, and offers Sicily to Richard Earl of
Cornwall, who refuses it: Urban 4 th Excommunicates Manfred 1262. Nicolas the
3d altered the form of Government in Rome, and took away the Title of Vicar of
the Empire, from Chharles 1278. Martin the 4th Excommunicates and deposes Peter
of Arragon, and gives it to Charles Valois, youngest Son to the King of France,
1283. Honorius the 5th continues the Excommunication. All this, excepting what
was done by Gregory the 7th, in the time of the Expeditions to the Holy Land:
And if we look farther, (though I make it not necessary, that every Vial must
just suceed one another, but as I have before noted it, it is no inconsistency
to suppose them to be contemporary, or in the same Age and time,) but I say if
we look farther we shall see this great Heat which scorched Men, to be still
continued, if not increased; most frequent indeed, and almost upon every
occasion was this Fire Heaven, or Excommunications made use of.

Thus Anno 1297, Boniface the 8th deposes John, and Peter of Columna
Cardinals, and prosecuteth their Families; and that we may see what their
Opinion was of the extent of their Power, at the Jubilee 1300. He styles
himself Lord in Spirituals, and Temporals,, and Anno 1301. He excommunicates
the French King for burning his Bull, by which he commanded him to acknowledge
himself his Vassal, and 1302 gives France to the Emperor; this is that
Baniface of whom it was said (a form of Speech Baronius applies to several
others of the Popes) quod intrarit ut Vulpes, regnaverit ut Leo, mortuus sit ut
Canis, That he came in as a Fox, reigned as a Lion, and died like a Dog.

Anno 1317. John the 22d boasts that he had Power to depose Kings, (but was
opposed herein by Ockham) and de facto, first excommunicates Viscount Milan,
and after great contests with Lewis of Bavaria, or Lewis the 4 th chosen
Emperor, he Excommunicates him Anno 1324, and that which incensed him to it, is
supposed to be the offense he took at the Style Ulric, the Emperor's Secretary
(though without his knowledge) had given him in his Letters, of the Beast
rising out of the Sea. And Anno 1329 the Pope publishes his Excommunication
against the Emperor the second time; which Bennet the 12th, Anno 1335 likewise
continues, and makes King Edward the 3 d of England, Vicar of the Empire: The
said Excommunication is also continued afterward by Clement the 6 th Anno 1343,
and Absolution denied to the Emperor, unless he would resign the Empire to the
Pope; which he refusing Anno 1346. He causes some of the Electors to choose a
new Emperor, and to depose Lewis, whom he had branded with the Style of
Heretic, and Schismatic.

And here I shall put a stop to what I have to say on this head, the Princes of
the Empire upon the occasion of the Treatment Lewis met with for so many years
together from several of the Popes, having, as I may say, put their stop too to
this Exorbitant Power, the Popes had for several Ages tyrannized over them
with; For so it was deereed at Franckfort, Anno 1347. That the Yoke of the Pope
should be cast off, quod servus servorum fastu, libidineque dominandi, ita
insaniat and in preceps abeat: Because he who was the Servant of Servants, out
of an Haughtiness and Lust of Ruling, did so rage and run headlong into such
rash and precipitate things: And as for Charles the 4 th. (whom the aforesaid
Clement had caused to be chosen Emperor in the place of Lewis, whom he had
deposed) they deny him to be lawfully chosen, as being neither chosen nor
Crowned in the Places proper for either, as also because it was all a clancular
proceeding, and when there was no Vacancy of the Empire; whereupon they choose
King Edward the third of England; but he having Affairs of his own to mind,
returns his Thanks for the great honor done him, and waves it.

The Pope however sends his Legate after the Death of Lewis, to absolve the
Princes of the Empire, who adhered to Lewis, on condition they would swear that
the Emperor had no Power to depose the Pope, and that from thenceforward they
would not obey their Emperor, unless he be approved as Emperor by the Pope: The
Ecclesiastics most readily approve this, and the Laics as fiercely oppose it;
whereupon the Pope is forced to abate something (let me so express it) of this
great Heat, with which they had so long scorched Men, and remit this Oath, and
absolve them from the Excommunication.

And this may be sufficient to explain this Vial: Only here, as before, it will
be asked what is this to the Fall of Antichrist? These and such like Instances,
(for many more might be given, and particularly in our own Story, witness (1.)
the Controversy between William the second, and Urban the second, Anno 1097. in
the Case of Anselm's appealing to the Pope, who was thereupon about to
Excommunicate the King, but having a little before excommunicated the Emperor
Henry the fourth, he forbore it, lest otherwise Excommunications by being made
common, might be slighted; as also (2.) between him, and Henry the first, in
the case of Investitutes, in which Anselm likewise opposed the King in behalf
of the Pope's Pretensions to them. (3.) Between him, i. e. his Legate, and King
Stephen; and again, (4.) in the case of the Legatine Powee between him and
Henry the Second. (5.) Between him, and King John, whom the Excommunicated, and
Interdicted the Kingdom; and upon his submission to him, at the instance of
Pandulphus, at whose Feet he laid down his Crown to be disposed of as the Pope
should please, which Pandulphus took up, and kept it three or four days; nor
restoring it then, but upon condition that he and his Successors should hold
the Kingdom of the Sea of Rome, at the annual Tribute of 1000 Marks; which was
the great occasion of that Slavery in which Rome so long held this our Nation,)
all tending to aggrandize him in his most insolent Tyranny; but if so yet it is
too for the Increase of that Guilt, which will at last be so thoroughly avenged;
as will appear, by that time we shall have rellected on the following Vials:
The first whereof, i. e. the fifth, is directly on Antichrist, i. e. The very
Seat of the Beast.

The second or sixth is likewise on Antichrist, though so as to affect the
whole Seat of the Roman and Mohammedan Empires, i. e. The Eastern, and Western
Empires thus joined again, for they shall be both then hastening toward the
day of Vengeance.

And as for the third or seventh, it is to end in the final Ruin of both, and
all the Antichristian Powers under them; or rather in the Kingdom of Christ set
up against Antichrist in its utmost extent, in that lasting Triumph, he shall
then give his Church over him, and all other her Enemies.

But then, as in this Vial, we have been now speaking of, so in that which next
follows, this will be again to be observed, that it is not necessary it should
immediately succeed the other; or not to be to begin, till the other is fully
expired; no, it is necessary in the nature of the thing, that several of the
Vials should be contemporary with one another, forasmuch as they are
Punishments for Sin, and did not the Sin continue (to which Men are often
judicially given up) the Punishment inflicted for it, would not be so agreeable
to the manner of Gods proceeding in the ways of his Judgment, the Rule being,
Isaiah 27. 9. By this therefore shall the Iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this
is all the fruit to take away his Sin.

Now then these being spoken of as distinct Vials, i. e. The Punishment and
Sins which bring them on; if instead of having their Iniquity purged, Men shall
run into more gross, and heinous Iniquity; if instead of that Fruit, they ought
to bring forth upon the Chastisement, which is to take away their sin, they
shall fructify only in Malice, and Wickedness, if, (which is the case in these
Vials) they, who are punished for having the Mark of the Beast on them, and
worshipping his Image, shall continue still to wear that Mark, and worship his
Image, which I take to belong to the second, third, and fourth Vials, (for on
such it is, (not so properly on the Beast himself) they are poured out) what
can be expected, but that the Plague should go along with the Sin, that calls
for it down? And that if the Beast himself do not so immediately suffer in
those Vials, that it should be, because to Him more particular Judgments are
reserved, or both He and they to go on from one wickedness to another, till
there be no Remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16.

CHAP. XV. Of the fifth Vial, Rev. 16. 10, 11.
AND the fifth Angel poured out his Vial upon the seat of the Beast, and his
Kingdom was full of Darkness, and they gnawed their Tongues for Pain.

And blasphemed the God of Heaven, because of their Pains, and their sores, and
repented not of their Deeds.

What is the seat of the Beast, but Rome? What the Vial poured out upon his
seat, but the depriving it of what gives it its Luster, Dignity, and Wealth, i.
e. (as it is expressed in the former Vial) of its Sun? the Pope I mean, whose
more benign aspect and influence were so highly beneficial to it, whilst it was
the place of his Residence; but being removed thence, how is its Greatness and
Glory forthwith Eclipsed? How all things black and dark, and under the thickest
Cloud?

Now, when happened this, but when Clement the fifth Anno 1305, being chosen
Pope in his absence in France, called the Cardinals thither, and settled his
Residence at Avignon? 'Twas now the City that was full of People, sat solitary,
and became as a Widow; now she that was great among the Nations, and Princess
among the Provinces, became Tributary, Lam. 1. 1. She that before received the
Riches of so great a part of the World, that had so great Honor and Devotion
paid to her, now sends her Wealth, and pays homage herself to another shrine:
This lasted for seventy four Years together, till Gregory the Eleventh brought
back his See to Rome; but so that after his Death, the French Cardinals would
have a Pope of their Nation, and accordingly chose Clement the 7 th, the rest
of the Cardinals having chosen Urban the sixth: Urban keeps at Rome, but
Clement at Avignon: The Schism continued for above forty Years, for the cure
whereof, a Council is called at Pisa, which creates Alexander the fifth Pope;
so that now there are three Popes at once, Gregory the Twelfth, (for he was
chosen to succeed at Rome,) Bennet the thirteenth to succeed Clement the
seventh in France, and Alexander the fifth; and not long after John the 23d,
and after him Martin the fifth, upon which the Schism ended.

But such were the contests, prevarications, and cruelties of those Times, such
the Barbarities of these Vicars of Christ, (as they would all fain be styled)
that it is a shame they should be named among Christians: I shall give but one
or two Instances.

The first is that of Urban the 5 th, wrapping up five Cardinals in Bags, and
commanding them to be cast into the Sea.

The second, that of Innocent the seventh, who, when the Romans were earnest
with him to take away the Schism (that had been so long in the Church), and
that he would extinguish the Wars and Seditions; the King of France having
promised his Assistance herein, and Peter de Luna, the Antipope no way
resisting such an accord, he sent the Romans (who thus addressed him) to Lewis
his Nephew, then residing at the Hospital of the Holy Ghost in Saxia, and by
his Authority they are forthwith all Murdered, and thrown out at the Windows,
and the reason given for it was, Eo modo tolli seditiones and Schisma, non alio
quidem posse, That that was the way that Seditions and Schisms were to be taken
away, and that it could be done no other way. So Longus a Coriolano. p. 373,
374.

He that shall read the History of those times, shall not need to go far for an
Expositor to explain to him, what is to be understood by the Beasts Kingdom
being full of Darkness, and they gnawing their Tongues for pain; such the Envy,
and bitter Malice they had against one another, such the Torment, Vexation, and
Rancour of their envenomed Minds, such the disorder and confusion that was
among them, every thing dark, and black as Hell it self, from whence it came:

As neither will he for a Comment on what follows, viz. Their blasphemingthe
God of Heaven because of their Pains, and their Sares, and repenting not of
their Deeds: For what could be so highly to the dishonor of God himself, what
so much to Blaspheme his Name, as to pretend Religion, the cause of Christ, and
the Right of governing his Church; for all their excess and outrage? And to say
no more, to use his Holy Name in thus Excommunicating one another? What so much
for the Disgrace of those Princes, and others, who were so highly scandalized
at such Enormities, as to continue still in Communion with those who had (let
me so speak) Excommunicated all Holiness and Charity, I may say, even Christ
himself, and his Gospel from their Church?

For was it not too in this Season, that the Gospel was made to give place to
the Papal Constitutions, the Word of God made of none Effect through the
Traditions of Men? Mark 7. 13. I mean in that Authority to which the Canon Law
was advanced? Which being begun by Cyratian Anno 1145, enlarged by Boniface the
8th, Anno 1298, and having the Clementines added to it by Clemeus the 5th, Anno
1308, and the Extravagancies by John the 22d, Anno 1320, became the Rule and
Standard of Popery.

And what could this produce, but the grossest darkness in the Kingdom of the
Beast? For what must the mist be, that is cast hereby upon the Understandings
of Men, when instead of that Word which is a Lamp unto our Feet, and a Light
unto our Path, Psalm 119. 105. Only such a fatuus ignis, as that of foolish
Man's Invention is, shall be allowed to guide us? How is this for the Blind to
lead the Blind, and what is the Consequence thereof, what can it end in, but in
making both fall into the Pit?

Indeed this I could not here well pass by, as being at least part of that
heavy Judgment, which was then inf^icted on Antichrist; not but that this
darkness began earlier to spread it self over the Kingdom of the Beast, than
the time we mark out for that particular Vial, said here to be poured on his
Seat, (according to what we have already taken notice of, viz. That it is not
necessary that each Vial in its full extent should be just confined to some one
Period, wherein none other of the Vials were pouring out,) and will in some
degree continue, as long as any thing of this Kingdom shall remain; for indeed
the Kingdom of the Beast is nothing else but the Kingdom of Darkness, it being
only by Error, and Ignorance he can hope to prevail: For let but the light of
the Gospel once clearly shine forth, and all Mists, and Clouds will vanish
forthwith, and this Kingdom of the Beast it is by that at lastit is to be
overthrown) will vanish with them.

But one thing more is to observed of this Vial, as it was poured out upon the
Seat of the Beast; and that was, as now Princes began to despise the Power of
the Popes, and make themselves their Judges; it was what they had sometimes
attempted before, but the Popes still got the better of them in the contest;
but now they effectually made them to be deposed, and submitted them to the
Authority of Councils, as in that of Constance: Nay, they came to that
Indiffereucy, that several of them owned neither the Pope at Rome, nor at
Avignon; and Charles the 6th King of France went so far, as by a public Edict
to decree, ne quis suorum Romanum, aut Avenionem excutreret ad Pontifiem, That
none of his Subjects should go either to Rome or Avignon to the Pope.

Besides, it was what did not a little increase their pains, and sores, what
happened to the Seat of the Beast under this Vial, from Wiclef, and his
Followers, who so highly declaimed against the Pope, as being Antichrist, and
so stronuously opposed the Doctrines of Purgatory, of Images, of Invocation of
Saints, of Transubstantiation, of Indulgences, etc. For however Wiclef's
Doctrine was condemned at Constance, Jerome of Prague, and John Hus Burnt for
defending it, yet how did the Light of the Gospel by them Preached, begin to
dispel the Mists and Clouds which this Kingdom of Darkness had cast abroad? How
did it but make way for that clearer Light, which shone forth yet clearer at
the Reformation? When according to Hus's Prophecy, (viz. Nunc quidem torretis
Anserem, at veniet Cycnus, quem non poteritis torrere, post centum Annos Deo,
and mihi respondebitis: Now indeed you roast a Goose (alluding to his own Name,
which signifies a Goose) but there will come a Swan, whom you shall not be able
to roast, after 100 Years you shall answer to God and me) Luther appeared
against the Corruptions of the Church of Rome.

And here let us leave them full of Darkness as they are, and gnawing their
Tongues for pain, for grief and Vexation, that all they can say in the defense
of their Superstition and Idolatry, will never be able to silence Truth: Let
them do all they can to hold the World in Darkness still, by the denying them
the use of Scripture, but the Day is dawned, and the Light is broken forth, and
will dazzle the Eyes of those Bats and Owls, who so much fly from it. The
Knowledge of God's Word, (blessed be his holy Name for it) will not suffer Men
to be so Blind as to be led any longer by such dark Guides: let them (seeing it
is their black doom so to do) Blaspheme the God of Heaven; let them continue in
their Impenitency, and not repent of their Deeds; but that God, whom they
Blaspheme is able to recover his own Glory, and will give them but too too long
a day to repent, when they who have so much labored to support their Kingdom
by it, shall themselves be reserved in Everlasting Chains of Darkness.

CHAP. XVI. Of the sixth Vial, Rev. 16. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
AND the sixth Angel poured out his Vial upon the great River Euphrates, and
the Water thereof was dried up, that the way of the Kings of the East might be
prepared.

And I saw three unclean Spirits like Frogs come out of the Mouth of the
Dragon, and out of the Mouth of the Beast, and out of the Mouth of the false
Prophet.

For they are the Spirits of Devils, working Miracles, which go forth unto the
Kings of the Earth, and of the whole World, to gather them to the Battle of
that great Day of God Almighty.

Behold I come as a Thief, blessed is he that watches, and keeps his
Garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his Shame.

And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew Tongue,
Amageddon.

This Vial contains a great variety of matter, and Subjects, to whom it
relates, and seems to point at Events, which concern not only the fall of
Antichrist, under the restriction we have hitherto been speaking of him, but of
all others, (though not so precisely under that Denomination) who with him rise
up against the Lord and his Anointed, Psalm. 2. 2.

And it is but necessary we should have this notion of it, the business of this
Vial being to usher in the Kingdom of Christ on Earth, i. e. To open a way for
the Return of the Jews, and the fullness of the Gentiles, which is what that
Kingdom will consist in; And if so, it cannot be imagined, how there should be
any left to oppose the Purity of the Christian Religion, (which will be the
great Glory of our Lords Reign,) any of his Enemies remain, who shall not be
destroyed.

That indeed his Enemies shall be willing to make a push for it, to make their
last attempt against his Power, is scarce to be doubted; for if (as it is in
the former Vial) they repent not after all his Plagues of their Deeds, what can
be expected, but that their Impenitency will hide the things that belong to
their Peace from their Eyes, and they will use all endeavors to assert their
unrighteous Cause?

What can be expected, but that they will band and league together to oppose
their common Enemy? or if they band not, if they enter not into common Leagues
and Alliances to this purpose; if they continue still at a distance, and
Enemies to one another, yet that they will all conspire in the same Malice
against Christ; i. e. That the Dragon, the Beast, and false Prophet will all
unite in the common cause of Hell, and gather themselves together to the Battle
of that great day of God Almighty? Such is the precipitate Malice, such the
blind Envy, such the unaccountable Despair of the Devil, and his wicked
Instruments, that though they are certain, nothing but ruin can be the
Consequence, they cannot deny themselves the satisfaction of the attempt:
Lucifer, under whom they have listed, will ascend, and be like the most high;
will in his boundless Pride and Ambition be aspiring to set himself above God,
although he thereby be but preparing his own Hell, and fitting himself for
everlusting Chains of Darkness.

But then Chains and Darkness will be their Lot, Ruin and Destruction will
attend all their Enterprises, and that in the Extent, Manner, and Circumstances
of it, is what is here more particularly to be considered.

Now that I shall do in the Method the Vial is delivered.

1. I shall consider what is to be understood by the great River Euphrates, and
the water thereof, and how that is to be dried up?

2. What by the way of the Kings of the East to be prepared, and how the drying
up of the Water of the great River Euphrates will prepare their way?

3. What is to be meant by the three unclean Spirits like Frogs, coming out of
the Mouth of the Dragon, and out of the Mouth of the Beast, and out of the
Mouth of the false Prophet?

4. Why Christ is said to come as a Thief at this time, and to declare those
Blessed that shall then Watch?

5. The turn he shall give to Affairs, in gathering them into a place, called
in the Hebrew Tongue, Amageddon?

1. What is to be understood by the great River Euphrates, and the Water
thereof, and how that is to be dried up?

Euphrates may be taken either literally, or in a figurative sense; either for
the River it self, and its Waters, in the common Notion we have of these, or
for those who are Borderers on it; and it is the style the Holy Ghost makes use
of, Rev. 17. 15. to express Peoples, Multitudes, Nations, and Tongues, by
Waters.

If in the first sense we take this, viz. For the River it self, and its
Waters, in the common notion we have of these; then the drying up the Water
thereof under this Vial, will be either like what happened in the drying up the
Red Sea for the Children of Israel to pass through it toward Canaan, or what
has already happened to Euphrates it self at the taking of Babylon by Cyrus,
who made wide and deep Trenches, whereby to divert it Streams, and so came upon
that City unawares in the night of their solemn Feast; the same Stratagem by
which Semiramis and Alexander are likewise reported to have taken it, as
Frontinus relates, l. 3. c. 7. i. e. This will be, Either

By Miracle; God immediately interposing as he then did, for the deliverance of
his People, the same People of Israel, as we shall afterward show, for whom he
wrought the former Miracle, and in order to his bringing them into the same
Canaan, or Land of Promise; Or

By some artificial Stratagem, whereby they shall be enabled to open to
themselves a passage through it.

But if in the latter Sense, Euphrates, and its Waters are to be taken, viz.
for those who are Borderers on, or Inhabitants near or about it; Then

The drying up the Water thereof, will be, causing the People who thus inhabit,
or border on or about it, like the Sea opening on this, or on that side, no
longer to hinder the passage of the ten Tribes (for it is in all likelihood
there the ten Tribes, at least, great part of them are; nay, whether not mixed
among the Turks themselves is very doubtful) into Canaan, and returning to
Jerusalem, whether in all probability they shall be then gathered. And this
makes way for our second Enquiry, viz.

2. What is to be understood by the way that is to be prepared for the Kings of
the East, and how the drying up of the Water of the great River Euphrates will
prepare their way?

The preparing the way for the Kings of the East, i. e. For those vast
Dominions and Countries that lie Eastward, (for Kings come not without their
People, and Subjects to attend them) will signify that great Accession shall
in those parts of the World be there made to the Gospel, by a way being opened
for them to embrace it; or if by the Kings of the East we understand those, who
de jure, or of right are such, viz. The Seed of Abraham, or the Jews, whose the
Promises are, then will this import (as is already said) a way being made for
them through Euphrates, in the twofold Sense we have given of it; to return
into their own Country, and be there possessed of that Sovereignty over other
Nations, that belongs to them; and being there, without confining their Return
to those who shall come Eastward of Euphrates (for from all parts of the World
shall they at least some of them be gathered to Jerusalem, as is otherwhere
Prophesied; Isaiah 11. 11, 12, 14, 15, 16. Ezekiel. 37. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26,
27, 28.) They may be called the Kings of the East particularly (for so
Jerusalem, and Canaan are called the East,) because there is to be the chief
Seat of the Empire, there they to be again Established.

And it is more than probable it should be so, if we consider the many
Prophesies which expressly foretell it, and have never yet been fulfilled to
them. It Is impossible that there should not be glorious times behind for the
Seed of Abraham, and as impossible that the Kings of East, (the Nations amongst
which they are scattered, those vast Dominions and Countries which lie
Eastward, and have hitherto been so much in the dark, as to the knowledge of
the Gospel) should not share in that Glory with them.

And, methinks I cannot but upon this occasion apply what we read, Jeremiah 50.
38. A drought is upon her Waters, and they shall be dried up; and again, chap.
51. 32. The Passages are stopped; it is with reference to Euphrates, and the
drying up of its Water, the Prophet there speaks, when Babylon was to be taken
by Cyrus, as we have already showed, it really happened; but it we consider the
whole context, and the gracious expressions of God to his People, beyond what
has ever yet been verified to them; such as what occurs, chapter 51. 5. For Israel
has not been forsaken, nor Judah of his God, of the Lord of Hosts: And ver.
19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. The Portion of Jacob is not like them, for he is the
former of all things, and Israel is the Rod of his Inheritance, the Lord of
Hosts his Name.

Thou art my Battle-Axe and Weapon of War: For with thee will I break in pieces
the Nations, and with thee will I destroy Kingdoms.

And with thee will I break in pieces the Horse, and his Rider, and with thee
will I break in pieces the Chariot, and his Rider.

With thee also will I break in pieces Man and Woman, and with thee will I
break in pieces Old and Young, and with thee will I break in pieces the
Young Man and the Maid.

I will also break in pieces with thee, the Shepherd and his Flock, and with
thee will I break in pieces the Husbandman and his Yoke of Oxen, and with thee
will I break in pieces Captains and Rulers.

And I will render unto Babylon, and to all the Inhabitants of Chaldea, all
their evil that they have done in Zion in your sight, says the Lord.

And again, ver. 36. Therefore thus says the Lord, behold I will plead thy
Cause, and take Vengeance for thee, and I will dry up her Sea, and make her
Springs dry.

And before, chap. 50. 4, 5, 6. In those Days, and in that time, says the
Lord, the Children of Irael shall come, they and the Children of Judah
together, going and Weeping: They shall go and seek the Lord their God.

They shall ask the way to Zion with their Faces thitherward, saying, Come and
let us join our selves to the Lord, in a perpetual Covenant that shall not be
forgotten.

My People has been lost Sheep, their Shepherds have caused them to go astray,
they have turned them away on the Mountains; they have gone from Mountain to
Hill, they have forgotten their resting place.

And afterward, ver. 17, 18, 19. Israel is a scattered Sheep, the Lions have
driven him away: First the King of Assyria has devoured him, and last,
Nebuchadrezzar King of Babylon has broken his Bones.

Therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, behold I will
punish the King of Babylon, and his Land, as I have punished the King of
Assyria.

And I will bring Israel again to his Habitation, and he shall feed on Carmel
and Bashan, and his Soul shall be satisfied upon Mount Ephraim and Gilead.

In those days, and in that time, says the Lord, the Iniquity of Israel shall
be sought for, and there shall be none, and the Sins of Judah, and they shall
not be found, for I will pardon them whom I reserve.

And ver. 33, 34. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the Children of Isreal, and the
Children of Judah were oppressed together, and all that took them Captives held
them fast, they refused to let them them go.

Their Redeemer is strong, the Lord of Hosts is his Name, he shall thoroughly
plead their Cause, that he may give Rest to the Land, and disquiet the
Inhabitants of Babylon.

Now then, if Babylon has never yet been so fully destroyed, as is here
expressed, as he, who reads these two whole Chapters, will see: If Israel has
never yet been so restored as is there Prophesied, it will follow, that what is
there promised is still to be made good to the Jews, and that which is to lead
to it, will be (whether in a literal, or Metaphorical Sense, or both, I leave
it to the considering Reader to determine) by the drying up the River
Euphrates, and that for the destruction of Babylon in its largest Extent:
Whatever Babylon it is, that has tyrannized over God's People, it is to have
its Share in this Vial.

It Is true, I submit it, that the Holy Ghost has expressly mentioned the Medes
in the Judgment to be brought on Babylon, described in these two Chapters of
Jeremiah, Jer. 51. 28. But I cannot but think that there is something typical
as well as literal, in the large description there given; and if it be certain,
that a great deal of what is said there cannot be applied to the taking of
Babylon by Cyrus, and the return of the Jews upon his Proclamation, or any
thing that has since happened to that Land of graven Images, chapter 50. 38. It is
as certain, that there is a Day still to come, when what is lacking shall be
fulfilled upon her, and upon all those, who like her are mad upon their Idols,
ibid. A Day too wherein no one Title of what God has promised to the Jews, to
Israel and Judah (as they are chapter 50. 4. and 51. 5. distinctly mentioned) shall
fall to the Ground.

This, as to the drying up the Water of the River Euphrates, with the end why
it is to be dried up, viz. That the Way of the Kings of the East might be
prepared.

Only one thing I shall farther offer, and that is, if by Euphrates and the
Water thereof, we understand those who were the Borderers on it, the
Inhabitants near or about the River, (of whom more by and by) it will not be
necessary, that we precisely tie them up to that Place, for the whole time of
the Vial, no more than it will be necessary, that for the ascertaining the
River it self, we suppose the same Waters to be always there: No, we know very
well, the Waters that run in Rivers are still in Flux, that which passes the
Channel to Day, is gone from thence to Morrow, and yet it is by all esteemed
the same River still; People and Nations are as much in Flux, as Waters can be,
those that live in one Country in one Age, in another Age may live in another
Country, but yet sure they are the same People still; at least if they change
their Seats, and remove their Habitation, they leave still their Country behind
them, that abides the same, whatever becomes of its flitting Inhabitants.

The use I make of this, is, that if Euphrates be taken for the People that
bordered on it, when the Holy Ghost first speaks of them, then wherever this
People shall be in the whole time of this Vial, the drying up the Water of
Euphrates may be applied to them: So that if now the People (the Turks are that
People, as we shall presently show) be removed any of them from the Banks of
Euphrates ('it is but what its own Waters often do,) wherever they are (for so
might the Waters that run out of Euphrates, if they could in all their
wanderings be distinguished from other Waters, be still called the Waters of
Euphrates) they may still be expressed under the same style; And if so, then
there will be still a farther notion we may have of the drying up the Water of
the great River Euphrates, as it may be enlarged to hold out to us the
overthrow of the whole Mohammedan Empire; the removing that Tyrannical Kingdom,
which has so long usurpt upon the World, and oppressed the Jews in particular,
has so far extended its Territories, and all to the Ruin of the true Religion;
that Religion, which under the last Vial is to be in its Triumph, and under
this to have its way prepared for it.

I pass on to the third Enquiry, viz.

3. What is to be meant by the three unclean Spirits, like Frogs coming out of
the Mouth of the Dragon, and out of the Mouth of the Beast, and out of the
Mouth of the false Prophet?

And this will be divided again into these several Questions, viz.

1. What we are to understand by the Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet?

2. What by the three unclean Spirits?

3. Why they are compared to Frogs?

4. Why said to come out of the Mouth of the Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet?

5. What it is, with reference to the Business for which they come, that stirs
them up more particularly to come out, as they do, under this Vial?

1. What we are to understand by the Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet?

The Dragon in this Book of the Revelation is taken either for that old Serpent
called the Devil, or Satan, Rev. 12. 9. Or for the supreme, Secular, or
temporal Power, as acting under him, Prosecuting the same Mischief, envenomed
with the same Malice against all that is good, as this Serpent, or Dragon
himself is; and the Name under which such act, is that of the Beast, the name
of Antichristian Power, whilst both in Heathen and Papal Rome as is evident by
comparing the first, and eleventh verses of the 13th. Chapter of this Book:
Where we have two Beasts, one rising up out of the Sea, and the other coming
up out of the Earth; the one said to have seven Heads, and ten Horns, ver. 1.
The same that is expressly said of the Dragon, chap. 12, 13. The other to rise
only with two Horns like a Lamb; to the first, the Dragon is said to have given
his Power, and Seat, and great Authority; of the other it is said, He spoke as
the Dragon, both under some relation to him, but so that the first (as I shall
offer the Reason for it presently) has his Name here given him of the Dragon,
the other that of the Beast, and the Subject of their Power is Antichristian
Rome in its largest Extent, bloody and cruel as a Dragon.

For that seems to be the reason, why Rev. 12. 3. He is called Red, as if dyed
with the Blood of the Saints. Cruelty indeed has been the Character of Rome
ever since it had its Being: Romulus first Tinctured its VValls with the Blood
of his Brother; and all the Increases of it have been by Spoil and Ruin: The
Bloody Sword has in a manner always been drawn amongst them, and the time can
scarce be named, wherein they have not been Engaged either in intestine or
foreign Wars; Blood has always colored this Dragon, but his deepest Dye has
been in the Blood of the Christians.

It was the ruin of Christianity he labored for, in its very Birth, as is
described Rev. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4. and has not been wanting ever since to attempt
upon it, in all the Methods and Degrees of that native Cruelty which is
ascribed to the Dragon.

But then the difference is, that whereas the Beast, as applicable both to
Imperial, and Papal Rome, is said to have ten Horns, and upon his Horns ten
Crowns, Rev. 13. 1. The Dragon is said to have but seven Crowns, and those on
his seven Heads. The Reason whereof I take to be this; That the Power of the
Dragon looks backward and forward, viz. to the whole duration of the Roman
Power, under its seven Heads, or seven forms of Government, viz. Under Kings,
Consuls, Tribunes, Decemvirs, Dictators, Emperors, Popes: That of the Beast is
limited to the time of the ten Kings, which were afterward to rise up upon the
division of the Empire; at which time that other Beast, (for so the Holy Ghost
speaks distinctly of them in that forementioned Chapter, viz. Rev. 13. 1st and
11 Verses) was to rise, and that too to hold of the Dragon; for if it be said
of the first of these Beasts, that the Dragon gave him his Power, and his Seat,
and great Authority, verse 2. (as we just now observed) it is said of the other
Beast, that he spoke as the Dragon.

But that the name of Dragon, (for so I suppose it to be in this Vial) is here
given to the one and not to the other, I am apt to think may be, from the
different Grounds on which they act; the former Beast, i. e. The Emperor
standing upon the same Foundation, and exercising the same sort of Power, that
the former Emperors, or whatever other his Predecessors did, i. e. what is
properly Civil: The other Beast pretending his title from Religion, the title
he holds under Christ, as his immediate Vicar on Earth, said therefore to have
two Horns, like a Lamb: And therefore where they come to be distinctly spoken
of, (as I presume them to be in this Vial) the Name of Dragon, the common
Emblem of the whole Roman Power is given to the one, that of Beast, (for the
Dragon he cannot be, properly speaking, because at the most he is but one of
his seven Heads, and that under another Capacity than the others are, as
pretending to hold from Christ for other ends, and purposes, than the other
Heads received their Power,) to the Other. The first is the Beast too, ver. 1.
But the Beast that was to be, as it were wounded to Death, and ever after not
to live but in that Image this other Beast should give him, ver. 15. And
therefore more eminently may this Beast which gave the other that Life it has,
be styled the Beast, as it is in the following part of this whole Book of the
Revelation. Distinct indeed they are in all their Actings, and therefore may
very well be distinctly spoken of; the first Beast, i. e. The Emperor in the
Exercise of Civil Power, as he now enjoins it, for his distinguishing Character
be very well remitted to what the Holy Ghost makes the common Style of all the
seven Heads, or forms of Government in the whole time of the Roman Power, i. e.
The style of Dragon; the other Beast, i. e. the Pope, for his Usurpations over
the Civil Powers, with that Jurisdiction he exercises over them, as well as
others, and that dependence they have on him, more eminently and solitarily be
said to be the Beast.

So then by this time it will not be difficult to apprehend, whom we are to
understand by the Dragon and the Beast: Not so much the Old Serpent, the Devil,
or Satan himself, as those who act under him. The one the more directly under
the Relation of a Dragon, as to him he, (the Dragon) so expressly is said to
give his Power; the other under the style of Beast, as it is more particularly
ascribed to him, that came up out of the Earth, i. e. As is before showed at
large, as he was to usurp upon the former, and come up upon the Ruins of the
Empire; And this as a Lamb, though in the Event he should show himself to act
as a Dragon.

Which being granted, the only difficulty will be, whom we are to understand by
the false Prophet: Whether the deluding Spirit, by which these Acted, those
false Teachers, and Seducers, which act with, or under them; or some other
Person, or state of Men distinct from both?

And for my part, I am inclined to think it must be some third Person or State
distinct from the two other: For I cannot be of their Opinion, who make the
Dragon, and Beast, and false Prophet to be the same, no more than I can the
three unclean Spirits which come out of their Mouths to be one; which being in
it self a Contradiction, I hope it will not be accounted one to distinguish
them.

But who then shall be this false Prophet? Who indeed, but he, who has falsely
arrogated it to himself? Mahomet I mean, who is known to have assumed it, and
it is always given him by his Followers, and that in preference to Christ
himself, the great Prophet of his Church, and he who was promised under that
Name, Deuter. 18. 18.

Besides it is a Style the Dragon, and Beast, Emperor and Pope, let me now call
them, never assumed: And I cannot see, why this should not be admitted here; if
we observe either, where the Vial is said to be poured out, viz. on Euphrates,
in which the Turks or Mahometans are so much concerned, (as is at large showed
in this Chapter,) and what the work assigned to the three unclean Spirits, is,
viz. To go forth unto the Kings of the Earth, and of the whole World, (a larger
district than is any where given to the Roman Empire alone) to gather them to
the Battle of that great Day of God Almighty.

It Is true indeed, that the false Prophet afterward, viz. Revel. 19. 20. and
Revel. 20. 10. is a style under which Antichrist is expressed, but then it is to
distinguish him from the Beast, not to make him the same with him; as also to
show how it was the Beast, or Roman Empire, was deceived by him, as he was a
false Prophet in the Doctrines he taught, and the Miracles whereby he pretended
to confirm the same; and what was the consequence thereof, that the Deceiver
and deceived were to perish together.

Indeed I can scarce forbear to conjecture at least, that this Vial looks
farther than is yet expressed; for when we have given the utmost Extent we can to
the Roman, and Mohammedan Empires, they will come very much short of what is set
down here, I mean the Kings of the Earth, and the whole World; which is of too
wide a compass to be contained in either of the former: Only the Dragon, the
old Serpent, or Satan who is called the God of this World, (and is most
properly so, in those places, where their Jurisdictions do not reach, for it is
there to this day the Devil is professedly Worshipped, at least he is so, in
some parts of the Pagan World,) in the extent of his Territories will take in
the whole. And I would be willing to hope that the Day is coming when there
shall be an end put to such his Usurpations; I would hope at the end of this
Vial to see the Jews in their Return, and the fullness of the Gentiles coming
in: I would hope to see, (it is an Event methinks, but agreeable to the Battle
of that great Day of God Almighty) our Lord taking to himself his great Power,
and Reigning, Rev. 11. 17. Or as it is Psalm. 2. 8. 9. Asserting to himself the
Heathen for his Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for his
Possession, breaking them with a Rod of Iron, and dashing them in pieces like a
Potters Vessel. And that such a time seems to be at hand will, appear, by that
time we shall have gone though this Vial.

This as to the first of these Questions, viz. What we are to understand by
the Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet? The second is,

2. What by the three unclean Spirits?

If by the Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet we understand three distinct
Persons, or States of Men, as before explained. then the three Spirits will be
nothing else but either so many distinct Powers, or Principles by which they
are acted in their opposition to Christ and his Church; or so many great
Instruments, Messengers, Missionaries, or whatever other Name we give them, by
which they execute their Decrees, and any way carried on the said Opposition.

Nor will the notion of these Spirits either acting the Dragon, Beast, and
false Prophet themselves, or sent out by them, be different, if as some do, we
understand them all of Antichrist, properly so called, as limited to the Romish
Economy.

And it may be worth enquiring whether with respect to a threefold sort, either
of Decrees, or Orders of Men, by which he propagates his wicked Cause; the
Canon Law, the later Councils, (such particularly as that of Trent,) and the
College set up; de propaganda fide on one Hand the Jesuits, Mendicant Friars,
(those wandering Saints among them,) and Secular Priests on the other, may not
make up the number?

For here I am sure, to go no further, we shall find unclean Spirits with a
witness: Such is not only the Corruption of the Doctrines they propagate, but
of the Lives of them that propagate them; such their Impurities of all sorts,
that we need but mention their Names, and their Persons, and Practices will
confirm all we can imagine in this Matter.

What they are, and how they Act, the World is too much a Judge of.

Nor is it to be admired, of which soever of these we understand it, that the
parallel the Holy Ghost has found for them, is that of Frogs. And

3. Why they are compared to these, is now to be enquired.

Frogs, we know, are amphibious Creatures, that delight in Filth and Slime; and
Naturalists tell us that many times they are immediately engendered out of
these, without the help of any other Parent; but where their cleanliest
Production is, it is by spawn cast on the sides of the most miry and offensive
Waters: Their nature is exceedingly to increase and multiply; they love to be
creeping abroad in the dark, and then croak most. But after all their croaking
and multitudes, they are one of the most feeble and despicable creatures; have
nothing but their noise to affright with, being trod down with every foot, and
soon lost in the slime and filth they delight in.

Clear Day, and Clear Waters they most avoid; what may either show or cleanse
them, is their greatest Enemy.

And what now could have better suited these unclean Spirits, of which we have
been speaking? And that whether we understand them in the first or latter
sense, as relating to the Emperor, Pope, and Turk, as they are differently
acted by them; or, as relating to the Romish Corruptions, and so belong only to
the two former?

For what is it but filth and slime they all delight in? What their Impurities
of Life and Doctrine? What the Corruption of Manners is in the Romish Church,
has been already touched, and is too notorious to want any large descant on
it; what it is among the Mahometans, whose Religion is made only to serve their
carnal appetite, their pride, ambition, cruelty, lust, and the like, the
liberty they give to these here, and the sensual Paradise they are taught to
expect hereafter, is but too sensible a demonstration of.

And to follow the Metaphor yet farther, it is slime and filth they rise out of,
troubled and fouled Waters that produce them; such are Ignorance and Errors,
Sin and Vice of all sort, abetted under the false pretenses of Truth and Piety.
It Is only in such corrupted streams that they spawn and multiply; only under
the covert of darkness, by concealing the light of the Gospel, that they creep
out in such numbers, in so many Sects and Orders as are among them both; and
it is in this darkness they croak most, make the greatest noise, and boast, and
with their clamours hope to bear down Truth: But after all their croaking and
multitudes too, what pitiful, weak, contemptible wretches will they find
themselves to be, when the day appears? How easily stamped into the mire, and
left only as noisome slime and filth to be detested and avoided by all that
pass by such are the unclean Spirits here spoken of, such these Frogs coming
out of the mouth, (a Conception worthy such Parents, such breath to inspire
them!) of the Dragon, the Beast, and the false Prophet, and

4. Why said to come out of their mouths, is our next question? The mouth is
the place of speech, where the Soul that sits Queen Regent within, gives forth
her commands; and these three unclean Spirits, like Frogs, being out of the
mouth of the Dragon, the Beast, and false Prophets, show them to be formed
there, and will agree both to the Persons, and things, to which we have above
applied these.

1. To the things, and then they may signify some commands, decrees, or
edicts, given out by each of these; the effect whereof should be to be rallying
together all the Antichristian forces from all parts of the World (as far in
them lies) to oppose the Truth, and people of God, and (as it were) to give
battle to God himself, who is the Protector of both.

2. To Persons, and then 'twill signify some Orders of men, their Messengers,
Missionaries, and the like; which being created by their respective Powers, set
up by their Decrees, or Commissions (for it is still out of their mouths, as all
Decrees or Commissions whatever are words proceeding thence) are to be the
busy Instruments to execute, what to these purposes is enacted by any of them.

But there is another Notion of these unclean Spirits like Frogs coming out of
the mouth of the Dragon, the Beast and false Prophet, and that I am apt to
think is (for we must consider this is one of the last Vials, or Plagues, and
therefore must look toward the ruin of them, on whom it is poured) to point
out the shameful end, toward which, these Enemies of the Church are hastening:
And the unclean Spirits coming out of their mouth, is a sort of dispossessing
them, and will signify the depriving them of that Power and Life, which before
they had; the breath when it once comes out of the mouth, being ready to vanish
in the Air.

Before, 'twas with the mouth of a Dragon every thing was spoken by them, Fear
and Terror went with all their Decrees; but see the Metamorphosis, the Dragon
with all his proud Boasts is changed into the most feeble, and contemptible
Frog.

And this leads to our fifth Question, viz.

5. What it is with reference to the business for which they come, that stirs
them up to come out of the mouth of the Dragon, the Beast, and the false
Prophet, as they do under this Vial?

Now that is to defend the false Worship, which they have so long upheld, and
for the maintaining whereof, they are so zealous (if 'twere possible) to engage
the whole World in their Quarrel; their time, as it is said of him, by whom they
are acted, Rev. 12. 12) is but short, and that makes them have so great wrath.

A little to explain this in the reason the Holy Ghost assigns of these unclean
Spirits now coming out like Frogs, croaking every where, raising all the noise
and clamor they can, like those of Egypt (let me use the allusion, Exodus 8.
3.) coming into the House and Bed chamber of Pharaoh, every where following and
plaguing those Princes, who shall like him harden their hearts, and not let
Gods people go, for (says the Text) they are the Spirits of Devils, (...) of
Demons, i. e. those wicked Powers whose great business it has always been to
corrupt the Divine Worship by setting up themselves, or any thing else in the
place of God; as those Ancient Heroes, and Deified Persons were among the
Heathens; in the Romish Church, the worship of Images, Saints, Relicts, etc.
and let me add, among the Mahometans, they pay to the Shrine of their own
Prophet the devotion (rather may be the false Prophet mentioned in this Vial,)
with the preference they give him above Christ, and those other Superstitions
among them, relating to the Opinion they have of their Dervises, and other
their Holy Men, will but too plainly interpret this: the Character the Apostle
gives of their many Corruptions under the Style of (...) the Doctrines of
Devils, or Demons, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. will comprize the whole matter: Now the
Spirit speaks expressly, that in the later times some shall depart from the
Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils, (of Demons)
speaking lies in Hypocrisy, having their conscience seared with a hot Iron,
forbidding to Marry, and commanding to abstain from Meats, which God has
created to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe, and know the
Truth.

Now these, such like are the things for which they shall set themselves to
contend; in the defense of these, and all other Doctrines of Devils, is it,
that they shall use all their skill, what by their false Miracles, their
Forgeries, and Impostures of every sort, to make Kings and Princes League in
their defense, and whom else they can draw into their Party; and they shall be
able very far to prevail therein, to the engaging them all in a War against the
true Religion; in which, when they shall appear most formidable, in full array
of Battle, and (as 'twere) ready to seize the Spoil: Then see the sudden turn
of things, the strange disappointment there will be to the Churches Enemies,
the surprising Catastrophe to the Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet; to the
unclean Spirits that come out of their mouths, the croaking Frogs of all sorts:
The Battle they are gathered to, is the Battle of that great day of God
Almighty; that day of most glorious success and victory; And he that shall
command as General in it, shall come as a Thief; sudden and surprising, as to
the Amazement and Confusion of all his Enemies, so to the joy and transport of
those that wait his coming. Blessed is he that watches and keeps his
Garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame! Which is an answer to the
fourth Enquiry, viz.

4. Why Christ is said to come as a Thief at this time, and to declare those
blessed that shall then Watch. And it is worthy our farther looking into,
whether he be not already come as a Thief? Whether great part of this Vial be
not fulfilled, and men have taken no notice of it? Whether he has not often
already trampled down his Enemies, as dirt, or mire under the feet, when he
has pleased to appear in the Cause of his Church and People? Let the success
of the Reformation, so far as it has already been carried on, the great and
wonderful overthrows that have been given to Papal Arms, such as what happened
in the Low Country Wars, the Sweedish War, our own Wars against the Spaniard,
etc. inform us herein: not to pass by the Inroads of the Turks, and other great
Events, I could mention, were they not too near us, and such, wherein we have
too much reason to fear, Men have not so watched, and kept their Garments, but
that they walk Naked, and their shame is seen through them; for so it is, when
men seek themselves and not God, when however the great Noise and Cry be for
Religion, yet that is forgotten as soon as they have served their turns.

But whatever men's designs and purposes are, yet the Counsel of God shall
stand; where ever they make the false step, God can make none. They may list
and rally for their own ends; the Enemies of the Church may form Campaignes,
confederate with their Allies, and gather them to the Battle of that great day
of God Almighty; but he has another work to do, both by, and upon them, than
they imagine; As

5. With respect to that great Turn, he is said to gather them together unto a
place called in the Hebrew Tongue Armageddon.

And it being called so in the Hebrew Tongue, we must examine what it is it
signifies in that Tongue.

Now to me there seems to be no more natural Etymology of the word, than what
speaks it to be utter Excision, (...) or (...) which is the same with Arma, is
res devota, or Anathema what is devoted, or set a part for destruction. And
(...) from the Verb (...) Exscidit vel discidit, may be rendered Excision; In
allusion it may be to those Excommunications which had been so much abused by
Antichrist (and something of this there is likewise in the Abhorrence the Turks
have of the Christians, whom they cut off from their Communion too) to
intimate, it may be, that great Excommunication, and real delivering them up to
Satan, which the Enemies of the Church were to expect.

And as to the place, if there be any, where this shall more eminently be
executed, why may not the Holy Ghost's giving us the name in Hebrew, and
telling us it is called so in the Hebrew Tongue, without explaining it, (as it is
done in other parts of Scripture, and particularly, Revel. 9. 11.) afford us
this Note, viz. that 'twill have its completion in some place, where the Hebrew
Language is supposed to be understood without an Interpreter; and what place so
proper for that (especially if the return of the Jews be pointed at in this
Vial) as Judea, or Jerusalem?

And what if it should be in some such manner as this? Suppose upon the issue
of the Wars, which are now on foot, in the Christian World, some European
Prince, or Princes, who have of late had very great success against the Turks,
should not accept of any accommodation, but pursuing their Victories into their
Territories, and striking so great a Consternation into them, (for it is upon
Euphrates, in the Sense we give of it in this Vial, that the Vial is poured)
that they every where fly, and are scattered, should affect to look toward
Constantinople, or Asia; and in the success of such Wars should give that
Apprehension to the Eastern, and other Princes round about, whereupon, (or for
what other cause God in his wise Providence shall think fit,) they, (the
Princes and Countries might be named too, for they seem to be noted in the
Scripture of Truth, but I forbear to be too curious in such a matter) should
forthwith gather together to dispossess them, but with that fatal disaster to
them all, that in this high Project they should clash between themselves, and
as it is Prophesied, Psalm 2. 9. Be dashed in pieces like a Potters Vessel?
Whereupon the Jews, whose right it is, and who about that time shall in all
likelihood be gathering thitherward, should without any the least Opposition,
seat themselves in their own Land; according to the Prophecy given out Zechar.
4. 6. Not by Might, nor by Power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts.

Suppose too, that at or about the same time, some Christian Prince leaguing
with the Mahometans, or otherwise weakening the Papacy by his, or his Peoples
falling off from Rome, should be instrumental in the Downfall of Babylon; or
those Princes, who have already deserted that great Where (as she is called,
Rev. 17. 1.) joined with the other of the ten Horns, which shall likewise in
due time desert her, (They have no other way to keep their Crowns on their
Heads!) should all conspire to hate her, and make her desolate and naked, and
eat her Flesh, and burn her with Fire. Rev. 17. 16?

Not that I will exclude from hence the Concurrence of the two Witnesses
themselves, i. e. Those suffering Christians who were to prophecy a Thousand,
two Hundred and threescore days in Sackcloth, as it is said Rev. 11. 3. The
same time (for 42 Months are made up of so many days) that the Court without
the Temple was to be given to the Gentiles, and the Holy City to be trod under
Foot, ver. 2. of that Chapter. For as it is said of them, That if any will hurt
them, fire proceeds out of their Mouth, and devoureth their enemies, and if
any Man will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed, v. 5, and ver. 6.
These have power to shut Heaven, that it rain not in the days of their
Prophecy: And have power over Waters to turn them into Blood, and to smite the
Earth with all Plagues as often as they will, with reference to those
Judgments, which for their sakes shall be brought upon the Antichristian World;
so, when they shall have finished their Testimony, have had War made against
them by the Beast, that ascends out of the bottomless Pit, and shall be
overcome and killed by him. ver. 7. But so that their Bodies shall not be
suffered to be put in Graves. ver. 9. No, by the Peoples, and Kindreds, and
Tongues, and Nations, they shall be still kept above Ground for those three
days and half, (as is there expressed) they are to lie in the street of the great
City, The Spirit of Life from God is to enter into them, they to stand upon
their Feet, and great fear to fall upon them which see them, ver. 11. And they
to hear a great Voice from Heaven, saying unto them, Come up hither, and to
ascend up to Heaven in a Cloud, and their Enemies behold them, ver. 12. And the
same Hour to be a great Earthquake, and the tenth part of the City to fall, and
the names of seven thousand Men to be slain, and the Remnant to be affrighted,
and give Glory to the God of Heaven.

Which, what it can signify, but the reinstating them in the enjoyment of
their Rights and Religion (for so standing upon their Feet, and ascending up to
Heaven, may import) with the great Change that shall thereon ensue in the
falling off of one of the ten Kings, or Kingdoms, into which at the Rise of
Antichrist, the Roman Empire was divided, (for that is the tenth part of the
great City, or Rome, as she is said afterward, chapter 17, 18. to Reign over the
Kings of the Earth) from all subjection to the Beast?

And the Names of seven thousand men being to be Slain, many point at the
overthrow of those, who as to any commerce, and good they bring to the World,
are but us the mere Names of men, the Priests and Monks I mean, with the other
parts of their corrupt Hierarchy, which in all probability must be then quite
extinct; slain not so much in their Natural, as Politic, or Religious Capacity
(however we shall call it,) which I suppose to be understood by their being
said to be slain in the Earthquake and not with the Sword, i. e. abolisht in
that great change and Revolution there shall then be. And the Remnant being
affrighted, and giving Glory to the God of Heaven, must signify the Conversion
of that 10th part of the City (the great City as it is before, v. 8. which in
the Book of the Revelation signifies the Antichristian Empire; i. e. Rome in
the full extent of its Territories, as said to Reign over the Kings of the
Earth, Revel. 17. 18.) which is said to fall, fall from Rome, from her
Superstitions and Idolatries, fall from her as she is Spiritually called Sodom
and Egypt, where also our Lord was Crucified; as she in her Corruptions and
Tyranny is what the two former were, and by her Power (for 'twas the Roman
Governor, who sentenced our Lord to the Cross) crucified the Lord, and has
ever since been crucifying his Members.

But then how much of this Transaction shall belong to the Witnesses, I am not
capable to say; that they shall have their part in it, not only in being
themselves restored, but in striking Terror into their Enemies, in dismaying,
and disabling them from all opposition, I make not the least question: The
Event must show how this shall be, and things are not so far off, that we
should be discouraged to wait for the Completion. Behold says our Lord, I come
as a Thief!

And how will men wonder that they were so much in the dark as to the Mystery?
How will they be ashamed that they have no better watched and kept their
Garments? That they have walked so naked, so unprovided for such a day? That
though the work has been doing, they observed it not? But, if they had, it
would not have been said Behold, I come as a Thief! 'Twill, notwithstanding all
the warnings God has given of it, all the preparations there are toward it,
be sudden, be surprising. I repeat it again, Behold I come as a Thief!

I said just now, notwithstanding all the warnings God has given of it, i. e.
of what is to happen under this Vial, viz. the recalling the Jews, the bringing
in the fullness of the Gentiles, the final fall of Babylon; notwithstanding too
all the preparations toward it;

Toward the first, the recalling of the Jews there cannot be much preparation,
for their return is to be as life from the dead, Romans 11. 15. as the
Resurrection of dry bones, Ezekiel. 37. by bringing them out of their Graves, v.
13. only as it is Ezekiel. 36. 37. Thus says the Lord, I will yet for this be
enquired of by the House of Israel, to do it for them; but it is what he will do
first for them, in pouring upon them the Spirit of Grace and Supplication,
Zach. 11. 10. And it may be there never was a greater longing in that people
for their return, than now is, never a fairer disposition toward Christianity.
But in that God will have his own way.

But as for the Mahometans, that they seem to be preparing for it, their
entertaining several of the Christian Tenets, and Principles, as may be seen in
Rycaut's History of the present state of the Ottoman Empire, p. 231, and
otherwhere may informus; As

With respect to the Fall of Babylon, there is nothing can more speak that to
be drawing on, than the Irreverence with which even those who still retain the
same Profession with her, do almost every where Treat her; witness the Wits of
France, and Italy it self, who either run into direct Atheism, or have private
Opinions and Sentiments of their own, with which they qualify those
Absurdities in that Religion, which they have not yet found a way entirely to
reject.

I shall not need on this occasion to mention the Quietists, or any other sort
of Scepticks in that Communion, but shall conclude this with that of our
Savior, Mark 3. 24. If a Kingdom be divided against it self, that Kingdom
cannot stand.

But to return: supposing the sense of the Vial to be as we have assigned it,
it will still remain upon as to show, what in likelihood is the time, when this
Vial shall begin, when to end.

Now for this can we have a better Guide than the Holy Ghost himself? Let us
see therefore what he has said in this matter.

We have it, Rev. 9. 13, 14. And I heard a Voice from the four Horns of the
Golden Altar, which is before God, saying to the sixth Angel which had the
Trumpet, loose the four Angels which are bound in the great River Euphrates.

What was the binding of the Angels? But that stop Providence was pleased, for
the time appointed, to put to their Acting, what before they were loose, or
free to?

What their being loosed, but the same Providence permitting them to Prosecute
their former designs, the taking off that check and restraint the same wise
Providence had laid on them?

Now when was it they were thus bound, when was it they were to be thus loosed?

But to this we must premise another Question, viz. Who these four Angels were?

To this the Context must give us Light, and that it will, if we consider of
whom the Holy Ghost had been speaking: Now those the Holy Ghost had been
speaking of, are generally agreed to be the Saracens, or Turks: For they were
those Locusts, as they are called ver. 3. which came up out of the Smoke, to
whom was given Power, as the Scorpions of the Earth have Power, and who are
said, ver. 11. To have a King over them, which is the Angel of the bottomless
pit, whose name in the Hebrew Tongue is Abaddon, but in the Greek Tongue has
his name A polly on, i. e. A Destroyer; I may say too in the Arabic, for both
Saracen and Turk in their Original are derived from Verbs, which among other
significations have that of to spoil, or destroy; according to which, John
Baptist a Egnatius speaking of the Origin of the Turks, says, Vagi
dispalatique quove cuique sors affuit, latrocinantes magis quam belligerantes,
pro vincias vastarunt. Wandering, and straggling about as every ones chance was,
they wasted Countries more like Robbers than Warriors.

Indeed both these Names are but the same, and by an usual change in the
Oriental Languages of Shin into Tau, they seem to have but one Original, (but
this by the by.)

They might be said to come up out of the Smoke, as it was by their Alcoran,
and the gross Errors therein broached, the Mists, and Vapors exhaled out of
the bottomless Pit, i. e. Derived from Hell it self, that the Sun, and the Air
were darkened; such the Cloud hereby cast upon the true Religion; the Light of
the Gospel, and its Professors.

That they are said to be Locusts, may be, as for their Numbers, and the
Country from whence Mahomet sprang, viz. Arabia where these most abound; so
from what they resemble the Locusts in, as they waste, and destroy all, where
they come.

That they are commanded not to hurt the Grass of the Earth, neither any green
thing, neither any Tree, but only those Men which have not the Seal of God in
their Foreheads, show, that they are not natural Locusts, but such who liko
Locusts shall make spoil, and havoc of those, who are hereby signified.

That they are said to have power given to them, as the Scorpions of the Earth
have Power, must relate to the manner in which by their first coming into
Europe, they plagued those, against whom they had their Commission; which was
not to Kill, but only torment for the time there assigned, i. e. for five
Months, the time which Locusts usually make their stay, or 150 Years signified
by those 5 Months; as a day in the Prophetic style, is taken for a Year, and de
facto it happened, and has been already touched on in our Chapter of the first
Vial.

That they are said to have a King over them, which is the Angel of the
bottomless pit, whose name in the Hebrew Tongue is Abaddon, but in the Greek
Tongue has his name Apollyon, ver. 11. Is a manifest Declaration, as under
whom he acts, i. e. Him, whose place of Residence is the bottomless pit, or
Hell; ('it is his Message and Errand he is sent on, though by the Permission of
the divine Providence,) so what the Message is for which this Angel, or
Messenger is dispatched thence; viz. It Is to destroy, and waste those persons,
and Countries to whom he is sent: Be it Hebrew, or Greek, in which he has his
Name, this is his Business, this his profession, to be a Destroyer: He pretends
to be descended from Abraham and Sarah, and claims the promise of all Kingdoms
for his Followers, as being the only true Believers, (to Mustliman imports,)
and avows the prosecuting all with War, who observe not the Rules of his
Religion. Elmachin. Histor. Sarac. p. 3.

So then granting the Saracens, or Turks to be those the Holy Ghost there
points to, how come they to be called the four Angels, seeing they were all of
the same Original, and Religion?

Now this will be cleared by considering, what time the Holy Ghost may here be
supposed to aim at, which must be that, wherein they are said to be bound; (for
loosing them can have no relation, but to their being bound.) and

That seems to be about the end of the eleventh Century, when they were driven
back by the Romans toward Euphrates, the place where they were said to be
Bound.

Paulus Jovius relates it to have happened under Soliman their Captain, in the
time of Godfrey of Bulloign; about which time they divided into four
Tetrarchies, Dynasties, or Governments, viz. Of Lesser Asia, of Aleppo,
Damascus, and Antioch, or rather Bagdat, (for that of Antioch continued but
fourteen Years) the three first on this side, the last beyond Euphrates.

It Is true indeed, that this division of Sultanies, or distinct Governments
lasted not till the time, they are said to be let loose; but that no way
hinders, why they, being the same People, under whatever Government they should
be called back again to serve the Purposes of Divine Povidence, should be
called by the same Names, or notified under the same distinction, that was then
amongst them, when they were first said to be bound in the great River
Euphrates. They who were to be loosed, and prepared for it, for an Hour, and a
Day, and a Month, and a Year, Rev. 9. 15. are the same with those, who before
were bound, and therefore but reasonable they should have the same Appellation,
whatever changes, or vicissitudes had otherwise happened to them in that long
tract of time, no less than 396 Years, with some other fractions of time
intervening (for so much a Year, viz. 365 Days, a Month 30, a Day 1. (a Day
being taken for a Year) and an Hour will contain) between the time of this
Division, if we date it from the erecting the Dynasty, or Government of Bagdat,
which was 1057; for then 'twas Tognulbecus General of the Turks, was by the
Caliph Cajim Biamrilla invested with Royal Robes, and inaugurated in the Royal
City of Bagdat, which falls in with the 449th year of the Turkish Hegira, in
which Elmachinus the Arabian Historian p. 272, relates it to have been thus
performed. Now add to 1057 the aforsaid 396 it produces 1453, when the Turks
took Constantinople, abolished the Eastern Empire, and made their Irruptions
again into Europe, with that success, as scarce to find any thing to withstand
them: What their Progress then was, the narrow limits of the present Empire,
and the Mediterranean Isles sufficiently declare, and where it will end, only
be that commanded them to be loosed, can foretell.

And by this time we are able in some measure to judge, when this Vial was to
begin, viz. When the four Angels (whom I have showed to be meant of the Turks)
that were bound in the River Euphrates were loosed, which we have placed Anno
1453.

As to the time when this Vial shall end, that must be judged as by the Events
here foretold, so by what is to succed in the next Vial.

CHAP. XVII. Of the seventh Vial, Rev. 16. ver. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
AND the seventh Angel poured out his Vial into the Air, and there came a great
Voice out of the Temple of Heaven, from the Throne, saying, it is done.

And there were Voices, and Thunders, and Lightnings, and there was a great
Earthquake, such as was not since Men were upon the Earth, so mighty an
Earthquake, and so great.

And the great City was divided into three parts, and the Cities of the Nations
fell, and Great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto her the
Cup of the Wine of the fierceness of his Wrath.

And every Island fled away, and the Mountains were not found.

And there fell upon Men a great Hail out of Heaven, every Stone about the
Weight of a Talent, and Men blasphemed God because of the Plague of the Hail;
for the plague thereof was exceeding great.

This Vial, as by the Air into which it is said to be poured, we understand the
vast Circumference of the great System of the World, to the more eminent parts
whereof, viz. the Earth, the Sea, the Rivers and Fountains of Waters, the Sun,
etc. the other Vials refer, seems to be the most general of all the Seven; and
as the Air is common to all, that wherein all, good and bad breathe and live,
so will the Events of this Vial respectively affect them.

For if with respect to the One, i. e. the Bed, or Enemies of Christ, it be
said, it is done, all that was to be executed on them, being now fulfilled; the
same seems applicable to the others, i. e. the Good, with respect to the end,
that is now to be put to their Sufferings, and the Glory of the Gospel, which
is thereon to succeed, and the manner of expressing it, viz. (...), it is done,
seems to speak as the full Completion of all, so the suddenness of these
Events, upon the Angel's pouring out this Vial; as we use to say, dictum
factum, no sooner said than done: Every thing before, was prepared, as for the
Ruin of the Enemies of our Lord, so for the advancement of his Church: He who
is said to come as a Thief in the former Vial, for the sudden and surprising
manner of his coming, has no farther delay to make in this; for the Angel does
but pour out his Vial into the Air, and a great Voice comes out of the Temple
of Heaven from the Throne, saying, it is done.

Which I take the more notice of, that if the expiring of the 1260 Years for
the Reign of Antichrist, should appear to be at or near the end of the sixth
Vial, the seventh being still to be poured out, should not put us to a long
expectation of having it fulfilled: Christ comes as a Thief, to gather them
together, viz. all his Enemies into a Place called in the Hebrew Tongue,
Armageddon; being there, what should hinder but that (like the executing the
Sentence upon the Conviction, and Judgment given on the Offender) the utter
excision of them should forthwith Succeed?

And the seventh Trumpet, with which I take this Vial to syncronize, seems to
speak the same. For if with respect to that it is said, that the Mystery of God
should be finished, which he had graciously declared, (...), had declared it as
the very good Tidings of the Gospel it self, (for so what concerns the Ruin of
their Enemies must be) it is here said (...), it is done, all is fulfilled that
was there declared.

And that these syncronize, i. e. fall in together, and are to be fulfilled at
the same time, will not the manner in which they are expressed, farther instruct
us? Thus if in this Vial it is said, There came a great Voice out of the Temple
of Heaven, from the Throne; it is said in the other, the Temple of God was
opened in Heaven, and there was seen in his Temple, the Ark of his Covenant,
both, as to signify from whence they came, for it is added in the one, And
there were Lightnings, and Voices, and Thunderings, and an Earthquake, and
great Hail; in the other, And there were Voices and Thunderings, and
Lightnings, and there was a great Earthquake, etc. And there fell upon Men a
great Hail, etc. So that it is the same thing they in the main aim at; the
chief difference there seems to be, is, that in the one it is said the Temple
of God was opened in Heaven, which in the other is expressed only by a great
Voice coming thence, without restraining its opening to the time of the Vial;
but then is not that supplied by what weread, Rev. 15. 8. where it is said, And
the Temple was filled with Smoke from the Glory of God, and from his Power, and
no Man was able to enter into the Temple, till the seven Plagues of the seven
Angels were fulfilled: If none were able to enter in till then, then certainly
it was not open till then: i. e. Opened it was in neither in the Sense I give
of it, as relating to the free publication of the Gospel, i. e. The Word of
God, or his Testament which in the times of Antichrist was locked up, but now to
be seen, and perused of all.

And to this Opening of the Temple, seems to agree, what we have Rev. 11. 1.
Where St. John is bid to rise and measure the Temple of God, but to leave out
the Court which is without the Temple, and measure it not, for it is given unto
the Gentiles, who should tread down the holy City for forty two Months.

Measuring is the setting certain bounds to any thing, accordingly what John is
bid to do, may be understood of definite, and certain Bounds set to the Church
in its Purity, so that it was not to appear as such again, till the Interval
that was to Intervene, should expire, viz. the 42 Months there spoken of; that
being expired, the Limits and Boundaries so set, are again removed, i. e. The
Temple is again opened, Religion in its purity professed, the Ark of the
Testament seen in the Temple, the Law which was deposited there (so it was
commanded, Exodus 25. 16. 21.) published, and to be obeyed by all.

And its being poured into the Air, methinks very plainly speaks this to us,
for what is the Air, but the whole Medium, or Vehicle of Light, and so may
denote all who are capable of being enlightened by the Truth, to be the subjects
of that clearer, or more universal Revelation, which is now to be made of it.

Before, which I take to be at the first breaking forth, as it were of this
Light, whether at the Reformation, or whatever other time that be applied to,
it is said Rev. 14. 6. I saw another Angel fly in the midst of Heaven, having
the everlasting Gospel to preach to them, that dwell on the Earth, etc. To
signify that it was but a part of the great (...), or transparent Orb was then
enlightened, it was but (...), the middle part, or half of Heaven; but now it is
the whole Orb is made lucid, the Gospel every where so shining in its Purity,
that they must be very much in Love with darkness, who shall not now receive
the Light; the Air will be full of it, (and its being so, with respect to its
Enemies, who are to be destroyed by the brightness of our Lord's coming, 2
These. 2. 8. is sufficient to denominate it one of the Vials of Gods Wrath on
them) it is but opening the Eye, and all will be clear and transparent, no
Clouds now to interpose, no Storms to divert the Beholders.

And this possibly is what we are farther directed to by the Voices, Thunders,
and Lightnings, in allusion to what was done at the first publishing of the
Law, Exodus 19. 16. to declare that now the Gospel should be the Law of the
World, published as by the Voice of God, (he appearing in the defense of his
Truth,) so by that of his Ministers (which may be the reason why it is Voices
in the Plural) carried on with that Power, and Evidence, so clear, so
irresistible in all its Truths, that like Thunder and Lightning there should be
no stopping the Ears, no shutting the Eyes against it, no opposing it, but at
the peril of falling under the immediate stroke of Heaven. The Thunder does not
so loudly proclaim the Gospel, but that it will as loudly revenge if neglected;
the Lightning can as well blast the Gainsayers, as discover the Truths, they
ought to receive; such will be the Terror and Conviction, that will now go
along with the Gospel!

And is it any wonder, when this shall be, that a great Earthquake should
follow: says the Text, it shall be such as was not since Men were upon the
Earth, so mighty an Earthquake, and so great.

An Earthquake, we know shakes and unsettles all; Houses, Villages, Towns,
Cities, Hills, Valleys, Forests, whole Countries, with the Inhabitants have
felt the Effects thereof: This is to be such an Earthquake, so mighty, and so
great, as was not since Men were upon Earth.

I will not say it is to be a mere natural Earthquake, though such often have
been observed to forerun, or accompany great Judgments, and I am apt to think
this sort of Earthquakes may usher in or accompany this Vial; there have great,
and extraordinary things of that nature happened in our own times!

But to such prodigious Events only, I do not imagine this to be confined, but
rather I believe it to direct to something like what God speaks by his Prophet.
Haggai 2. 6, 7. Yet once it is a little while, and I will shake the Heavens and
the Earth, and the Sea, and dry Land, and I will shake all Nations; which St.
Paul thus refers to, Heb. 12. 26, 27. whose Voice then shook the Earth (he
speaks of the Earthquake that accompanied the giving of the Law of Moses,) but
now he has promised, saying, Yet once more I shall shake not the Earth only,
but also Heaven, and this Word yet once more signifies the removing of those
things that are shaken.

The business of this Earthquake will be utterly to remove what in the times of
Antichrist prevailed, quite to change the whole Face of things, and bring in
that Evangelical State, which, to follow the Apostles Expression in the next
verse, will be a Kingdom which cannot be moved.

Would we see what were to be the effects of this Earthquake? It follows v. 19,
20. And the great City was divided into three parts, and the Cities of the
Nations fell, and great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto
her the Cup of the Wine of the fierceness of his Wrath.

And every Island fled away, and the Mountains were not found. The great City
what it is, is sufficiently described in the next Chapter,, ver. 18. where it
is said, and the Woman which thou saw, is the great City which Reigns over
the Kings of the Earth.

It Is Rome that in that Chapter is, 1. represented under the Figure of a Woman,
and that, as with respect to the several successions of Government in the Roman
Empire, so too with respect to the great Corruptions in the Church, which was
to be seated in it. 2. Her Cruelties likewise are there set forth as under the
emblem of a scarlet-colored Beast, ver. 3. So by her being drunken with the
Blood of the Saints of the Martyrs of Jesus, ver. 6. And 3. How she is said to
come to her End: ver. 16. viz. By those very Horns, or ten Kings (who had given
their Power and Strength to her, ver. 13.) Hating her, and making her desolate,
and naked, and eating her Flesh, and burning her with Fire.

So then the great City here spoken of, is Rome, as she Reigns over the Kings
of the Earth, not Rome as confined within the Walls of the City, which bears
that name, but as she extends her Territories as far as the Roman Empire, or as
it is now changed into Papal, reaches.

And as to the dividing this City into three parts, I shall offer these two
Conjectures; the first is Monsieur Jurieu's, (whose Learning, Piety, and Zeal,
I extremely reverence,) and it is this, viz.

That upon the Preaching of the Reformers, the Antichristian Empire was divided
into three Parts: one part remained to Antichrist himself, one sepaated from
him under the name of the Confession of Ausburgh; the third under the
Confession of them who are simply called the Reformed.

Sueden, Denmark, and a great part of Germany make the 2d Part England, the
united Provinces, the Reformed in France, the Suisses, and port of Germany make
the third. Here, says he, are the three great Parts which divide the Western
Church, which is the great City.

The second Conjecture I have to offer in this matter, is the Division of it,
as it is that City which reigns over the Kings of the Earth; And that is, as
at present, and since the Reformation there have been these three distinct
Parts of this great City.

The first of such Kings, or Kingdoms that have wholly fallen from her, such
are all who profess the Protestant Religion.

Secondly, of such, which however they have not left her Communion, yet have
cast off her Supremacy, and Infallibility, i. e. As the distinction is since
taken up, are of the Church, though not of the Court of Rome. This I suppose to
be verified, wherever the Council of Trent (by which Rome subsists) is not
received, and where the Regalia, Investitures, etc. are disputed, and where too
these, or any other the Arcana Imperii, the secret Grounds and Foundations, by
which the Papacy upholds it self, have been prosessedly disputed, contradicted,
and by the public Decrees of their Universities, or otherwise declared
against, or rescinded: And then

Thirdly of such, as still continue in their Obedience to her.

What follows, And the Cities of the Nations fell. I take to be, but the
Consequence of the former; for if the great City be Rome in the extent of her
Empire or Government, lesser Cities will import lesser Governments, and their
falling with respect to Rome, must be a falling from her Laws, in being no
longer governed by the Papal Decrees, the Canon Law, or whatever else she Rules
by; but by their own Models both for their Civil and Religious Government.

But if still we would have something more particular here, why may not the
united Provinces, and Hans Towns in Germany afford us a Comment on it! Sed
monum de Tabula. It Is added,

And great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto her the Cup of
the Wine of the fierceness of his Wrath.

And every Island fled away, and the Mountains were not found.

This seems to be the great Catastrophe of all, every thing else is but
preparatory, this the consummating of the Judgment of the great Whore. And may
she soon have this Cup to drink, I persuade my self it is not far off.

What the Cup is, is more expressly set down, chap. 18. 2. 8. Babylon the Great
is fallen, is fallen, and is become the Habitation of Devils, and the hold of
every foul Spirit, and a Cage of every unclean and hateful Bird; this was her
Sin, this is her Doom! Therefore shall her Plagues come in one day, Death, and
Mourning and Famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with Fire: For strong is
the Lord God who Judges her. When it comes to pass, it will explain it self;
nor shall I therefore add any thing farther on it:

Only what is to be meant by every Island flying away, and the Mountains not
being found, which is yet behind to be spoken to, would be known.

And for that, I content my self, with applying the notion of Islands to those
numerous Monasteries, and Convents, and Religious Houses of any sort among
them. For what is an Island, but a part of the Earth environed by the Waters,
and having no Commerce, or Union with the Continent? And are not such Houses
and Places, with respect to the several Countries in which they are, divided as
it were from the Earth? Do they not subsist by Laws and Constitutions of their
own? Do they not pretend to be sequestered from the rest of the World? To have
no converse in Worldly Affairs, but to be wholly separated to observe the Rules
of their several Orders? These to me are the Islands here spoken of; Islands in
respect to their distinct Governments, in the same Sense, that the great City,
is the whole Roman, or Papal Empire.

And as for what we are to construe these Mountains of, I can see nothing more
proper to answer this Allusion, than the great and eminent Men among them, (who
in Scripture are so often expressed by Hills or Mountains, as Men of low Estate
are by the Valleys) such are their Bishops, Archbishops, Cardinals, Abbots,
Priors, Generals of their several Orders, and highest of all, the Pope himself,
and his Legates.

Now the flying away of the one, and the others not being found; signifies the
sudden Destruction and Confusion, that will overtake them all in that day; when
all States, and Orders, their whole Hierarchy with all its Dependants, shall at
once Vanish: And such a Storm follow them that adhere to them, expressed by Men,
i. e. Men of ordinary rank and station, the Laity of that Religion, such Hail
out of Heaven fall upon them, as it were by the immediate Hand of God bringing
these Judgments on them, that wicked and impeniteut Wretches as they are, (for
otherwise they would have taken the Warning, and come out of Babylon, as it is,
chapter 18. 4. would not have been Partakers of her Sins, that they might not have
received of her Plagues,) but cursed Wretches as they are, still to adhere to
her in her Abominations, nothing but Blasphemy is left them; they Blasphemed
God in the profane use of his name all the time of their Apostasy, they now
without looking up to that Heaven, from whence these Plagues come, Blaspheme
him because of the plague of the Hail, and shall be given up to Eternal
Blasphemy, bitter Execrations and Cursings (the lot of the Damned) and being
Cursed for Ever.

But when this shall be, will be still the great Enquiry, and what to answer to
it is difficult; for as Christ speaks, when the Elders of the People, and the
chief Priests, and the Scribes asked him, Art thou the Christ? If I tell you,
shall I say, I say it not; but if God, if Christ, if the Holy Ghost should tell
you, you will not Believe, Luke 22. 67. For it is God, it is Christ, it is the
Holy Ghost who have already told it; it is declared with all the certainty that
a Mystery can be declared, in this Book of the Revelation: The Rise, the
Progress, the Downfall of Antichrist is foretold, and yet forsooth we must be
tender in the Point, and not so much as dare to say, that Antichrist is come,
who, or what he is, and where is his Seat: The Angel may tell John, Rev. 17. 7.
etc: the mystery of the Woman, and the Beast that carries her, which has the
seven Heads, and ten Horns, may show the place from whence he comes, and
whither he goes, ver. 8. With all the particularities of his Reign; may show
what the seven Heads, and ten Horns are, when, and where to arise, ver. 9. 11,
12. And for whom to drudge, ver. 13, 14. may show the Extent of the Beast's
Empire,, over Peoples, Multitudes, Nations, and Tongues,, ver. 15. And lest
after all, any mistake should be about his Seat, may so point out the City of
his Residence, that but one City in the World can answer the Description; And
that is the City which reigns over the Kings of the Earth; and the City that
so Reigned when John saw the Vision, the City that has ever since so Reigned,
is Rome; the Angel I say, may thus tell John the Mystery of the Woman, and of
the Beast, but we must be sure to let it be a Mystery still, and fix it any
where but where it is. Oh the shame of the Cowardice of the Christian! Oh the
reproach of those who have Eyes, and will not see!

But are they willing, who ask the question, to have it resolved? What can be
plainer than that 1260 Years is the date of Antichrists Reign? This being the
time that is allotted to the little Horn, Dan. 7. 25. This the time Set for the
giving theoutward Court to the Gentiles, and the treading the Holy Cities under
Foot. Rev. 11. 2. This

Being the time for the two Witnesses to Prophecy in Sackcloath, ver. 3. This

Being the time that is set for the Flight of the Woman, clothed with the Sun
into the Wilderness, Rev. 12. 1, 6.

This being the time in particular for the Beast with seven heads, and ten
Horns to make War with the Saints, Rev. 13. 5, 7.

Only when these 1260 Years were to begin seems the Difficulty; but neither is
that so obscure, but we may easily point at it: I speak not so as to point to
the Day, or Year; because,

1. It may be we have no such exact Chronology, that we can depend upon for
such express, and minute Particulars: Or

2. Supposing the Masters in this Art should not fail, yet we must consider
that all great Transactions have a time to come to their Maturity, or End; and
it will be hard for us to fix the very Critical Minute, where matters are to be
accomplished by Degrees: As I do not think that the Fall of Antichrist will be
in a Moment; no, there is to be a Harvest and Vintage, Rev. 14. 15. 18. A time
to begin to put in the Sickle, (and may not that have been at the Reformation?
'Twas certainly a considerable Harvest was then reaped) and a time to reap all
down.

This being observed, I make no doubt, but that it will not be so obscure, but
we may point at it, and as our Lord said, Mark 13. 30. may boldly pronounce (so
near are we to the Completion of these Prophesies) this Generation shall not
pass, till all these things be done.

And first, as to the outward Court of the Temple being given to the Gentiles,
and treading down the Holy Cities under Foot; when could that be, but when the
Gentile, or Heathen-Worship first crept into the Church? And as to that, if we
consult History, we shall find reason to fix it (not but that it was sooner
offering at, as we have already observed) in the fifth Century; it being then,
as we noted out of Theodoret, that the Worship of Saints, the Doctrine of
second Intercessors, and Relics, etc. was so far advanced. It being then also
that Leo the first began so far to exalt his See above those of other Bishops,
as to call it Cathedram Petri, qui appellatur Petra and fundamentum, the Chair
of Peter, who is called a Rock and Foundation; and to call Peter the Doorkeeper
of Heaven, the Arbiter, and Judge of who were to be bound, who to be loosed;
and then ascribes the Power, and Authority of St. Peter to his own Chair; and
is angry, that in the Case of Eutyches, as is before there observed, they did
not reserve the matter to him, and therefore pretends he was not rightly
Condemned; calls himself Ecclesiae Catholicae Episcopum Urbis Romae, the Bishop
of the Catholic Church of the City of Rome, with many other the like Excesses;
which certainly may be one sense of treading the Holy City under Foot, thus to
exalt him above all others.

And then for the tme of the two Witnesses Prophesying in Sackcloth, where can
we begin that better, than in the Testimony, which from that time, those who
were sound in the Faith bore against these, and the like Excesses? Rather from
the time that the two Testamennts, God's faithful Wisnesses, the Holy Bible
began in its Authority to be deprest, and and the Fancies, and Inventions of
Men to take place? This was their putting on Sackcloth; but so, as from that
time they never did, nor ever shall cease to Prophecy in it, till they have
Prophesied down all their Enemies, Rev. 11. 3, etc. The Word of God in the
Mouth of his faithful Servants, has, and must always witness for him, and that
with those Effects which are there ascribed to these, i. e. of being the
Instruments to denounce God's Judgments on those who despise the Warning; but
in their Witnessing there is another (...), or Test, and that is, let their
Prophesying in Sackcloth begin when it will, yet it must end when the Beast
which ascends out of the bottomless Pit, shall have made War against them,
have overcome, and killed them, Rev. 11. 7. i. e. Whenever Antichrist shall
have so much Power to banish true Religion, as to all outward appearance quite
to ruin and destroy the sincere Professors of it, so that there is no longer
the Face of a Church, or any publicly to bear Witness, as Christ says, Luke
21. 28. When those things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up your
Heads, for your Redemption draws nigh; the Epoch of it is set, and it is but
three days and an half, i. e. So many Years and an half, and Deliverance will
come; the People, and Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations shall see their dead
Bodies three days and an half, and shall not suffer their dead Bodies to be put
in Graves, ver. 9. And therefore (which I note by the by) that last Persecution
is not to be Universal; for if it were, where would be the People, and
Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations, which should not suffer them to be buried,?
No: as it is ver. 11. the Spirit of Life from God shall enter into them, and
they shall stand on their Feet, and great Fear shall fall on them which see
them: So that were there no other prediction of the End of Antichrist's Reign
in this whole Book, than this alone, whenever this comes to pass, it is easy to
see how short his time is, and being so, we cannot wonder, as it is Rev. 12.
12. He should have great Wrath. Again,

As to the time of the Woman's Flight, (who is clothed with the Sun, and has
the Moon under her Feet, and upon her Head a Crown of twelve stars) into the
Wilderness; where it be proper to date the beginning of it, but after the
Serpents casting out of his Mouth Water as a Flood, that might cause her to be
carried away of the Flood, i. e. When after the ceasing of the ten
persecutions, the Devil endeavored to fill the Church with Heresies, (those
are the Flood cast out of his Mouth,) and when he could no longer Prosecute his
Rage with open Violence, to try what could be done by making her persecute
herself; i. e. As it is in the Parable, by those Tares he sowed in the Field,
destroy the good Seed? and this seems to look to that Deluge of Arianism which
came in upon her, in its full Torrent; but against which the Earth, the secular
powers, pious Emperors, Constantine, Theodosius Junior, etc. came into her Aid,
and helped her, as by their interposing for her present Rescue, so taking Care
for her future safety herein; in particular by calling the four first general
Councils by their Authority, to condemn that, and the other Heresies which grew
up under it; the last of which was Anno 451, and from this time, or
thereabouts, (till I find reason to change this opinion) I scruple not to
reckon the Woman in the Wilderness; whither that she might Fly, were given to
her two Wings of a great Eagle; (i e. of the Eastern and Western Empire, both
which belonged to the Romans, whose Standard that is,) This I say seems to be
that date of the Churches Wilderness-Condition, in which she was to be
nourished for a time, and times, and half a time, (the same measure with that
of 1260 Days) from the Face of the Serpent; and it is observable, (if I may so
speak) that the Eagle it self flew along with her into his Wilderness, it being
not long after that Rome was taken the second time, and but twenty four Years,
when Augustulus was forced by Odoacer to renounce the Empire; but of this by
the by. Once more,

As to the time of the Beast's rising to make War against the Saints, Rev. 13.
7. That Beast, which as as it is, ver. 12. exercised the Power of the first
Beast before him: Where can that be more probably fixed, than where the
Holy Ghost has (as I have already observed) with so many Remarks fixed it,
viz. After the taking of Rome, Rev. 13. 4. 10. And the gradual expiring of its
Sovereignty? that being then taken away, which was to let, (as the Apostle to
the Thessalonians expresses it) till removed? And that however the taking of
Rome were so notable a Period, we may not just fasten it to the point of Time;
the Holy Ghost gives us another note, which will bring this nearer to the time
where it is to be fixed, and that is by making the rise of the Beast, and of
the ten Kings to be at the same time, (...) at one and the same hour, it is Rev.
17. 12. the Chapter in which he expressly Interprets this Mystery 10 St. John,
ver. 7. etc. And when that was, History will easily resolve: We have already
observed it, 'twas in or about the 455th Year of Christ.

Nor will the account be different, if we take it in the Words of the Angel,
Dan. 12. 7. Holding up his Right Hand, and his Left hand unto Heaven, and
swearing by Him that lives for ever, that it shall be for a time, and times,
and an half, i. e. That till then the Power of the Holy People should be
scattered; but then an end was to be put to it by Michael, the great Prince
which stands, says the Angel speaking to Daniel, for the Children of thy
People, i. e. For the Jews, who were then to be on their Restoration; but so,
as I have before offered it in this Treatise, that some time is to succeed for
their full coming in, possibly that Interval which is afterward notified, ver.
11. where it is said, that from the time of the daily sacrifice shall be taken
away, and the Abomination that makes desolate shall be set up, there shall be
a Thousand, two hundred, and ninety Days, and whereas it is added, Blessed is
he that waits, and comes to the Thousand, three Hundred, and five and thirty
Days: I am apt to think, that is the Per^od that will fully accomplish the
Calling of the Jews, and fullness of the Gentiles; till the end of which, Daniel
is told, that he shall rest, and stand in his Lot at the end of the Days.

Which end, if the Abomination that makes desolate, be the same with Idolatry
brought into the Church, in that degree, which we have observed about the Year
455, will be about the Year 1715, to which adding for those other two Periods
mentioned by the Angel, i. e. what makes 1260, to be 1290, i. e. 30 Years; then
we shall have for the Yeas there signified 1745, or what advances the said 1260
to 1335, i. e. 75, the whole will be 1790; and as the Angel, so say I, Blessed
is he that waits, and comes to that time, for it will be a Blessed time for
the Church of God, and the Glory of the Gospel.

One Remark more I have to add to this, before I leave it, that the several
Periods we have been mentioning, for the ending the Reign of Antichrist fall in
likewise with what we read, Dan. 8. 14. It Is the Answer is there given to the
Question put by one Angel to another, asking, How long shall be the Vision
concerning the Daily Sacrifice, and the transgression of Desolation, to give
both the Sanctuary, and the Host to be trodden down; but returned to Daniel in
these Words, And he said unto me, Unto two Thousand, and three Hundred Days,
then shall the Sanctuary be cleansed. For consider the time when this was said
to Daniel, viz. Before Christ 555; now, if we add to 555 before Christ, the
number we just now assigned of 1745, these put together make up the
forementioned 2300 years, the time there assigned; out of which again take 30,
which is the number added to the so often mentioned 1260, and we have left
1715. Which in all likelihood, if we rightly compute, I mean if Chronology be
herein exact, is the fixed time for the final Ruin of Antichrist, or fall of
Babylon; the great Enquiry we would so fain be satisfied in.

But because still there will arise a difficulty upon either the different
Computations that men use, or the Supernumerary days that are found in our
ordinary years, beyond those the Scripture seems to make use of; it may not be
unuseful to consider how many years will be abated from this time, if we take
out the odd days which there are in every year; which being five, and some
hours, if these be taken away from each year, (for so they must to make it just
360 days, which seems to be the Scripture-year) they make 17 years and a half,
in the same proportion that 360 days make one year; which 17 years and a half,
with the odd hours and minutes likewise, which are found in the ordinary year,
taken out of the foresaid 1715, leaves it, as the last number to be enquired
into, as a full answer to this great Question, to be about the latter end of
1696.

But in this 'twill be hard to require such an exactness, as may not admit of a
Latitude, especially in a matter wherein Christ has declared he will come as a
Thief; wherein too the Holy Ghost himself has spoken with that variety, as to
lay down three several periods, viz. of 1260, 1290, and 1335, as we just now
observed out of Daniel, and all in answer to the same question; the reason
whereof may be either because 1. The Behavior of men toward God, with
reference to their preparing themselves for the deliverance by their
Repentance, is too often such as defers the performance of his promises, which
possibly might be the case here; not but that it is still certain in Gods
Calendar, and such is his Goodness, that the first, or shortest period is
offered, and if the Vision stay, it is the sins of men that put the stop to it.
Or,

2. Because such great Affairs are not to be transacted in a point of time, and
therefore for the commencing of them, the first period may be set, and that
under the greatest certainty, i. e. the time, times and half a time, the 1260
days, the 42 months all concurring, as they do, to show the certain downfall of
Babylon at such a time; As for the carrying on, and perfecting the great work,
the other two may be assigned. Or else,

3. Because of the different Subjects concerned herein, i. e. the suffering
Christians, or the Martyrs of Jesus, in the time of the reign of Antichrist, or
the Jews and Gentiles in their fullness; both of whom were to be brought into
the Church upon the Ruin of Antichrist; but so, that deliverance must first
come to the suffering Church then in being, before the effects of it could
reach the others, who were to be the great Accession to it.

To the first, viz. the suffering Christians, or Martyrs of Jesus and their
deliverance, the first period, viz. of 1260 years; to the other two, i. e. the
Jews and Gentiles to be fully called in, the two other periods in all
probability will belong; when it is promised Daniel, who receives the Answer
there in the behalf of his people, i. e. the Jews, that he shall stand up in
his Lot: A point (but that is beyond our Argument) that would well deserve our
Curiosity to be informed of; possibly what is here hinted, may stir up some
excellent Person, to go on with so noble a design.

For certainly, nothing can be so much for the honor of that Image, and
likeness of God, in which man was made, as to be conversing with his Maker in
the great Secrets and Mysteries of his Grace and Providence. I magnify my
Office, says St. Paul, Romans 11. 13. speaking of that Administration that was
given to him toward the Gentiles; he had too been speaking in the context of
the fullness of the Jews, and the certainty of their return: And if I may
presume at any thing of the Parallel, I know not any thing, wherein I should so
much magnify my Office, as one of the meanest of the Ministers and Servants of
Christ, as in being in the lowest degree instrumental toward the unfolding any
of those mysterious Events, which are to happen in his Church, and will be so
highly for his, and his Fathers glory: And I hope, indeed I question it not,
but he has so far heard the desire of the humble, and accepted of the
sincerity of his poor Creature, as to have opened his Eyes to see some of the
wonderful things of his Law.

Such has been the comfort, such the joy that has accompanied me in my lowest
state, (for 'twas in a long fit of Sickness I applied my self to this work)
that I dare not doubt, but it has been from his good Spirit: And I am apt to
think, through his Grace, without which we are able to do nothing, that what is
here delivered by his so unworthy Servant, may be of that use to such, who
shall heartily, and diligently vouchsafe to peruse it, that they will find some
of that satisfaction in reading, which I have in writing it. Wherein if any
thing be performed for the Service of Truth, I desire wholly to ascribe it to
him, whose I am, the God of Truth, and to that assistance, he has been pleased
of his great Goodness, to vouchsafe to honest Endeavors: As all is due to him,
so 'twas by Prayer to him his poor creature always endeavored to fetch in his
succor. The prayer with which he first set upon this work, and with which he
relieved himself, when at a stand in it, is here subjoined with the same
Preface, and in the same Form, in which he wrote it, when first engaged in this
sort of Studies; which was several years ago; though his Thoughts were not
drawn into this order, till occasioned to it, by Nubes Testium, and the
reflections herein made on it.

Sept. 8. 1678.
Prove. 18. 1. Through desire a Man having separated himself, seeks and
intermeddleth with Wisdom.


AND that thy weak and poor Servant may with all Sincerity and unbiassed Zeal
give up himself to the search of that Wisdom which is contained in the holy and
mysterious Book of the Revelation, to which, through thy Grace, and by thy
Blessing only he desires to separate himself: Grant, O Thou, who art the
infinite Fountain of all Wisdom, that he may with all Humility, and faithful
Diligence set upon so hard and difficult a Task, that with the most impartial
love of Truth, he may abandon all Passion, and Interest, and avoid the Censure,
and Prejudices, which have usually attended those who have hitherto, though
with ever so great Care and Industry, Fidelity, and Piety, engaged in the same
undertaking; and as he wholly depends upon Thee, O Blessed Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, O most mysterious and adorable Unity in Trinity, Trinity in Unity,
whose Nature and Ways are unsearchahle; Let him accordingly meet with that
success, which may make it appear, that that blessed Spirit, who was promised
to guide the Disciples into all Truth, and show them things to come ( John 16,
13.) first inspired thy unworthy Servant, and moved him to so holy a Work, in
the discharge whereof, to thee, O Father, Son, and Holy Ghost be Praise, Glory,
and Honor, to thy distressed Church the use and benefit of what Thou shall
instruct me to deliver, and to thy poor Servant Comfort, and sure confiderce of
thy Assistance and Direction, through Jesus Christ my Lord, Amen, Amen.

What here follows, is the Copy of a Dedication written to the King, on the
occasion of what is now Published; it being written on the same Page with the
Prayer above, it is thought fit to add it here, without altering it in any thing
from what it is in the Manuscript.

To the K.
October. 9. 1686. SIRE,
THE final Ruin of Antichrist is at hand, it will not be many Tears before this
will he fully completed; it will begin in a very short time, the Pope is the
great Antichrist, the power of the Papacy his Antichristian Kingdom: I do not
say how this shall be accomplished, whether by Noise, Confusion, and Violence,
or by the Spirit of the Lord working in the Hearts of Kings and Princes to take
away the Power they have so long given to the Beast, or by a general Conversion
of the Heathen World, and coming in of the Jews, all conspiring toward the
overthrow of Superstition, and Idolatry, and making Way for the true Kingdom of
Christ on Earth, in that universal Piety and Holiness, which shall prevail
throughout the World; only that this shall be, and that the time is at hand, is
what I think I can by God's Assistance demonstrate. I most dutifully premonish,
and in the Name of Christ beseech your Majesty not to be found in the RVINS OF
ANTICHRIST, or to share in his Plagues.

Your most Dutiful, W.
Sire, As you value either a Temporal or Eternal, an Earthly, or Heavenly
Crown, despise not the Warning: Let not the Drolls of the Ignorant or Profane
rob you of the Price put in your hand to get Wisdom, Prove. 17. 16.



FINIS.
This refers to Page 151. l. 7. And in the Preface to page 15. l. 4.
LEst there should be any Mistake about the Period fixed for the Fall of
Antichrist, which in the Preface, p. 15. l. 4. is said to be in the latter end
of 1696, or the middle of 1697, whereas p. 151, there is but one of those
numbers mentioned, viz. 1696, and the other supposed in the different
Calculation, it is thought fit here for the clearing of both, to add the
Calculations from whence those Numbers arise, which are thus.

1260 Days or Years are assigned for the Reign of Antichrist, which beginning
at 455 after Christ, the time upon so many accounts fixed for it, as is at
large there discoursed, gives us 1715; and the odd Days, Hours and Minutes in
1260 (for that is the number from whence the abatement must be made, it being
only of that Period the Holy Ghost so often speaks under the different
Measures) give us in the whole 18 years, and 125 days, 9 hours; i. e. five days
to be taken from every year, will in in 1260 years give us 17 years and an
half; and 5 hours taken like manner out of the said 1260, will make 262 days,
12 hours; and then for the 49 minutes to be also thus taken out, those in 1260
years, amount to 42 days, and 21 hours: For 49 minutes multiplied by 1260, give
for the whole number of Minutes 61740; which divided by 60 for hours, give 1029
hours, and that again by 24 for days, gives 42 days, 21 hours. Now out of 1715,
take 18 years and 125 days and 9 hours, and that will throw it back to the
latter end of 1696, i. e. 125 days and 9 hours in that year, which generally
speaking, I say to be about the later end of that year.

Not that for the Reasons there mentioned, and those p. 146. I would presume so
to fix this in a Point, as not to allow a great Latitude for the completion of
such Predictions; which number is to be taken, the event must show, and when
that comes, that will regulate all our Chronology; but that it lies within the
compass of the numbers there offered, I cannot have the least Scruple. God
Almighty clear up the Minds, and Eyes of Men to wait for, behold, and adore his
wonderful Works; for I cannot but add it again, BEHOLD I COME AS A THIEF.

The Translation of the Manuscript p. 49. etc. is as here follows.
THIS Book is dated in the Year 1120, and the Title that is prefixed to the
Treatise of Antichrist, is this.

As the Smoke goes before the Fire, as the Battle before the Victory, so the
Temptation of Antichrist goes before Glory: and then the Book it self follows
thus.

Who Antichrist is.
Antichrist is the falsehood of Eternal Damnation, covered with the appearance
of Truth, and of the Righteousness of Christ and his Spouse: Opposed in like
manner to the way of Truth, of Justice, of Faith, of Hope, of Charity, and to a
moral Life, and the ministerial truth of the Church; it is menaged by false
Apostles, and most obstinately maintained on all hands. Or else Antichrist is a
Cheat, which hides the Truth of Salvation both in Substantial and Ministerial
Matters; or else is a fraudulent opposing of Christ, and his Spouse, and every
faithful Member. And so it is not any particular Person, set in any Degree,
Office, or Ministry, i. e. commonly so considered; but it is the same falsehood
opposed to Truth, which is covered with, and makes show of Beauty; and Piety,
out of the Church of Christ, as in certain Names, Offices, Scriptures,
Sacraments, and in many other things; which sort of Iniquity, with its
Ministers, great and small, and all those who with a wicked and blind Heart
follow them; His names.
such a Congregation taken together, is called Antichrist, or Babylon, or the
fourth Beast, or Where, or the Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition.

His Ministers are called False Prophets, Liars, Ministers of Darkness, the
Spirit of Error, the Where in the Revelation, the Mother of Fornication, Clouds
without Water, Autumnal Trees dead, and twice pulled up by the Root, Waters of
the cruel Sea, Wandering Stars, Balaamites, and Egyptians.

Why called Antichrist.
He is called Antichrist, because being covered and decked with the Livery of
Christ, and of his Church, and of his faithful Members, he acts contrary to the
Salvation wrought by Christ, and truly administered in the Church of Christ;
which as the Faithful partake of by Faith, Hope, and Charity, so he opposes it
by worldly Wisdom, by false Religion, by feigned Goodness, by Spiritual Power,
by secular Tyranny, by Riches, Honors, and Dignities, by Luxury, and the
Delights of the World.

How manifested.
So that it is manifest to every one, that Antichrist cannot come but where all
those things abovementioned meet together to make up perfect Hypocrisy, and
falsehood, that is to say, the wise Men of this World, the Religious, the
Pharisees, Ministers, Doctors, the secular Power, with the People of the World
all joined together; so that all together have made up a perfect Man of Sin,
and Error. For although Antichrist was already conceived in the times of the
Apostles, yet because he was still as 'twere in his Infancy; he wanted both
inward and outward Members; and forasmuch as they knew him, they more easily
ruined him, and turned him out of their Communion, as being but yet rude and
unformed, and silenced him: For as yet he had not the Wisdom nor Reason to
excuse himself, to define and pronounce Sentence: He had not yet his lying
Ministers, and humane Traditions were wanting, and Religious Orders were not
yet abroad. And therefore however he was fallen into Error, and Sin, yet he had
not wherewith to cover Filthiness and Shame of his Errors and Sin; having
neither Riches, nor Preferments, he could not draw to him any Minister for his
Service, had no way to increase, preserve, or defend those that belonged to
him. For he was destitute of Power, or secular Strength, and he could not force
or compel any from the Truth to Falsehood. And because many things were thus
wanting, he could not corrupt nor scandalize any by his Cheats, and so being as
yet tender and feeble, he could not gain place in the Church. But growing up in
his Members, i. e. in his blind Ministers, and Hypocrites, and Subjects of the
World, he is grown to be a perfect Man, at full Age, i. e. since the Lovers of
thee World, both spiritual and temporal Persons, blind in the Faith are
multiplied in the Church with all Power. They being wicked, desiring to be
sought to, and honored in Spiritual things, and to cover their Grandeur,
Malice, and Sins, made use of the Wise of this World, and Pharisees to this
Purpose, as has been above said. Now this is a great wickedness to disguise,
and set off Wickedness that deserves Excommunication, and by that means to make
themselves what is to be allowed to no Man, but belongs only to God, and Jesus
Christ the Mediator; That he robs Christ of the Honor due to him.
to take away these things from God fraudulently, and by Rapine, and transfer
them to himself, and his Works, seems to be the greatest Robbery: Such are the
assuming to himself the Power of regenerating, He pardons Sins.
of pardoning Sins, of giving the Graces of the Holy Spirit, of making Christ,
and such like things; and in all these things to cover himself with the Cloak
of Authority, and of the Word; By this means deceiving the ignorant People, who
follow the World in these things, and are of the World, and departing from God,
and from the true Faith and Reformation of the holy Spirit, departing from true
Repentance and Perseverance in what is good, departing from Charity, Patience,
Poverty, Humility; and that which is worse then all, departing from true hope,
to rely upon all that is ill, and the vain hope of the World, enslaving
themselves to all the Ceremonies that belong to such things, He makes Men to
wor^ip Images, Saints, and Relics.
making the People to commit Idolatry, and fraudulently to serve the Idols of
all the World, under the name of Saints and Relics, and Ceremonies paid to
them; so that the People miserably erring from the way of Truth, think that
they serve God, and do well; and the People stirred up to hatred and wrath
against those who love the Truth, commit many Murders, and as the Apostle says
truly; This is the Man of Sin grown up, who Exalts himself above all that is
called God, and opposes all Truth, who sits in the Temple of God, that is to
say, in the Church showing himself that he is God, whose coming is with all
manner of Deceivableness in them that Perish. And seeing that he is truly come,
there needs no longer waiting for him; for he is already grown old by the
permission of God, and already decreases: For his Power and Authority is
lessened, and the Lord Jesus has slain this wicked one by the Spirit of his
Mouth, in many Men of good inclination, sending a Power contrary to his, and
his Lovers, and dissipating his Place, and Possessions, dividing this City of
Babylon, in which all sort of wickedness is in its Strength.

What the Works of Antichrist are?

The first work of Antichrist is to banish truth out of the World.
The first work of Antichrist is to take away Truth, and to change it into
Falsehood, Error, and Heresy; the second work of Antichrist is to cover
Falsehood with Truth, and to confirm and prove a Lie by the Faith, and by
Virtues, and to mix Falsehood with spiritual things for the People under him,
whether by the means of his Ministers, or by the Ministry, or whatever else
there is in the Church. Now these two ways of proceeding contain a perfect and
accomplished Malice, such as no Tyrant, no Potentate from the beginning of the
World to the time of Antichrist, could ever yet show. And there never yet was
any Enemy who could so turn the way of Truth into falsehood, or falsehood into
Truth; or that in like manner has perverted those, who make Profession of one,
or the other, i. e. either of Truth or Falsehood. So that the Holy Mother the
Church, with her true Children, are altogether trodden under Foot, especially
as to Truth, and for the sake of the true Worship according to truth, and as to
the Ministry, and the right use thereof, and her Children, who partake of the
same. She weeps bitterly in speaking of it, and in the Complaint of Jeremiah,
she says, How does the City sit solitary, that was full of People, as Heathen,
and uncircumcised? She is become a Widow, that is to say destitute of the Truth
of her Spouse, she that was the Mistress of Nations, by reason of her
subjections to Errors, and Sin; the Princess among the Provinces, by seeking
her Portion in the World, and the things which are of the World. Weep, and look
forward, and thou shall find that now all these things are accomplished at this
time. For the Holy Church is reputed a Synagogue, and the Synagogue of the
Wicked is declared to be the Mother of those who best believe the Law: Falsehood
is Preached for Truth, Injustice is Preached for Justice, Error for the Faith,
Sin for Virtue, a Lie for the Truth.

What the Works are that proceed from the former?

These they are: The first Work is that which turns the Service of Latria,
which is not properly due but to the only one God, to him [Antichrist] and his
Works; to a poor Creature, reasonable or unreasonable, sensible or unsensible;
Reasonable, as to Man, to Saints of both Sexes gone out of this World, and to
Images to a stinking Carcass, or Relics. His Works are the Sacraments,
especially the Sacrament of the Eucharist, which he adores as God, and as Jesus
Christ, worships things Blessed and Consecrated, and forbids to worship God
alone.

The 2d is to rob Jesus Christ of his Merit.
The second work of Antichrist is, that he takes away, and robs Christ of his
Merit, with all the sufficiency of Grace, of Justice, of Regeneration, of
Remission of Sins, of Sanctification, of Confirmation, of spiritual
Nourishment, and imputes and attributes all to his own Authority, and a form of
words, to his Works, and Saints, and their Intercession, and to the Fire of
Purgatory, and draws away the People to these things here mentioned, that they
might neither seek the things of Christ, nor by Christ, but only by the works
of their own Hands, and not by a lively Faith either in God, or in Christ, or
in the Holy Spirit, but by the Will and Works of Antichrist, so that he
Preaches that all Salvation consists in his Works.

The 3d is a dead Faith.
The third work of Antichrist consists in this, that he attributes the
Reformation of the holy Spirit, to a dead, outward Faith, and Baptizeth Infants
in this Faith, teaching that by that, it is they must Baptism and Regeneration,
and in that he makes Priests, and gives Orders, and the other Sacraments, and
founds all Christianity in it, which is indeed contrary to the Holy Spirit.

The 4th is the Introduction of humane traditions, and Jewish and Heathenish
Ceremonies.
The fourth work of Antichrist is this, that he has constituted, and placed
all Religion and Holiness of the People in the Mass, and has interwoven many
Ceremonies, whereof some are Jewish, others Heathenish, and others Christian;
whereby leading the Congregation, and People, he deprives them of their
Spiritual, and Sacramental food, and seduces them from the true Religion, and
Commandments of God, and draws them from the Works of Charity by his Offertory,
and by such a Mass makes the people to rely upon vain Hopes.

The 5th is Simony.
The fifth Work of Antichrist is this, That he does all his Works to be seen,
that so he may gratify his insatiable Avarice, by putting all things to Sale
and doing nothing without Simony.

The 6th is Conniving at Vices.
The sixth Work of Antichrist is, That he gives License to manifest Sins,
without any Ecclesiastic Censure, and does not Excommunicate the Impenitent.

The 7th the Usurpation of Temporal Authority.
The seventh Work of Antichrist is, That he governs not, nor defends his Unity
by the Holy Spirit, but by Secular Power, and that he takes to his Aid
Spiritual things.

The 8th the Persecution of the Faithful.
The eighth Work of Antichrist is, That he hates, and persecutes, and pursues,
pillages, and murders the Members of Christ; these are the Principal of his
Works, which he does against the Truth, all of which can in no manner be
numbered, or written; but it suffices for the present, to have marked out, what
is most general, by which this Iniquity is covered.

That Antichrist covers his Iniquity, 1. by the Confession of the Christian
Faith in appearance.
First and principally, by the outward Confession of the Faith, concerning
which the Apostle says, That they Confess, that they know God, by Words, but
deny him in their Works.

2. By Antiquity and Multitude.
Secondly, he covers his Iniquity by the length of time, and the Authority of
some Wise and Religious Persons, and by Virgins, and by certain Widows, and
honest Women, and he is supported by innumerable People, of whom it is said in
the Revelation, And power was given to him, over every Tribe, and Language, and
Nation, and all that dwell upon the Earth shall Worship him.

3. By the pretense of Spiritual, and Apostolic Authority.
In the third place he covers his Iniquity with the Spiritual Authority of the
Apostles, contrary to what the Apostle speaks, We can do nothing against the
Truth, and Power is not given us to Destruction.

4. By Miracles.
In the fourth place, by many Miracles on this, and the other hand, of which
thing the Apostle speaks: Whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all
Power, and Signs, and lying Wonders, and with all deceivableness of
Unrighteousness.

In the fifth place, by outward Holiness, by Prayers, by Fasts, by Vigils, and
Alms; against which the Apostle speaks having the Form of Godliness, but
denying the Power thereof.

In the sixth place, he covers his Iniquity by certain Words of Christ, by the
Writings of the Ancients, and by the Councils, which they observe so far, as
they destroy not their wicked life and pleasure.

In the seventh place, by the Administration of the Sacraments, by which they
belch out the chief of their Errors.

In the eighth place, by Reproving, and Preaching in their Words against Vice.
For they say, but don't do it.

In the ninth place, by the Virtuous life of certain, who live in
dissimulation, and of others, who do it in earnest. For the Elect of God, who
love, and practice what is good, are detained there, as in Babylon, and are, as
'twere Gold, with which the wicked Antichrist covers his Vanity, not suffering
them to Worship God alone, nor that they should place their hope on Christ
alone, nor that they should understand the true Religion.

These, and many other such things, are as 'twere the Cloak, and Garments of
Antichrist, with which he covers his lying malice, that so he may not be
rejected as a Heathen, and under which he walks shamelessly, and as a Whore.

The Necessity from seperating from Antichrist.
From whence it is plain, both by the Old and New Testament, that the Christian
is obliged by the Commandment, which is therein delivered to him, to separate
himself from Antichrist, for God says in the 52 of Isaiah, Depart ye, depart
ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean thing, go ye out of the midst of
her, be ye clean, that bear the Vessels of the Lord; for ye shall not go out
with haste, nor go by flight, etc. And Jeremiah 50. Remove out of the midst of
Babylon, and go forth out of the Land of the Chaldeans, and be as the He-Goats
before the Flocks, for lo I will raise, and cause to come up against Babylon,
an assembly of great Nations jrom the North Country, and they shall set
themselves in array against her, from thence she shall be taken. Again, Numbers
16. Separate your selves too among this congregation, that I may consume them
in a moment, and afterward, depart from the Tents of these wicked men, and
touch nothing of them, lest ye be consumed in all their sins. Levit. I am the
Lord your God, who have separated you from other people, wherefore ye shall
separate the clean Beast from the unclean, and shall not defile your Souls with
Beast, or Birds, nor with any other thing that creeps upon the Earth, and ye
shall show that they are unclean. Also Exodus 34. Take heed to thy self, lest
thou make a Covenant with the Inhabitants of this City, lest it be for thy
ruin; and farther on, make no agreement with the men of that Religion, lest
when they shall have gone a whoring after their Gods, and shall have worshipped
their Images, they call thee to eat of the things which are dedicated to them,
and thou take of their daughters to thy son, and their daughters go a whoring
after their Gods, and make thy sons go a whoring after their Gods. Levit. 15.
Wherefore ye shall teach your Children, and command them, that they keep
themselves from their pollutions, lest they dye in them, when they shall have
polluted my Tabernacle. Ezekiel. 2. The heart that goes after their abominations
and their sins, I will bring their way upon their own head, says the Lord.
Deuteronomy. 20. When thou shall come into the Land, which the Lord thy God shall give
thee, take heed, that thou do not according to the Abominations of the people,
for the Lord has all those things in Abomination, and for such sins will he
blot them out, that thou may go into their Country. Thou shall be clean, and
without spot before thy God: Those Nations, whose Lands thou shall possess,
followed Southsayers and Diviners, but thy God has otherwise ordained it for
thee.

Now this is manifest too from the New Testament, John 12. That the Lord is
come, dyed, and suffered, that be might gather in one the Children of God: And
it is for the sake of truth thus united, and for the separation of it from
others, that he says, Matthew. 10. For I am come to divide a man from his Father,
and to set the Daughter against her Mother, and the Daughter-in Law against her
Mother-in-Law, and those of a man's House shall be his Enemies. And he has
commanded thee to separate, saying, If there is any who leaves not Father and
Mother, etc. Also, beware of false Prophets, who come to you in Sheeps
Clothing. Also, beware of the Leven of the Pharisees. Also, beware that no man
seduce you, for many shall come in my name, and seduce many. Wherefore if any
man say unto you, lo here is Christ, or lo he is there, believe him not, and
go not after them. And in the Revelation, he forewarns with his own voice, and
commands his people to go out of Babylon, saying, I heard a voice from Heaven,
saying, O my people, come out of her, and partake not of her sins, that ye
receive not of her plagues, for her sins are come up to Heaven, and the Lord
has remembered her Iniquities. The Apostle says the same, Be not unequally
yoaked with Infidels, for what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? And what communion has light with darkness? And what concord
has Christ with Belial? Or what part has he that believes with an Infidel?
And what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? Wherefore come out from
among them, and be separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing,
and I will receive you, and ye shall be my Sons, and Daughters, says the Lord
Almighty.

Also in the 5th to the Ephesians, Be ye not partakers with them, for ye were
sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord. Also, in the 1. to the
Corinthians, 10. I would not that ye should have fellowship with Devils, ye
cannot be partakers of the Table of the Lord, and of the Table of Devils. Also
in the 2. to the Thessalonians, 3. Now we command you, Brethren, in the Name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every Brother, that
walks disorderly, and not after the tradition, which ye have received from
us; for your selves know how ye ought to follow us. And below: And if any man
obey not our word by this Epistle, note that man, and have no company with him,
that he may be ashamed. Also Ephesians. 5. And have no fellowship with the
unfruitful Works of darkness. Also 2 Timothy 3. This know also, that in the last
days perilous times shall come. And below: Having a form of Godliness, but
denying the power thereof, from such turn away. By these things noted here
above, the malice of Antichrist, and his perverseness, manifestly appear. Also,
it is commanded by the Lord to separate from him, and to be joined to the Holy
City of Jerusalem. And therefore, we who have knowledge of these things, the
Lord having revealed them to us by his Servants, believing this Revelation
according to the Holy Scriptures, being admonished by the Commandments of the
Lord, The Waldenses protest their separation from Antichrist.
we separate our selves inwardly, and outwardly from him, because we believe
that he is Antichrist, and have joined together, and are united with a free
will, and most sincere intention, and are purposed with purity and simplicity,
to please the Lord, and to be saved, through the assistance of the Lord,
holding our selves firm to the Truth of Christ and his Spouse, as far as our
Capacity of Understanding can support us.

The Causes why the Waldenses separated themselves from the Romish Church.
And therefore we have deliberated to show the causes of our separation, and
what sort of Congregation we are, that so if the Lord shall vouchsafe the
knowledge of the same truth, those who shall have received it, may love it with
us; and if they are not sufficiently enlightened, they may receive succor by
this Ministry, and be watered by the Lord; that if it be more abundantly, and
more highly conferred on any other, we may desire the more humbly to be taught,
and to learn what is better from him, and to be corrected in our Errors. Now
the things which follow are the Causes of our separation.

To maintain the Essential Truth.
That it may be manifest to every one in general, and in particular, that the
Cause of our separation is such, that is to say, for the Essential truth of the
Faith, and for the inward knowledge of one true God, and the Unity of Essence
in three Persons, which knowledge flesh and blood cannot give, and for the
Worship due to one only God, by all those things abovementioned: for the
sanctification, and honor, which is due to him above all things, and above
every Name, for the living hope in God through Christ, for regeneration, and
inward renovation by Faith, Hope, and Charity; for the merit of Jesus Christ,
with all sufficient Grace and Justice, for participation, or Communion with all
the Elect; for the remission of sins; for a holy Conversation, and for the
faithful performance of all the Commandments in the faith of Christ, for true
Repentance, for perseverance to the end, and for life eternal. 2. And the
Ministerial truths, and in what they consist.
The Ministerial Truths are these: The outward Congregation of Ministers, with
the people subject in place, and time, in the Truth by the Ministry, i. e. in
the Truth mentioned above, leading, establishing, and preserving in a faithful,
and frequent assembling together, tending to Faith, and good life, according to
the Customs, and Obedience, and diligent continuing in the practice, and usage
of the Lord over his Flock.

The duty of good Pastors.
The things which the Ministers are obliged to for the service of the people,
are these: The Word of the Gospel, the Sacraments joined to the Word, which
certify what has been the intention, and understanding, and confirm the
faithful in hope in Christ, and the Ministerial Communion in all things
according to Essential Truth. And if there be any other Ministerial things,
they may all be referred to these above; but of these particular Truths, some
are essentially necessary to the Salvation of men, others conditionally are
contained in the 12 Articles of Faith, and in many of the discourses of the
Apostles. For Antichrist has already reigned in the Church, in time past, by
the Divine permission.

A summary of the Errors, and Impurities of Antichrist. 1. Idolatries and
superstitions of several sorts.
The Errors and Impurities of Antichrist, forbidden by the Lord, are these,
viz. Diverse and innumerable Idolatries against the Commandment of God and
Christ; Worship given to the Creature, and not to the Creator, visible, and
invisible, corporal, or spiritual, intelligible, or sensible, natural, or
framed by any Art, under the Name of Christ, or Saints of both Sexes, and
Relics, and Authorities; which Creature is Worshipped by Faith, Hope, Works,
Prayers, Pilgrimages, Alms, Offerings, costly Sacrifices: Which Creature they
Worship, Adore, Honor in many manners, by Hymns, Speeches, Solemnizings, and
Celebrations of Mass, of Vespers, bowing to the same Creatures, by Hours,
Vigils, Feasts, by Acquisition of Grace, which is essentially in one only God,
and meritoriously in Jesus Christ, and is acquired by Faith alone, and the holy
Spirit.

The first cause of such superstitions.
For there is no other cause of Idolatry, but a false Opinion of Grace, of
Truth, of Authority, of Invocation, of Intercession, which this Antichrist has
taken away from God, to attribute it to Ceremonies, and the Works of his Hands,
and to Saints, and Purgatory. And this Iniquity of Antichrist is directly
against the first Article of Faith, and against the first Commandment of the
Law.

The second cause.
In like manner an Inordinate love of the World, which is in Antichrist, and
that is it from whence sprung all the evils, and sins that are in the Church,
in those who are the Guides to govern her, and her Officers, who sin without
any restraint; these are against the Truth of the Faith, and against the
knowledge of God the Father, as St. John Witnesses, He that sins, neither
knows, nor has seen God, for if any one love the World, the love of the Father
is not in him.

The second Iniquity of Antichrist is trusting in the Creatures.
The second Iniquity of Antichrist lies in the hope, which he gives of Pardon,
of Grace, of Righteousness, of Truth, and of Life Eternal, as being what are
not in Christ, nor in God by Christ, but in men living, or dead, in
Authorities, in Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, in Benedictions, in Sacrifices, in
Prayers, and in the other things above mentioned, and not in true Faith, which
produces repentance by Charity, and makes men to depart from evil, and brings
them to do good. So that Antichrist teaches not firmly to trust on such things,
as Regeneration, Spiritual Confirmation, or Communion, Remission of Sins, and
everlasting Sanctification, but to trust in the Sacraments, or in his base
Simony, by which the people is deluded, so that selling all things, he has
invented many Ordinances, old and new, to get Money, suffering, if any one has
done this or that, hereby to obtain Grace and Life. And this double Iniquity,
is properly called in the Scriptures, Adultery, or Whoredom,; and therefore
those Ministers, who lead the brutal People in these Errors, are called the
Whore in the Revelation. And this Iniquity is against the second Article, and
also against the second and third Commandment of the Law.

The third Iniquity of Antichrist is the Establishing the merit of Works.
The third Iniquity of Antichrist lies in this, That he has invented, besides
what has been already said, false Religions, and Rules, and Monasteries,
giving hopes of obtaining Grace by building of certain Churches. As also in
this, viz. If any one often, and devoutly hears Mass, if he has partaken of
the Sacraments, if he has been at Confession (things that rarely show men to
be contrite) or if they have satisfied by Fastings, and emptying the Purse, or
if they have been, or are Members of the Romish Church. Or whether they have
not devoted themselves already, or vowed to be of any Order, either to take the
Cap, or Monks Hood, which they affirm against all Truth, that they are obliged
to. And this Iniquity of Antichrist is directly against the 8th Article of the
Creed, I believe in the Holy Ghost.

The fourth Iniquity of Antichrist is covering all with specious titles.
The fourth Iniquity of Antichrist lies in this, That as he is the fourth Beast
before described by Daniel, and the Apocalyptick Whore, he covers himself
nevertheless with the Authority, Power, Dignity of Ministers, Officers, and
Scriptures; and equals, and compares himself to the true, and holy Mother
Church, wherein Salvation Ministerially is, and no where else; wherein is Truth
of Life, and of Doctrine, and of the Sacraments: For if he should not cover
both himself, and his wicked Ministers, these being known to be open sinners,
he would be abandoned by all. For Emperors, and Kings, and Princes, looking
upon him to be the true, and holy Mother Church, have loved, and endowed him
contrary to the Commandment of God. And this Iniquity of Ministers, and those
subject to him, who are thus upheld in error and sin, is directly against the
9th Article, I believe the Holy Church. This as to what respects the first part.

Of Unction and the Superstitious Shaving of Priests and Monks.
Secondly, for as much as they who partake only of the outward Ceremonies,
ordained by humane Inventions, believe, and hope to partake of the Truth of the
Pastoral Offices and Cures, provided that they be shorn like Lambs, and
Anointed, and blessed by touching the Book, and Calice with the hand, they
profess to be ordained, as Priests ought. In like manner (as is above said) the
people, who are under them, communicating by the words, signs, and outward
Exercises, and their diverse Actions, think they partake of the Truth drawn out
from them. And this is against another part of the 9th Article, I believe the
Communion of Saints. Wherefore it is necessary to depart from the wicked
Communion of Monks, by whom Carnal men are drawn in, they through their Avarice
making them trust in such vain things, so that though they be Luxurious, or
Covetous, yet if they do but give to them, they promise them that they shall
partake of their Poverty and Chastity.

The fifth Iniquity of Antichrist, is their presumption to Pardon sin.
The fifth Iniquity of Antichrist lies in this, That they feign, and promise
Pardon, and Remission of sins to Sinners, who are not truly contrite, and cease
not to continue in their wicked doings; and in the first place, through
Avarice, they promise them Remission of their sins, upon Auricular Confession,
and the Absolution of Man for their Pilgrimages: And this Iniquity is against
the 11th Article of the Faith, I believe the forgiveness of sins. For that is
Authoritatively in God, and Ministerially in Christ, by Faith, Hope,
Repentance, Charity, Obedience of the Word, and in man by participation.

The sixth Iniquity is, to deceive by Purgatory.
The sixth Iniquity consists in this, That they serve themselves, and hope to
the end of their life, in the forementioned covered Iniquities, and specially
in Extreme Unction, and the dream of Purgatory, so that the ignorant, and more
rude perservere in their Error, they giving them to understand, that they are
absolved from their sins, though they never forsake them with a good will, and
to hope for remission of sins, and life eternal. And this Iniquity is directly
against the eleventh and twelfth Article of the Faith.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the Epistle Dedicatory, p. 11. l. 24. for Sovereign r. Sovereigns: p. 14.
l. 25 for glozying r. glozeing: p. 15. l. 7. for remonstrate: p. 28. l. 21.
after grateful add to ibid after those blot out to: In the Preface, p. 15. l.
13. for aquitted r. acquitted: p. 9. l. 7. after Duxit add in 16. after Duxerat
add in p. 12. l. 9. for etc. r. And -- l. 31. for now r. not: p. 14. l. 29.
after much add as: p. 15. l. 6. after hours add and minutes: p. 16. l. 1. after
thunders blot out,: In the Book, p. 9. l. 39. for preserve r. prefer: p. 10. l.
2. for altered r. attested: p. 14. l. 36. blot out etc: p. 18. l. 31. for led
r. let: p. 34. l. 28. blot out the: p. 36. l. 27. for Nongentisimo r.
Nongentesimo: p. 66. l. 3. for Cities r. City: l. 4. for that r. the. l. 27.
for heights r. height: p. 68. l. 14. for reostored r. restored: p. 77. l. 1.
for his name r. the beast: p. 80. l. 15. for Martymum r. Martyrum. l. 20. for
appelebantur r. appeteb antur. l. 30. for Thaebean r. Thebaean: p. 81. l. 4.
for Christianum r. Christianorum: p. 82. l. 16. for leaving r. having. l. 29.
for Gorgon r. Gregory. l. 38. for Iconoclastie r. Iconoclastae: p. 83. l. 4.
Copronynons r. Copronym us: l. 51. Nicephonis r. Nicephor us: l. 12. after
aforesaid blot out,: l. 17. blot out but: p. 87. l. 14. blot out (...): p. 93.
l. 5. for be r. by: p. 97. l. 2. for Bishops r. Bishop: p. 101. l. 7. for
Ammonites r. Amorites: p. 103 l. 6. after these add fiery: p. 104. l. 11. for
Nicephonus r. Nicephorus: p. 110. l. 10. after Church for; r.,: l. 22. for
Cyratian r. Gratian: l. 24. for Extravagancies r. Extravagantes: p. 111. l. 23.
for Romanum r. Romam: p. 113. l. 5. for Amageddon r. Armageddon: p. 114. l. 22.
ditto: p. 117. l. 38. for Israel: r. Israel: p. 122. l. 10. for enjoins r.
enjoys: p. 124. after up blot out; ib. after hand add;: p. 126. l. 9. after by
add;: l. 18. for Prophets r. Prophet: p. 127. l. 33. and 34. after Mahometans
add the devotion: ib. blot out the devotion: p. 128. l. 10. after these add
etc: p. 129. l. 26. for (...). r. (...) p. 131. l. 31. for it can r. can it: p.
132. l. 1. for many r: may: p. 133. l. 19. after otherwhere add,: p. 135. l.
29. for mustliman r. musliman: p. 136. l. 28. for Tognulbecus r. Togrulbecus:
p. 139. l. 16. after was add in and after neither add,: p. 147. l. 3. for
reserve r. refer: l. 8. after him add self: p. 149. l. 5. blot. out as: l. 13.
for the r. that: p. 150. l. 38. blot out and some hours p. 154. l. 22. for wars
r. way.

FINIS.

