A DISCOURSE CONCERNING THE CELIBACY OF THE CLERGY.

At OXFORD Printed, Anno 1687.

CONTENTS.
1. CElibacy a better state than Marriage.. 1. A holiness of the Body, as well
as of the Soul.. 2. As a holiness of it, that is opposite to fornication; so
that is opposite to Marriage.. 2. To the married, on pious occasions,
forbearance of the acts of marriage advised.. 3. Forbearance of second
marriages commended; in some cases, enjoined.. 4. 2. Having a greater reward in
the world to come.. 5. Continency especially necessary for the Clergy.. 6. That
it is the gift of God.. 7. Given to very many.. 8. For some space of time, at
least, to all. That none, from not exercising the act of continency, can say,
he has not the power.. 9. That he, who, having this gift, does not exercise
it, in living unmarried, sins not.. 10. Whether the gift of Continency
(supposing it to be given only to some) may by them be certainly known. That
tho all have not, yet all may have, the gift of continency. And that God denies
it none, at no time, they using the means.. 12. That it may be vowed.. 15. Yet
it more difficult, than the matter of any other vow.. 25. Therefore not hastily
to be vowed.. 26. Yet not unlawful for the Church, and very beneficial to
restrain the sacred function of the Ministry to single persons.. 27.
Ambros. de Viduis. -- Scit Creator omnium affectus esse varios singulorum; and
ideo praemiis virtutem provocavit, non infirmitatem vinculis alligavit. -- Sunt
spadones, qui se castraverunt etc: sed hoc non omnibus imperatur, sed ab
omnibus flagitatur. -- De Virginibus 3. l. -- Dominus, qui sciret praedicandam
omnibus integritatem, imitandam paucis, Non omnes (inquit) capiunt verbum
istud. Hierom contra Vigilantium 2. Ep. -- Exortus est subito Vigilantius, qui
damnandas dicat esse vigilias, etc. continentiam haeresin; pudicitiam,
libidinis seminarium dicat etc. (dicat) -- proh nefas! Episcopos sui dicitur
sceleris habere consortes etc. qui nisipraegnantes uxores viderint Clericorum,
etc. Christi Sacramenta nontribuunt. Quid facient Orientis Ecclesiae? Quid
Aegypti, and Sedis Apostolicae? Quae aut virgins Clericos accipiunt, aut
continentes: aut, si uxores habuerint, mariti esse desistunt. -- Conc. Trident.
Sess. 24.9. Can. -- Si quis dixerit, Clericos in sacris Ordinibus constitutos
posse matrimonium contrahere, non obstante lege Ecclesiastica vel voto, --
anathema sit. cum Deus id [donum castitatis] recte petentibus non deneget, nec
patiatur nos supra id quod possumus, tentari. Bellarmin. de Clericis. 1.18. c.
-- B. Thomas diserte docet, votum continentiae esse annexum Ordinibus sacris ex
solo Ecclesie decreto, ac proinde dispensabile esse, -- quod ego verissimum
puto. Again, ibid. -- In tota Scriptura nullum tale extat praeceptum, [viz. ut
Sacerdotes non ducant uxores.] -- Ib. -- Ecclesia Romana multis jam saeculis
permisit Graecis sacerdotibus usum uxorum, quas ante Ordinationem duxerant, ut
patet ex c. Cum olim de Clericis conjugatis.

CONCERNING CELIBACY.
Celibacy; That it is a better condition of life than Marriage, for prayer and
fasting, Celibacy a better state than Marriage.
and all other service of God without distraction, and so for gaining the
Kingdom of Heaven ( Matt. 19.12.); for works of charity to our neighbor; for
avoiding covetousness, worldly cares and impediments, (and this in all, not
only in afflicted, times;) for enjoying our liberty, (1 Cor. 7.4.) which, when
we can have, we are rather to use it. 1 Cor. 7.21. See for these 1 Cor. 7.1, 8,
26, 32. to the 37, 38. -- Lu. 14.20. -- 1 Cor. 7.5.

II. As there is a purity and holiness of the body, as well as of the soul,
Cor. 7.1. -- 1 These. 4.4. -- Jud. 23. compared with 8. and 2 Pet. 2.10, 14)
opposite to fornication and uncleanness, A holiness of the body as well as of
the soul.
[which uncleanness is more especially opposed to holiness than other vices,
(see Romans 6.19. 1 These. 4.7. -- Ephesians. 5.3.) and has a natural shame and guilt
upon it, which makes it seek privacy beyond any other sin whatsoever; (see the
shame of our First Parents upon the first appearance of concupiscence, Genesis
2.25. compared with Genesis 3.10.)] and enjoined to be observed in reference to
Christ, he being now the husband of the body, and it his spouse, (see 1 Cor.
6.20. compared with 13, 18, etc.): As a holiness of it that is opposite to
fornication; so, that is opposite to marriage
so there seems to be a greater degree of this purity of the body opposite to
Matrimony. See 1 Cor. 7.34. and Rev. 14.4. where defilement with women is
opposed to virginity, as another defilement is opposed to matrimony; Heb.
13.14. the marriage bed is undefiled, that is, with sin; (for this was
appointed, as for a means of propagation to Adam innocent, so for a remedy
against fornication (1 Cor. 7.2.) to man fallen, and troubled with
concupiscence): yet the virgin's-bed, it seems, is more undefiled, more
Angel-like in respect of corporeal purity: [undefiled] being opposed to an
imperfection of chastity virginal, as well as to the sin of lust; to the act of
concupiscence, as well as to prohibited copulations: therefore (hereafter) not
to marry, nor be given in marriage, but to be like the Angels of God, is
reckoned as a thing more honorable for the body. Lu. 20.35. And concupiscence,
one cause now of marriage, and which, could it be remedied, the Apostle would
not advise so many to marriage, was not known by Adam when perfect; and was a
thing, when appearing upon his fall, which he was ashamed of, and sought to
hide, as his posterity ever since do, those acts, even of the lawful bed. To a
higher degree (then) of this primogeneal virginal purity of the body I suppose
that expression relates, 1 Cor. 7.34. The virgin cares etc. that she may be
holy both in body, and in spirit.

To the mared, on pious occasions, forbearance, of the acts of marriage advised.
or in times of humiliation etc.) even to those, who are in the state of
marriage, (as doubtless conjugal chastity also has many degrees in it, and in
some men is far more pure than in others, and the permissions of matrimonial
privileges very easily transgressed. See Exodus 19.15. -- three days
sanctification, and not coming at their wives; -- 1 Samuel 21.4. -- women kept
from them about three days, and the vessels of the young men holy, i. e. from
their wives; -- Zech. 7.3. where we see, that, in times of more earnest
addresses to God, this separation from carnality was continued. Neither is this
only Old-Testament-ceremonial holiness: but see 1 Cor. 7.5. a place parallel to
these; Defraud ye not one the other except it be with consent for a time, that
ye may give your selves to fasting and prayer. Where it may be noted, that as
fasting has no good correspondence with the acts of the conjugal bed, (sine
Cerere etc.) so these also are as prejudicial to fasting, and its companions.
And suitable to these Scriptures were the Decrees of the ancient Church: --
Diebus orationis, and jejuniorum, and praeparationis ad Eucharistiam a conjuge
abstinendum. And this, because carnal pleasures are some way or other always
enemies to spiritual exercises; either proceeding to excess, and so rendering us
faulty; or too much either heightening, or also debilitating our temper, and so
making us undisposed; or dividing, and diverting some portion of that love, and
of those intentions to things inferior, which are always all incomparably best
spent upon, and consecrated to, God the supreme good.

Lu. 2.36) and, to some persons, to wit, Forbearance of second marriages
commended; in some cases enjoined.
those entertained in the pious or holy Services of God, or the Church,
enjoined: as appears in the widows of the Church, 1 Timothy 5.9. of whom it is
there required, that such widow have bin the wife of one man; which words
being capable of several senses, either that she have not had two husbands at
once, or not two successively; again, not two successively, either by a divorce
from the former, or upon the death of the former: seeing that no woman might
have two husbands at one time, nor any women at all were allowed remarrying
upon divorce; (see 1 Cor. 7.11.) it follows, that the Apostle's widow must be
understood to be such, as had not had a second husband after the first dead.
For this injunction seems to have something singular in it, the same caution
being given no where to any, but only to Church Officers, and servants. Nor is
it probable (as some against the current of Antiquity interpret it) that the
Apostle here restrained only the admission of such a widow as had causlesly
turned away her husband, and unlawfully married another man, (which is granted
was done sometimes, but seldom and without any permission of Moses law; (see
Mar. 10.12) or, as had many husbands at the same time, (of which there are some
rare examples amongst the heathen,) because such things cannot well be imagined
(tho possible) to have happened in the Church; or when they happened, not to have
bin severely punished with excommunication; as we see the incestuous Corinthian
was. And the Apostle seems here rather to require something of extraordinary
example and goodness above others, in such as were thus to be devoted to the
Churches Service, and maintained by her Charity, than only to caution, that
they should not be of the worst wicked amongst Christians. Which is further
confirmed by St. Paul's displeasure against those Church-widdows that
remarryed, ver. 11. And if this interpretation be admitted for the widows,
much more may it, upon the like expression [a husband of one wife] for the
Bishops of the Church, 1 Timothy 3.2. and for the Deacons, 1 Timothy 3.12.

Celibacy, as it occasions larger fruits of righteousness to many, Having a
greater reward in the world to come.
yet if a married condition also produces the same, it has no pre-eminence in
this beyond wedlock: yet, as in it self, it is a stronger resistance of the
lusting of the flesh, and a greater subduer of the natural concupiscence, which
all have less or more; whose importunities it heroically repelleth, whilst the
married only lawfully satisfies them; thus, it seems worthy of, and so to have
promised to it, a higher reward and crown in the world to come, and is one of
the eminentest of all the virtues; as not moderating, but subduing the most
violent of passions. See Esai. 56.4, 5. where Eunuchs, who as dry trees under
the law were much disparaged, ( Deuteronomy. 23.1.) yet under the Gospel have ample
promises beyond those who beget children. -- See Matt. 19.12. where the Kingdom
of heaven being inheritable without it, the using of this means seems to be for
something singular in that Kingdom, as well as for the more easy or certain
attaining it. But however this be, those who grant there several degrees of
glory, proportioned to those here of sanctity, must give the highest to
Virgins; because if supposed only equal with the rest in all other graces, they
are granted in one to be superior. See Act. 21.9. where Virgin seems to be a
term of honor.

Continency especially ne^^ss^^y or the Clergy.
IV. Single life, being so advantageous for having our liberty (freed from any
other conjugal fetters) to bestow our selves wholly on Christ, and to wait upon
him without distraction, freed from cares, and holy in body and spirit; seems,
tho worthy to be sought for by all, yet so necessary to none as to those of the
Clergy, so far as they find themselves capable of it: that perfection, which
others, as it were unnecessitated thereto, attain by it, being their constant
duty and profession as it were; especially, that; to give themselves unto
prayer, [1 Cor. 7.5. -- Act. 6.4.] and to wait upon the Lord without
distraction, [v. 35.] and to take a special care of the poor. Act. 6.3.

That it is the gift of God.
V. It Is plain, that this Continency, and the power of living a single life, is
the gift of God; both 1. such a cool and moderate temper, and calm passions as
do not so eagerly provoke and kindle the fire of lust in us; and 2ly. the grace
to be able to abstain and quench these fires, when we are provoked, if we will
use the means; and 3ly. the actions or means, which we use, by them to procure
the grace to abstain, (as prayer, mortifications of the body, avoiding all
temptations, constant and diligent employment,) are the gift of God. For so
also are all other good things said to be, both natural, and moral, and
spiritual; even all those things which we have most in our power, and which our
industry most procures; and the powers themselves, and every action of them.
So, to be rich, to be honorable; the condition of a freeman, or of a servant,
etc. are the gift of God. See 1 Cor. 7.17. -- Deuteronomy. 8.17, 18. --.3.27. And if
we cannot, of our selves think a good thought, much less refrain the most
violent of our lusts, except from the gift of the Almighty.

VI. Taking this ability to contain,. 8 n. ^. Given to very m^^^.
not for a power of being freed from all concupiscence, and from the first
motions of lust; (for so none at all have this power,) but for a power to
suppress these first motions, and quench these lesser sparks, before they break
out into a flame, 1. either into fornication, therefore [ v. 2.] marriage is
opposed to fornication, as it is [ ver. 9.] to burning; or, 2ly. into
uncleanness, [ which uncleanness, contradistinct from fornication, is no small
guilt, but every where marches along with it as its fellow in the catalogue of
those sins that exclude us from heaven, ( see Gal. 5.19. Ephesians. 5.3. Col. 3.5. 2
Cor. 12.21. etc. some kinds of this uncleanness being advanced above any other
sin, except that in Spiritum Sanctum; see 2 Pet. 2.10. Romans 1.24. Ephesians. 4.18,
19. Rev. 22.15.] or 3ly. into morose delectation, somenting first, and heating
our selves by it, before we put it out, [see 1 Cor. 7.9. expounded by the 2.]
in respect of which, virginal continency in several persons is less or more
pure: This power, I say, thus understood, ( i. e. of being able to contain, if
they be not wanting to themselves,) is given to very many; nay, for some time
at least, to every one. For this I suppose granted; that whenever marriage, or
the use of it, is unavoidably hindered, or by God himself also prohibited,
there also is given by him the power to contain. And this happens in very many
instances; before, in, and after, marriage.

For 1. before marriage,. 8. n. 2. For some space of time (...) least, to All
there being many ceremonies to be observed in it, many surprizals of lust
seize upon youth that are more liable to it, when in an unripe age (of 12, 13,
14, years old perhaps), which for the present, that way, cannot be remedied,
who many times may not marry without the license of their Superiors; as it
happens to youth yet under the power of their parents, (to whom the Apostle
allows a power in disposing of them, 1 Cor. 7.36. etc. and it is there to be
noted, that he considers much more the father's inclinations, toward her
single life, or marriage, than the virgins); and to servants, not yet made free
from their Masters. Besides that, many other causes of delaying marriage may
intervene, as when it is not permitted to any at certain times of the year set
aside for humiliation; Lent, etc: So, when external impediments occur; as being
in a journey, or imprisoned, or upon the Sea, etc, and in many other cases; and
these happening most-what in the age too wherein concupiscence is in its
greatest strength; here, if some have not the power of continency, nor yet of
the remedy, marriage, how will incontinency become a guilt?

2.. 8. n. 3.
Again, in the state of marriage, there is necessary power of continency always
required in respect of concupiscence toward any person whatsoever
(notwithstanding the many temptations the world presents) saving one, i. e. his
wife; and toward all absolutely, when any sickness happens to that one party, to
which we are confined; or when any casual debility, tho never recoverable; so
also, in all necessary absence about the affairs of life, in journeys, in being
taken captive by the Turks, or others, etc, we must allow this gift. Else how
can husbands, when busied abroad by employments, embassies, warfares, etc, be
secure of the honesty of their wives? or how can the State, who many times
permit not their wives to follow them, lawfully make such a separation, by
which they shall necessitate them to sin? So, when the woman is menstruous, and
after childbirth, before she is churched, at least to those that were under
Moses his law. See Lev. 18.19. -- 20.18. Ez^c. 18.6. which abstinence in the
birth of a maid-child was enjoined for eighty days, almost a quarter of the
year. See Lev. 12.5. etc.

3.. 8. n. 4.
And so after marriage dissolved, we must allow this gift to all that are
(justly or unjustly) divorced, who are prohibited under pain of adultery a
second contract, all or most of them; to the Bishops; to the widows
forenamed. Add to this; that of those that marry, few (if we examine things
well) do it, because they want the power of continency, but for other reasons;
as appears, in many forbearing marriage, as long as their places or other
secular respects consist not with it; and presently, when quit of these,
engaging in it: and in most, wedding after the heat and concupiscence of their
youth is already in the wane and declination. And when we see so many, without
marrying, at length reclaimed from former vicious courses, and becoming in a
singular manner continent, we have reason to presume, that God was not wanting
to them, in affording the like power to them before; but they rather wanting to
the grace of God, That none from not expressing the act of continency, ^^n say,
he has not the sewer.
and to themselves.

VII. Since many that certainly have from God the power to contain, (as the
divorced, the one party when the other is debilitated, etc.) yet do not, or
with some difficulty (yea more than the never-married have, because otherwise
accustomed,) and not without temptations to the contrary, do, contain; none can
gather (neither the delinquent, or others) from not containing, or from some
difficulty therein, that he has not power from God to contain, unless also he
use the means; nor, in using the means, can he certainly know it yet, unles
certain that he has used all the means, and in that manner these as he ought;
(hence none can say, that any of those, who, vowing chastity, proved afterward
incontinent, had not power to contain;) or if he perceives that as yet he has
not the power, yet knows he not, whether for the future he may receive it; as
many do, that of debauched, without marriage, at length become chaste. Therefore
can none gather from an act of uncleanness or fornication committed by him,
that he cannot have the gift of continency for the future; or that absolutely
from one such experience of himself he is obliged to marry. But it remains
still true concerning him, as well as others; that, as it is melius nubere,
quam uri; so it is melius continere, quam nubere; if then at length he shall
seriously attempt to quench such burning with prayers, solitude, fasting, etc,
the prime and more noble, rather than by wedlock, the second, and much
inferior, remedy.

That he who having this gift does not exercise it in living unmarried, sin^eth
not.
VIII. It seems, that he that has, and yet does not exercise, the gift of
Continency, nor practice our Saviors precept or advice of Celibacy, Matt.
19.12. does not sin in so doing. For then marrying, to some persons, would be a
sin. Which 1. the Apostle says, it is not, even to those, whom, upon the gift
of continency, he advises to Celibacy. See 1 Cor. 7.27, 28, 36, 38. -- and
Heb. 13.4. 2. If it were; it would follow, (since there is no divorcement upon
any such title,) that there would be a sin which a man was bound to live in,
and having committed it once, to commit it always; and whether would not the
children here also be illegitimate, where the marrying is unlawful. 3. Then
Celibacy can be recommended to no persons in respect of any times of distress,
(as yet we find it was by the Apostle 1 Cor. 7.26.) since, after puberty, all
men sin, either in marrying, or else in abstaining: for those who have not the
gift of continency in the most afflicted times, ought to marry; and the other,
in the most prosperous, to forbear. 4. Those, Whether the gift of continency
(supposing it to be g^v^n only ^o ^^me) can by them etc certainly known.
whom such supposed precept of Celibacy should oblige, must someway certainly
know it; else how can they either forbear, or repent of, a sin, which they know
not when they commit. And, as soon as they know it, they are bound, either
presently to marry, if they find they have not the gift of continency; or for
ever to abstain, if they have: so that those who marry not, as soon as capable
of marriage, and marry afterward, either sin in marrying then, or sinned in not
marrying before. 5. But how any one can certainly know this gift in him, I see
not. First, by what signs shall he know if he has it? In being free from
temptation? So none is. In overcoming them? But who foreknows the success of
future conflicts? May not he marry then, if much tempted, to prevent sinning?
May he not marry, unless he first burn? But then in marrying before burning,
perhaps he has the gift; and so sins in marrying. But if by the effect only of
resisting, or yiedling to, a temptation, we know the gift; it follows, that
none can know he wants the gift, but by (at least once) sinning, yet, to
prevent which sin none may, first, marry. 2. Again, how shall he know if he
have not this gift? by burning or any one act of any uncleanness? 1. None can
argue from not exercising the act of continency, that he has not the power,
(as is showed before. 9.) till he knows whether this failing proceeds from the
absence, or from his own ill managing, of God's gift. For that it often proceeds
from our ill husbandry of grace, is manifest in many of those mentioned before.
7. who having certainly from God the power to contain, yet are many times very
incontinent. If in this case therefore he should go and marry, having the gift,
but abusing it, what thus would this be, but a multiplying of sins, the sin of
lust begetting the sin of wedlock? 2. If thus, after any such uncleanness, all
(as being denied the gift of continency) were obliged to marry, then all, who
remain not in a pure virginity, would be sinners in a single life.

But then;. 11. n. 1.
these are likewise fit things to be known; whether the gift once had may not
aferward be withdrawn? for if so; at several times, to the same person to
marry, or live single, may be a sin. Again, whether not being given at first,
it may be given afterward? for then, after some act of incontinency we need not
cast our selves presently into the bonds of marriage; upon the hopes we have,
from our prayers etc, of recovering this gift: neither indeed is every one by
the Apostle, after burning, bound to marry, (unless he find himself refractory,
and unwilling to use the means to quench such burning, as well as to remove all
occasions of this flame, apt from his temper, temptations, etc, continually to
break out again,) because he is not by this certain, that for the future he may
not by the grace, and other means used, be freed from ever falling again into
this fire. Since many, after such burning, have attained, without marrying, to
the highest degree of Continency. As S. Austin, after long incontinency,
received this gift, so soon as he humbly, and earnestly, and mortifiedly sought
it.

Now if this once be granted from what is premised;. 11. n. 2.
that marriage to no person (I mean in relation to his power to contain) is a
sin, nor celibacy to any absolutely necessary; it follows, our Savior's advice
Matt. 19.12. is not a precept or command of absolute duty to any, under pain of
sinning if he not observe it; but only a Counsel of greater perfection, under
the penalty (if I may so say) hereafter of a less reward if he not practice it.
(See 2 Cor. 9.6.) Note, that by counsel or precept of perfection, (wherever
this expression is found referring to celibacy, abandoning of riches, etc,) I
mean this: The advising us of, and to, a means, whereby we may, more easily,
and free from impediments, attain the diminishing of sin, and the increase of
virtue and grace in us; in which greater purity from sin, and greater practice
of holy duties and habits of grace, and not in the means prescribed, consists
that degree of perfection, to which we by this means attain: which perfection
also may, possibly, but not so easily, be acquired without it.

That tho all have no^, yet all may have, the gift of continency: and that God
denies it to none, a^ no time, a^ no time, they using the means.
IX. Next: It seems also, to be a counsel or precept of greater perfection, not
only to some particular persons, (as some others in the next place would limit
it,) but to all; and that, tho every one has not, ( Matt. 19.11.) yet every
one may have this gift of Continency (and so may practice the precept or
counsel of celibacy) if he please to use those means and endeavors, upon which
God gives it; and that every one may make himself an Eunuch, if he please, for
the kingdom of heaven. (1). For, first, were it a singular gift gratuitally
given only to some men; then, as we have showed before, that it is necessary
for those, to whom we hold it is given as a precept of duty, by some signs
certainly to discern it, for their avoiding of sin; so it is necessary also to
these to whom we hold it is given as a counsel of perfection, to know it, for
their endeavoring to do that which may more please God; that such gracious
gifts may not be bestowed in vain, and their salvation suffer much impediment;
if men endeavor not, or their endeavor be not only in vain, but displeasing
to God, ne quis incontinentia laborans, dum coelibatum appetit, cum Deo
luctetur, says Calvin; and exposing them to sin, if God give not.

Now the difficulties of discerning any such thing, see before: yet without
discerning which (unless all be capable of this gift) there can be no alacrity
in our endeavors; nor will any labor to make themselves Eunuchs. Especially,
when one sees any evident signs, or also has once felt the effects of
incontinency, none should dare any further to defer marriage, or any further
entertain any endeavor of attaining this gift contrary to such indications of
God's denial of it to him; yet is this much contrary to the practice of many
holy men. (2.) There seems no sufficient reason, to make this grace, which is
conversant about the strongest of all passions, and the very root of sin; upon
which depend so many excellent advantages in serving God etc, (confessed by
all,) and granted also to be given to all, at all times, when the remedy of
marriage cannot (as often it can not) be had; to make this grace, I say, when
there is opportunity of marrying, then only, a gratuital grace given to some;
others being denied it, tho never so earnest after it. And thus to restrain
this grace, only upon such a pretense, because tho denied the gift of
continency, they have a sinless way of satisfying their concupiscence: when as
indeed this appointed remedy of marriage (as it refers to incontinency, not to
progeny) may argue only the difficulty in some, not the impossibility in any,
of attaining this gift; and, being instituted for a help of our weakness, ought
not to be made an argument of the restraint of God's goodness and bounty.
Again; no reason, to make this prace only particular to some few; when as all
other graces whatsoever, conversant about the like object, i. e. the moderating
and subduing of our passions, are proclaimed to be general; and all men capable
of them, who are not wanting to God and themselves. So we do not say that any
are necessitated to be immoderate in meat, or drink, or sleep, in the love of
riches, or honor, but, upon doing their endeavor, grace sufficient to be given
to all, to bridle the appetite, and master the affections; only the extremities
of concupiscence it is that we affirm some men are dis-enabled upon any means
whatsoever to suppress. When as meanwhile it must be granted, that to those
singular favorites, to whom God pleases to give it, it is, both gotten by
means; else why are any said to make themselves Eunuchs? and preserved by
means: for none that have the gift (as those who in marriage have their
bedfellows sick or absent) are free from temptations, and do only by means and
resistance overcome them; which means experience shows to be powerful, not only
for subduing lust in men, but in the brute beasts also. Whereas therefore there
are two sorts of God's gifts to us; 1. some to the obtaining of which is
required our endeavor joined or subservient to God's both preventing and
assisting grace, or aid; such as are Faith, Hope, Charity, Patience, etc.
which, tho always God s gifts, yet may be said in some sense to be in our power
also, in as much as we are to presume, that God denies them to none, by his aid
rightly first seeking and laboring for them. 2. Others given gratis by him
without any cooperation of ours, (tho we may also desire and pray for them. 1
Cor. 14.1.) Note that there is not any other of those usually called gratiae
gratis datae, (which are divided to every man as the Spirit pleases, mentioned
1 Cor. 12.) any way like unto this of continency. 1. They being not conversant
about passions, or bettering our selves, but edifying and profiting others. 1
Cor. 12. ver. 7. -- 2. Not by our means procured, or conserved, but conferred
without our cooperation or endeavor; therefore we find no exhortations to the
practice of them, as if they were in our power, as we find to continency: 1
Cor. 7. We find it not said concerning them, There be Prophets that have made
themselves Prophets, or, -- He that can receive them, let him receive them. 3.
Those who have them sinning, if they be not used: the contrary of which is
proved in continency. 4. Lastly, neither is there any thing said of continency,
as restraining it to some particular person; which is not said of those other
gifts, and graces of God of the first kind, as particularly of that of Faith.
See 23.. (3). Concerning the other great precepts or counsels for attaining
perfection, as that in particular by quitting superfluous riches (and so by
this, all the cares and temptations of them,) (of which may be said, what is
said of marrying, 1 Cor. 7.34. and v. 30, 31. compared with 29. -- 2 Timothy 2.4.)
so often recommended, See Matt. 19.21. presently after the recommending of
continency, v. 12. and both of them to be done for the Kingdom of Heaven. See
likewise Lu. 12.33. Lu. 3.11. -- 6.35. -- Matt. 5.42. -- Lu. 16.9.11. -- Matt.
19.29. compared 27. (where, as we must grant, that, tho marriage be lawful, yet
the continent does better; so, tho possession of riches is lawful, yet he that
parts with, and bestows, most of wealth superfluous upon the poor, does better,
than he that keeps or spends more of it upon himself:) Concerning this counsel,
I say, we do not contend, but that all are capable of receiving it: and yet our
Savior, upon occasion of the young man's not receiving so hard a saying, and
so difficult a lesson, seems to put the same difficulty in it, as in
continency: for when he breaks out upon it, [ verily I say a rich man shall
hardly enter into the kingdom etc. and again, Camels shall as easily be
threaded through Needles, ver. 23, 24. see 1 Cor. 1.26.] he says only, (if we
well observe,) It is hard for rich men to receive this saying, [go and sell,]
i. e. of parting with their superfluous wealth. For, be this hardness of rich
men's entering into heaven, from their trusting in their riches, or from having
continual temptations of excess, and fuel for all their lusts ministered by
wealth; or from continual cares and distractions from them, Matt. 13.22. (which
also he names, from marriage, 1 Cor. 7.35): all is presently remedied in
receiving this saying, (yet foolish men take no notice of it,) sell that ye
have, [i. e. superfluous,] and give it away in alms, (where the charity is not
so much to others, as to our selves.) For in parting with his riches, he is
sure at once to part with his trust in them, cares, temptations of them, etc;
for no man trusts in, or is tempted with, what he has not. I have stayed the
longer upon this general offer of the gift of continency on God's part; because
the conceit of it as of a private gift is very discouraging (as we see by their
practices, where this doctrine is taught,) for the attempting that heavenly
condition of life (so much recommended by our Savior, and St. Paul) after they
first believe, that for some men no means can procure it; and then, by the
strong assaults of their lusts (from which none are free) believe that
themselves are such. And hence, whilst we are in suspense, whether there be a
possibility of it, or no, in respect of us, (as there is to none a possibility,
who are destitute of the gift) we cast all our care, not upon mortifying and
refraining our lust; but upon the observance of the Symptoms of this gift, and
the several risings and heights of our lusts, accordingly to shape to our
selves that future condition of life, to which our present seems to lead us.
And all this without cause, whereas we may make our selves what we are not; and
God's providing a remedy for an innocent satisfying of that concupiscence,
which cannot (by our deficiency) otherwise be allayed, was by reason of our
ordinary weakness, not of our absolute necessity; to whom he (in some times)
indulged a facile changing also of those to whom men were joined: but it
likewise not for their necessity, but for the hardness of their hearts. Matt.
19.8. -- Whereas now it is a fruit of the Evangelical perfection, that husbands
(by mutual consent) do separate from their wives (without taking others) for
the Kingdom of God, ( Lu. 18.29. compared 28.) always secure of the gift of
continency from God, (if resolute in their endeavors of preserving it): Else
this would be an act most unlawful, which our Savior makes so heroical, and
promises to it so great a reward.

It seems therefore, that God, this gift being so advantageous to his service,
parag. 1.) and so common, (see par. 7.) not denied upon repentance and prayer
etc to many grievous sinners, after long contrary habits, without their using
the remedy of marriage; that God, I say, denies not this power to any at all,
who first have power over their own will; decree and stand steadfast in their
heart; 1 Cor. 7.37. resolutely undertake and offer this their singleness to God
for such an end, as is so much approved by him; and then practice also the
means conducing to it, which are observed (as abstinency, for example,)
naturally to cure the burnings of lust, even in brute beasts.

Paul could not justly have blamed the widows, when some of them young, for
remarrying; whose marriage, he says, was out of wantonness, and that they had
damnation, for having cast off their first faith and promise, ( i. e. of living
single, and attending wholly to those charitable duties etc.) which they had
made to Christ, and the Church: but if God had not given them the power of
observing their vow, the Apostle should have allowed their remarrying, and
blamed their vowing; who ordered also for the future, that such young women
should no more be admitted to such vows or duties, for public service of the
Church; not because they could not, but ordinarily would not, abstain.

made themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven, Matt. 19.12. if he would
not also be assistant to them with his grace; as he approved their purpose, and
design; to which also they were allured by his Encomiums of that happier
condition. Nor would he have (and that in the general) commended those, who
leave the pleasures of marriage for the Kingdom of God's sake, that is, for the
better serving God in any way, (see 1 Cor. 7.34, 35.) or, those who have
forsaken their wives, ( i. e. by mutual consent, 1 Cor. 7.4, 5.) see Lu. 18.29.
compared with Matt. 19.29. There is none that has left, (or, every one, that
has forsaken,) wife etc. who shall not receive etc. Forsaken, i. e. as the
Apostles did, in local separation from them, (see Matt. 19.27.) unless
continency were a gift; which all pious purposes, using the means for
conserving it, and intending God's glory in it, may presume upon. Tho, where we
do not subdue our lust, S. Paul as much prohibits any long separation, as our
Savior here encourages it. See 1 Cor. 7.5.

Paul have approved the same resolution in those, who could master so far their
own will: 1 Cor.7.37. who doubtless, what he praises in the father, (who yet
might be necessitated to go against his will, by the virgin's
incontinacibility) he would much more have approved in the virgin. Neither is
that need ( ver. 36.) necessity absolute, as appears by what follows, [do what
he will,] the other doing better.

etc; or else, that, it being a special gift only to some, every one, before
taking Orders, or making a Vow, might certainly know, not only, whether he had
the gift for the present, but whether he might also persevere therein to his
death, (forasmuch as concerned God the Doner thereof.) But here it is
unintelligible, how such assurance can arise, only to some particular persons;
nor can any direct, how such a special gift, not only for the present, but the
future also, may be discerned. Meanwhile concerning the prohibitions and
practice of Antiquity, see and compare together Can. Apostol. 27. -- Conc.
Chalcedon. can. 13.15. -- Constantinop. in Trullo. can. 6.12, 13. compared Can.
Apost. 6: In brief, you will find the issue to be much-what to this purpose:
That no Presbyter may marry after his taking Orders, nor Bishop after his
Consecration: That of those who, being before married, are admitted afterward
into holy Orders, some Churches required that they should ever after (by mutual
consent, [which was known before Orders conferr'd]) abstain from their wives;
as the Roman-Church: Some, that Bishops only should abstain universally; and
simple Presbyters, only abstain then when they were to officiate; as the Greek
Church. -- See likewise Provincial Councils celebrated about the time of the
Nicene Council, and approved afterward by the Constant. Conc. in Trullo. can.
2. -- Ancyran. Conc. can. 10. -- Neocaesar. can. 1: -- etc,

Apostol. Canon. 27. In nuptiis autem qui ad Clerum evecti sunt, Praecipimus
ut, sivoluerint, uxores accipiant, sed lectores cantoresque tantummodo; not the
higher Orders of Bishop, Presbyter, Deacon, etc. -- Conc. Ancyranum (before the
first Council of Nice) Can. 10. -- Diaconi quicunque cum ordinantur, si in ipsa
ordinatione protestati sunt, dicentes, velle se habere uxores, n^^ posse se
continere, (where posse is taken as expounded. 24.) hi postea si ad nuptias
venerint, maneant in ministerio, propterea quod his Episcopus licentiam
dederit. Quicunque sane tacuerunt and susceperunt manus impositionem, professi
continentiam, si postea ad nuptias venerint, a ministerio cessare debebunt.
[But note, that, si protestati sunt, is here said of Deacons only.] -- Conc.
Naeocaesar. (before Nice) c^n. 1. -- Presbyter si uxorem duxerit, ab ordine suo
illum deponi debere. -- Conc. Nicaenum can. 3. -- Omnibus modis interdixit
sancta Synodus; neque Episcopo, neque Presbytero, etc. omnino licere habere
secum mulierem extraneam, nisi forte sit matter, aut soror, aut avia, aut amita,
vel matertera. In his namque solis personis, and harum similibus omnis, quae ex
mulieribus est, suspicio declinatur. Whereas might they have entertained a
wife, neither would there have bin cause of such suspicion; nor would it have
bin reasonable, nor safe, to deprive their wives of all Women-attendance or
Society. As for the story of Paphnutius in this Council, [which makes so great
a noise amongst us; so that this instance stands for a bulwark against all the
other evidence, in this point, of Antiquity, (see Calvin Institut. 4. l. 12. c.
26. and generally all our writers,)] this is the All of it: That, motion being
made by some in the Council, that the married Presbytery, ( i. e. such as were
married before made Presbyters) should after their Ordination be separated from
their wives: [which separation the Greek Church allows not to this day; and of
which the 6th of those called Canons Apostolical, says thus, (notwithstanding
that the same Canons prohibit marriage after Ordination except to Lectores and
Cantores:) Episcopus aut Presbyter uxorem propriam nequaquam sub obtentu
religionis abjiciant: (Some conceive this to be meant, *without her consent;
others, * not for cohabitation, but for maintenance only:) Si vero rejecerit,
excommunicetur. -- And Council. Gangrense, because some held it unlawful to
receive the Communion from a Presbyter formerly married, was necessitated to
make this Canon. 4. -- Quicunque discernit, a Presbytero, qui uxorem habuit,
(here it is habuit, not habet,) quod non oporteat eo ministrante de oblatione
percipere, Anathema sit.] That, such a motion being made, I say, Paphnutius, a
Reverend Bishop, and a Confessor, tho never married, withstood it, saying,
Grave jugum, etc. neque a singulorum uxoribus fortasse eam castimoniae normam
posse servari. But now mark what follows: -- Illud satis esse, ut qui in Clerum
ante ascripti erant quam duxissent uxores, hi secundum veterem Ecclesiae
Traditionem deinceps a nuptiis se abstinerent; non tamen quenquam ab illa quam
jampridem, cum laicus erat, uxorem duxisset, sejungi debere. The story is in
Socrates Eccl. Histor. 1. l. 8. c. and in others from him. Sozomen. 1. l. 22.
c. Judge now what cause there is, to urge Paphnutius for the marrying of the
Clergy, after H. Orders received by them when as single. I go on. -- Conc.
Romanum under Silvester, in the time also of Constantine the Great, Can. 7. --
Nullum autem Subdiaconorum ad nuptias transire praecipimus, ne aliquam
praevaricationem sumpserit. -- Elibertin. Council. about the same time in Spain;
Can. 33. Placuit in totum prohibere Episcopis, Presbyteris, Diaconis, ac
Subdiaconis, positis in ministerio, abstinere se a conjugibus suis, and non
generare silios. Quod quicunque fecerit, ab honor Clericatus exterminetur.
Which Canon plainly shows; That at that time in the Western, tho not in the
Eastern, Churches, not only marriage after Holy Orders was forborne, but
abstinence from their wives, by those who were married before, was commonly
practiced; since he, who should do the contrary, was so highly punished. --
Conc. Arelatense secundum under the same Silvester. Can. 2. -- Assumi aliquem
in Sacerdotium in vinculo conjugii constitutum, nisi fuerit praemissa
conversio, non oportet. Two Councils, in which S. Austin was present, * 1.
Conc. Carthag. 2. Can. 2. -- Placuit and condecet sacro-sanctos Antistites and
Dei Sacerdotes, necnon and Levitas ( i. e. Deacons etc, continentes esse in
omnibus etc. ut quod Apostoli docuerunt, and ipsa servavit antiquitas, nos
quoque custodiamus. Ab universis Episcopis dictum est, omnibus placet, ut
Episcopi, Presbyteri, etc, pudicitiae custodes etiam ab uxoribus se abstineant.
Hence S. Austin, ( Confess. 10. l. 30. c.) speaking of his continency, before
obliged by Priesthood to it, says, -- Et quoniam dedisti factum est, and
antequam dispensator Sacramenti tui fierem. And *2. Conc. Africanum cap. 37. --
Praeterea cum de quorundam Clericorum quamvis erga uxores proprias
incontinentia referretur; placuit Episcopos, and Presbyteros, and Diaconos,
secundum priora statuta etiam ab uxoribus continere. Quod nisi fecerint, ab
Ecclesiastico removeantur officio. Caeteros autem Clericos ad hoc non cogi, sed
secundum uniuscujusque Ecclesiae consuetudin^m observari debere. -- These were
before the third General Council. -- Add to these the fourth General Council of
Chalcedon. Can. 13. -- Quoniam in quibusdam provinciis concessum est Psalmistis
and Lectoribus, (se Apost. Can. 27. quoted before,) uxores ducere, constituit
sancta Synodus prorsus cuiquam ex his non licere alterius sectae accipere
uxorem, etc. Where it is plain, that other Clergy besides Psalmists and Readers
might not marry at all.

these a Canon or two in Constantinopol. Conc. in Trullo, reckoned by the
Eastern Church for a part of the sixth General Council, tho it was not
consented to by the Roman Patriarch; Can. 6. -- Quoniam in Apostolicis
Canonibus dictumest, cor^m qui non duct ae uxore in Clerum promoventur, solum
lectores and cantores uxorem posse ducere, and nos hoc servantes decernimus, ut
deinceps nulli penitus Hypodiacono, vel Diacono, vel Presbytero, post sui
Ordinationem, conjugium centrahere liceat. etc. Canon. 12. Jubet omnino
Antistites, ( i. e. Bishops,) postquam sunt ordinati, a propriis uxoribus
secedere: and here they take notice of the 6th. Apostol. Canon, quoted before
in the last, and yet advance beyond it: quoniam Apostoli (say they) cum sides
inciperet, ad fidelium imbecillitatem se magis demittebant etc. -- Can. 13. --
decernunt, Presbyteros a prioribus suis legitimis uxoribus non separari, sed eo
tempore quo sacrificant; and expellentes suas uxores pietatis praetextu,
excommunicandos. And this (say they) notwithstanding the contrary custom of the
Roman Church. Thus the Council in Trullo. And ever since have the same laws and
customs bin preserved in the Eastern Churches, as we may see in the Answer of
Jeremias Patriarch of Constantinople, in Epilogo to the Reformed, soliciting
his approbation of their innovation in this matter, and remembering him of the
Apostle's rule, Melius est nubere quam uri, -- and his order, -- Oportet
Episcopum esse unius uxoris virum: to which he replies this; -- Proinde and nos
illis sacerdotibus, qui in virginitate persistere non possunt, priusquam tamen
consecrentur, and Sacerdotes [ i. e. futuri] siant etc. Ille autem [ Sacerdos,
entering into Orders, or others vowing Virginity] qui semel virginitatem
professus est, virgo permaneat, nec jam illi ullam amplius licentiam post votum
susceptum nubendi damus. Nemo enim mittens manum ad aratrum, and respiciens
retro, idoneus est consequendo coelesti regno. [Here is Priests, after their
consecration, or others vowing Virginity; for ever after denied marriage.] --
This the modern law of the Greek Church; and if the prohibiting them afterward,
makes them the more, who intend Priesthood, to take wives before, and so many
of the Greek Clergy de facto are married, to enjoy this liberty more than for
necessity; yet this is an abuse no ways countenanced by their Ecclesiastical
Canons. Much less may we imagine that they are obliged by any such law (ne
periculo fornicandi se exponant) to take wives before they may enter into this
Holy profession, so contrary both to the Apostle's Counsel, 1 Cor. 7. and the
Church'es former Injunctions, when as even all secular employments have at
least the liberty of a single life; and the Reformed themselves, so great
friends to marriage, yet impose no such yoke upon their Clergy, nor has any
that I know of entertained such a fancy save Vigilantius.

Out of the Canons then recited above you may observe, 1. That the Greek
Church, who acknowledge and practice these Canons in this point to this day,
allow indeed the use of their wives, except when they officiate, (but what if
they officiate every day, as many Priests do?) to Priests married before
Ordination, but not so to Bishops; but permit not that any Ordained unmarried
may afterward marry at all. 2ly. Again, That those married persons, who were to
be made Presbyters in the Roman Church, and Bishops in the Oriental, might not
separate from their wives without consent, received from the wives before such
Ordination or Consecration of them. 3ly. That such continency was annexed to
Holy Orders only by Ecclesiastical Constitution, and was rather Lex
Continentiae, than Votum: which therefore has bin capable of many
dispensations, and the Canons about it somewhat differing; and the Clergy more
restrained by some of them than by others. But this seems to be a received
ground amongst them all in those primitive times, that Continency is a general
gift, at least in potentia remota, i.e. which is by God denied to none using
the means, and rightly preparing himself for it, etc. Else how could they
prudently make such laws, strictly prohibiting marriage for such a number of
men, involving also the Deacons, and Subdeacons, upon penalty of degradation
from their office, (which laws you see, the Reformed, because they hold
continency a particular gift, only possible to some, generally decry.) How
could they allow of a separation (by consent once given) of a man and his wife
for ever, required, in the Roman Church, of all; in the Eastern, of Bishops;
notwithstanding what the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 7.5? unless you will say, that
the Church Officers in time of Ordination could discern who had this gift, who
not. Or, that there was no party coming to be ordained, or consenting to such a
separation, but was able to discern it in himself, and that not only for the
present, but always for the future; and likewise that none would present
himself, that knew he had it not.

Tim. 4.1. etc. that in the latter times there should arise Apostates etc,
forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, any way prejudice
these injunctions and practices of ancient Church, (nor consequently of the
latter times, herein following only her example.) 1. Because the Apostle, by
opposing to such error, that every creature and ordinance of God is good,
(according to Genesis 1.31. and 2.23, 24.) and therefore being sanctified first,
by the word of God and prayer, may lawfully be used, (see 1 Timothy 4.3, 4, 5.)
shows, that he means such Apostates, as abstain from, or prohibit, marriage
and meats, as in themselves unlawful, and unclean, and contaminating. Which
thing can neither be objected to the ancient, nor modern Church-practice, using
abstinence from some meats for the chastisement of the body, not for any
uncleaness in the food; and not forbidding marriage to any single person
absolutely, but only upon his voluntary undertaking such an employment, with
which they imagine a married condition not so well to suit. In which case if
necessary abstinence from marriage be a fault, the Apostle himself may seem to
comply with it in those expressions of his 1 Timothy 5.11.12. -- 2ly. Because
experience has manifested the Apostle's prophecy to have bin most eminently
fulfilled in other persons of these latter times, (whom these Fathers even in
these points most vehemently resisted,) affirming downright all marriage,
especially with reference to procreation of children [therefore the married
were advised by them, in such manner to use their wives, as to avoid this, (see
S. Aust. de moribus. Manich. 18. c.)] to be unlawful, and the work or design of
the Devil, as likewise flesh-diet to be unclean and defiling. Animata
abominantes interdicunt (says Epiphanius haer. 47.) non continentioe gratia,
neque honestoe vitae, sed ob timorem, and imaginations ut non contaminentur ab
animatorum esu. Vino vero omnino non utuntur, Diabolicum esse dicentes. -- And
S. Austin contra Faust. 30. l. 5. c. Ipsam creaturam immundam dicitis, quod
carnes Diabolus operetur faeoulentio^e materia, mali. -- And de haeres. 46. c.
Non vescuntur carnibus, tanquam de mortuis vel occisis fugerit divina
substantia. -- Vinum non bibunt, dicentes, fell esse principum tenebrarum. Such
were some of the Gnostics, Encratites, Montanists, Marcionites, and in the
last place the Manichees, being as it were the last extract and quintessence of
all those former gross errors, not a little potent even in S. Austin's times;
who, not holding all things to have bin created by the same good God, but this
lower world by an evil principle, or by the Prince of darkness, as they call
him, affirm, in the begetting of a man, that the Soul, which they account to be
a part of the substance of God himself, becomes fettered and imprisoned in the
walls or handiwork of the devil, i.e. the body, from which it is again
released only by death; (therefore was marriage, occasioning such imprisonment,
forborne by all their elect; and tho this permitted to their auditors, yet
(says Austin) it was, non dicences non esse peccatum, sed peccantibus veniam
largientes, propterea quod illis necessaria ministrabant. con. Faust. Man. 30.
l.) Likewise that the same part of God was continually more defiled, and
enclosed by such and such gross nourishments of the body. And when of such
errors they were accused by the Fathers, it was ordinary with them to
recriminate the Orthodox with the same things; both for their frequent
abstinencies from flesh, and some other fruits; and for their (to some persons
at least) recommending virginity; who in this matter were answered by them
after the same manner, as the Protestants, objecting the same things, are now
by the Church of Rome. See concerning this the contest between Faustus the
Manichee and S. Austin, ( cont. Faust. Manich. 30. l.) and see concerning such
Heretics in the Church before the Manichees, Irenaeus adv. Haeres. 1. l. 22.
c. there, of Saturninus and Basilides, he says, Nubere autem and generare, a
Satana dicunt esse. Multi autem ex iis and ab animalibus abstinent etc. -- See
Clem. Alexand. Strom. 3. near the beginning. Marcionistae quidem dicunt malam
esse naturam ex mala materia etc. -- qua quidem ratione nolentes implere
mundum, qui factus est a Creatore, volunt abstinere a nuptiis, resistentes suo
Creatori etc. -- See much what the same relation with that of Irenaeus, in
Epiphan. Haeres. 23. and 46. and 47. Continentiam hic (i.e. Tatianus)
praedicat, asserens nihil differ matrimonium a scortatione, sed idem esse.
Haer. 46. And the judgment of the Fathers commenting on this place of Timothy,
applies it to the same men. See S. Ambrose, or the Author of those Comments in
his works. Doctrina, says he, quae nunc in Marcionistis, (quamvis pene
defecerint,) vel Patricianis, aut maxim in Manichaeis denotatur. Hi enim and
Christum natum negant, and nuptias prohibent, and abstinendum a cibis tradunt.
-- Chrysostom. de Manichaeis, and. Encratistis, and Marcionistis, omnique
illorum officina hic loquitur etc. -- After whom see Dr. Hammond on 1 Timothy 4.
note b. and the authorities there cited by him. And in the last place consider
what Mr. Mede himself ( Apostasy of the latter times, p. 113.) grants;
namely, That errors about marriages and meats were no novelties in the Apostles
own times, as the diligent Reader may easily collect out of their own Epistles:
which makes it improbable, that he would specify the apostasy of latter times
in these alone. Thus much Mr. Mede. Neither will that expression [in latter
times] (the like expressions to which are found in many other places; see 2 Timothy 3.1. -- 4.3. -- 2 Pet. 3.3. -- 1 Jo. 2.18. -- Jude 18. -- 2 These. 2.3.)
carry the purpose of this prophecy beyond the days of these ancient Herericks.
For first, this expression does not seem in the Apostle's drift so to indicate
the future times, as altogether to exclude the present; they reckoning even
their own times also a part of the last times, (see 1 Pet. 1.20. Heb. 1.2. Act.
2.17. 1 Jo. 2.18. 1 Cor. 10.11.) and therefore, when they describe such wicked
persons, advising those they writ to for the present to beware of them, to
resist them, to teach contrary doctrine, etc. See 1 Timothy 4.6. etc. 2 Timothy 3.14.
-- 4.2. 2 Pet. 3.2. 1 Jo. 4.1. Or, 2ly. if they do; yet thus, either we must
free the Father's times from any such imputation, as living before these latter
times here prophesied of, (and consequently in all future times we must absolve
all those, who in these matters affirm no more than the Fathers did,) or, if
these latter times involve the days of the Fathers also, (as Mr. Mede fancies
them to begin about 360, or 410, ( Apostasy p. 84.) yet in the same times we
find also these heretics contemporaries with, and much combated by, the
Fathers. And therefore whether the prophecy (eying those times) is likely to
mean them, [i. e. the asserters of marriage and meats to be in themselves
utterly unlawful and unclean,] or to mean the Fathers rather, their Antagonists
in these points, I leave to the Readers judgment.

[5ly.] The same persuasion, in Antiquity, of the universality of this gift to
all seeking it, may be gathered from the vowing 1. of virginity, much used,
allowed, recommended by them. Of which also we find something in the ancient
Councils. See Conc. Ancyran. before that of Nice, Can. 19. Quotquot
virginitatem pollicitam praevaricati sunt, professione contempta inter digamos
haberi debebunt. Here the practice thereof appears. -- Conc. Elibertin. about
the same time with that of the Nicene, Can. 13. Virgins quae se Deo
dedicaverunt, si pactum perdiderint virginitatis, atque libidini servierint,
non intelligentes quid amiserint, placuit nec in fine dandam eis esse
Communionem etc. -- Conc. Romanum at the same time under Silvester, Can. 10.
Nullus Episcoporum virginem sacratam maritali consortio ( i.e. to receive the
veil, and the solemnity of her marriage unto Christ) expetierit benedicere,
nisi eam probaverit 72 annorum esse constitutam, ubi probabitur judicium verae
pudicitiae, ut in 72 annis requirens Virum Christum pudicitia custodita, uncta
vertice introducatur ad nuptias Christi, velamen capitis ferens, non cordis,
(alluding, I suppose, to 2 Cor. 3.) This admission was not, of her to vow at 72
years, who was sacrata before, but of her, having so long faithfully kept her
vow, to such an honor as this ceremony imports. In this same time, namely of
the Emperor Constantine, were some former Roman-laws, prejudicial to Celibacy,
abrogated by him for their sakes, who had vowed to keep their virgin-chastity
inviolate. Eusebius. de vita Constant. 4. l. 26. c. -- Council. Carthaginense 3.
Can. 33. Vt virgins sacrae, si privatae fuerint parentibus, a quibus
custodiebantur, providentia Episcopi, vel Presbyteri, ubi Episcopus absens est,
in Monasterio virginum vel gravioribus foeminis commendentur, ut simul
habitantes invicem se custodiant, ne passim vagantes Ecclesiae laedant
aestimationem. -- And Carthag. 4. Can. 104. Si quae viduae quantumlibet adhuc
in minoribus annis positae, and matura aetate a viro relictae, se devoverunt
Domino, and vest Laicali abjecta, sub testimonio Episcopi and Ecclesiae
religioso habitu apparuerint, postea vero ad nuptias soeculares transierint,
secundum Apostolum, damnationem habebunt, quoniam fidem castitatis, quam Domino
voverunt, irritam facere ausae sunt. Tales ergo personae sine Christianorum
communione maneant, etc. And afterward. De talibus ait Apostolus: Quum
luxuriatae fuerint nubere volunt, habentes damnationem etc. These two Councils
were before the fourth General Council of Chalcedon, and both subscribed by St.
Austin. Lastly, see Conc. Chalced. with which I will conclude; Can. 14.
Diaconissam non debere ante annos 40 ordinari statuimus, and hoc cum diligenti
probatione, si vero -- postea se nuptiis tradiderit, injuriam faciens gratioe
Dei, haec Anathema sit cum eo qui in nuptiis illius convenerit. -- And Can. 15.
Siqua virgo se dedicaverit Deo, similiter Monachus, non licet eis nuptiis
jungi. Si vero inventi fuerint hoc facientes, maneant excommunicati.

Ignatius in Ep. ad Tharsenses, and ad Antiochenses, making mention of Virgins
Deo sacrae in his time. In the first, after Viri diligite sponsas vestras, etc.
he says, Eas, quae in virginitate, honorate ut sacras Christi; eas, quae in
honestate viduas, ut altar Dei, etc. In the second, -- Populus subjiciatur
Presbyteris and Diaconis. Virgins cognoscant, cui consecraveruntseipsas. This
in the copies approved by Archbishop Usher, and Dr. Hammond. Tertullian and S.
Cyprian before A. D. 300, writ Tracts; one de velandis virginibus (i.e.
sacris,) That they should cover their faces with veils, etc. where he mentions
votum continentiae -- viderit ipsum continentiae votum, p. 200. -- and
distinguishes between virgins hominum, and virgins Dei. -- Ambiunt virgins
hominum adversus virgins Dei, etc. p. 193. -- and near the end he says to
such Non mentiris nuptam. Nupsisti enim Christo; illi tradidisti carnem tuam:
illi sponsasti maturitatem tuam, etc. And of those who should offer to pull off
this veil, he says; O sacrilegae manus, quae dicatum Deo habitum detrahere
potuerunt! etc. -- The other, de disciplina and habitu virginum (i.e.
sacrarum,) of whom he says there: -- Quae se Christo dicaverunt, and a carnali
concupiscentia recedentes tam carne quam mente se Deo voverunt, -- and that
they were flos Ecclesiastici germinis etc gaudere per illas, atque in illis
largiter florere Ecclesiae matris gloriosam foecunditatem; and that those of
them who afterward yield to lust, are adulterae Christi. -- And see his Epistle
to Pomponius, about some that lived unchastly, after that exfide se Christo
dicaverant, sanctitati suaese destinarant, propter regna coeborum se
castraverant, etc. To these, that you may know that anciently also those who
lived Monastic lives made vows thereof, (the contrary of which some endeavor
to persuade us,) I will add only two other testimonies: one out of S. Basil,
praesat. constitut. Monast. Nuptias velut compedes fugit; vitam suam Deo
consecrat, and castitatem profitetur, ut neque facultas ipsi sit conversionis
ad nuptias: the other out of S. Austin, in Psalm. 75. upon [Vovete and reddite
Domino Deo nostro.] -- Alii virginitatem ipsam ab ineunte aetate vovent etc.
isti voverunt plurimum. -- Alius vovet relinquere omnia sua distribuendo
pauperibus, and ire in communem vitam, in societatem sanctorum; magnum votum
vovit. -- Nescio quae castimonialis nubere voluit. Aliquid mali voluit? mali
plane. Quare? Quia jam vove^at Domino. Quid enim dixit de talibus Apostolus
Paulus? ( Cum dicat, viduas adolescentulas nubere si velint,) Quid autem ait de
quibusdam, quae voverunt, and non reddiderunt? habentes, inquit, damnationem,
quia jam fidem irritam fecerunt. Nemo ergo positus in Monasterio Frater dicat;
Recedo de Monasterio. Neque enim soli, qui sunt in Monasterio perventuri sunt
in regnum coelorum: -- Respondetur ei; sed illi non voverunt, tu vovisti. And
concerning the married, by consent vowing continency, and obligation afterward
for ever to observe it, see S. Austin's 199 Epistle to Ecdicia. The argument of
which Epistle I will transcribe you. -- Mulier quaedam [ i. e. this Ecdicia]
inscio marito susceperat votum Continentiae. Post tamen maritus assensus est,
and continenter cum ea vixit, non sinens tamen ut Monachae vestem sumeret.
Tandem inscio marito facultates omnes duobus [Monachis] veluti pauperibus
erogavit, cum haberet filium puerum ex eodem viro. Maritus suspicans eos
Monachos esse ex eorum numero, qui penetrant and praedantur domos alienas,
resiliit a proposito, and coepit maechari. -- Now in this Epistle St. Austin
blames Ecdicia indeed, for all the things above named, which she had done
without the consent of her husband, commanding her to submit, and ask his
pardon, etc. but as to the vow of Continency, to which they had once both
consented (notwithstanding his fornicating,) he holds them both for ever
obliged to it, and exhorts her, at least, to perseverance therein. -- Quod enim
(says he) Deo p^riconsensu ambo voveratis, perseveranter usque in finem
reddere ambo debuistis; a quo proposito si lapsus est ille, tu saltem
constantissime persevera. Thus He. As for other quotations of Fathers, I refer
you to the Controvertists: instead of which I will set you down the confessions
concerning them of Calvin, Instit, 4. l. 12. c. 27. s. -- Secuta sunt deinde
tempora, (he means after the Conc. Nicen.) quibus invaluit nimis superstitiosa
coelibatus admiratio, etc. Haec, quia videbantur reverentiam Socerdotio
conciliare, magno plausu etiam antiquitus recepta esse fateor. Now the reason,
why he censures not the times till after Nice, is the story of Paphnutius, from
which he gathers, those former times Conjugium in Sacerdotio tolerasse, not
observing, or concealing, that it was only Conjugium contracted before
Ordination. Himself meanwhile condemning the Canons which these times
approved; quibus vetitum est, ne matrimonium contraherent, qui pervenissent ad
sacerdotii gradum. (Sect. 27. and Sect. 29.28.) Nulla omnino condition dandum
esse locum iis Canonibus censeo, qui vinculum Coelibatus Ecclesiastico ordini
injiciunt. Concerning vows of single life, (13. c. 17..) Hoc, inquiunt, ab
ultima memoria fuit observatum, ut se alligarent continentiae voto, qui totos
se Domino dicare vellent. His Answer. Fateor ^erre antiquitus quoque receptum
fuisse hum morem: sed eam aetatem sic ab omni vitio liberam fuisse non concedo,
ut pro regula habendum sit quicquid tunc factum est. -- And the confession of
Pet. Martyr de Coelibatu and Votis. -- Vt quod verum est fateamur, cos in hac
causa habemus iniquiores. Statim enim ab Apostolorum temporibus nimium tribui
coeptum est Coelibatui. And of St. Austin he says; Iste vir Dei scribit
(speaking of Vows) ut homo deceptus. Now the objections which are made, by the
opposers of the law of Celibacy, for those entering into Holy Orders; or of vows
of Celibacy, for other persons, out of the Canons of Councils, or the writings
of the Fathers, are not against any thing here affirmed: but either, concerning
some, who, having wives before Ordination, were not obliged afterward to
abstain from them, (allowed still by the Greek Church, except to Bishops only),
*or concerning marriages contracted after Ordination or Vows, that such are not
irrita; of which opinion S. Austin is clearly, De bono Viduitatis, c. 8, 9,
etc. a thing granted by all after only simple vows; and after solemn, disputed
still; whether such persons, who have so solemnly delivered, and made over
themselves in a particular espousal to God, are made illegitimate for any
Secular marriage afterward jure Divino, or only jure Ecclesiastico. (See Bell.
de Monach. 2. l. 34. c. sect. Respond: convenit. --) For the Church has always
claimed much power (as being not restrained by the Levitical law, qua talis,
but only by that of Nature, nor prescribed any thing by Christ) in ordering the
matters of marriage; and in hindering some persons from marrying, (even not to
making the marriage illicitum to be done, but irritum when done,) who are not
restrained there from by the Divine law, or the law of Nature. See if you
please the discourses of this in Estius 4. sent. 40. d. 3. s. etc. -- 28. d.
sect. 4, 8, 9. *or, concerning those, who, after vowing continency, live in
fornication and uncleanness, that such, notwithstanding their vow formerly
made, had better marry than thus offend. Which is granted by all, after a
simple vow: (hear what Bellarm. says, ( de Monach. 2. l. 34. c. sect. Est
autem. --) -- Licet sine peccato contrahi nequeunt, tamen verae nuptioe sunt:
and ideo aliquo modo minus malum est nubere post votum ejusmodi, quam assidue
fornicari, tum ob sidem conjugii, tum ob prolem legitimam, tum ob alia bona,
etc.) * But let it be granted them after a solemn also: but if from hence they
would prove the lawfulness of marriage after vowing continency, the places they
produce will no way bear it. They are three, much pressed: one of S. Cyprian,
Epistola ad Pomponium 62. Quod si ex fide se Christo di^averunt, pudice and
cast sine ulla fabula perseverent; ita fortes and stabiles praemium
viginitatis expectent: si autem perseverare nolunt, aut non possint, melius est
ut nubant, quam in ignem delictis suis cadant. The second of S. Hierom, Ep. ad
Demetriadem 8. Sanctum Virginum propositum and coelestis Angelorumque familiae
gloriam quarundam non been se agentium nomen infamat; quibus aperte dicendum
est, ut aut nubant, si se non possint continere; aut contineant, si nolunt
nubere. The third of S. Austin, de sancta Virginitate, 34. c. upon that of the
Apostles, 1 Timothy 5. Nubere volunt. -- Hae igitur (he speaks of those who have
vowed chastity) quae nubere volunt, and ideo non nubunt, quia impune non
possunt, (quae melius nuberent, quam urerentur) quas poenitet professionis, and
piget confessionis, nisi correctum cor dirigant, and Dei timore rursus
libidinem vincant, in mortuis deputandae sunt. etc. 1 Timothy 5.6. -- But in these
places the Fathers, only, of two evils, if one of them they will do, wish
rather the less to be done; and prefer marriage, being in it self, tho not to
them after a vow, lawful, before living in fornication, and other uncleannes,
neither to them after vows, nor before in it self, lawful: therefore they say,
si nolunt continere, or perseverare, nubant. Which marriage yet none at all
allow lawful; namely to none who can keep their vows. As for the non possunt,
they speak if not of them as no way able to keep their vow, (for then indeed I
grant, marriage would be lawful, if the vow of virginity were impossible to be
kept,) but of them as, by their own fault (which they may redress [therefore S.
Austin says, nisi correctum cor dirigant, etc,]) impotent. Which may clearly
appear (to any who delight not rather to make the Fathers to contradict
themselves, even where their speeches are most easily reconciled) both by the
same Fathers allowing these perpetual vows, and their holding in all the
possibility of continency; showed before. Of which also hear S. Hierom, (
comment. in Matt. 19. c.) upon [Non omnes capiunt.] Nemo putet sub hoc verbo
vel fatum vel fortunam introduci: quod hi sunt virgins, quibus a Deo datum
sit, aut quos quidam casus ad hoc adduxerit: sed his datum est, qui petierunt,
qui voluerunt; qui ut acciperent laboraverunt. Omni enim petenti dabitur, and
pulsanti aperietur, etc. -- Qui potest capere, capiat; qui potest pugnare,
pugnet; superet, ac triumphet. -- And adversus Jovinianum 2. l. 19. c. to this
Apostate Monk, who equalled a virginal and conjugal state, he says: Virgins
tuoe, quas prudentissimo consilio quod nemo unquam legerat nec audierat, de
Apostolo docuisti [melius est nubere, quam uri] occultos adulteros in apertos
verterunt maritos. Non suasit hoc Apostolus, non electionis vas; Virgilianum
eonsilium est,

Conjugium vocat, hoc praetexit nomine culp^m:

See S. Austin ( Confess. 6. l. 11. c.) -- Putabam me miserum fore nimis, si
foeminae privarer amplexibus: and medicinam misericordiae tuoe ad eandem
infirmitatem sanandam non cogitabam, quia expertus non eram: and propriarum
virium credebam esse continentiam, quarum mihi non eram conscius; cum tam
stultus essem, ut nes^irem, sicut scriptum est, (Wisdom, seu Sapient. 8. c.
21.) Neminem esse posse continentem, nisi tu dederis. Vtique dares, si gemitu
interno pulsarem aures tuas, and fide solida in te jactarem curam meam. -- ( De
adulterinis Conjugiis 2. l. 20. c.) Solemus eis [qui propter adulterium
dimissis conjugibus suis, alias volunt ducere, and quum prohibentur,
infirmitatem nobis carnis opponunt] proponere etiam continentiam Clericorum;
qui plerumque ad eandem sarcinam subeundam capiuntur inviti, eamque sus^eptam
usque ad debitum finem, Domino adjuvante, perducunt. Dicimus ergo eis; Quid si
and vos ad hoc subeundum populorum violentia caperemini, nonne susceptum cast
( i.e. in celibacy) custodiretis officium, repent conversi ad impetrandas
vires a Domino, de quibus nunquam antea cogitastis? See the like in Psalm. 137.
Nemo praesumat viribus suis reddere quod voverit: Qui te hortatur, ut voveas;
ipse adjuvat, ut reddas. So other Fathers also. Chrysostom. Comment. in Matt. 19.
His datum est qui sponte id eligunt: Quod ideo dixit, ut ostenderet, superiore
nobis auxilio opus esse; quod quidem omnibus paratum est, si volumus in hae
lucta evadere superiores. Add to this that place of S. Austin in Psalm. 75.
quoted before. 22. and that 104. Can. of Conc. Carthag. 4. subscribed by him,
quoted before. 21. with some others there to the same purpose, where they deny
marriage lawful to Votaries, and Anathematize them. To which I will add that of
S. Ambrose ad Virginem lapsam, 5. c. Quae se spopondit Christo, and sacrum
velamen accepit, jam nupsit; jam immortali juncta est vivo, and jam si voluerit
nubere communi lege conjugii adulterium perpetrat. -- And that of S.
Chrysostom, spoken by way of caution to young Theodorus deserting his Monastic
life. Paraen. 2. -- Honorabile, inquit, connubium, and cubile immaculatum. Sed
tibi jam non est integrum jura connubii servare; coelesti enim sponso semel
junctum illum relinquere, and uxoris laqueis implicari, adulterii crimen
incurrere est. Quamvis millies hoc ipsum nuptias voces, ego tamen and adulterio
(that is, the adultery of another man who has not vowed, not his, as I
conceive him) illud tanto pejus affirmo, quanta major ac melior mortalibus
Deus. Nunc autem nihil in te penitus tui juris est. -- Nam si mulier proprii
corporis non habet potestatem, sed vir: multo magis hi, qui Christo potius,
quam sibi vivunt, ditionem corporis sui habere non possunt. So S. Austin, who
holds not the marriages of Votaries to be null, or no true marriages, (see de
bono Vidutiatis, c. 8, 9, 10, 11.) yet says in the same place, c. 11. Non
possum quidem dicere foeminas a proposito meliore lapsas si nupserint adulteria
esse, non conjugia: sed plane non dubitaverim dicere lapsus and ruinas a
castitate sanctiore, quae vovetur Deo, adulteriis esse pejores. Si enim ad
offensionem Christi pertinet, cum membrum ejus fidem non servat marito, quanto
gravius offenditur, cum illi ipsi non servatur fides in eo, quod oblatum
exigit, qui non exegerat offerendum? This in answer to those places, wherein
it is pretended, the Fathers held marriage lawful after vows; or continency to
seem not possible. But the Apostle sufficiently decides this business (at least
as the Fathers understood him) in 1 Timothy 5. who affirms his young votaries to
have damnation, ( i.e. great guilt upon them,) for breaking their former faith
or vow by marrying. Now this denying of marriage, the remedy of incontinency,
to all such as have passed a vow, argues that the Fathers held the gift of
continency denied to none such. Which if it be true, the only considerable
objection (that I know of) against a Monastic life is here also removed. For
as concerning the other two vows, * That (commonly called) of Poverty,
provided, that one remain still either possessed of what in humane probability
is enough to supply him with necessaries, or have a trade or a profession
(amongst which I reckon preaching of the Gospel one) wherewith from time to
time to get his living, (for the labourer is worthy of his hire, as our Savior
told his disciples, when he sent them abroad to preach without any provision),
and may in reason presume he shall receive it; and *That of Obedience,
provided, it be engaged only for things lawful, about which lawfulness, when
any doubt happens, he is to be guided by the Church'es, not his private
Superiors judgment: (Which I think, in no Monastical institution that ever was,
can be showed to be peremptorily denied to any, for the ordinary plea of many
of the Roman Doctors is contrary; namely, that no Authority less than
infallible (which Superiors are not) can oblige to absolute obedience and
submission to their judgment in matters credible or practicable in order to our
salvation (See Notes of Infallibly;) Tho those who are under Authority are
prudentially advised, rather to submit in all things to their Superiors (most
likely) better judgments, than (with very little sign of humility) indulge
their own; and causlesly afflict their Society with appeals and contests:)
These two vows, I say, thus qualified, are not liable to any just exceptions.
And indeed the former we see done frequently amongst us, in many parting for
ever with their estates (only what is necessary reserved) to their Son: why not
then to the poor? and the latter in Servants promising, of also swearing
obedience to their Matters; why not to a Spirtual Superior?

Ananias his vow, Act. 5. whose fault, so much aggravated by S. Peter, seems to
be more in his keeping back part, after his devoting it to God, than in
pretending, by a lie, to bring it all: see the inference ver. 3. But Peter
etc.) * of using every day two or three times of prayer extraordinary; * of not
drinking wine, because of many former temptations by it to excess. And 2ly, is
not the performance of all these only by the power God gives us, (who cannot
think a good thought, much less curb the least appetite, without him,) and
therefore we give him thanks also for the performance of them? 3. And again,
make we not in baptism a vow of things necessary to salvation, i.e. of
repentance, and of faith? but the expressions concerning which in Scripture are
the same as those concerning continency. to wit, that they are not given to
all: [See Jo. 6.37, 39, 64, 65. -- 2 Timothy 2.25. -- Matt. 13.11. It is given
unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not
given.] Not as if God absolutely denied such a gift to them, but only upon
their non-preparation, and other obstacles, which by their own fault hindered
them from receiving it; for so our Savior expounds himself in the next words,
ver. 12. For whosoever has, to him shall be given. In the same manner may it
be said of continency; non omnibus datur; but habenti (i.e. to men using those
endeavors and preparations toward it, which God has given them power to use)
dabitur. ( Jo. 12.39. -- Ephesians. 2.8. compared 2 These. 3.2. Act. 13.48. (For which
expressions if we make the vow of continency unlawful, why not the other? Now
who is there that may not lawfully vow, to repent of his sins, to believe in
God to his lives end, to observe God's commands, etc? (118. Ps. 106.108. v.)
yet as S. Austin says, Nemo praesumat viribus suis reddere quod voverit. Qui
te hortatur ut voveas, ipse adjuvat ut reddas. [In Psalm. 137.] Here it is
said; there is not the same reason: because Faith is a thing necessary to
salvation, not so Virginal Continency, therefore we cannot justly have the same
confidence, that God, surely not wanting to us in necessaries, must needs
supply us also in superfluities. Resp. Doubtless, since God, as he has
commanded duty, so also has advised perfection, as not in the one, so neither
in the other, is he wanting in his gift, to those that seek it; especially the
latter undertaking (as higher) deserving more encouragement. Else why is not
[petenti dabitur] restrained also to necessaries? and why may a man lawfully
make vows in other things, that he conceives profitable, but acknowledges are
not absolutely necessary to his salvation, (as in the things mentioned before,
as also in other rules of perfection, 1 Cor. 9. Luke 12.33. Matt. 19.29.) if he
may not presume on God's assistance in such things only profitable, without
which he is able of himself to do nothing profitable. 4. Again, I know not why,
if we may safely vow the keeping of any of God's commandments, and may make a
covenant with our eyes, not to look upon a woman to lust after her, why, I say,
we may not also, to guard our passion from being set on fire, and from burning;
since the former seems to be the more difficult.

Ps. 76.11. Jon. 1.16. Is. 19.21. etc. And very expedient doubtless it is
(after some trial and experience of our having a reasonable command over our
selves, and of our not suffering a very tyrannical mastery of our passions) to
pass a vow in such matters to fortify our selves against temptations, and the
mutability of our inclinations; by which the less former tie we have of our
selves, the easilier we are seduced. Faelix necessitas, quae ad melior a
compellit, says S. Austin of Vows.

As for those places of the Apostle which are urged, against vowing, at least
before sixty, or for leave given to marry, tho it be after vows, upon
incontnency; [as 1 Timothy 5.9. Let not a widow be taken into the number under 60
years old: -- and 14. I will therefore, that the younger women marry etc. and 1
Cor. 7.9. If they cannot contain let them marry: and v. 35. I speak not that I
may cast a snare upon you.] In answer to them, I take this first for granted;
that all those (young or old) who have the power to be continent, may safely
vow it; since the reason given by the Reformed, why it may not be vowed, is,
because it is a thing not in our power. Again, I say, that if these places
prove, either that continency before 60. may not be vowed, or marrying after a
vow may be lawful, upon this reason, because some persons before sixty, and
after vowing, cannot contain; then the Apostle will be made to contradict
himself. For according to this he could not say of the Juniors, (whose
particular gift of continency he could not know, but had rather reason to
presume, from the miscarriage he saw in them, that they had it not,) that they
had damnation, for marrying; or for not keeping their vow or promise to Christ,
which they could not keep; but damnation, for making such a vow, which they
must necessarily break. For, Non est peccatum violare, quod servare impossible
est; and it was as lawful to break such a vow, as unlawful to make it. But yet
notwithstanding this, the Apostle plainly says, damnation they had for
marrying, and for breaking this promise, not for making it. I conclude
therefore, that the Apostle's advice here of marriage is not * to Votaries, nor
absolutely to all other younger women: for so his volo juniores nubere here
would be contrary to his volo omnes esse sicut meipsum, 1 Cor. 7.7. and would
lay an obligation on all young folks to marry: But * to those that are in such
a manner qualified, as those were that miscarried: so qualified; not from want
of power from God to contain, but want of will, and of a steadfast purpose to
make use of that power, (as S. Paul describes it 1 Cor. 7.37.) which
instability of the will, and pronenes to incontinency (that is in some much
more than in others) every one ought well to examine before they vow; that so
they may make use of the lawful remedy, which in the second place God has
provided for it, namely marriage; if they do not aspire to the higher cure
thereof by prayer, and mortifications. See Dr. Hammond in his Paraphrase,
expounding it thus, [That those who have not attained to such gravity of mind,
and command over themselves, do, in that case, betake themselves to a married
life:] -- So, in that text, [if they cannot contain, let them marry.] (Where
note, that our Translation renders, (...), If they cannot contain; and so Matt.
19.11. (...), All men cannot receive this saying etc. without rule or
precedent, that I know of: for the Vulgar has it, omnes non capiunt: and si
non se continent.) The advice is not, to any that have an obligation to
contain, (tho actually perchance they do not so), as it is not to the married;
tho one party be sick, absent, or impotent; nor to those who have vowed, it
being proved, that such may contain, from the Apostle's saying, they have
damnation in marrying; who yet actually non se continebant: But the advice is
to those only, that are free from any obligation against marriage; that if they
perceive themselves so affected, as that they have much temptation, and no
steadfast purpose to contain, if they have gotten (which yet is by their own
defect) so little power and mastery over their will, (which mastery is acquired
by some pains and practice) as that they cannot (not cannot possibly but cannot
without much difficulty) contain, (for we say we cannot do a thing, tho in our
power, which we can hardly do): that then they should make use of the common
remedy allowed by God for it. All which weaknesses, since they are by industry
remediable, excuse none from continency, who have already made any engagement
to it. To the 3d. place, 1 Cor. 7.35. I grant a vow rashly undertaken to be a
dangerous snare: rashly, I say, i.e. without well proving before it what
mastery we have over our carnal inclinations. Lastly, for the admission of none
under sixty, the Apostle seems to prescribe this age with respect to their
impotency then to get their living, and liableness to want, (see ver. 4, and
16.) and to their staydness and gravity, [see v. 13, 14.] as much or more than
to their continency, in which a lesser age would have rendered them secure. But
suppose the Apostle chiefly to have reference to this, yet was it not done as
if any lesser age has not a power of continency; or experiencing their ability
to live single, might not also resolve it: but because the Church had not the
same means to be assured of their inclinations, and was much concerned in her
first growth, after the experience too of some miscarriages, thus to prevent
all scandal. But later Church, upon experience of the chaste behavior of such
persons from the power of more discipline, due restraint, amp;c. thought not
her self obliged by this rule fitted for the Apostles days. But as S. Paul,
from the lapsibility of younger women, admitted them at 60: so the 4th. General
Council of Chalcedon, Can. 14. cum diligenti probatione admitted them at forty.

X. As God has encouraged us to single life by recommending it; Yet it more
difficult, than the matter of any other Vow.
and denies the power to none at all, taking the pains, and using the means,
that are necessary to procure it; So I grant, that the act and exercise of
Continency, and purity, is much more difficultly attained, than any other
matter of a Vow whatever; and the sin, which the undiscreet attempters thereof
fall into, if they miscarry, very abominable. Therefore is there nothing in all
the Scripture recommended with so much caution, and putting men in mind of
their own abilities, as this: which appears both in our Savior's limitations,
Matt. 19.11, 12. and in the Apostle's proceeding so tenderly in this point, and
with such cautious and suspended steps, (see 1 Cor. 7.2, 6, 7, 25, 28, 35, 36.)
tho much commending it, yet warily recommending it: looking doubtless as onone
side at the heavenly perfection of this virtue, so on the other at the
hainousnes and filthiness of those crimes, and the great peril of those snares,
that men, avoiding, and obstinate against, the common merciful remedy of
marriage, were endangered to fall into, in an unmodified pursuit of this grace.
More difficultly, I say, is this grace attained, both by reason of this strong
impression made in our nature by the most wise providence, for the necessary
use of propagation; and by reason of the concupiscence of the flesh; which, as
it was the first exorbitancy appearing in Adam, ( They saw that they were
naked, Genesis 3.7. being only a modest expression of the rising of concupiscence;
compared with Genesis 2.25. therefore followed by shame); so retains it its
strength in all his sons, beyond any other passion whatsoever: to which
likewise one person (and in him one age of his life) may have yet a far greater
pronity than another, by the greater heat of their constitution; natural
impetuosity of their passion; more liberal diet; much rest and vacancy from
employment; conversation amongst tempting objects, etc. so that such, without
extreme difficulty, cannot contain, as it also many times happens even to them
after divorce, etc, (who, all grant, have from God the power of containing, if
they will use their best endeavors). And in respect of the great strength of
the temtations of lust, beyond all other, and of these great impediments in
some, more than in others, ( i.e. the natural temper, age, condition of life,
former habits, etc, and of most men's averseness to undergo those rigors and
mortifications, which procure and preserve continency, etc,) I conceive it is;
that our Savior answered his forward disciples voting, upon his discourse, that
none should marry; * that to all this was not given, and that some only could
receive it; and so the Apostle by the same spirit, * that every one has his
proper gift of God, one after this manner, and another after that, 1 Cor. 7.7.
and * that there was a necessity to some parents of giving their virgin in
marriage, (ver. 36, 37.) therefore he says, it is not given to all, i. e.
without such pains-taking as some other gifts are; Nor do all receive it:] For
tho power to contain is given to any who use the means, subdue their passions,
etc. yet few there are, who can without much difficulty and resolution so
master their will, subdue their passions; few, who have a temper naturally so
calm, or artificially so rebated, that they can arrive to such a power. And so,
every one has his proper gift of God, etc.] i. e. First, in respect of gifts
of nature; men are of several tempers and abilities, some inclined more to one
passion, as enamour'dnes, some to another, [as continency,] some more, some
less, subject to be tempted; some fitted for one sort of life, some another;
which all yet are the distributions of God, (see 1 Cor. 7.17.) So that some can
more easily, some not without almost insuperable difficulty, contain; for we
say, we cannot do, tho a thing in our power, what we can hardly do, or which is
very troublesome to us to effect. See Luke 14.20. 2 Cor. 8.3. -- Such phrases
are not unfrequent in Scripture, Jo. 13.36. Luke 14.26, etc, to 34. Jo. 6.65.
spoken in things, of which we do not deny an absolute possibility, whilst by
prayer etc may be attained stronger inclinations; but yet in them we suppose to
some a present impotency, and impromptitude of their will, and waywardness of
their inclinations; especially where the thing requires a strong conatus, and a
stout spirit, as Peter's dying for Christ; their forsaking friends, and all
they had, for Christ. Luke 14.26. and 33. Their believing in Christ, especially
at that time, when appearing to them in such weakness of our flesh; none of
these things (tho) being absolutely impossible to them. 2ly, in respect of
gifts of grace every man has his proper gift of God; some, superior; some,
inferior, graces; some, Virginal, some only conjugal, chastity, (1 Cor. 7.9.)
according to every man's capacity, ( Matt. 25.15.) or endeavors: which not
premised, the grace is not bestowed. For we must know, that God always gives
not his habitual graces at first, but excites and assists our endeavors for
them; and afterward crowns these endeavors with them. And hence, because most
do not well employ God's former grace, (in which he is not wanting to those,
whom he questions for want of the latter) the other happen to be given but to a
very few. Sec Matt. 13, 11. concerning that necessary grace of Spiritual
illumination, [To you it is given; to them it is not given;] and Jo. 12.39.
concerning faith; [Therefore they could not believe.] See. and so Mar. 6.5.
concerning the favors of God, that he is ready to do for us, but we are
incapable of receiving; [And he could there do no mighty work.] In all which
the deficiency is not to be understood to proceed from the want of will in God
to give, but from the want of preparation in them to receive. (See Matt. 13.11.
compared with 12. -- Mar. 6.5. compared with 6.) If they receive not, because
God gives not; Matt. 19.11. and if God gives not, because they do not by
prayer, and other means, prepare themselves for it; it follows, the prime
reason, why they receive not, is because they are unmortified, or unprepared.
Now the exhortation ver. 12. He that is able to receive it, let him etc. See
Mat. 20.22. plainly supposes, * that God gives it to those that are able; and
the instance in some that make themselves Eunuchs, proves, * that men also
make themselves able; able, by God's concurrence, and preventing and assisting
aid, or grace, from whom is all ability. Which ability also supposes that he
gives to some, not others, only in the same sense as he gives faith, and other
graces; (see Ephesians. 2.8. compared with 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.) yet notwithstanding, as all
may both pray for faith, and upon their endeavor presume they shall receive it;
and may promise and vow unto God to be faithful; so notwithstanding the former
expressions (if no other reason be alleged) we may say the same of Continency;
That it is a gift attainable by all, as it is a gift by few attained. Thus much
concerning the grace. But 3ly, in respect of the faculty it self, and the using
of it well, in our endeavors to attain such a grace, it is true also, that our
being willing to do a thing is frequently called God's gift; and there is
nothing, of which we can say, it is our fault or infirmity that we do it not, but
that we may as truly say, it is God's gift, if we do it. (See Phil. 2.13. Jer.
10.23. Prove. 16.1. Ex. 4.11. 2 Chronicles. 18.31. -- 10.15. -- Ezr. 6.22. Matt.
13.11.) Therefore also this our desiring such a grace to be given us, or our
entertaining such a grace offered us, is also in some sense another gift or
grace of God to us, without which we should not have possessed his other grace;
and so, our own endeavor, as well as the grace we seek for, is all gift and
grace, tho we should go in infinitum; till we also find (as the most ordinary
doctrine of the School is) that the first motion of the will to embrace God's
grace is also the grace, gift, or work of God in us: else if this motion of the
will were from it self, in any sense contradistinct to that of being from God,
then there would be some good in us, not from God; then something, which we had
not received; and so, place for merit, and boasting; contrary to Romans 4.2, 4.
-- 3.17. But I conceive, it is not said of these first gifts of God, ( i.e. of
his first excitings of the will; his both preventing and assisting aids and
helps of the will, in its using the means to attain his further, and richer,
habitual, and inherent graces,) that non omnibus data sunt; but of those other
second graces, which are given but to few, because the means, and his former
commoner aids are used by few: of which it is said, that, only to him that
has, shall be given. Of those first aids therefore we may safely say, that
they are so far common to all, (to whom is come the sound of the Gospel, and
who shall be judged at the last day by the Gospel) that it is their fault, in
any duties, which are absolutely commanded them, and their defect, in any
counsels of perfection, if they, by not making use of them, come short of such
duty or perfection; and, that any thing being thus said to be God's gift
hinders not, but that it likewise may be said also to be in man's power,
(meaning a power, in man, but, from God,) as long as the tender of such a gift
is made to him, and ability also to acquire it given to him. But of this more
in my Notes of Grace. Yet since, there are some that allow not the means to
attain faith, or other duties commanded, common to all to whom the Gospel is
preached, (therefore P. Martyr, 3. class. 7. c. Commun. locorum. argues thus:
Magis videretur debere commune esse omnibus hominibus donum essicacis
vocationis ad sidem in Christum, quam donum ad Coelibatum. -- Sed inter illos
qui eandem praedicationem audiunt, non omnes a Deo trahuntur. Where he quotes
Jo. 6.44. Nemo venit ad me:) Let but so much be granted from them, of the means
to attain continency, as is, to attain faith; and this will serve our turn,
without reasoning the point any further in this place; for then see what will
follow. 23. In granting therefore, that the using of the means also to obtain
graces from God is the gift of God; yet we affirm, that it is only by their own
default (for which see Luke 12.57. Matt. 11.21. Mar. 12.34. Matt. 23.37. Jer.
18.4. -- 8.10.) if in things absolutely commanded, and their own defect, if in
things recommended for their greater perfection, that such do not use the
means, and that they may use them if they will. Because these must consist
together, i.e. * that we can do no good (small or great) but from God; and *
that we have free will to do good, and if we do not good, it is by our own
default; and * that when we do any good, it is not without our own endeavor. Else
we should be free from sin in not observing the divine exhortations; and there
would be no vice, nor virtue; and consequently no (just) punishment, or reward.
See concerning this S. Austin, De Gratia and libero Arbitrio 4. cap. Nunquid
non liberum arbitrium Timothei est exhortatus Apostolus, dicens, Contine
teipsum? 1 Timothy 5.23. -- Et in hac re potestatem voluntatis ostendit, ubi ait,
Non habens necessitatem; potestatem autem habens suae voluntatis, ut servet
virginem suam. 1 Cor. 7.37. Et tamen non omnes capiunt verbum hoc, sed quibus
datum est, etc. -- Itaque ut hoc verbum, quod non ab omnibus capitur, ab
aliquibus capiatur, and Dei donum est, and liberum arbitrium etc. Neither will
this be sufficient to hinder a vow, because it is only of God's gift (that we
are willing to use the means) to keep and fulfill it. For also we cannot do any
thing he commands, unles he gives us the will; and yet may we vow to do any
thing he commands.

Therefore not hastily to be vowed.
XI. And in respect of these considerations, as all ought to endeavor and covet
this the most happy condition of life, and many men are much wanting to their
own perfection, the Service of God, and of the Church, etc. who, out of neglect
to this gift, and not out of, or from, any strength of temptation cast
themselves into the impediments of marriage, and might receive it, and do not:
so I conceive it is not so safe for any, who are not very well practiced first
in mortification, and experience in much piety and devotion, to vow it. Not
safe; not out of any diffidence in God, as if he would be wanting in his
assistance proportionable to our endeavor; but in reference to the flesh, lest
it should happen, in this chiefest piece of its strength, if we do not find
that we have a strong command over our selves, to overmaster us; and our good
resolution become a snare to us, 1 Cor. 7.35. beginning to build, and not able
to finish. In which S. Paul's wariness may be a sufficient precedent to ours;
who, * finding the young widows after such purposes (by their own fault indeed)
remarrying, and * considering the greatness of internal and external
temptations incident to youth, (through the indulgent discipline the infancy of
the Church was then capable of, not so restrained as latter times have since
provided,) ordered that none under sixty should be admitted into public
service upon such strict bonds and obligations. And indeed in the business of
continency, in which some degree of burning is in the most pure, it is very
hard, till long experience has as it were assured us, at any one time exactly
to measure our own strength, constancy, and stedfastness, whether we shall be
able to contain for the time to come; and, by the intervening of new
temptations etc. (unless we resolve wholly to shut up our selves from them) our
future, is not easily judged by our present, complexion. And as, when I look at
the heavenliness of a single life, I would advise all men to abstain; so when
at the great difficulty of such a purity, as shall not be contaminated with one
uncleanness, than which the Apostle advises rather to marry, I would counsel
all men to marry; [See Conf. 2. l. 3. c. how S. Austin complains of his parents
not preventing by marriage the many exorbitances of his wanton youth:] seeing
the single person much hazards a great sin, whilst he attempts as great a
glory. But yet the zealous Servant of God can do all through Christ that
strengthens him. Nor shall he in this be tempted above his power, 1 Cor.
10.13. if he first tempt not himself; and the reward is well worthy the pains.

Yet not unlawful for the Church, and very beneficial, to restrain the sacred
function of the Ministry to single persons.
XII. It Is not only lawful, but of singular benefit, that those offices more
nearly conversant about the public service of God, or the Church, should be
discharged only by single persons, wholly sequestered from the world. Which if
the Apostle saw fitting in the ministering widows, the Deaconesses, (Romans 16.1.)
how much more is it in the Clergy? Tho he, loath to lay such a hard burden on
the tender shoulders of the Infancy of the Church, therefore nourished by him
with milk, rather than strong meat; * when there was not so much choice of
Pastors, and they of necessity to be admitted to such functions much sooner
than the widows; and * when single life and Eunuchism was as yet, especially to
the Jew, a strange proposal, (which may partly be the reason, why he, who
became all things to all men, in the 1 Cor. 7. recommends single life so
modestly, and after the way of delivering only his advice and judgment, (a
phrase unusual in his other doctrines,) see 1 Cor. 7.6, 8. compared with the
10, 25, 40,) restrained then the Clergy only to one wife. Yet (where there is
sufficient plenty of single persons that are worthy, and not else) it seems no
way unlawful or unjust, if the Church (which is * in this left to her liberty
(for S. Paul, restraining the Clergy only to one wife, obliges them not by
this, to have a wife) and * has power to establish what the H. Scriptures no
way prohibit) shall ordain (which is a means to make many more zealous of this
excellent gift) * that single persons only shall be admitted into such
employments, or at least into those functions amongst these of the more
eminency and moment; and if these persons should afterward engage in marriage,
* that they shall no longer stay in the same office. Which wisdom, since the
world frequently shows in many other places of less consequence, they cannot be
excused for omitting it in the Church Affairs, to which it is most proper.

Neither do I see what hurt or scandal can come thereof, if only the
Ecclesiastical Canons were strictly executed: 1. If none, but after long
probation of their temperance, continency, gravity, mortification, were
admitted into such sacred employments, (see what trial the Apostle requires
before such admission, 1 Timothy 3. and elsewhere, [not a novice, lest he fall
into the temptation of the Devil; one of a good report, and found blameless;
even the Deacons to be proved, before they use that office, 1 Timothy 3.10.]) 2.
If all necessary restraints from the ordinary occasions and temptations of
incontinency were used to such persons after admitted. 3. If the Church'es
censures were vigorously executed against the offenders.

Else, as Celibacy is better than Marriage, so Marriage is always honorable;
but unchaste celibacy, especially in the Ministers of Christ, most abominable,
and for ever void of excuse. And even after such vows, (in which petenti
dabitur, nec patietur Deus nos supra id quod possumus tentari,) yet if such a
one will not contain, I conceive (supposing no Ecclesiastical law to intervene,
which may render marriage to such, when contracted, invalid, or not to be a
marriage) he sins much less in marrying, i. e. in doing a thing in it self
lawful, but against his vow, than in fornication, i.e. in doing a thing
eternally unlawful, being against God's command: for the one fault is against
God's law, the other only against his own. And if some, in comparing marriage
with some one act of fornication or uncleaness, may affirm the first to be more
opposite to a vow, than the latter; as rendering one incapable of observing his
vow at all for the future, which the latter does not: yet in this all will
agree, that even to a Votary the living in Marriage, than living in continual
Fornication, or other uncleaness, is a life to God less offensive. S. Austin de
Bono Viduitatis, 9. c. -- Non quia ipsae nuptiae vel talium, i.e. voventium,
damnandae judicantur, sed damnatur propositi fraus, damnatur fracta voti fides,
etc. -- Postremo damnantur tales, non quia conjugalem fidem posterius inierant,
sed quia continentiae primam fidem irritam fecerunt.

FINIS.

