A PLOT To Disseize GOD of his RIGHT DEFEATED: AND The CONTRIVERS Punished.
DISCOVERED IN A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral of S. Paul, on the 15th. of
September, 1661. Before the Right Honorable Sir RICHARD BROWN Knight and
Baronet, Lord Mayor of the City of LONDON.

By THO. WOOD, M. A.

LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid for R. Thrale at the Cross Keys at S. Paul's Gate
entering into Cheapside. M. DC. LXI.

To the Right Worshipful The LADY LENNARD of West-Wickham in Kent: and The LADY
HARFLETE of S. Stephens near Canterbury: Grace and Happiness.
MADAMS,
I Have observed in you both (which was partly a reason of joining you together
in this Dedication) a constant respect (in the worst Times) toward the Old
Clergy, when the firmament of our Church was sadly and totally over-cast, with
Black Clouds of Novellisme and Heresy; even then your Aspects were benign and
gracious, and raised the drooping spirits of the Orthodox Professors round
about you. I bless you for it, and God for you, who is faithful, and will most
certainly put it to your account at the general Day of Retribution.

Particularly, I (the meanest in the Lords Vineyard, and save for my
sufferings) hardly considerable) have (in reference to my Calling) received
many Civilities from you, and must profess, that as I always honored you both,
more for your goodness than your greatness, so I conceived my self obliged in
gratitude to a public acknowledgment, and wanting other means, have presumed
upon this way. Madams, let it meet (I beseech you) with a favorable
interpretation. It Is a small Piece, and was the fruit of my younger Studies. If
the Style be somewhat Lofty, 'twas like my Thoughts when I composed it. Age and
the Calamities of the Nation (in which I had a share) have since broken and
humbled me. And it is impossible (without the wonder of a Miracle) I should be
made whole and raised but by Dissolution. Madams, I commend it to you only as
a Remembrancer, being able to add little to your Accomplishments in matters of
Information. It has been preached in Three several great Assemblies, and (upon
the request of some Friends) is, (such as it is) sent abroad into the world. I
fear not much but 'twill endure the test, and meet with the same good liking in
the Reading, which it had the happiness to do in the respective Deliveries of
it. It must needs pass the more current with all that know your Ladyships, if
you deign: to stamp it with your acceptance and approbations. I pray for you,
and your Right Worshipful Bedfellows. I rest,

MADAMS, Your hearty Honorer and Servant in Christ Jesus, THO. WOOD.

1 Kings. 1. 7. And he took Counsel of Joab the son of Zerviah, and of Abiathar
the Priest, and they helped forward of Adonijah.
My Design in the choice of this Scripture is to discover to this Honorable
Corporation (and others of this great Assembly) A Plot. Not an imaginary one,
such as (for ends of State) you have had heretofore many obtruded upon you, but
a real Plot. A Plot tending to no less then the Disseizing of the Lord
Paramount of Heaven and Earth, God Almighty, of his right; withal, if the time
will allow it, to manifest the Power of the same God in the Defeatment of it,
and his Justice in the deserved punishment upon the Delinquente

I have (not long since in a neighbor Assembly) entered upon this Argument, and
by some (that are somewhat prevailing with me) am desired to finish it here.
The opening of the Story must not be omitted, for it is that which must give
Light to every piece of the ensuing Discourse; Several points will appear very
intricate and dark in their Derivation without this. I desire to make my way
plain before me, and rather to run the hazard of censure for somewhat a large
repetition, then for Obscurity.

IN This Chapter we have two Brethren Competitors, scuffling hard which shall
mount the first Chariot in Israel. Either had read his thoughts such a lofty
Lecture, that like those great Roman Cortivals, they can endure nor Superior
nor Equal. A Kingdom is the prize they run for, they strain the harder, as
knowing he that loses, loses something of Natures Privilege, and must fall
so much beneath a Brother, as (upon Humor or State-occasion) to be reckoned
for no other then a Subject, a Servant. That which awakes them into action, and
puts life into their Resolutions, is the hourly expectation and Likelihood of
the long and last Sleep of their Father in Death. David, though a King, and so
a God by his Office, yet by nature he was a man; and so, like the rest of
Mankind, must dye. His able Shoulders had for a good space of time undergone
their share in the Burden of Government (as a subordinate Assistant) during the
Reign of his Predecessor Saul, and for nere Forty years he had steered the
Affairs of State in chief; so that now he was far gone into the second Infancy
of his Life, and could not continue long, as having (at least) one foot on the
Threshold of the House appointed for all Living. This makes these two Brethren
whom it only concerned, the one by nature, the other by promise, to bethink
them early of their Interests: And because in such a weighty affair, bare right
(by the secret judgment of God, and neglect of due afforded means for its
supportation) does sometimes miscarry, they underprop and fortify it with the
association of such Friends, whose Power and Authority in the State, might
almost without the justice of any Title, give credit and countenance to an
adventurous Undertaker.

Adonijah is the first that steps up the Stage to act his part, and he comes
bravely on with Chariots and Horse; and 50. Men to run before him. Verse. 5. We
may take a measure of him in the 6. Verse, and that from three material
Circumstances, his Education, Personage, and Birth; all (methinks) after a
sort prophecy and forespeak what he intended, and seems to point him out not to
a meaner Fortune then a Kingdom.

First, The King, his Fathers Affection toward him was not to be doubted of;
when David was a Man, and his Son a Child, he never displeased him, and 'twas
not likely he would now go about to cross him, when himself was become Child,
and his Son Man. He loved him but too well (as we have a Say.) His continual
indulgent cockering Carriage toward him we find noted in the Text, and in
probability not only as a piece of the Fathers Infirmity, but of the Sons
Encouragement too. Something there was in it or else the Holy Ghost would never
have left it upon record, that his Father would not displease him from his
Childhood, to say, Why have thou done so?

Secondly, Nature had played the Prodigal with him, and conferred on him much of
her Bounty for his Body, He was a goodly man to look upon, says the Text; and
(if we will credit the Conceits of some Philosophers) the parts of his Soul must
then have been answerable. Indeed when we see a House more then ordinarily
beautified without, we are apt to imagine the furniture within to be more then
ordinary too. Rich Caskets are commonly made to hold more precious Jewels; and
set aside divine Virtues (unless Theives (as Flattery) ill Education, or the
like, have robbed Us of them) 'twill not (perhaps) be extremely absurd to
affirm the like of man. However comeliness of personage (it must be confessed) as
the Loadstone does Iron (by a secret yet irresistible force) attracts our Love
and Liking, and like a Conqueror inslaves and captivates, compells our
Affection. Had unnatural Absolon been this way unbefriended, I make a Question
whether all his other Court Policies in wrigling, and insinuating himself into
the favor of the People, had ever gaim'd so much upon them, as to have raised
them in such multitudes to side with him against their Sovereign? Adonijah his
Brother here has the very same advantage, that which would have exceedingly
much set off a private man, but a Prince as he was, more: as receiving from
other Complements of such greatness a reciprocal addition of Luster.

Thirdly, But there is another thing behind, which seems to be more available to
his Ends then both these, and it is laid down in the words immediately
preceding the Text; His Mother bare him, etc. His Mother bare him next after
Absolon? Why, what is that to the purpose? How comes this any way to advantage
and promote his Cause? Yes, very much. Ammon the eldest Son (as we may read)
was diverse years before slain by Absolon; And Absolon the second Son again
slain by Joab; and so as if they had never been, the natural right is devolved,
and rests upon the next Surviver. If Ammon or Absolon were the eldest whilst
they lived, Adonijah is so now they are dead. So that we see here that he has
the Privilege of Primogeniture, and that always (as we have a Proverb)
carries Meat in the Mouth of it. By the very Law of God a double portion was
due to it, and because Kingdoms admit not of Division, of Partition (in those
that are settled in a Succession) by the Law of God, of Nations, to the whole.

So that you see he has Three strings to his Bow, a threefold Cord to
strengthen and assure his hopes, and that (his wise brother tells us) is not
easily broken.

But though his Tackling were thus good, yet like a discreet man he warily
suspects and provides for a greater Tempest then was likely to happen. His
Competitor was a youth, nay very little more then a Child: and such (we know)
men desire not should Reign over them; a Child too of a Mother tainted formerly
with the Stain of known Adultery; and that, questionless, bated him something
too in the common opinion. And yet our Pretender is as careful to settle and
assure his cause, as if his Corrival had been a well-grown man like himself,
and had had too the start of him in reputation.

In weighty Affairs it is still the wisest and safest course to doubt the worst;
to forecast the Extremity, and to prevent and provide for that. How many have
lost an Inheritance, a Lordship, a Kingdom, nay (by somes leave) Heaven it
self by reckoning themselves but too sure on it.

Adonijah here, was a man of another Temper: He has a fair Game we see, which
does in a manner assure him the Stake, yet for all this like a wary adventurer,
he remits nothing of his care, but plays it with all advice and deliberation
possible: So in the Text, And he took Counsel, etc.

In which words we may consider the two parts of all great Enterprises; 1.
Consultation. 2. Action. And this in hand being of that nature, we have of
either a plain Description.

First, we have three plotting heads laid together, and so taken; (though one
but young) perhaps not Three wiser between Dan and Beersheba.

Secondly, We have three pair of hands executing the contrivances of these
heads.

For from either we must not exclude him whom it all concerns. The first word (
He) makes him a Party in the Consultation; The last word ( Adonijah) makes him
so in the Action. His advice undoubtedly was not wanting in his own cause, nor
stood he then by as an idle Spectatour, but as they helped him forward, so he
too helped forward himself.

The end, reason, and But which they drive at in both, is to make this younger
head, Head both of Young and Old in Israel. To set him upon the Throne of his
Father, and publicly in the face of the World to justify his
private-taken-up-resolution. I will be King, verse. 5.

This was their aim about this they consult.

I might here (for the first part of my Text) enter upon a Common place of
Counsel. Be plentiful in Quotations of what divine and profane Writers,
Orators, Historians, Poets, have delivered in commendation of it.

I might too enlarge the praises of it from experience generally how it is of
singular use, nay absolute necessity to the well managing of all weighty
concerning Affairs, particularly in matters of Government; how it is the
Steersman of a State, the Soul of all Sound Policy, and that which (next under
Heaven) a Kingdom may chiefly thank for all its Happiness, Peace, Plenty,
every good thing. If in matters of War, how by it small things have confounded
great; Ten men shut up a Thousand, an handful overthrown a Million. Amplified
likewise further it might be from its contrary; What frequent examples there
are in all Story of manifest and miserable inconveniences, which men of all
forts have run themselves into by inconsiderate rashness and temerarious
precipitation.

Again (from the second part of my Text) I might go on upon another head of
Action, tell you, that it is this which renders Consultations, Illustrious;
Counsels are dark things, begot in obscurity, and so nourished, and ordinarily
show not themselves to the World but by this. Indeed they are but Illusions,
when Action is not designed to back them. And as faith without works is but an
abusive misleading Chymaera, so it is here; Though Counsel seem to consist of
more spiritual parts then Action, yet it is Action that makes the Demonstration;
that raises out of the dust and gives Life and a Lasting Luster to those
advices, which else had perished like the untimely fruit of a Woman, and had
never seen the Sun. This and more (upon these two heads) might be largely
discoursed on, and the Text does seem to warrant it; but I shall take Leave to
leave these general Considerations, and to fall up more closely, with the
particularities of the Story.

In this Chapter then (as I told you, for substance in the beginning) we have a
Kingdom at Stake, and Two Brethren Gamesters playing hard for it. The elder
and more experienced, loses, yet perhaps we cannot say 'twas so much his fault
as his destiny.

He had Heaven against him, or else we might justly wonder he came not off the
Winner: for, for his Title and Likelyhoods we have them in the precedent Verse,
and in this the well managing of both, He took Counsel, etc.

Where first (to make way to my after Discourse) give me leave to observe that
his ambition was better ordered and tutored then his Brother Absolons. I find
not that he did any way envy or undermine his Fathers honor, or that he did so
much as in a wish desire his Death. Let this be his Piety, since Slighter hopes
have made some Children so strangely unnatural as to do more to effect it. No
such black thoughts came nere the Soul of our Adonijah, his ends and aims (for
ought appears evidently from the Text) were more fair and justifiable; Not like
his Brother to un-King his Father, but to reign after him; not to depose but to
succeed him, was the sum of his Intentions; and who can blame an eldest Son
for this? Make his case but your own, and (I believe) he will be likely enough to
go away not only not openly rebuked, but secretly encouraged; especially when
he takes no grossly indirect, nay a seemingly fair and lawful course to compass
it. Confers his design too with those, who had it been unlawful should have
directed him, his Ghostly Father Abiathar, and his experienced Cousin Joab. But
these are as forward as he, and not only advise him, but afford their helping
hands likewise in the business; They helped forward Anonijah, etc.

But I shall deal with them in an after Discourse, give me leave first to
dispatch the worthier person.

And in him secondly, in every passage of the Text (considering the Affair in
hand) I observe abundance of Wisdom and sound Policy.

First, That he does not go rashly to work, but takes Counsel.

Secondly, That he takes Counsel of such as were able to give it, and whose
Countenance too, was as available as their Counsel. And he took Counsel of
Joab, etc.

That he does impart these important privacies to such, whom formerly he had so
firmly assured to himself, as to run the hazard of their own Counsels, and
really to engage themselves in it by Action. What they advise they do, They
helped, etc.

First, He goes not headdily and rashly to work, but Takes Counsel; The Wise
man says, There Is more hope of a Fool then of a man hasty in matters, Prove.
29, 20. And (if I remember right) Charles Duke of Burgundy, I have read, taxed
for this kind of Folly, of whom somebody records, that he seldom asked, never
followed the advice of others. To be so overwise in our own Conceits, as to
despise or neglect the Counsel of our Friends, is a strong Argument of
weakness, and hears ill among the very Heathen.

Agamemnon (a wise Prince) wishes (in Homer) that he had Ten Nestors to
consult withal; and a wiser then he tells us, that in the multitude of
Counselors there is Safety.

And indeed, however we find in Story some few sudden Actions to have
succeeded well, yet their Glory is still blemished with the stain of rashness,
and blind Fortune, more entitled to them then the undertakers. We have a
Proverb amongst us somewhat to this purpose; It Is more by hap, then any good
Cunning. We cannot fasten this fault upon our Adonijah, he was no hasty
inconsiderate Hotspurre; did not precipitate himself headlong into the
business, fall back, fall edge, (as we have a word) but he looks before he
leaps, chooses his best ground for rising, goes on with wary advice and sound
Deliberation. It Is the first point of his Wisdom, and in it I commend him as a
Pattern for your Imitation, In all weighty Affairs do as he did, Take Counsel.

But secondly, some have judgment enough, to see into their own want of
judgment, yet too little to make a fit Election of such as may inform them.
They can perceive Counsel to be good, and in diverse cases themselves to stand
in need of it, yet have not attained to that happy height of Wisdom, to select
and single out such as are best able to give it. Rehoboam nephew to our
Adonijah, was one of this number; who refused to be guided by experience and
gray hairs, but embraces the raw and green advice of such as were like
himself; and we may read it coshim dear, the revolt of ten Tribes, five parts
in six of his Kingdom, 1 Kings 12.

So was Antiochus the great too, in his war against the Romans, and Zerxes a
greater then he, in his expedition into Graecia, both weakly followed the
feeble counsel of their effeminate Courtiers, men utterly unacquainted with
Martial Discipline and Polity, save superficially to discourse on it, before the
strong advice of those tried spirits, the exiled Hero's, and that ever
renowned, though unfortunate Hannibal. And they find the success answerable.
The one at length, (in the midst of his own strength) is basely braved by but a
Minister of State, imperiously circumscribed by an imaginary circle drawn with
a wand about him, and is fain unworthily to stoop and take law from his
Inferior. The other after the loss of diverse thousands of lives, glad to
escape in a small Vessel, and by the ill carriage of the action, discovered so
much of the weakness of the Asiatiques his subjects, as gave courage to his
enemies in the next Age to invade and subvert the whole Persian Empire.

And from such like observations some have drawn this safe rule in Polity, and
it holds in Reason, and in Religion too. In a doubtful case rather to incline
to the advice of such as have been versed in the business enquired after. Thus
in matters of Government, to give ear to the Statesman; in matters of War, to
be directed by the Soldier; and in things pertaining to our souls and
salvations. not to be led aside by every new Vpstart, every private Fanatique
spirit, but to be guided by the Churchman.

Yet it must be confessed this rule holds not generally, sometimes it miscarries,
and yet when it does, it carries a fair excuse along with it; That man can
never be taxed of much, of gross weakness, (unless he beforehand know men to
be persidious) that believes them in their particular professions.

But this rule though good, yet is not full. Other considerations must be taken
in too, (which I make no question Adonijah had a respect to) and they likewise
according to the quality of the persons, vary exceedingly.

Private men when they consult of their particular interests, may take courses
of their own. The narrowness of their personal conditions and relations afford
them more liberty, and their errors are neither so material nor discernable.

But matters of State, public Business of Kingdoms, tying us to a kind of
formality, must be carried in a Majestique way of discussion, and are not to
want any complemental circumstances, which at home may render them less
venerable, or abroad diminish their reputation. And so a care is to be had that
the men be both great and good, whose advice we follow. Great, to prevent envy
and contempt; Good, (in account at least) to avoid scandal and discredit.

If the person that gives counsel be mean, though he speak like an Oracle,
'twill be slighted; nay, cavilled at. The Wise man observed some such thing in
his time, when he tells, If a rich man spoke, the people kept silence, but if
poor, they were ready to stop his mouth with that course quaere, What fellow's
this?

Again, though the men be great, if they be not good too, their advice though
as good as Achitophel's, will be liable to prejudice. Hence (if I rightly
record) the Lacedemonian Senators were exceeding coy of their Suffrages to a
very profitable proposition for their Republic, laid before them by a lewd
great one; yet underhand caused the very same thing to be propounded by one of
more upright conversation, and it passed the House with great applause.

I might be long in this Argument, but must call home.

I find out Adonijah's wisdom approvable in this particular too; He
communicates not his design with inexperienc'd Youngsters, men either of loose
Titles, or lewd Conditions; but with such as were of conspicuous eminency,
acquainted with the very bowels and secrets of the State, and that knew better
then any how to steer him in his desired course. Of such authority and
reputation too by reason of their places and persons, exceedingly countenance
the action, and draw multitudes of their dependants and others, either out of
fear, love, or opinion, to declare themselves for him, or to stagger at least,
and stand as Neuters. The invincible Joab, and the High Priest Abiathar, these
consult and advise with him; nay, they do more, they help him forward.

And this Thirdly, Manifests yet something more our young Princes wisdom too.
Many will give good counsel, not out of any love to the person or cause, but to
screw themselves into trust, that so upon occasion they may the more certainly
overthrow both. Upon suspicious men (therefore) though they speak well, we are
never to lean so hard as (should they treacherously slip aside) to give out
selves a fall. Absolon was somewhat this way indiscreet, in so suddenly
embracing the advice of Hnshai the Atchite.

Again, Some will give counsel, yea, and sincerely too; but if in a business
that imports danger, they desire not to be seen in it. You have not such great
interest in them, not so far engaged them to you, as to cause them to do more
then barely to advise, when perhaps their countenance were as good as their
counsel, and would themselves assist in the execution, 'twere yet like to
succeed much better. For I think I need not ask leave to think, That such as
can soundly advise (if they be sincere in the business, and alike in other
things) are most fit to excoute, as knowing best the extent, breadth, depth and
length of their own counsels, and able too at home, to furnish themselves
afresh, upon the accidental miscarriage of any particular. I must remember home
again.

Our Adonijah's wisdom is herein remarkable too, that such as he does
communicate his design withal, he had before by benefits, observance, and other
ways of courtesy and insinuation, so firmly assured to himself, as first, to
deal sincerely with him, more to declare themselves for him, most of all to run
the hazard of their own counsel, and really to engage themselves in it by
action. We find it in the last words, They helped forward, etc.

To sum up all together, and so to make way to the main Observation.

We have here an able young man, laying a strong foundation of greatness,
encouraged to it by the King, his Fathers Love, and that double bounty of
nature, comeliness of personage, and eldership; assisted in it by those of
greatest power and sway in the State, Abiathar the high Priest, and Joab
Captain of the Host, who delude him not with Court-Holy-Water, (a piece of
falsehood, a mere stranger for the most part to true Priests and right
Soldiers) but their works speak them as good as their words; they afford him
head, and hands, and hearts too in the business, They advise him, they help him
forward.

And he that shall consideratively read thus far the story, (ignorant of what
ensured afterward) would willingly (I suppose) venture his fortune in the same
Bottom with the undertake For the design in the whole managing of it discovers
such (...) apparencies and probabilities of success, as indeed it is a matter of
just marvel to think how it did miscarry. But here we see Heavens Power and
Prerogative, how it easily alters and overthrows Projects that seem to be
founded and rooted in Adamant.

The Lord does whatever he will both in Heaven and Earth, and, should the whole
world conspire in an insurrection to revense or alter one of his least decrees,
their attempts would prove as vain as ridiculous. For he that dwells in Heaven
would laugh them to scorn, the Lord would have them in derision, Psalm 2. 3. A
remarkable place to this purpose is that in the Prophecy of Isaiah, chap. 3.
ver. 9, 10, 11. Where we find a confederacy, an association of diverse persons,
nay, in likelihood Nations too, against the people of God. Like that
combination mentioned by the Psalmist, Psalm. 83. 6, 7, 8. Gebal, Ammon, Amalek.
the Philistines, with the Tyrians, Assure, and the children of Lot, Edomites,
Ishmaclites, Moabites, Hagarens, men of diverse interests, and not all of one
and the same Religion neither, though all aliens to the Commonwealth of
Israel, and strangers to the Covenant, or like (to come so near, and no nearer)
that holy League in France, the cause of so much mischief to that Kingdom,
(and by their example to others.) Well, but (for proof of the main Observation)
mark what God says there by his Prophet, Associate your selves together, and
ye shall be broken to pieces; Gird your selves, (put your selves into a posture
of war) broken to pieces notwithstanding. This judgment ( of being broken to
pieces) we find thrice repeated in that ninth verse, to note the fullness,
centainty, and in Gods time, suddenness of such contrivers destruction; and
though they all lay their heads together to prevent it, yet it will not do.
Take counsel together, (ver. 10.) it shall be brought to naught, make a decnee,
it shall not stand; and the Prophet shows his extraordinary Commission for this
in the eleventh verse. The Lord spoke this to me with a high hand. And it is
just the same with the example in the Text. They take counsel here for
Adonijah's succession, but God (as the Psalmist speaks) breaks this counsel,
and brings to naught this device. He has said, Solomon shall reign, and he
will not alter the thing that is gone forth of his lips; Though all the
Achitophels and Statists upon Earth project the contrary, yet his counsel shall
for ever, and the thoughts of his heart from generation to generation, Psalm
33. 11. Wisdom and understanding, and counsel do bravely bring to pass mighty
matters, so long as they keep their distance, but when once they will dare
Theomakisme, and Giant-like wage war against Heaven, then they turn to
foolishness. He tells us so that had experience of it, (as in diverse other
passages, so in this particular of the Text) There is neither wisdom, nor
understanding, nor counsel against the Lord, Prove. 21. 30.

To reduce this meditation into matter of Use and Practice.

First, It serves for Caution. And the advice in brief will amount to thus
much. That we are to take heed as how we follow a multitude: So how we side
with a few eminent men in any evil design. The Kingdom of Israel (by what we
find evidently recorded) was at this time miserably divided; and it was Gods
extraordinary mercy toward them, that it broke not forth into the greatest of
plagues and mischiefs, A Civil War: Read through this only Chapter, and but
consideratively weigh what is written, and you will apprehend as much as I have
intimated. Here was at one side the renowned Joab, Generalissimo of the Hosts
of Israel, one who had merited that honor by a remarkable act of valor at his
entrance, and since for near forty years had managed it with such success, that
who could say, Joab ever turned his back upon his enemy? nay, that his sword
ever was sheathed undrunken with the blood of the slain? Here went along with
him all the Captains of the Host, and it may be presumed (though unmentioned)
that far the major part of the soldiers followed their Leaders. Besides, as
fair additionals, (not only for show, but use too) here were all the
Blood Royal, and all the Kings servants that swam with this Current, and
imbarqued themselves in the business; and which was almost as much as all, here
was the high Priest, head of the Church in Sacris, who had walked so many years
in and out before the people unblameably, and by whose decision and definitive
sentence most cases of consciences were de jure, determinable; and questionless
most of the inferior Priests by his command, or (at least) the authority of
his example, put their hands to this work, and by insisting on that Text about
the firstborn in their Harangues and discourses to the people, boldly bore
them in hand, that it was the cause of God, the will of Heaven which they
pleaded for.

On the other side, there wanted not a Prophet Nathan, and a very eminent
Priest too, chief of those about the Tabernacle, Zadok; and both these had
undoubtedly their followers, which did as much for Solomon. Here were besides
Benaijah one of the chief of David's Worthies, together with Shimei and Rei,
persons very remarkable. The Cherethites, and Pelethites picked choice men of
eminent stature and courage, exempted from Joabs jurisdiction, and appointed
under the foresaid famous Benaijah, for the guard of the Kings body.

So that here we find Statesman against Statesman, Captain against Captain,
Soldier against Soldier, and (which commonly puzzles the general sort of
people most) Altar contra Altar, a Prophet joined with a chief Priest to
balance Abiathar the Supreme; And the division (I make no question) went
proportionably downward to the very skirts of Aarons order. And though the
advantage (had the quarrel been suddenly to have been comprimis'd by the swords
decision) lay clearly in all humane probability on the side of Adonijah. Yet
knowing upright men measure not their adherence to a cause so much by the rule
of power as justice; and the inferior multitude who wanted the spirit of
discerning, and in such bickerings were sure to carry away the most blows,
could not but be exceedingly staggered and distracted, to observe the strange
sidings amongst the powerful, the prudent, and the reputed religious, which
sat next the Helm of the State. (In all difficulties undeterminable at home)
their opinion of others whom they fancy honest and wiser then themselves, being
almost the only Pole Star they steer their course by.

We have drawn a picture of Isreal's condition, and (it was within these few
years) so like our own, that it may save the art of a farther Pencil, and
changing but the names, serve as well for England. For though with us there
were not two several Pretenders to the Supreme Title, yet (which does
tantamount) to the Supreme Power, there were manifestly; and the case in the
Text of elder and younger, Nature and Promise, was not neither (if we look to
the bottom of the business) a stranger to our Controversy.

What God in mercy prevented amongst them, he has in judgment (the fury of his
indignation) permitted to fall upon us. We have had the miserable experience of
a sad, miserable Civil War, and that accompanied with as much division between
men of all sorts, degrees and conditions, and prosecuted with as much
Heathenish heart-burning, as (I believe) since there were men enough in the
world to make up such a politic Society as a Kingdom, never more in any. And
because Civil strifes are never so hotly pursued as Religious, coldness (which
in other contentions is presumed to proceed from modemtion) being not admitted
the favor of such a construction in this, (to exasperate men's minds more) This
War was at first (by the cunning of some) so Christians and the Laws of the
Land, the Liberty of the Subject, and I know not what other Privileges,
brought in as Gosipps yea, and the Solemnity and Sacrament of an Oath likewise
added, to terrify back-sliders, discover enemies, and associate friends more
firmly. Well, we fought, and who would have thought that the noise (though once
we find in the case of the barbarous Midianites, Judge. 7. 12.) of a few empty
Pitchers, and some fiery Lights, could have engaged a peaceable and wise people
against one another so felly, so foolishly. I need not acquaint you with the
success. He is a strauge stranger in our Israel, that knows not what has rome
to pass in our days. A Success (I confess) so extraordinary unexpected, sudden
and complete, as would have staggered any faith, not built upon a rock; set off
any Cause (if but tolerably handsome) even to an envious degree of beauty and
glory; yet (by the secret judgment of God) it contributed so little to this,
that the prevailing party never found themselves at so great a loss, as when
they had gained all; never felt themselves so weak, as when there was not an
enemy to stand before them. For falling now upon the division of the spoil, not
without visible disagreement, (confident likewise to draw the Curtain, and
discover the great Design) there did follow such a general alienation of
affections, such an aversion from what people before so exceedingly overmuch
doted upon, that a Parallel to it can hardly be re-mark'd in any story, and
which (by the merciful disposition of God Almighty) has produced the
happiness which (for above fifteen months) we have seen and felt.

To conclude this first Use of Caution. To you of this Honorable City.

Let us from henceforth take heed how we be carried about with every wind of
doctrine, or every blast of present Success, that we believe not every spirit,
or powerful persuasion, or great example, for diverse that boast themselves of
God are not such; many false Prophets are come forth into the world.

Let it be enough, that by glorious glittering pretenses we have been cheated
out of our Religion, Loyalty, Property; nay our very Reason, that by strong
dazeling delusions, we have been cajoled iuto such a Pit-fall, from which only
the Almighty power and extraordinary Goodness could, redeem us. If our own
harms will not make us beware, neither the Texts Example, nor any humane
Instruction can possibly work upon us. And the next blow of Gods hand must
needs be far heavier, because we have so soon forgotten the grief of our former
misery, and the comfort of our present Deliverance.

Secondly, for Comfort. To stay our hearts as with Flagons of Wine, when we
consider, that not one word of Heavens mouth, made to our own souls or others,
shall fall to the Ground. Is thy faith assaulted concerning the truth of Gods
promises, made either to the whole Church, as the Body in the general; or to
thy self, as a Member in particular.

Take heed of giving too far and free Entertainment to such Suggestions The
Lords hand is not shortened, He Is commonly better then his word, as good as his
word (to be sure) he is always. Though, for the present, perhaps thou may
perceive nothing less, no Shadow of Likelihood, all thing to run to a
Retrograde. course to their seeming accomplishment. Yet possess thy Soul with
patience, stand and see the Salvation of the Lord, rest upon his
All Sufficiency, believe with Abraham, even above hope, etc. He does diverse
times work out his ends by means, in our shallow conceits apparently contrary.
He Is so good that he would not suffer evil to be, unless he were also so
powerful as to be able to draw good out of it. Nothing can make void the
purposes and promises of Heaven. Though a Joab, though an Abiathar, though all
men on Earth, and Devils in Hell, attempt their Nullity: yet Maugre all
Opposition, they shall stand in force, and be made good to those whom they
concern; that Word of truth has spoken it, not one word of whose Truth, shall
return empty, Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but, etc.

Third, for Direction, to steer our course on the troublesome Sea of this
World, that so we may arrive at the Haven where we would be; and that is in all
our Intendments to take Heaven along with us, not to depend upon new Truths,
pretended to be concealed for so many Generations, and now revealed to I know
not whom, for I know not what fanciful purposes, but to make Gods clear
revealed Word (with David) our Counselor, and Warrant, and then we shall be
sure to have either the Sum of our Desires, or that which is better for us.
Then either our purposes shall have a good Issue, or else our failing in them
shall be more for our Good.

Instance: You of this City, desire to be rich, and in places of Honor and
Eminency, and such desires (if attended with their due Qualifications) are for
ought I know not amiss neither. Now Solomon tells us, that riches and honor
are in the hands of the Almighty: Length of Days are in his right hand, and in
his left Riches and Honor. Prove. And if we will credit the Devil he will tell us
that all these are his too, once to be sure we know he told the very Owner so
to his Face, Matthew. 4. and where he is likely to gain more belief, he will
cettainly be more forward to boast his vain Title. And were there not too many
in the World that lent a willing ear to him; the forbidden paths of Bribery,
Flattery, Extortion, Overreaching, Cozenage, and Cunning; would not be so
crowded with Passengers, and the allowable Road of Truth and Honesty, fair
upright, and ingenious Dealing, so thinly frequented.

But brag the Devil never so confidently, of these and all other good things,
God is the true Proprietary; and we must have and hold them of him, if we will
have and hold them at all, or long, or with Comfort. We take an ill Match in
hand if we go about to wrestle with him, and wrest them from him by Violence.
God is a liberal God, and yet in some Sense he is a hand-fast God too; maugre
all the World, he can keep his hands shut if he please, and until he be
pleased to open it, we cannot be filled with Plenteousnesse. In all our
Enterprises therefore, let us be sure to have him to friend, to have his
allowance at least, if not command, in the main Intendments of our Life,
otherwise (let me tell you) it is neither the Plotting of our heads, nor the
Sollicitousnesse of our hearts, not the Drudgery of our hands, nor the whole
concurrence of our created strength, improved by all accessory procurable
Assistances, that can finally render our attempts successeful. Adam may make
himself a Garment, but it shall not cover his nakedness; Jonah may build him a
booth, but it shall not defend him from the heat of the Sun; Peter may toil all
right at fishing, but shall catch nothing. Though we rise up early, and lie
down late, and eat the bread of sorrow, yet is our labor in vain, except the
Lord give the blessing, Psalm 127. 2.

I might illustrate this by almost infinite instances out of Story. Take the
Texts example for all.

Here is an able eldest Son using the strongest humane means to settle himself
in the Seat of his Father: Ordering this affair with as much polity and
discretion, as the best heads in the Kingdom could furnish him with. Many
advantages he had of his Competitor, both the Word and the Sword (if I may so
speak) were on his side. The High Priest and Captain of the Host: The latter of
which alone was so powerful in the State, that David himself (though a King
well-beloved of his Subjects) confesses him too hard for him, and for the
murder of diverse of his dear friends, durst not punish him. Yet see
notwithstanding all these interests, assistances, probabilities, Heaven
overswaies and determines the contrary: Go but to the latter end of the
Chapter, and there we shall read that Solomon is King. So true is that of the
holy Ghost, the foolishness of God is wiser then man's wisdom, and his weakness
stronger then their power.

But stay; was indeed God's hand in this business against Adonijah? How then
durst either Joab or Abiathar move so much as a finger for him? Nay, how durst
he himself take counsel and plead his own Title, when that Wonderful
Counselor and Supreme Judge both of Heaven and Earth was in the Cause his
adversary?

1. But indeed for him, first, I can easily satisfy my self without the puzzle
of a wonderment. A Crown is a strong temptation, and where an apprehension of
compassing it gets footing in the brain, it infatuates, corrupts our judgments,
and inveigles us to any impious, desperate undertaking. Caesar, thought a
Kingdom worth an oath-breaking. And I have observed it, that Religion has not
such another shrewd enemy as ambition. Look into the Annals of all ages, search
the Records of time from the beginning, and you will scarce find one of a
thousand that have let go their hold, or relinquished probabilities of
Sovereignty, out of a mere respect to conscience.

Secondly, For Joab too, I marvel not at all at him. A man he was it seems by
the whole course and tenor of his actions, of a violent, over-heady spirit.
One that looked no farther (though a Subject, and an Israelite) for a Law, then
his own will. He had slain Absolon expressly against the King's Commandment,
and Abner and Amasa against both Gods and the Kings; And if he now beard Heaven
by opposing with a high hand its decrees, which had so often before set naught
and slight by it, what need we wonder.

But for Abiathar methinks to do so, cannot but rouse our admiration: For
God's high Priest to set himself against God, and to oppose his will and
purposes, must needs be to those that consider the circumstances of the story
and person, a matter of just astonishment. Shall we say for him by way of
excuse, or extenuation, that perchance he might not be clearly and thoroughly
acquainted with God's will in this particular. We would fain be as favorable
to him as might be, but this in reason allow him we cannot. For then (unless
we'll argue like Turks) Solomon spoke amiss to him, chap. 2. 26. When he told
him he had deserved death; for supposing him ignorant do but show me what so
great evil he had done.

But indeed faulty he was, I make no question, knowingly and presumptuously
faulty too. God had sent the Prophet Nathan to bestow a second name upon
Solomon, a name of such an happy signification, as might almost alone direct
Abiathar to the Almighty's intention, Jedidiah the beloved of the Lord. And
that some clearer intimation of God's pleasure was the ground of David's oath to
Bathsheba by the Lord, that her son should reign after him, may be more then
probably conjectured. For can we suppose that David a Prophet of the Lord,
would so resolutely (without limitation, or Saint James his reservation, if the
Lord will) swear, that Solomon should reign after him, without a Warrant from
him by whom Kings reign, and the Thrones of Princes are established. And that
this being such a public business, and necessary to be known too, should be
concealed from Abiathar, no circumstances can make likely. I take no pleasure
in this Argument; Give me leave from hence only to note unto you, That the best
sometimes over-shoot themselves grossly; That not a Miter, not an Ephod, not the
holy Calling of Priesthood, does make us so universally good, but that we
sometimes run into a Praemunire against Heaven, transgress the Laws of our Maker
like other men. We are earthly Vessels, kneaded of the same Clay, shaped of the
same mould whereof all mankind are fashioned. Prophets we are, but yet like
unto our brethren, (as Moses) Men of God, but yet but men, and so subject to
whatsoever sins are incident to man's nature as well as others. Abiathar here
though the High Priest, and headman of the Church, yet led aside by some
corrupt respects, goes about (as much as in him lies) to frustrate Gods promise
and appointment. He helps forward Adonijah.

Well, but all this while we have condemned them; how may we now justify God?
Was there no partiality, no iniquity in him, to prefer the younger before the
elder? Primogeniture by his own Law, had the privilege of a double portion,
and does he now (for no wickedness neither that we read of) bar Adonijah from
this Prerogative? Shall not the Judge of all the world do right? Shall he do
any man wrong? that be far from him.

Answ. Twofold. 1. General. 2. Particular.

First, God is a free and liberal Agent. He does and may do whatsoever he will
both in Heaven and Earth. His will is the rule of Justice; for though some will
have Justice to be the reason of his will, (blasphemously enough, if well
sifted) yet it is confessed on all hands, that he wills nothing, but what is just.
When therefore we hear him clearly enjoining any thing, we are not (in our weak
way) to dispute the lawfulness of it, but with all alacrity to hasten its
execution. For God is equally as unable to command, as to commit injustice; All
his ways are judgment and truth, Psalm. --

The Canonists affirm of the Pope, nunquam ligat sibi manus, he can never tie
his own hands, never limit and restrain his own power. They write him down a
God on Earth and therefore herein they will have him like the God of Heaven.
And your greatest Statists of Laws in Monarchies, tell us, that they bind only
those that are under them. A Coactive power they have not, serve only for
Direction to such as are above them. Besides, we grant that Laws may be
dispensed withal, nay, nullified by the same power by which they were made, and
that the ground and reason of a good Law is always justice, though the letter
in some particular application may be otherwise. Hence that usual Say
(considering the unsufficiency of Laws, to meet with those millions of
circumstances) (one of which may alter a case) Better a privaete mischief then
a public inconvenience.

These Observations (some of them at least) may not be perhaps (in a
Metaphysical transcendent consideration) utterly incompatible with the
Almighty. For we find God (for the present) to have commanded contrary to the
letter (to be sure) of his own Law, As in the Israelites spoiling the
Egyptians. Nay in a weightier business then the Text holds forth, we find the
younger accepted, the Elder rejected. Nay for an Earthly Kingdom too, the
point in hand (though attended with other Circumstances) we find David
preferred before Eliab.

Secondly, But this Discourse of Gods absolute power to do whatsoever he will,
and that all being truly his both in Heaven and Earth, he may dispose of his
own as it pleases him, will perchance scarce satisfy some, and indeed let it
be confessed, something farther, and (I conceive) better may be said to the point.

Many things are holden in the World by Prescription, Custom put into the
Balance with Law clearly out weighs it, and then time out of mind we deem no
Title better. Now Isreal's case was different from that of other Nations. These
had been from their very beginnings as Commoners, left to the Light of the Law
of Nature, and to such Constitutions, as they were able to make out from that;
But Israel was Gods Enclosure, continued by his special particular care under
Pupillage as his own peculiar, and the Government amongst them to the very day
of this Consultation went not by Succession but Election, and in that, they
were never suffered to carve out to themselves, whomsoever they fancied as the
most fit, but as the Power, so the continual Exercise of it was only in God.
From Moses to Samuel about five hundred years, they had still rulers, when they
had any, of his appointment. In all that time (we read not) of a Son succeeding
his Father, But heaven according to several Exigencies singled them out several
men, of several Tribes and Families, of proportionable Abilities, to sit at the
Helm of the State. During the Life of Samuel, they require a King like other
Nations, but a King still of Gods choosing, not their own.

They have Saul and he has a Son both good and valiant, yet he in his Life
time perceives the Kingdom destined to a Stranger; The Father indeed storms at
it. but the Son seems well content, and though after both their Deaths, Abner
sets another Son of Saul's upon the Throne, yet the cause thrives not, the whole
Kingdom at length devolves unto David. So that if Jonathan or Saul's other Son
had no wrong; neither had here Adonijah; And if God had not limited himself by
an after assurance to David, he might have dealt with him and his posterity, as
he did with Saul and his, given the Kingdom to any Israelite; now however he
has his whole offspring to choose in, and might without the least injustice
have fastened upon any issue of his as well as Solomon. So that as St. Augustine
in another case, Huic fit misericordia, illi non injuria; God was favorable to
Solomon, did no injury to Adonijah.

Considering then that the Commonwealth of Israel, was so constituted at the
Beginning, and had so continued many hundred years, that none could pretend to
the Principality by Filiation, and therefore at this time fell not under the
Cognizance of that Law of Primogeniture, (which God (surceasing his claim)
suffered it to do in the Ages following.) Considering too, that as the right of
Election was in God, so he had continually all along exercised the power of it
without interruption; for Joab and Abiathar, boldly to undertake the pointing
out of a Supreme Magistrate without his special Warrant and Commission, nay to
set up one when he had appointed another, was a Presumption worthy the
Vengeance inflicted upon them afterward. For we find (and I thought not fit to
conclude without this Note) they paid deerly for it (and so shall all those
sooner or later that attempt upon any of Gods Reservations) they had better
been out of Employment then have had such Wages. The one loses his Life, the
other his Office, and Heaven is to be admired for the Certainty and Justice of
its Dispensations in both. Joab had before committed diverse Murders, and so
powerful he was in the State, that Vengeance by the hand of the present
Magistrate durst not seize on him. This Action of his (Springing from the same
root) pays those old Scores, and as he had shed man's blood, so by man is his
Blood powered forth. Abiathar was of the house of Eli, against whom we have Two
several prophetical Denunciations, 1 Samuel Chap. 2, 3. and this his Stickling
for, and Siding with Adonijah here, causes his Removal from the Priesthood;
and so we see those Predictions likewise made good by their accomplishment.

And this consideration well sifted (would the Time, and the Space allotted for
this exercise bear it) would afford us fresh matter of Contemplation and
Discourse, about the certain, yet secret ways of Providence.

First, How the wise Disposer of all things, turns (many times) man's greatest
Shame, into his own greatest Glory.

Secondly, How our very Sins (though Traitors to us their Owners) prove Trusty
Executioners of the Almighties purposes, and our wickedst Actions (so
over-ordered) as they become the Instrumental Examples of Heavens Justice.

But these will fall more fitly into some Texts in the Second Chapter.

To the only wise and powerful Trinity, Three persons, One God, be ascribed,
etc.

Amen.
FINIS.

