THE Times Mended: OR, A RECTIFIED ^CCOUNT OF TIME, BY A New Luni-Solar Year;
THE TRUE WAY TO Number our Days.

By R. W. LL. D. Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY.

Ad AUTHOREM. Ad minimum revocas Errores Temporis: O si Corrigeres Mores
Temporis (...) F. D.

LONDON, Printed by E. Tyler, and R. Holt, for Ionath. Robinson and Ben. Took,
both in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1681.

A NEW YEARS GIFT: OR, THE TRUE WAY TO Number our Days, AND KNOW THE TIMES:
WITH AN ACCOUNT How they have been, and how they may be farther Mended.
ALL Nations we have had any Commerce with, even those called Barbarous, being
found to reckon their Time one way or other, and ordinarily by the most equable
Motions or Revolutions of the greatest Heavenly Luminaries, (at least,
appearing so to us) such universal Consent seems to imply some considerable use
or convenience of such Reckoning. As for Example, to count their own Age, and
the Ages of their Friends or Relations, their memorable Actions or Accidents,
or those of their Country, or Governors: To date their Civil Contracts and
Agreements; of which, if one or both parts were to be performed at any
determinate future day or time, to mark when, or how long it would be before
that time or day was to come. And in many such other like Instances the
mesuring of Time is so much employed by all men, that it seems to be one of
those Properties or Characters that distinguish Men from Beasts; and therefore
the more worthy of our Inquiry. But tho all Nations seem thus to conspire in
the Use of the Thing, yet have they not all, nor the same Nation at all times,
used the same Standard or Way of Reckoning: For besides the shorter measure of
a Day or (...), which they all reckoned by, the number of days in larger
Accounts, proved too great to be remembered; and therefore they found it
expedient to use some longer measure also; as of Months, or Circuits of the
Moon; or of Years, that is Circuits or Revolutions of the Sun; or both. Now
according to the different apprehensions or opinions which several people had
of the length or quantity of the Revolutions of those Luminaries which made
their Months or Years; that is, how many days made a complete Month or Year; or
what greater number of days made such a complete number of Months or Years, the
length of the Month or Year was different in several Ages and Countries: some
thought the Year consisted of just 360 days, and therefore probably they
divided the Ecliptic (or the supposed Line in the Heavens in which the Sun
appears to perform his Yearly Course) into 360 equal parts or degrees,
according to which the Egyptian King made an huge Circle or Ring of Gold in the
Suns Temple, so divided; they likewise thought the Moons Circuit to consist of
just 30 days, and so made three Months in a Quarter of a Year, and twelve
Months in the Year, (12 times 30 making 360) and consequently they divided the
Zodiac into twelve parts, or Signs. Others thought there were but 28 days in
the Month, which they divided into Quarters, consisting of 7 days each, which
probably was the original of Weeks; But After-Ages found there were more than
360 Days in the Year, and so they added 5 days; others finding the Solar Year
yet too short, added a quarter of a day more, which in four Years makes a whole
Day, called the Leap day, or Bissextile, by Julius Caesar, upon the Advice of
his Astronomer Sosigenes, who yet only took the measures of Calippus, a
Grecian, designed for another purpose; thus was the Julian Year or Account
framed with intent to follow the Suns course only, without making any use of
that of the Moon; which Account held generally in these parts of the World till
within an hundred years past; but the Julian Year being found by experience too
long, viz. having anticipated near 15 days since Caesar's time, Pope Gregory
the Thirteenth, in the Year 1582, made the Year shorter by three days in four
hundred Years, and so introduced a new Account in all those Countries that
would follow him, as far as the greatest part of Europe did. His Account, tho
more correct than the former, is yet judged by many to want much of that
exactness which an Account of time is capable of.

On the other side many of the Europeans anciently, as most of the Eastern
People still, and also diverse of the West Indians do reckon their time by the
Moon, and so probably did the Jews heretofore, who now reckon by both Moon and
Sun, with no small Curiosity: but the Grecians, or some of the Athenians at
least, had for several Ages labored that point very far, and framed an
excellent Luni-Solar Year; but yet both the one and the other were short of
exactness, tho their ways of Account are intricate enough, and seem somewhat
too fine for vulgar Capacities.

The consideration of all which put me upon thoughts of examining, Whether
(which has hitherto been only wished for among other Desiderata) whether, I
say, a way of reckoning our Time might not at length be contrived, not inferior
to the exactness of any Astronomical Observations, and yet not superior to the
Understanding of the lowest sort of common people; which two Ends of being
exact and easy are all that can be reasonably desired in any civil Account. In
order whereunto, I considered, First, that the Revolutions of all the other
Heavenly Bodies (besides those of the Sun and Moon) tho perhaps equable enough
in themselves, yet did not so appear unto us; and farther that they were of
more difficult and nice Observation, even to the most curious Astronomers.
Secondly, That the Annual Revolution of the Sun was either not exactly known,
or at least not so universally agreed on. Thirdly, that there were means and
ways far more exact of knowing the Moons Course, than that of the Sun; and tho
there are 3600 Thirds in a Minute of an Hour (viz. 60 times 60) yet that the
Moons Course was better known, or at least better agreed on, to Thirds, than
the Suns to Minutes; so that a reckoning by the Moon seems to have some
hundreds of times the advantage of one by the Sun, as to exactness. Fourthly,
that the Changes of the Moon were obvious to every eye. And fifthly, that in
measuring time primarily by the Moon, we might reckon by the Sun also, exactly
enough for the business of Husbandry and other civil Affairs; but that the same
vice versa could not so well be done, measuring time primarily by the Sun.

Upon all which, and diverse other considerations, I have, not without some
pains, contrived a certain way of a Luni-Solar Account, so exact that one day
need not be lost or got in Millions of Years, and yet so clear, short and easy
(and the more plain and simple the better) that I have made a Youth of twelve
years old to understand, and remember it too, all in an hour. And indeed the
great obstacle to the right understanding of this is the apprehension of
Difficulty, where there is none, and the prejudice or prepossession of the mind
with the old way of Reckoning.

My greatest labor and pains has been to make this work easy to others; the
work, I say, I have cut out of the hard Rock, without any other help from first
to last, (except common Observations, long since Printed) but what I had from
the Division or Powder of the Rock it self, or rather from the Rock of Ages,
Cui sit laus in secula seculorum. Amen.

As for all other possible ways of Measuring Time, whether such as have been
already practiced in some part of the world, or not; I shall venture to say
this of them in general, viz. that they will either want a Foundation in
Nature, or else come short of mine in point of Exactness.

But if any man shall discover a better way of measuring Time, or find a
material fault in this my Contrivance (tho it is easy to find faults almost in
any thing, or to add to any Invention) I Will promise him a better Reward for his
labor, than I expect for mine, tho no such Error, or better way can be found.

In a thing of so universal Use or Convenience to all Mankind, as the Reckoning
of Time, it is matter of Wonder, that the best way of doing it has not hitherto
been found out in so great a number of Ages as the Earth has lasted,
especially since so many excellent Wits in several Parts and Ages of the World
have employed their Endeavors therein: But I see that Time and Chance, which
happen to all, happens also to Time it self.

I shall now in few words give you my Contrivance (and that two manner of Ways,
one for the Pen or Memory with the Demonstration; the other contrived into the
Honorable Garter for an Instrument or Clock-work:) and afterward (...) shall
add, by way of illustration, some further Remarks thereupon.

A Specimen of A NEW ALMONAC FOR EVER: OR, A Rectified Account of TIME, by a
Luni-Solar Year. That is, By the Moon's Monthly Course primarily, so as the
First of the Month shall always be within a Day of the Change; And yet adjusted
to the Sun's yearly Course also.
LET the New Year, or Account begin with March 10, 1680/1 the New Moon and
Vernal Equinox in the Meridian of Windsor-Castle, being also near the same,
viz. the former being about of an hour after Midnight; and the later near as
much before it: or it may begin at any other Epoche when the New Moon and
Equinox, or Solstice (if that be thought a better time to begin the year,)
happen both near the beginning of the Civil Day, which perhaps they very seldom
will be found to do. From such Epoche or Beginning, let the following Months,
which in ordinary Years are Twelve only, have days 30, 29; 30, 29, etc.
alternately: But in Fourteen Years of a certain Period or Revolution completed
in Thirty eight Years, viz. in the Years 2, 5, 7, 10, 13, 15, 18 21, 24, 26,
29, 32, 34, 37 let there be intercalated or added to those extraordinary Years,
a Thirteenth Month, consisting of Days 31, 30; 31, 30, etc. alternately also:
And so on, Period after Period, for ever, as the Moon, etc.

Once every Century, or to one Year of 100, add one Day, viz.

To near about the first 50th Year, or middle of the Century, and then to every
100th Year following. Which additional Day being omitted every 230th, or 240th
Century, or thereabouts (according to the Latitude of the differing Opinions of
Dissenters in Astronomy) that is, once in 23 or 24000 Years (only the first
omission to be about the middle thereof, if any one should require such great
exactness) will balance the Account for ever. But we need not be solicitous
about that remote consideration.

The DEMONSTRATION.
(Which may be passed over by those not accustomed to Mathematical
Demonstrations.)
BEsides common known Principles denied by none, I suppose, or take for granted
only two things, viz.

1. That the Motions of the great Bodies of Heaven, particularly of our great
Luminaries, the Sun and Moon, are Regular or Uniform, or at least do approach
somewhat near toward being so.

2. That in taking the measures of their Motions, especially that of the Moon,
all the famous Astronomers, Ancient and Modern, have not been much mistaken.

This Account of Time being made up by continued Addition or Multiplication,
the Truth or Exactness thereof may be casily Examined or Demonstrated, only by
Division of the number of Dnys of the Period (or number of Years assigned) by
the number of Months contained in the same; and the Quotient shall be (the
Days, and parts of a Day in) a Month; or the Time, at a Medium, between Change
and Change, according to the exactest Astronomers, ancient and modern. E. g.

In 38 Years there are Months or Lunarions, 470, viz. (38 times 12) or 456 and
14 intercalar ones: And Days, 38 times 12 times 29, that is 13452; and 14 times
30, or 427, that is 13879 whole Days; together with 38 hundredth parts of a day,
viz in all 13879:38, because one day is to be added every hundred years. Divide
13879:38 by 470, and the Quotient will be 29:53059574468, etc. that is 29 d. 12
h. 44 m. 3 sec. 28 thirds.

Which is about 18 thirds only too much in a Month, or 1 min. in 16 or 17
years, or about 1 hour in 1000 Years, or (24 hours or) one Day in about 24000
Years: And yet is above eight times more exact than even the Gregorian
Reformation, as they call it.

Nevertheless if greater exactness be required, subduct 1/530th or 1/240th part
of a 33/100 part of a Day from the said 13879:38 (because the additional Day is
to be omitted every 230th, or 240th Century) and so in my thirty-eight-years
Period or Cycle, there will be days and decimal parts of a day, viz.
13879:3783478 in the first case; and 13879:378416666 in the second case: Divide
the said days, etc. by 470, and the Quotient in the first case shall be
29:53059223 -- viz. 29 d. 12 h. 44 m. 3 sec. 10 third. 7 fourth. that is
greater than the Month of Ricciol. and less than that of Dechales; but in the
second case 29. 530;9236 -- viz. 29 d. 12 h. 44 m. 3 sec. 10 third. 52 four.
that is a little greater than the Month of Kepler. Now between the one and the
other is probably the just quantity of the Mean Month of Conjunction. However,
tho it should hereafter be found out to be less than the one, or greater than
the other; yet the Account of time by me proposed will hold good for about
twelve thousand years yet to come; at which time the said Additional Day being
omitted (only some few years sooner or later, as by experience shall appear
best before that time) will keep right, and balance the Account for millions of
years after.

But if any one will assign me the exact quantity or measure of the Mean Month
of Conjunction, I shall tell him precisely what Century (or Year if he please)
the said Additional Day is to be omitted: For the best Astronomers do differ a
little even upon that Account, as may appear by the following List. The measure
of the Mean Month of Conjunction, according to the Astronomers following, viz.
d. h. m. se th. fo. Hipparch. Ptolomy. 29 12 44 3 15 44 Lansberg. Wendelin. 29
12 44 3 12 Kepler. 29 12 44 3 10 50 3 Copernic. Reinold. 29 12 44 3 10 48 5
Vieta 29 12 44 3 10 43 ^ Clavius. 29 12 44 3 10 38 5 Dechales. 29 12 44 3 10 9
Ricciol. 29 12 44 3 10 Bulliald. 29 12 44 3 9 37 ^ Tycho 29 12 44 3 8 39 is
none, and the prejudice or prepossession of the mind with the old way of
Reckoning.

My greatest labor and pains has been to make this work easy to others; the
work, I say, I have cut out of the hard Rock, without any other help from first
to last, (except common Observations, long since Printed) but what I had from
the Division or Powder of the Rock it self, or rather from the Rock of Ages,
Cui sit laus in secula seculorum. Amen.

As for all other possible ways of Measuring Time, whether such as have been
already practiced in some part of the world, or not; I shall venture to say
this of them in general, viz. that they will either want a Foundation in
Nature, or else come short of mine in point of Exactness.

But if any man shall discover a better way of measuring Time, or find a
material fault in this my Contrivance (tho it is easy to find faults almost in
any thing, or to add to any Invention) I Will promise him a better Reward for his
labor, than I expect for mine, tho no such Error, or better way can be found.

In a thing of so universal Use or Convenience to all Mankind, as the Reckoning
of Time, it is matter of Wonder, that the best way of doing it has not hitherto
been found out in so great a number of Ages as the Earth has lasted,
especially since so many excellent Wits in several Parts and Ages of the World
have employed their Endeavors therein: But I see that Time and Chance, which
happen to all, happens also to Time it self.

I shall now in few words give you my Contrivance (and that two manner of Ways,
one for the Pen or Memory with the Demonstration; the other contrived into the
Honorable Garter for an Instrument or Clock-work:) and afterward I shall add,
by way of illustration, some further Remarks thereupon.

A NEW YEARS GIFT, IN A NEW ALMONAC FOR EVER: OR, A Rectified Account of TIME,
by a new Luni-Solar Year. That is, By the Moon's Monthly Course primarily, so
as the First of the Month shall always be within about a Day of the Change; and
yet adjusted to the Sun's yearly Course.
(A larger Discourse hereof was lately Published)
By Dr. Robert Wood.
LFT the New Year or Account begin with March 10, 1680/1. The New Moon and
Vernal Equinox, in the Meridian of Windsor-Castle, being, viz. the former,
about three quarters of an hour after Midnight; and the later near as much
before it: or it may begin at any other Epoche when the New Moon and Equinox,
(or Solstice, if that be thought a better time to begin the Year.) happen both
mean the beginning of the Civil Day.
From such Beginning, let the following Months, which in ordinary Years are
Twelve only, have days 30, 29; 30, 29, etc. alternately: But in Fourteen Years
(of a certain Period or Revolution completed in Thirty eight Years,) viz. in
the Years 2, 5, 7, 10, 13, 15, 18, 21, 24, 26, 29, 32, 34, 37, let there be
intercalated or added to those extraordinary Years, a Thirteenth Month,
consisting of Days, 31, 30; 31, 30, etc. alternately also: And so on, Period
after Period, for ever.

Once every Century, or to one Year of 100, add one Day, viz. to near about the
middle of the first Century, and then to every 100th Year following.

Which additional Day being omitted every 230th or 240th Century, or
thereabouts (according to the latitude of the differing Opinions of Dissenters
in Astronomy) that is, once in 23 or 24000 Years (only the first omission to be
about the middle thereof) if any one should require such great exactness, will
balance the Account for ever. But we need not be solicitous about that remote
consideration.

The Demonstration.
(Which may be passed over by those who are not accustomed to Mathematical
Demonstrations.)
BEsides common known Principles, denied by none, I suppose, or take for
granted only two Things, viz.

1. That the Motions of the great Bodies of Heaven, particularly of our great
Luminaries, the Sun and Moon, are Regular or Uniform, or at least do approach
somewhat near toward being so.

2. That in taking the measures of their Motions, especially that of the Moon,
all the famous Astronomers, Ancient and Modern, have not been much mistaken.

This Account of Time being made up by continued Addition, or Multiplication,
the Truth or Exactness thereof may be easily Examined or Demonstrated, only by
Division of the number of Days in my Period or number of Years assigned, by the
number of Months contained in the same; and the Quotient shall be (the Days,
and parts of a Day in) a Month; or the Time at a Medium between Change and
Change, according to the exactest Astronomers, ancient and modern. As for
Example,

In 38 Years there are Months or Lunations 470, viz. (38 times 12) or 456 and
14 intercalar, ones. And in 38 Years there are Days (38 times 12 viz.) 456
times 29, that is 13452, and 14 times 30, or 427, that is in all 13879 whole
Days; together with 38 hundredth parts of a Day, viz. in all 13879:38, because
one day is to be added every 100 years: Or more plainly thus, In (100 times 38,
viz.) 3800 years, there are 47000 Months, and 1387938 Days. Multiply the said
3800 Years by 6, and likewise the said Months and Days by 6 respectively, viz.
Years. Months. Days. And omitting one day in the said 22800 years, there
remains at last 8327627 Days. 3800 47000 1387938 6 6 6 22800 282000 8327628

Divide 8327627 by 282000, the Quotient will be Days 29:53059219854, that is 29
days, 12 h. 44 min. 3 sec. 10 third. (almost) viz. the Month of Ricciolus.

But if to each of the above Years, Months and Days respectively you add a
twentieth part, there will be near 24000 years, viz. Years. Months. Days. And
omitting one Day in the said 23940 Years, as before, there remains at last
8744008:4 Days. 22800 282000 8327628 1140 141^^^ 416381:4 23940 296100 8744009:4

Divide 8744008:4 by 296100, the Quotient will be Days 29:530592367444, that is
29 day. 12 h. 44 min. 3 sec. 10 third. 50 fourth. (almost) viz. between the
Months of Copernicus and Kepler, etc. Near which, or between both, is probably
the just quantity of the mean Month of Conjunction. However, tho it should
hereafter be found out to be less than the one, or greater than the other; yet
the Account of Time by me proposed will hold good for about twelve thousand
years yet to come; at which time the said Additional Day being omitted (only
some few years sooner or later, as by experience shall appear best before that
time) will keep right, and balance the Account for millions of years after.

But if any one will assign me the exact quantity or measure of the Mean Month
of Conjunction, I shall tell him precisely what Century (or Year if he please)
the said Additional Day is to be omitted: For the best Astronomers do differ a
little even upon that Account, as may appear by the following List. The Measure
of the Mean Month of Conjunction, according to the Astronomers following, viz.
d. h. m. se. th. fo. Hipparch. Ptolomy. 29 12 44 3 15 44 Lansberg. Wendelin.
29 12 44 3 12 Kepler. 29 12 44 3 10 50 3/5 Copernic. Reinold. Clavius. 29 12 44
3 10 48 Vieta. 29 12 44 3^ 10 43 5/^ Dechales. 20 12 44 3 10 9 Ricciol. 29 12
44 3 10 Bulliald. 29 12 44 3 9 37 1/^ Tycho. 29 12 44 3 8 39 3/4

A New AL-MON-AC for Ever; or A Rectified Account of Time, (beginning with
March 10 1680/1) by a Luni-solar Year, or by both Luminaries: That is By the
Moons Monthly Course primarily; so as the First of the Month shall always be
within about a Day of the Change: And yet adjusted to the Suns yearly Course
also; viz Keeping within about a Week thereof at a medium: DESCRIBED in, and
DEDICATED to the most Honorable ORDER of THE GARTER.
By (...) LLD.


The GARTER shows the Number (...) Da^s (...) 30, 29. etc.) which each of the
Twelve Month's of the year is to contain: And in the Buckle is discovered,
through a Hole, the days of a Thirteenth Month (31, 30, (...) 30 etc) to be
added to Some years, viz to Fourteen of Thirty eight, or more particularly to
the years 2, 5, 7, 10, 13, 15, 18 21, 24, 26, 29, 32, 34, 37. of a certain
Period or Revolution completed in 38 years; as in a Cycle or Rundle behind;
which is supposed movable one 38th part, every year, backwards or contrary to
the Months in the Garter: And the year of the Period or Cycle, or what 38th
year is Current, is showed through another Hole. and so on for ever

Once every Century, or to one Year of 100, add one Day viz to near about the
middle of the First Century, and then to every 100th year following. Winsor
Castle*

Some farther Remarks on the preceding Account.
(Formerly published in the Philosophical Collections. N. 2.)
THe Egyptian Hieroglyphick of the Year was a Serpent curv'd into a Circle or
Ring, with Tail in Mouth: but the Emblematical Garter will be much more proper
for England, etc, and is so exactly fitted to the Moon's motion, that perhaps
it will be hard to judge, upon consulting a whole Jury of Astronomers, ancient
and modern, whether it will prove too straight or too large a measure of Time;
and the exceeding small difference between this Account and some of their
Calculations on one side or other, may rationally enough be ascribed to the
imperfection of Instruments or Observations, 'till the farther experience of
future Ages, many thousand years hence, shall evince the contrary.

This Almonac measures Time principally by the Moon, but with a great and near
respect to the annual motion of the Sun or Earth: The Unite or least Measure is
a Day; and the Garter or Luni-Solar Year will be, at a Medium, within about a
Week, or half a hundredth part, of the true Solar Year; that is, so near that
the difference will not be discerned by ordinary popular Observation, (and
therefore must needs answer the ends of Husbandry, and other civil Affairs,
well enough;) And at certain periods balance one another, and have a kind of
coincidence or agreement, much better than the Suns course has with the Julian
Account, so much magnified by Scaliger and others.

I find the elder World generally computed their Time (and most of the Eastern
Countries, if not the bulk of Mankind, do so still) by the Moon, or by a Lunar,
or Luni-Solar Year; made up of Lunations, or real Months, or somewhat near the
matter such, (and not such in name only, as ours now are; being, as it were,
but the Ghosts and deformed Shadows of their old Moons and Reckoning:) Which
Months were for the most part 12, and some years 13: This appears from their
Kalendars, etc. It Is plain (from 1 Samuel c. 20. v. 5, 18, 24. compared with v.
27, 34.) that the days of the Jewish Month, were the same with those of the
Moon: And the Grecians (where Astronomy, as well as other Arts and good
Learning most flourished, and particularly the Athenians according to the
Institution of their wise Legislator, Solon) did thus reckon their Time; and so
did the Romans too, till Julius Caesar altered, I cannot say, mended, the Year.

Among the Grecians there lived, in three not far distant Ages, three famous
Astronomers in their several Times, Meton, Calippus, and Hipparchus; each of
whom still farther improved Astronomy, and rectified the Accounts of Time more
and more one after another respectively, according to their light and the
Observations of their own and the foregoing Ages: Hipparchus, the last of them
(and unto whom our modern Astronomers, with all their helps and advantages,
have been able to add very little as to the exactness of some of his
Observations) he flourished about 100 or 90 Years before Julius Caesar altered
the Year; yet Caesar, or his Astronomer Sosigenes, followed Calippus in framing
the Julian Year; as I find by examining their Accounts: For Calippus his Period
of 76 Years consisted of 27759 Days, and so do 76 Julian Years. About three
Centuries and an half after Caesar, the Council of Nice (first,) and about two
Centuries after that, Dionysius Exiguus (again) introduced the Decennoval Cycle
(called the Golden Number) for the Celebration of Easter; following Meton, the
first and least exact of the Three; or rather following both Meton and Caesar,
two Masters, who were neither of them the best, and would after some time
disagree and part farther and farther from each other; tho both Caesar and the
Church might have had much better Copy from Hipparchus: Which mistakes of
theirs (and their Eyes being dazzled with the Sun, whereas they might have
looked more safely on the Moon) have occasioned those Anticipations and
Differences, that have embarrassed the Accounts of Time, and these Parts of the
World in the succeeding Ages. And tho many have proposed laudable ways of
redressing the said Accounts, yet still building upon the old Foundations,
which were infirm; Pope Gregory XIII, in his Reformation of the Calendar near
100 years since, was necessitated to wave the Golden Number, and yet has but
palliated the Disease; so hard it is to cure an Error in the first Concoction:
Wherefore inverting a Dystic of Ovid's, 1 Fast. one may say, Scilicet Arma
magis, Caesar, quam Sidera noras:
Resque Aeternae, and non Tempora, cura Patrum.


The Council of Nice appointed Easter to be kept the first Sunday after the
first Full Moon after the 21th of March; because the Vernal Equinox (which was
on the 25th in our Savior's time, or thereabouts) was then come to be on or
about the said 21th Day; and therefore the Gregorian Reformation has reduced
the Vernal Equinox back to that Day, or brought that Day to it again, by losing
10 Days, and must omit another Day within 20 Years: But in this Garter or
Luni-Solar Year, Easter will always be the first Sunday after the frst Full
Moon of the New Year, that is, after the Vernal Equinox; according to the true
intent and meaning of the Nicene Council, or as it was in the Primitive Times;
and be but a Week moveable, or a Month less-moveable than now, either after the
Old or New Style: Which might perhaps have prevented the Difference, or served
as an Expedient for reconciling the West and East Churches.

The three Cycles of Meton, Calippus, and Hipparchus, were all of them too
large for the Sun, and primarily intended for the Moon, or for a Luni-Solar
Year; however that of Hipparchus was nearest to both, and very near the Moon's
Period.

Perhaps at first view, my 38 Years Period may be looked upon but as a double-
Metonic, or semi- Calippic one, etc. but upon farther consideration, it will be
found otherwise; for Meton and Calippus, their Periods, as also that of
Hipparchus, were all of them too big, not only for the Circuit of the Sun, as I
said before, but for that of the Moon also; whereas mine, on the other hand,
was too little for either, and needed one additional Day in near about every
100 Years: Meton's 19 Years Cycle, or Enneadecaeteris, had 6940 Days, the
Double whereof is 13880 Calippus his Period, or 76 Years, had 27759 Days, the
half whereof is 13879 Hipparchus his Period of 304 Years, had 111035 Days, the
Eighth part whereof is 13879 Whereas my Period has but Days 13879:38 --

So that it may easily appear, to any one who shall please to examine it,
wherein my Cycle or Period differs from all theirs: But the Frame of my
Contrivance of this so nice matter, for the easy Explication thereof, even to
the grossest Capacities, as to Practice and Use, is wholly different from
theirs, and every ones else I ever yet heard of.

I am not so vain, as to persuade my self, that any such Account of Time will
be used, and therefore do not set down the Uses of this; which otherwise I
could do, and show how the Practice thereof need not make any disturbance in
Civil Affairs or Contracts.

For it is not unlike but that, after 1700 Years Prescription, prudent Men may
judge it better to let the Year and World go on without alteration; as
Physicians say, Some Chronical Diseases in old Folks may with more safety be
continued, than their Cure endeavored; and that one had better follow old
beaten Highways, tho crooked and foul, than seek out, or make new ones: And
perhaps I should have thought so too; but Pope Gregory XIII having already
changed the old Julian Account, and his new Model having taken place, and
obtained in the major part of all the West of Europe, or Christendom; We, who
are Reformed in other things, seem now to be left almost alone, or with some
few other Places, in this. And several Persons having from time to time offered
their Proposals toward the amendment of the erroneous Julian Year, I thought I
might without offense offer mine also; which are not so novel, but that the
like thereof, tho framed with less artifice, have endured the Test in many well
policed Nations for several Ages.

It may afford one Argument, by the by, against the old Way, or Year, That like
a Finger-Watch, it needs so frequent setting, and must have a New Almanac got
every year; whereas one Direction in this Luni-Solar Way may serve for all
Ages; and the Garter may be so well buckled once for all, that it may last for
ever, as the Moon, etc.

I chose rather to take the Revolution of the Moon, than that of the Sun, for
my chief and primary Measure of Time; because, First, the Lunar Phases, and
consequently Months, are more easily discerned, than the Sun's annual Period,
even by the most ignorant vulgar Eyes, who need but look up almost any night,
to see their Almonac: Next, the Observations upon the Moon, made by more
knowing Men, have been more in Number, more exact and of far greater Antiquity;
Astronomers having also had the help of Eclipses of very distant Ages, for
their Guide in finding out very near the true measure of the Moon's mean
Motion: Lastly, keeping an Account by the Moon, we may reckon by the Sun also,
that is to say, by Months and Years too; whereas on the contrary, reckoning by
a Solar Year, the Months are but empty Names, and in measuring of Times and
Seasons the Moon is rendered of no use; tho some inanimate Bodies (so
considerable, that they take up and possess perhaps half this our Clobe) as the
Sea, do exactly observe the Moon's Course; and there are living Creatures also,
thought perhaps no less considerable at Land, that do the like; which I need
not mention, nor take any farther notice of the near Affinity, if not
Consanguinity with the Garter.

To conclude; the Sum of what I have done, is, after the finding a Par or
Equation, or a very near Approach thereunto, between Days and Months, in whole
Numbers, with a respective balancing the Sun's Annual Motion also, To render
the use thereof very easy and ready for Practice. I could in larger Periods
keep a more regular balancing Account with the Sun, by a small addition, or
very little alteration of one Rule of these Cycles; or by other great Cycles I
could perform all that these do; or by a farther Decomposition of Cycles I
could, I say, approach to a yet greater exactness, nearer and nearer to any
given quantity, in infinitum; But ne quid nimis.

Upon the whole Matter, I judge an Account of Time by the Moon to be much
better than any such Account by the Sun; because (setting aside other
considerations) I have reason to doubt, that, as we are in the dark in
reference to diverse other particulars about the Sun, so likewise the Measure of
the true Solar Year is much taken up on trust, or is not so well known, perhaps
never will be, or at least is not so universally agreed on, to near that degree
of exactness, as that of the Moon, which God appoints for Times and Seasons,
as the faithful Witness in Heaven.

Shenville. April 13, 1^80. ROBERT WOOD.

TO the end that this new Luni-Solar Account or Year may be the better
understood by any one who understands an ordinary Almanac, and more easily
compared with the old Julian Year; and that it may appear how the days of the
Month in one do answer the Days in the other; and that the Changes of the Moon
may be the more readily observed and examined (which will always happen in this
new Luni-Solar Account, within a day of the beginning of the Month) I have here
framed.

A Luni-Solar CALENDAR. OR, A Parallel of Days between That and the Julian
Year; Showing what Day of the Month of the One, will be the same with the
Respective correspondent Day of the Other. Beginning with March 10, 1680-81
EVery Page consists of twelve double Columns: That on the left hand, or First
of the two Columns, containing all the Days of the several Months of the Julian
Year, or old Style, viz. March, April, May, June, etc. And the second Column,
or that toward the right hand, containing the several respective Days of the
Lunar Months which are in the Luni-solar or Garter Year.

In which second Columns are signified by 1 1 1 1 The 1st Cycle or Period
completed in 38 Years. 1 or 1 or 2 or 6 etc. The Year of that Cycle, viz. 1st.
2d. 6th, etc. I II V X The Month of that Year, viz. 1st. 2d. 5th. 10th, etc.

In each of the said double Columns there are two Julian Months (except the
first, which wants 9 Days, and they are made up at last.)

If this Design should ever be imagined to take, and this New Years Gift be
accepted, the following Parallel would prove a Guide to people for the mutual
performance of their Bargains de futuro, that is to know the certain After-day,
as well in one Style as the other; when they are to be observed, and made good,
and so may serve them as a Bridge in passing over from one Account or Year unto
the other, with their Civil Contracts and other Baggage.

A Parallel of Days between the Julian and Luni-solar Years.
1680 Mar.
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
1681
25 26 27 28 29 30 31
Apr,
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
May.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Jun.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
July.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Aug.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Sept.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Oct.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Nov.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Dec.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Janu.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Febr.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
Mar.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
1682
25 26 27 28 29 30 31
Apr.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
May.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
June.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
July.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Aug.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Sept.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Oct.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Nov
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Dec.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Jan.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Feb.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
Mar.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
1683
25 26 27 28 29 30 31
Aprr.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
May
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
June
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
July.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Aug.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Sep.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Oct.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Nov.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Dec.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Jan.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Feb.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
Mar.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 1684 25 26 27
28 29 30 31
Apr.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
May
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
June
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
July.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Aug.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Sept.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Oct.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Nov.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Dec.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Jan.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Feb.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
Mar.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
168^
25 26 27 28 29 30 31
Apr.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
May.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Jun.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
July.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Aug.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Sept.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Oct.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Nov
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Dec.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Janu.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Febr.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
Mar.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
168^
25 26 27 28 29 30 31
Apr.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
May.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
June.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
July.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Aug.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Sept.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Oct.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Nov
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Dec.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Jan.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Feb.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 1^ 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
Mar.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
1687
25 26 27 28 29 30 31
Apri.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
May.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
June
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
July.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Aug.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Sep.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Oct.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Nov.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Dec.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Jan.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Feb.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
Mar.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
1688
25 26 27 28 29 30 31
Apr.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
May
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
June.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
July.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Aug.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Sept.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Oct.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Nov.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Dec.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Jan.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Feb.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
Mar.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
1689
25 26 27 28 29 30 31
Apri.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
May.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
June
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
July.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Aug.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Sep.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Oct.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Nov.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Dec.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Jan.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Feb.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
Mar.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
1690
25 26 27 28 29 30 31
Apr.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
May
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
June.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
July.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Aug.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Sept.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Oct.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Nov.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Dec.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Jan
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Feb.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
Mar.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
1691
25 26 27 28 29 30 31
Apri.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
May.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
June
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
July
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Aug.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Sep.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Oct.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Nov.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Dec.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Jan.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Feb.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
Mar.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
1692
25 26 27 28 29 30 31
Apr.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
May.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
June.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
July.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Aug.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Sept.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Oct.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Nov.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Dec.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Jan.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Feb.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
Mar.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
1693
25 26 27 28 29 30 31
Apr.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
May.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
June.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
July.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Aug.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Sept.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Oct.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Nov.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Dec.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Janu.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Febr.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
Mar.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
1694
25 26 27 28 29 30 31
Apr.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
May.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
June.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
July.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Aug.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Sept.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Oct.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Nov.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Dec.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Jan.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Feb.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
Mar.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
1695
25 26 27 28 29 30 31
Apr.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
May.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Jun.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
July.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Aug.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Sept.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Oct.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Nov.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Dec.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Janu.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Febr.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
Mar.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
1696
25 26 27 28 29 30 31
Apr.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
May.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
June.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
July.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Aug.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Sept.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Oct.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Nov.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Dec.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Jan.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Feb.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
Mar.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
1697
25 26 27 28 29 30 31
Apr.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
May.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Jun.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
July.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Aug.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Sept.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Oct.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Nov.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Dec.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Janu.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Febr.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
Mar.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
School
25 26 27 28 29 30 31
Apr.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
May.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
June.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
July.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Aug.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Sept.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Oct.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Nov
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Dec.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Jan.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Feb.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
Mar.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
1699
25 26 27 28 29 30 31
Apri.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
May.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
June
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
July
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Aug.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Sep.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Oct.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Nov.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
Dec.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Jan.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
Feb.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
Mar.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
1 1 I.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
II.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
III.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
IV.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
V.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
VII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VIII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
IX.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
X.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
XI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
XI^.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
1 2 I.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
II.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
III.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
IV.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
V.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
VII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VIII
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
IX.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
X.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
XI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
XII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
XIII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
1 3 I.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
II
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
III
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
IV.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
V.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
VII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VIII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
IX.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
X.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
XI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
XII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
1 4 I.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
II.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
III.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
IV.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
V.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
VII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VIII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
IX.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
X.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
XI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
XII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
1 5 I.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
II.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
III.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
IV.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
V.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VI
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
VII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VIII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
IX.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
X.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
X.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
XII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 19 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
XIII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
1 6 I.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
II.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
III.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
IV.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
V.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
VII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VIII
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
IX.
1 2 3 4 5 16 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
X.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
XI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
XII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
1 7 I.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
II.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
III
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
IV.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
V.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
VII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VIII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
IX.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
X.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
XI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
XII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
XIII
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
1 8 I.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
II.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
III.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
IV.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
V.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
VII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VIII
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
IX
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
X.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
XI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
XII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
1 9 I.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
II
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
III
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
IV.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
V.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
VII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VIII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
IX.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
X.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
XI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
XII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
1 10 I.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
II.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
III.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
IV.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
V.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
VII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VIII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
IX.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
X.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
XI
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
XII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
XII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
1 11 I.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
II
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
III
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
IV.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 ^6 17 18 19 20 21 22 ^3 24 25 26 27 28 29
V.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
VII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VIII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
IX.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
X.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
XI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
XII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
1 12 I.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
II.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
III.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
IV.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
V.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
VII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VIII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
IX.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
X.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
XI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
XII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
1 13 I.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
II.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
III.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
IV.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
V.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
VII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VIII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
IX.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
X.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
XI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
XII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
XIII
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
1 14 I.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
II.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
III.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
IV.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
V.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
VII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VIII
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
IX.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
X.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
XI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
XII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
1 15 I.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
II.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
III.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
IV.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
V.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
VII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VIII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
IX.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
X.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 19 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
XI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
XII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
XIII
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
1 16 I.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
II.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
III.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
IV.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
V.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
VII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VIII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
IX.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
X.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
XI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
XII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
1 17 I.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
II.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
III.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
IV.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
V.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
VII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VIII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
IX.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
X.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
XI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
XII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
1 18 I.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
II.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
III.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
IV.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
V.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
VII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VIII
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
IX.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
X.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
XI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
XII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
XIII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
1 19 I.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
II
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
III
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
IV.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
V.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
VII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
VIII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
IX.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
X.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
XI.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
XII.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
1 20 I.
etc.


THe foregoing Calendar, or Parallel of Days, is for 19 Years; at the end
whereof the two Accounts, viz. the Julian and Luni-Solar, do exactly balance
one another, sicut erat in principio, and four or five times in the (...), or
19 years, they walk very friendly together hand in hand, cheek by jowl, Day by
Day, sometimes a whole Month, sometimes two (almost.)

The next nineteen Years repeat the same again, only with the difference of one
Day more or less in some years; by reason of the Leap Years every fourth; and
that the XIIIth. Month, in the Luni-Solar or Garter-Year, has sometimes 30
Days, some times 31.

AN incomparable person sent me two or three Objections upon the foregoing
Contrivance: To which I returned Answers, viz.

Object. 1. I received yours with the Almonac, etc. and communicated it to A,
B, C, etc. some of them would have examined your Design by its agreement with
the Gregorian or Julian Accounts; but others thought that unreasonable to make
them Judges, who stood accused of Error.

Answ. I must return those of your company my best Thanks, who thought it
unreasonable to have me tried by the Julian Account, or examined at Caesar's
Tribunal: From which I must have Appealed: And indeed I see no reason why we
should be concerned to follow any longer an Usurper, especially in his Errors:
but he having commanded to many Legions, invaded our Isle, etc. I foresee the
force and prejudice of education may engage some to take his part, right, or
wrong; and therefore forbear -- As for the Gregorian Way, it is but the Julian
Account, rather new modeled, or mended, than (as they call it) Reformed: For
the Julian Reckoning was far from ever being right. And tho the Gregorian
Account be much more exact than the other, yet is it not altogether without
it is Errors excepted. So that upon the whole I expect in point of Justice,
rather to be tried before an Inquest, or Court of Astronomers, than judged by
the Pope or Emperor.

Object. 2. I do not see how the Day whereon the Moon changes, being designed
to be first of the Month, can consist with putting 31 days into any Month,
there being above 11 hours short of 30. Days in any Month between Change and
Change.

Ans. If the true Month of Conjunction, Between Change and Change, consist of
Days 29^^ and 44 min. 3 sec. 10 thirds, etc. those overplus min. sec. etc. of
several Months, (being near three quarters of an hour every Month, and about 14
days in 38 Years) put together do (at certain Periods) at length amount to one
whole Day, which I make the 31st. of some of the Intercalar Months, and so
still balance the Account: or, if you please, those Fragments of time are
melted together into the Mass or Mold of one whole Day; and thus tho no one
month in any Year of my Almonac, (I might add also, tho no one Year in the
Period, nor Day in the Year or Month) is exactly a just and true one, yet all
put together, the whole Account is true (morally;) and tho sometimes my Months
end before the Change, sometimes after; yet things are so ordered, that every
one of them begins and ends within a day of the Change. Thus the Vibrations of
a Pendulum are sometimes on one side the Perpendicular, and sometimes on the
other: And thus (Philosophically speaking) the Vibrations or Vicissitudes of
Day and Night, Heat and Cold, Summer and Winter, make the Sap rise, and Plants
and Trees to grow. In short, as the Days of my Months vibrate or play about the
Moons true course; so do my Garter-Months, or Luni-solar Year dance about the
Sun or Solar Year, sometimes before it, sometimes after; and sometimes also, as
in dancing, they close and kiss; and so I civilly take my leave of that
Objection.

Object 3. I do not find your Almonac fitted to the Festivals of the Church,
nor to the Iuridicial Days of the Law, etc. not knowing whether you inend any
H^ly-Days to be within the Intercalar Month.

Answ. The Movable Feasts of the Church, as Easter, and those other that attend
it, I have made better provision for than ever they yet had; and so Easter Term
and Trinity will follow of course. The Fixed Festivals may keep the same Days
in my Twelve Months as they had in the other, or as in the Apostles times, or
as at the time of the Council of Nice: Or in short, may be celebrated on such
other Days as those to whom it belongs to order such Affairs, shall judge best.
And I believe the Saints will not count it ny disparagement, to be so placed
and seated, as retaining still their former Order, Dignities, Pre-eminences,
etc. to have the Additional Honor of being installed, as it were, Knights of
the Garter. The intercalar thirteenth Month is without any anniversary
Festival, and so more fit for Fasting; for it will always fall in Lent; and tho
without any Holy Days, it will not be the less fit for the Lawyers to go their
Circuits in. The other two Terms might be easily accommodated either as now
they are, or as Authority should think fit, if any such Design were to take
place in good earnest.

FINIS.

