Wonderful News from WALES: OR, A TRUE NARRATIVE OF AN Old WOMAN Living near
LANSELIN in DENBYSHIRE; Whose Memory serves her Truly and Perfectly to relate
what she has seen and done One Hundred and Thirty Years ago. Having now the
full number of her Teeth; the most of them were lost when she was Three score
Years and Ten. She is also remembered by some of Ninety Years Old, to be Taller
than she is by 17 or 18 Inches; With several other Circumstances of her Life,
which shows Her to be the WONDER of our AGE.

Licensed August 9. 1677.

LONDON, Printed for C. L. Anno Dom. 1677.

Strange News from WALES, Or, a true Narrative of an Old Woman living near to
Lancelin in Denby-shire, etc.
NOthing appears so contradictory and idle, but some Philosopher or other has
so earnestly espoused, that his life might have been easily taken, as a
Mortgage for the security of the truth; Were the forfeiture thought
considerable: And as of this sort there are many extravagant Presidents that
would make Nature very ridiculous; so there are to be found amongst the graver
sort of assertors all the world over, whimsies, more foolish and barbarous then
with the Savages, who enjoyed scarce, or not at all, the light of Nature:
Amongst other Busslings and trials of Pens, It has been a great dispute about
the age of Adam, Methuselah, etc. Some would have monthly years, deducing
Arguments from Eve; Others from the Moon: Some more Persian-like, will give the
Sun the Glory of completing the Year; holding also, Nature to be in a
continual decay through her own weakness, or our wantonness; And though they'
did live so many Years heretofore, we have so changed our Bodies, that no one
can be expected to live the quarter, nay scarce the Tithe of our Forefathers
time. But 'twill be sound Nature cannot decay, nor has her Luxury so
circumscribed our age, but that we do find Persons, whose extent of Years serve
to confute such indigested Fancies.

Not far from the seat of Old PARR, at this time lives, (near Lanselyn in
Denby-shire,) a Woman, named Jane Morgan, whose Memory yet serves her to give
an exact account of several things she has seen and known One Hundred and
Thirty Years ago: She walks uprightly, without the use of the least Stick; Her
Teeth are almost all now perfect in her head, although about Threescore Years
ago she had lost most of them; She can see as well without Spectacles, if not
better then with them; Her Hearing is quick and apprehensive, and her Organs of
Smelling are so corroborated by Age, that no Stench can invade them to the
least prejudice. She was the first that learnt that Famous and Memorable Tune
called Sidanen, in all those parts. When Queen Elizabeth was Crowned, she led
all the Dances, and continued the Head of all that Country sports, until the
death of King JAMES; and was so sensible of the Glory she had achieved by such
continual Custom, that she would not part with it, until she had bred her
Daughter up to have it conferred on her; which she did in a public Assembly
when the Coronation of King CHARLES the First was solemnized: But before her
Daughter, as her Deputy had practiced, and in her absence taught the Country
Measures for the space of One and Twenty Years, having several Tunes Dedicated
to her; Old Simon the King, was called her Delight, Jo Bent, her Fancy; Bob-in
Joy her Conceit; Sleeping and waking she sung the Sidanen; wherefore the
Neighbors called her by that Name.

Her Mother Jane Lloyd was married at Twenty years of age to one Evan Morgan an
able Farmers Son, who was the activ'st and strong'st in his Country at
Wrestling: But at a certain Trial of Skill, when he had foiled all the
Neighbors, and Strangers too; She put on Man's apparel, entered the round, and
gave him three Falls; Upon which she bore away the little Silver Bell that was
the Conquerours due; But upon enquiry, who this Valiant stranger was, the young
man fell so deeply in love with her, that maugre all his Friends he married
her, and lived with her Forty five years, before her Womb was mature for
Conception; About the sixty sixth year of her age she brought forth her first
Born, a Daughter, who did not conceive till the Fifty Fifth year of her age.

Many Masculine, and Heroic acts did this Virago Mother do, and though
sometimes the Justices were severe, yet their Warrants were always void; and
like Curses of Malefactors, returned upon themselves, for what ever ground she
trod on, was to Catch-polls and Petty Constables, as fatal, as Irish Earth to
Venomous Creatures.

But as the Longest Day will have a Night, spightfull Age wrought a tendency
toward a decay, upon her Vigorous Nerves, yet in all this while Time could not
make her subject to the least Disease, tho it has submitted Her to the most
unheard of shifts for Food as ever were or can be, and by the Calculation of
her Stomach, She may be thought now to be in the Meridian of her Age: Hundreds
of her Neighbors can justify, that what Disease soever, Cattle, Horses,
Swine, Sheep, or the like, die, her stomach (so far is Fantastic Prejudice
unable to make the least Impress on her) has a Menstruum to digest gratefully
such faetid Flesh, that others would not only abhor, but it would put such
stress and violence upon them, that irresistible Death would infallibly follow.

It Is a certain Truth, that Carron buried two or three Days in the Wintertime,
she will take up, which without any other preparation, she will slice, and
fling as Collops upon the Coals, which she will eat as savorly, as he that
thinks he eats the best in Town, when he has the rarest Cutlets dressed for him:
And if her Prize cannot at once be eaten, she will gently and carelessly salt the
Remainder, and expose it to the greatest Fury of her smoking Cell, and
prudently reserves it as a future happiness.

If against a good Time her Neighbors bounty will bestow any Corn upon her,
she will yet upon her head make shift to carry Two Bushels to the Mill; Which
tho it be very remarkable in one of her Age, it is very inconsiderate to what
she has done formerly.

When she was near an Hundred Years old, her Occasions inviting her about that
time to Oswaldstrey Market, which is Three Miles; but because of its ruggedness
and length, she had better have gone from London to Barnet: After she had there
filled her Apron with cumbersom necessaries to that bulk, that the Burden
seemed at some distance to walk before her; she was told by a stander by, that
it was impossible for her to carry such a troublesome burden home: This man's
Horse was then laden with Two Pieces of course Welsh Cotton; She then
scornfully answered; If you put those Two Pieces which your Horse seems almost
to shrink under, upon my Sholders, I will for a Wager undertake to carry them
as far as my House, before You and your Horse can come thither: The Man being
her Neighbor, fearful to lose, and unwilling to displease her; replied, he was
more willing to ease then trouble her. But One of the incredulous Corporation,
ignorant of her prodigious strength, waged with her, and suspecting her
Neighbor would be partial; He, with 3 or 4 of his most curious Neighbors, got
Horses, and followed her presently; and at the end of Two Miles and a half they
overtook the Man, belabouring his weary Horse: They asked him for the Woman? he
answered them, cursing, saying he had had 2 or 3 scurvy falls; and that he had
no sight of her in a quarter of a Mile: They going forward, found her returned,
sitting in her Chimney corner smoking Tobacco in a comfortable short Pipe; at
which they were astonished.

A Thousand more considerable Stories, must here (for brevity sake) be omitted:
It will therefore be convenient to add a Relation her Neighbors give, in
respect of her Age; some of Fourscore and Ten, remember they heard their
Fathers say, she was a very proper tall Woman.

In a House out of which she had seen buried Eleven Heirs, Her proportion as to
her height, was taken above 100 years ago; And the last year coming to the same
place, she was found to want of that measure betwixt seventeen and eighteen
Inches; and now she is Four Foot and four Inches high, not at all stooping, at
which the bystanders much admired; which she perceiving, told them, that her
Mother was completely Two Yards high; And that before she dyed, she shrunk to
Three Foot and Six Inches: So that she concluded by the graduation of their
decays, before she had shrunk to her utmost, she must yet live above Threescore
years; and who knows but she may? For she is as merry as a Girl of Fifteen, and
will sing from Morning till Night; Her Memory is so lively, that she will tell
Stories of Queen Elizabeth and King James, as fresh, and more pleasantly then
the sufferers in the late Wars can.

I was the more willing to publish this, because I hoped some Virtuoso's would
be so kind, as curiously to satisfy themselves of the Truth, and then the
world after; with Reasons how this comes to pass; and why others live not to
the same Age?

What sort of Menstruum her Stomach has?

How are her Organs ordered, since no Stench offends her?

And since it is a Contradiction to say she grows less, how comes the whole
Contexture of her Body with such consent of Parts to be diminished?

And since the Bones must consequently be contracted, how come we to find Bones
long buried, of the same length as when first Interred

If any Person question the Truth of this Narrative, or desire to satisfy
their Curiosity, let them repair to West-Smithfield, where she is daily
expected, to convince the World of the Truth thereof.

FINIS.

