THE Christian Champion; Being the Substance of A Second DISCOURSE To the
Besieged Soldiers in LONDONDERRY: First, To exhort them to put away every evil
thing, that God may be merciful to them in this time of Trouble.

Secondly, That they should be courageous in this Christian Undertaking, not
fearing the Fury, or the Force of Rome.

By that Learned and most Loyal Col. Walker. portrait

Printed for P. Br^^^sby. J. Deacon. J. Blare. J. Back. 1689.

Licensed according to Order.

July the 30th. 1689.
THE Christian Champion, etc.
DEUTERONOMY XXIII. Chap. IX. Ver. When the Host goes forth against thine
Enemies then keep thee from every wickesd thing: Ver. 14. For the Lord thy God
walks in the midst of the Camp to deliver thee, and to give up thine Enemies
before thee; therefore shall thy Camp be holy, that he see no unclean thing in
thee, and turn away from thee.
THIS is an Exhortation given from the Word of God, and if we would be happy we
must be Holy; we trust not only to an Arm of Flesh, but to the gracious dealing
of a powerful God, whose All-seeing Eye is over all our Actions; and put case
we sin against him, How can we then expect a Blessing from him, who is of purer
Eyes than to behold Iniquity with Approbation? therefore let no Evil attend our
Actions, we are here Besieged with Enemies who studies the Overthrow of the
People of God, and would likewise Triumph over our Destruction, but keep close
to your Duty in the Service of the Living God, then will he prove your
Protector, Psalm 84. 11. For the Lord God is a Sun and a Shield, the Lord will
give Grace and Glory, no good thing will he withhold from them that walk
uprightly. It is our Duty, at all times to live Cireumspect in this present
Life, but especially at this time when we are exercised under this sharp Trial
of Affliction, being closely besieged by a powerful Enemy, and when we shall
make our Sally forth, What Man is certain he shall return again? therefore let
our Actions be seasoned with Grace, and Holiness, that whether we live or dye
we may be acceptable in the sight of God; therefore when we go forth let us
keep clear from every evil thing: This War which we are engaged in, is not
designed by us for the destroying of Cities, or the Destruction of Countries,
but for the maintaining of the Gospel Truth against the common Enemy of
Christianity, those that count they merit Heaven by Massacring and Murdering
the People of God, and glory in the shedding of innocent Blood; therefore as
God shall bless us in this Undertaking let us keep our selves free from Evil;
it is for the Glory of Heaven we venture our Lives, and who falls in the Field
his Reward will be greater than his Loss, it being in the just Defense of True
Religion and Piety; let not our Foes affright us, nor any Fears attend us, for
God will give the Victory to them that serve him, and make their Enemies fly
before them, as Chaff before the Wind. How many signal Mercies have we been
partakers off in our successful Sallies against our Enemies? And shall we now
despair of God's Mercies (no, no,) he is able to Deliver us at the last moment,
when we seem to stand tottering on the brink of utter Ruin; nothing is
impossible with our great Creator; nothing can separate us from the Love of God
but our Sins; therefore let us make War against our corrupt Nature; let us
destroy those Sins which makes us Enemies to God; for, What is our Sighs, our
Tears, and Prayers, if we still continue to hug our Darling Sins? for, as the
Psalmist says, If I regard Iniquity in my heart the Lord will not hear me;
therefore let us be sincere in what we profess, and not to go from Praying to
our Pollutions, or from hearing the Word of God to the breach of his
Commandments; he in his Holy Word has afforded us many gracious Promises to
support our Spirits in the greatest Troubles and Trials; therefore be of good
comfort, and lay hold on the Promises of God by Faith. Joshua 23. 5. And the
Lord your God, he shall expel them from before you, and drive them from out of
your sight, and ye shall possess their Land, as the Lord your God has promised
unto you; therefore be exhorted like Christian Champions to go forth with
Courage, Deuteronomy 31. 6. Be strong and of a good Courage; fear not; nor be
afraid of them; for the Lord thy God, he it is that does go with thee he will
not fail thee nor forsake thee. These most gracious Promises may be sufficient
for us to rely upon they are the Sayings of a God that is not only willing but
able; no Forces, nor Power is able to disappoint him in his purpose; it is not
the great and mighty but the humble and meek that he has a regard to;
therefore put away every evil thing and it will go well with us, Isaiah 1. 19.
If ye be willing and obedient you shall eat the good of the Land, yet observe
what is threatened to Persons on the contrary, ver. 20. But if ye refuse and
rebel ye shall be devoured with the Sword, for the Mouth of the Lord has
spoken it. Here you may see what is required by God, and how gracious he will
be upon the performance of your Duty; therefore, as in the Text, When the Host
goes forth against thine Enemy then keep thee from every wicked thing: Our War
is holy, and therefore we must be holy; our Sword must not be accompanied with
Sins, which go forth in the fear of God, and the just Defense of the pure
Religion; therefore while we pursue the Enemies of Righteousness our Actions
will be Crowned with Victory, as the Prophet Isaiah has it in 41 Chap. and the
latter part of the 12. Ver. They that War against thee shall be as nothing, and
as a thing of naught: The Scriptures are full of these comfortable Sayings, so
that though our Enemy may come against us with a strong and powerful armed
Host, and threaten this City with ruin and destruction, yet if God be for us
who can be against us. Romans Chap. 8. and the latter part of the 31. Ver. for
when Pharaoh and his Host pursued after the Children of Is(...)ael, the Lord
stretched forth his hand and showed his Power in overthrowing him and his
Chariots in the Red Sea, when at the same time his power preserved his chosen
People: What shall we say then? Can we not put our Trust in him who is able to
deliver his Servants at the greatest Time of Danger? Here we read of wonderful
things which he has performed for your Fathers of Old, and he is the same God
now as then; let us be but faithful Servants, and then we may assure our
selves he will be a Shield of Defense, and a present Help in the Time of
Trouble: When David was pursued by Saul, and hunted after like a Partridge upon
the Mountains, yet God being with him his Life was preserved, and his cruel
Adversary could not wrong him, his Heart was upright, his Conscience was clear,
therefore he had comfort in his Afflictions. Thus it may be with every Soul
here, who labors to cleanse his Heart from Sin, for nothing can burden our
Consciences more, in a time of Distress, than a fearful Remembrance of our
Iniquities; therefore keep your selves free from every evil thing; it ought to
be the care of every one present to cease from Evil, and learn to do well; a
good Christian makes a good Soldier, that will not fear to venture his Life in
a good Cause, and if God be pleased to require it, patiently submit, and then
will he give you a Crown of Glory for your Reward, 2. Tim. 2. 3. Now therefore
endure hardness as a good Soldier of Jesus Cbrist. put away every Evil thing,
God would have the Camp as pure as any College, or Christian-Society; the
Reasons are plain, He that fights for the Glory of God, must be careful that
at the same time he does not sin against that Divine Majesty for whose
Righteousness he seems to contend, lest his Wrath wax hot against us, and we
are delivered up to the Fury of our Enemies, as a just Reward of our Impiety;
put away every evil thing, Ephesians 5. at the latter part of the 6 ver. For
because of these thing comes the Wrath of God upon the Children of
Disobedience. Again, the Soldier ought to be prepared for another World before
he goes out to face an Enemy; for why, when we enter the Battle, Who is he that
is certain to return again? you have every one a Soul to be saved, and how
dismal a state would it be to be cut off in the midst of your Iniquities,
without having the opportunity of saying, Lord have Mercy upon me? Thus do you
see how necessary it is to put away every evil thing, when you see how soon the
slender Thread of Life may be broke, and you be hurried into everlasting
Misery, therefore I hope you will all be exhorted, this day, to quit your
selves as Christian Champions both in the sight of God and Man; this War of
ours is a necessary War, and not like those restless Spirits who will not be at
ease, but daily endeavors to entrench upon the privileges of his neighboring
Countries, as Ahab who covered Naboth's Vineyard, and could not be at Peace in
his mind till he had enjoyed it, because it lay near him, as you may find in 1.
Kings 21. we desire nothing more than Peace, and the True Religion, Laws, and
Liberties which we at present are denied by that French and Romish Enemy, the
common Disturber of* Europe, and Persecuter of the People of God, but good
Lord, ^n thy due time. Look on him that is proud and bring him low, and tread
down the wicked in their place. Job. 40. 12. so shall these Kingdoms flourish
once again, and the Gospel Truth shine in it is full power; but let us all walk
worthy of that Heavenly Blessing, that Peace may be our Portion after the
Victory over our Enemies which we do not doubt but the Lord will give us, if
our Sins do not provoke him to anger; therefore let our Camp be Holy, that he
see no unclean thing that may cause him to turn away from us again; be strong
and courageous in the Lord, fear not the force of your Foes, for their Bounds
are limited, and they can go no farther than God will give them leave, though
they may resolve for Ruin and Destruction, yet they shall be disappointed in
their Designs, for God will still have a regard to his People, whose Hearts are
upright before him, and will preserve them under the shadow of his Wings from
the Violence and Cruelty of wicked and perverse Men, he will be in the midst of
our Camp, where his strength and power will appear, if we by Faith and Patience
can but wait a while to behold the Salvation of the Lord, he will be with us;
and defend us from Danger, as he did his faithful Servant Daniel in the Lyon's
Den; his Power is great, and his Love is nothing less; he will not be wanting
to those who serve him with an upright Heart; he will be their Friend to
comfort them, and will be a present Help in time of trouble; therefore be of
good courage, and lay hold on those gracious Promises of our good God; through
his Blessing and Assistance we hope in due time we shall be able to weather the
storm of our present Miseries, and live to enjoy a sweet and pleasant Calm, and
the bright Sunshine of Prosperity in this Land and Nation whereunto we do
belong Let none be found to murmur or repine at the Divine Providence of God,
for this his sharp Rod of Correction upon us; we have sinned, therefore we may
well say, it is good for us that we have been afflicted; for it is a proper
means to take us home: we read in Luke 15. that the Prodigal never returned to
his Father's House until he was afflicted with Want, and then coming to
himself, he said, How many hired Servants of my Father's has Bread enough, and
to spare, and I perish with hunger; I will arise, and go to my Father, and say
unto him, Father I have sinned against Heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more
worthy to be called thy Son, make me as one of thy hired Servants. This his
Sufferings brought him to a true sense of his Sins, so that he humbled himself
before his Father, and was graciously received. Thus we see how the Lord deals
with his Servants when he finds them stubborn and disobedient, he will not
destroy them but chastise them and correct them, even as a Father does his Son
in whom he delights. Prove. 3. 12. therefore let us draw near to him whose
Love and Kindness never fails, he will be in the midst of our Camp, and Fight
for us; then fear not but we shall have the Victory over all our Enemies; by
one word of his Mouth he is able to do more than many armed Hosts, for they are
but Men, whose Lives are in his Hand, he can deal with them as it pleases him
best: Shall they fight against his Church and People, his Truth and Gospel, and
set up an Idol-Worship, contrary to his Holy Word? I say, shall they do all
this, and yet go unpunished? No, the Lord will be avenged of them, and suffer
them to fall before his chosen People; therefore let us not be in the least
dismayed, it is good for us that we have the Lord on our side, who has guarded,
governed, and defended this City for these many Months past, and has given us
many Instances of his Love and Kindnesses, in bearing up our drooping Spirits
to a miracle, during the time of this close Siege; likewise affording us a
happy Success against our Enemies, he is gracious, and his Mercies endure for
ever; he will not suffer his People to become a Prey to the Enemy, but will
walk in the midst of the Camp for their Defense; thy right hand, O Lord, is
become glorious in thy Power, thy right hand, O Lord has dashed in pieces the
Enemy, and in the greatness of thine Excellency thou has overthrown them that
arose up against thee, thou sentest forth thy Wrath which consumed them as
stubble, Exodus 5. 6. 7. Hear may we learn how the Lord did appear in his power
for his People in former Ages, and he will not be wanting to us now, if our
Sins does not separate us from his Divine Love; he has loved us, and it is
likewise our Duty to Worship him; the Life of a good Christian is seasoned with
Heavenly Meditations, all the days of his Life he makes a Preparation for the
hour of his Death; let every Soul present examine his heart, and labor to
bring his Soul into such a frame and temper as may be acceptable in the sight
of the Lord, and by so doing he will become our Friend, and will fight for us,
so that our Enemies shall soon be scattered; this is the only way and method
every good Christian Soldier ^ght to take; for let me tell you, that Soldier
that fights for Religion ought indeed to be a good Christian, and then live or
dye he is certainly happy. Holy David was a Warrior, and yet a Man after God's
own heart; in a righteous Cause the Sword may be drawn, when it is to oppose
the Enemies to Religion and Piety, such that can commit every barbarous Outrage
upon poor innocent People, without any remorse of Conscience, but on the
contrary count their horrid Villainies just and meritorious; but, He that
sits in the Heavens shall laugh; the Lord shall have them in derision.
Psalms 2. 4. yet let us keep free from every evil thing, for the Lord is in the
midst of us, and sees all our Actions, and searches into the Secrets of our
hearts, there can be nothing hid from his Eyes; therefore how pure and holy
ought our Lives to be, when we certainly know that we are always in the
Presence of that God which will bring us to Judgment; It is appointed for all
Men once to die, and after Death to Judgment. Again, what hardship we undergo
we must embrace it willingly, suffer cheerfully, and wait the Lord's time for
our Deliverance, which we hope will shortly be accomplished; in ^he m^an while
let us continue in our Duties, standing upon our Christian Guard, constantly
praying and making our Supplications to that Great God who will not suffer us
to fall; though we may be afflicted let us cheerfully undergo our present
Miseries, and then we shall not fail of a Reward; the greater and more grievous
our Crosses are in this Life, the brighter and more weightier shall our Crown
of Glory be; he that suffers most in this World for his Savior's sake, shall
one day sit the nearest to his Throne in the Presence of Saints, Angels, and
the Spirits of Just Men made perfect. To which end God of his infinite Mercy
bring us all. Amen.

A Prayer.
ALmighty and glorious Lord God, who never fails to succor those that put
their Trust in thee, look down with an Eye of Pity and Compassion upon thy poor
Servants, and suffer us not to sink under the weighty Burden of our Sorrows;
lift up the Light of thy Countenance upon us, and speak Peace to us, and say, I
will deliver you for my Name sake: Let our Enemies be scattered before us, who
stands in defiance of thee and thy Truth, arise, Lord, and help us by the power
of thy outstretched Arm, and let them know that thou art a God that can and
will pull down the Pride of those that would not suffer thy People to live in
Peace. Oh that our Hearts may be so upright before thee that every one of us
may be worthy of those Mercies which we so earnestly desire, neither let us
pray only for Mercies to come, but return our humble and hearty Thanks for
those Favors already received, that we have hitherto been preserved, and not
delivered up as a Prey to our Enemies; and for other Mercies, as, Health,
Strength, Succor and Relief, it is of thy Mercy that we are not destroyed.
Lord give us thankful Hearts that we may make a suitable Return for all thy
gracious Dealing toward us, that one Blessing may make way for another. Lord
hear us, and answer us, and grant what we ask, and whatever else is needful
for us, through the Merits of thy dearly beloved Son, and our alone Savior
Jesus Christ, Amen.

FINIS.

