Church Government PART V. A RELATION OF THE English Reformation, AND The
lawfulness thereof examined by the THESES delivered in the Four former Parts.

Printed at OXFORD, 1687.

The CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
EIGHT Theses pre-posed whereby to try the lawfulness of this Reformation.. 1.
CHAP. II.
Three Heads of this Discourse. I. 1. Head. How the English Clergy were first
induced to acknowledge a new Regal Supremacy in Spirituals.. 17. And how far
only at the first they seem to have allowed it.. 23.
CHAP. III.
II. 2. Head. Concerning what Supremacy was afterward by degrees conferred on,
or also claimed by, the Prince.. 26. n. 2. 1. In the times of Henry the Eighth.
CHAP. IV.
2. In the times of Edward the Sixth.. 38.
CHAP. V.
The former Supremacy disclaimed by Queen Mary and by the Bishops in her days,
and the Pope's Supremacy reacknowledged.. 48. And the final judgment of
Ecclesiastical matters restored to the Church. And the Church-doctrine under
King Edward condemned.. 51. That Queen Mary's Clergy was a lawful Clergy. That
the Bishops in King Edward's days were not lawfully ejected.. 54. Neither as to
the Authority ejecting them. Nor as to the Cause,
That the Bishops, deprived in Queen Mary's days, were lawfully ejected. Both,
as to the Cause. And, as to the Judge.. 64.
Where Concerning the burning of those, who, in Queen Mary's days, were by the
Church condemned of Heresy.. 65. And therefore others lawfully introduced in
their places.
CHAP. VI.
3. In the times of Queen Elizabeth. That as ample a Supremacy was claimed, and
by Parliament conferred on her, as on King Henry, or Edward.. 70. Where
Concerning certain qualifications of her Supremacy urged by the Reformed.. 72.
And the Replies to them. But such Supremacy not acknowledged or consented to by
the Clergy.. 77.
CHAP. VII.
III. 3. Head. How, according to such Supremacy assumed, these three Princes
acted in Ecclesiastical Affairs.. 78. 1. The Actings of Henry the Eighth in
Ecclesiastical Affairs. In the abrogating of former Ecclesiastical Laws, and
compiling a new body of them. In putting forth a model of the Doctrine of the
Christian Faith, and the Six Articles.. 81. Where Concerning the complaints
made by Protestants of his abuse of the Supremacy. In the consecrating and
confirming of Bishops and Metropolitans. 86. In the putting down of
Monasteries, etc. 87. The pretenses thereof.. 89. Reflections upon these
pretenses.. 93.
In the dispensing with the former Church Canons concerning Marriages, Fasts,
Holy days, etc.. 99. In the publishing and afterward prohibiting of the
Scriptures in a vulgar tongue.. 101.
CHAP. VIII.
2. The Actings of King Edward in Ecclesiastical Affairs.. 104. 1. Set down
first more generally. In putting forth certain Injunctions and Doctrinal
Homilies; sending Commissions through the Realm, and ejecting the refractory
Clergy etc. In the prohibition of Preaching till he had settled Religion. The
Defense made by the Protestant Divines concerning King Edward's proceedings in
matters of Religion The Reply thereto.. 111. Where Concerning the Clergy's
concurrence and consent to the Kings Reformations.. 119.
CHAP. IX.
2. More particularly. In sending certain Doctrinal Articles to be subscribed
by the Bishop of Winchester. In repealing the Six Articles passed by Synod in
Henry the Eighth's time.. 137. In seizing on Religious Houses and some Bishops
Lands, and denying the lawfulness of Monastic Vows. In defacing Images. In
enjoining Administration of the Communion in both kinds.. 142. In suppressing
the former Church-Liturgies, Ordinals, and other Rituals.. 143. In setting up
new Forms Of celebrating the Communion.. 144. Of Ordination.. 145. Of
Common Prayer.. 146.
Out of which was ejected the Sacrifice of the Mass.. 147. Where 1. Concerning
the alterations of the first Common Prayer Book of King Edward's in relation to
the Sacrifice of the Eucharist. 148. 2. Concerning the further alterations in
the second Common Prayer Book in relation to the same Sacrifice.. 149. 3.
Concerning the reduction of some things touching this matter, in the new
Common Prayer Book prepared for Scotland, to the first Form of King Edward..
150. Much complained of in Laudensium Autocatacrisis.. 151. And the celebration
of the Eucharist prohibited, when none other to communicate with the Priest..
152. And Invocation of Saints expunged out of the Litanies.. 154. And the
necessity of Sacerdotal Confession relaxed.. 155.
CHAP. X.
In setting forth a second Form of Common Prayer, than which the first was in
many things much more moderate.. 157. In which second Book are rectified and
removed many things which gave offense in the former.. 158. Among the rest,
Prayer for the Dead: and several expressions that seemed to infer the Real or
Corporal Presence in the Eucharist.. 160. Where Concerning the reduction of
some things, touching this Presence, made in the new Liturgy for Scotland, to
King Edward's first Form.. 161. Much complained of in Laudensium
Autocatacrisis. In the abrogation of several Ecclesiastical Laws concerning
Fasts, Celibacy of the Clergy, etc Lastly, In the Edition of 42 Articles of
Religion different from the former doctrines of the Church.. 165. Where Whether
these Articles were passed by any Synod.
CHAP. XI.
3. The Actings of Queen Elizabeth in Ecclesiastical matters.. 170. All the
former decrees of the Clergy in King Henry and King Edward's days being
reversed by the Clergy in Queen Mary's days. Her calling of a Synod; which
declares against the Reformation. A Disputation between the Bishops and the
R^^^^med Divines.. 177. The Regal Supremacy and all that King Edward had done
in the Reformation now re-established by the Qu. and Parliament.. 179. But not
by the Clergy. The ejecting of the Bishops for refusing the Oath of her
Supremacy.. 180. The unlawfulness of this Ejection. Concerning Regal Supremacy
How far it seems to extend.. 181. How far not.. 183.
That Submission to the Regal Supremacy in this later kind was required from
those Bishops.. 184. Concerning Foreign Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Affairs:
how far it is to be acknowledged.. 185. That the renouncing such Supremacy was
required of those Bishops.. 186. That so many of Queen Mary's Bishops could not
be lawfully ejected on any other ground, as would render the Protestant Bishops
a major part.. 187.
CHAP. XII.
Concerning the defects of the Queen's Protestant Bishops remaining since King
Edward's days.. 190. n. 1. Concerning the defects of the new Bishops ordained
in Qu. Elizabeth's days.. 191. Whether their Ordination unlawful according to
the Church Canons.. 193. Where Concerning the Queen, as Supreme in
Ecclesiasticals, her dispensing with the former Ecclesiastical Laws for their
Ordination.. 194.
CHAP. XIII.
Digression concerning The Opinion of several Protestant Divines touching the
lawfulness of the Prince's reforming of Religion in matters of Doctrine against
the major part of the Clergy, when to him seems a necessity that requires
it. 196. Opinion; Of Dr. Field.. 197. Of Mr. Mason.. 199. Of Bishop Andrews..
201. Of Mr. Thorndike.. 203. Of Dr. Heylin.. 205. Of Dr. Fern.. 208.
Conclusion of the Fifth Part. Wherein The Ecclesiastical Supremacy of these
Princes transcendeth that challenged by the Patriarch.. 214. That several
Protestants deny such a Supremacy due to Princes.. 215.
CHAP. XIV.
Conclusion of this whole Discourse of Church Government.. 218. Where
Concerning the benefit that may be hoped for from a future free General Council
for the settling of present Controversies,. 219.
OF Church Government
PART V. Concerning the English REFORMATION.
CHAP. I. Eight Propositions, whereby the lawfulness of this Reformation is to
be tried.
Eight Theses pre-posed, whereby to try the lawfulness of this Reformation.
there remain yet behind some Considerations concerning the lawfulness and
regularity of the Reformations made here in England, in the days of Henry the
Eighth, Edward the Sixth, and Queen Elizabeth, according to the Principles
already established. Of which Reformations that you may make the more exact
judgment; it is fit to remind you, first of these few Propositions, which have
been cleared, or do necessarily follow from what has been cleared in the
former Discourses. And they are these;

The First,. 2. These. 1.
That, amongst other offices and authorities which the Clergy, Christ's
substitutes, (by Clergy I mean the lawful Church Authority) have received from
him, as God's High Priest and Prophet, these are two principal ones. First, The
power to determine Controversies in pure matters of Religion, and to judge and
decide, (where doubts arise) what is Gods Word and divine Truth; what are
errors, in the Faith, or in the practice and performance of Gods Worship and
Service (which errors in Practice always pre-suppose some error in matter of
Faith.) Secondly, The power, to promulgate, teach, preach, and make-known such
matters, when decided by them, to Gods people, who are, for doctrine in
Spiritual things, committed to their charge; and to require their obedience and
submission thereto; with power to execute the Ecclesiastical Censures (which
have reference to things not of this, but of the next, world) upon all such, as
disobey their Authority: else what profits the Church a silent determination of
a Controversy, more, than letting it alone; a concealed, more than a
non-decision thereof? And these things from our Saviors Commission they are
obliged to perform, and consequently to use such Assemblies and Meetings
together, Consults, Summons, Examinations, etc. Without which such things
cannot be performed, though any Civil or Secular power, Heathen, or Christian
(who perhaps may be an Heretic or Schismatic; as some Christian Princes have
been Arians) does oppose them. [So, a Christian Emperor Constantius being an
Arian, and prohibiting in his Empire the promulgation of the Orthodox Doctrine
of the Trinity, yet the Western Catholic Bishops, nevertheless, did promulgate
their definition of the Consubstantiation of the Son with the Father.] And
indeed of these two Secular Powers the Christian, if either, seems to have the
less capacity to hinder or resist them: because he professes himself, with the
rest of the Christians, as to the knowing of Spiritual Truths, a Subject, and a
Scholar of the Church; and because he so earnestly claims a Supreme Power,
and professes an Obligation from God over all persons, in all Spiritual
matters, to bind them, upon Temporal punishments, to the obedience of the
Church's (or Clergy's) Determinations and Decrees. But if he means here, only
where himself first judges such their Decrees orthodox and right, this power
is, (in effect,) claimed, to bind all persons, in all Spiritual matters, only
to his own Decrees; whilst he pretends an Obligation both of himself and of his
Subjects to the Churches. Yet so it is indeed, that all Princes whatever, even
the Heathen, have such an Obligation from God: Nor does any Text of the New
Testament give Christian Princes more Authority over the Church, to restrain
any Liberties thereof, than it gives to the Heathen Princes. For all the
Texts, which are urged thence, ordain obedience of Church men to the Pagan
Princes that then Reigned, no less, than to others. And all Princes are
obliged, with the Sword, which God has given them, not only not to persecute,
but to protect and defend, his true Religion and Service in their Dominions,
whenever it offers it self to them, and claims their Subjection and
Protection. See Psalm. 2.1, 2, 10, 11, 12. Tho the Obligation of some Princes to
this may be more than that of others, as he has had more divine Truth
revealed, and has received more favors from God and his Church. See these
things more largely handled before, in Succession of Clergy, etc. And in Church
Government. 1. Part.. 38.

viz. That the Acts and Laws of the ancient Councills of the Church de Facto
had always the Christian Emperors consent, (tho indeed they always had not: not
the Antiarian Councills in Constantius his time, and yet they were obliging in
the establishing the Nicene Decrees) prove, that they were not of force without
such consent: nor does the Councills entreating the Emperors consent, when
Christian, prove; they did this, to legitimate the making or enjoining of such
laws (for such laws they had formerly both made, and imposed, when Emperors
were their enemies) but to strengthen the observance of them. Indeed the
Prince, who bears the Secular Sword, his giving to the Ministers of Christ
his license, to exercise their office, and their ecclesiastical censures in his
dominions, or in any part or province thereof, as it implies the prohibiting of
his officers or subjects any way to disturb them, is to great purpose, and
therefore much to be desired; But it shows not, that it is in his just power
to deny them such license. (I mean in general; for I meddle not here with the
Princes denying some of them to do these things, whilst he admits others); or
that his officers or subjects, without it, may lawfully disturb them in any
part of their Spiritual Function. Touching these things this is the concession
of Bishop Andrews ( Tort. Tort. p. 366) potestatis mere Sacerdotalis sunt
Liturgiae, Conciones [ i. e, docendi munus, and dubia legis explicandi, as he
says, ibid. p. 380] claves [to which he adds Censurae p. 380] Sacramenta [ and
omnia, quae potestatem ordinis consequuntur p. 380] and (somewhat more plainly)
of Bishop Carleton in his Treatise of Jurisdiction Regal and Episcopal 1. c. p.
9. As far Spiritual Jurisdiction (says he) standing in examination of
controversies of Faith; judging of Heresies; deposing of Heretics;
excommunications of notorious and stubborn offenders; ordination of Priests and
Deacons; institution and collation of Benefices and Spiritual Cures; this we
reserve entire to the Church; which Princes cannot give to, nor take from, the
Church. So he says, p. 42. That external jurisdiction is either definitive or
mulctative. Authority definitive in matters of Faith and Religion belonged to
the Church: Mulctative power is understood, either as it is with coaction, or
as it is referred to Spiritual censures. As it stands in Spiritual censures,
it is the right of the Church, and was practiced by the Church, when without
Christian Magistrate, and since. But coactive Jurisdiction was always ways
understood to belong to the Civil Magistrate, whether Christian, or Heathen.
And by this power (says he, c. 4 p. 39.) without coaction, the Church was
called, Faith was planted, Devils were subdued, the Nations were taken out of
the power of darkness, the World reduced to the obedience of Christ; by this
power, without coactive Jurisdiction, the Church was governed for Three Hundred
years together. [But, if it be inquired what was done, when the Emperors were
Christian, and when their coactive power came in?] The Emperors (says he, p.
178.) never took upon them by their authority to define matters of Faith and
Religion; that they left to the Church. But when the Church had defined such
truths against Heretics, and had deposed such Heretics; then the Emperors,
concurring with the Church by their Imperial Constitutions, did, by their
coactive power, give strength to the Canons of the Church. But then: what if
the Emperors, being Christian, should take upon them, by their authority, to
define matters of Faith, or should use their coactive power against the Canons
of the Church? Take the answer of another reformed Writer, Mr. Thorndike. Right
of Church 4. c. p. 234.
The power of the Church is so absolute (says he) and depending on God alone,
that if a Sovereign professing Christianity should forbid, the Profession of
that Faith, or the exercise of those Ordinances, which God has required to be
served with, or even the exercise of that Ecclesiastical power which shall be
necessary to preserve the Unity of the Church; it must needs be necessary, for
those that are trusted with the power of the Church not only to disobey the
Commands of the Sovereign, but to use that power, which their quality in the
Society of the Church gives them, to provide for the subsistence thereof
without the assistance of Secular powers. A thing manifestly supposed by all
the Bishops of the ancient Church in all those actions; wherein they refused,
to obey their Emperors seduced by Heretics, and to suffer their Churches to be
regulated by them, to the prejudice of Christianity. Which actions whosoever
justifies not, he will lay the Church open to ruin, whenever the Sovereign
power is seduced by Heretics. And such a difference falling out [ i. e,
between Prince and Clergy, in Church matters] as that to particular persons it
cannot be clear, who is in the right; It will be requisite (says he) for
Christians, in a doubtful case, at their utmost perils, to adhere to the Guides
of the Church against their lawful Sovereigns, tho to no other effect, than to
suffer [if the Prince impose it] for the exercise of their Christianity, and
the maintenance of the Society of the Church in Unity [tho contrary to the
Sovereigns commmands.] Thus Mr. Thorndike, in Right of the Church, 4. chap. And
like things he says in his Epilog. of the Church of Engl. See there 1. l. 9.
c. the Contents whereof touching this Subject he has briefly expressed thus:
That that power, which was in Churches under the Apostles, can never be in any
Christian Sovereign. That the Interest of Secular power in determining matters
of Faith presupposes the Society of the Church, and the Act of it. That the
Church is the chief Teacher of Christianity through Christendom, as the Sovereign
is of civil Peace through his Dominions. And there he gives reasons why the
Church is to decide matters of Faith, rather than the State, supposing neither
to be infallible. And see 1. l. 20. c. p. 158. Where he says, That He, who
disturbs the Communion of the Church, remains punishable by the Secular power
(to inflict Temporal Penalties) not absolutely, because it is Christian; but
upon supposition, that this Temporal power maintains the true Church. And
afterward, That the Secular power is not able of it self to do any of those
Acts, which the Church ( i. e, those who are qualified by and for the Church)
are qualified by virtue of their Commission from Christ to do, without
committing the Sin of Sacrilege (in seizing into its own hands the powers,
which by Gods Act are constituted; and therefore consecrated and dedicated to
his own Service) not supposing the free Act of the Church, without fraud and
violence, to the doing of it; [ i. e. joined to the Secular power, doing such
Act.] Now amongst the Acts and Powers belonging to the Church (which he calls a
Corporation) by divine right and appointment he names these l. 1. c. 16. p.
116. The power of making Laws within themselves; of Electing Church Governors
(of which see 3. l. 32. c. p. 398,) and of excommunicating, and (3. l. 32. c. p
385,) the power to determine all matters, the determination whereof is
requisite to maintain the communion of Christians in the Service of God; and
[the power] to oblige Christians to stand to that determination under pain of
forfeiting that Communion; the power of holding Assemblies, of which he
speaks thus 1. l. 8. c. p. 54. I that pretend the Church to be a Corporation
Founded by God upon a Privilege of holding visible Assemblies for the common
Service of God, notwithstanding any Secular force prohibiting the same, must
needs maintain by consequence, that the Church has power in it self to hold
all such Assemblies as shall be requisite to maintain the common Service of God
and the Unity in it, and the order of all Assemblies that exercise it. Thus Mr.
Thorndike. Discourse of Episcopacy and Presbytery p. 19.
And thus Dr Fern of the power of Judicature belonging to the Clergy. It is
confessed (says he) on both sides, that the power of Ordination and of
Judicature, so far as the Keys left by Christ in his Church do extend, is of
divine Institution; and that this power must be exercised or administered in the
Church by some [either Bishops or Presbyters] is also confessed to be of divine
right Therefore, surely, no Secular Prince can justly prohibit within his
dominions the exercise of such Judicature; nor, prohibiting is to be obeyed;
and Christ's substitutes, herein being denied the assistance of the Civil
power, are to proceed without it. To these I will add what Dr. Tailor has
delivered on the same Subject in Episcopacy asserted; and this the rather,
because this Treatise was published by the Command of so understanding a
Prince. He, after that, p. 263. he has laid this ground for the security of
Secular Princes; That, since that Christ has professed, that his Kingdom is
not of this world, that Government, which he has constituted de novo, does no
way make any intrenchment on the Royalty; has these passages. P. 237. he
says, That those things which Christianity (as it prescinds from the interest
of the Republic) has introduced, all them and all the causes emergent from
them the Bishop is Judge of. Such are causes of Faith; Ministration of
Sacraments; and Sacramentals; Subordinations of inferior Clergy to their
superior; Rites, Liturgies, etc. As for the rights of the Secular power, he
lays down this Rule, p. 236 Whatsoever the Secular Tribunal did take
cognizance of before it was Christian, the same it takes notice of after it is
Christened. And these are: All actions civil, all public violations of
Justice, all breach of Municipal laws. These the Church (says he) has nothing
to do with, unless by the favor of Princes these be indulged to it [these by
their favor then indulged, but not so the former.]. Accordingly p. 239. he
says: Both Prince and Bishop have indicted Synods in several ages upon the
exigence of several occasions, and have several powers for the engagement of
clerical obedience and attendance upon such Solemnities. That the Bishops
jurisdiction has a Compulsory, derived from Christ only, viz. Infliction of
Censures by Excommunication, or other minores plagae, which are in order to it.
And that the King is supreme of the Jurisdiction, viz. that part of it, which
is the external compulsory [ i. e, as he says before] to superadd a temporal
Penalty upon contumacy, or some other way abett the censures of the Church. P.
243. he says, That in those cases, in which by the law of Christ Bishops may,
or in which they must, use Excommunication, no power can forbid them. For what
power Christ has given them, no man can take away. And p. 144. That the Church
may inflict her censures upon her delinquent children without asking leave;
that Christ is her (...) for that; he is her warrant and security. And p. 245.
That the Kings supreme regal power in causes of the Church consists in all
things, in which the Priestly office is not precisely, by Gods law, employed
for regiment and cure of Souls: [ I suppose those he named before p. 237.] and
in these also, that all the external Compulsory and Jurisdiction [ as he
expounds it before p. 239] is the Kings. And lastly, p. 241. he says, that
the Catholic Bishops [in time of the Arian Emperors] made humble and fair
remonstrance of the distinction of Powers and Jurisdiction; that as they might
not entrench upon the Royalty, so neither betray the right which Christ
concredited to them to the encroachment of an exterior Jurisdiction and Power,
[i. e, the Royal.] See the like expressions frequent in Bishop Bramhal, Schism
Guarded, p. 61. All which our Kings (says he) assume to themselves, is the
external regiment of the Church by coactive power to be exercised by persons
capable of the respective branches of it [i. e, of that regiment;] and p. 63,
He comments thus on the 37th Article of the Church of England. You see the
Power is political, the Sword is political, all is political. Our Kings leave
the power of the Keys and Jurisdiction purely Spiritual to those to whom Christ
has left it. And p. 92, he says, We see the primitive Fathers did assemble
Synods and make Canons before there were any Christian Emperors; but they had
no coactive power to compel any man against his will [this therefore is the
power which Christian Princes bring in to them, without taking away, I hope,
any of that power which the Church from Christ held under Heathen Princes.]And
p. 119, We acknowledge, that Bishops were always esteemed the proper Judges of
the Canons, both for composing of them, and executing of them; but with this
caution, that to make them laws [he means such Laws, for observance of which
Secular coaction might be used,] the Confirmation of the Prince was required,
and to give the Bishop a coactive power to execute them, the Princes grant or
concession was needful. [ Does not this Bishop mean here, that Bishops may both
compose and execute Canons in the Kings dominions, and use the Ecclesiastical
censures by their own authority; only that they can use no coaction by
pecuniary or corporal punishments in the execution of them, without his? But
see below. 22. The Bishops deprived of the former power in the Reformation: See
more of this. 35. N. 2.] And Answer to Chalc. p. 161. he says, It is coercive
and compulsory and corrobatory Power, it is the application of the matter, it
is the regulating of the exercise of actual Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the
[external] Court of the Church; [Why or under what pretense?] to prevent (says
he) the oppression of their Subjects, and to provide for the tranquillity of the
Common wealth, [not therefore to examine, what in those external Courts of the
Church is passed agreeable or disagreeable to Gods word; for this Princes are
to learn from those Courts] which belongs to Sovereign Princes. Thus he Lastly
see the Kings last Paper in the Isle of Wight, p 3. where it is said. That tho
the Bishops in the times under Pagan Princes had no outward coercive power over
men's persons or estates [no more have they now except from and during the
Princes pleasure:] Yet inasmuch as every Christian man, when he became a member
of the Church, did, ipso facto and by that his own voluntary Act, put himself
under their Government [so Christian men do still, Princes and all] they
exercised a very large power of Jurisdiction in Spiritualibus; in making
Ecclesiastical Canons, in receiving Accusations, conventing the accused,
examining witnesses, judging of crimes [against Gods law] excluding such men,
as they found guilty of scandalous offenses, from the Lords Supper, enjoining
Penancies upon them, casting them out of the Church, receiving them again upon
their Repentance, etc. [Now I subsume, the same making of Ecclesiastical
Canons, the same Church Discipline, casting out of the Church or
Excommunication, etc. they are, and must be allowed still in Christian States;
being things which as Bishop Carleton says, Princes can neither give to, nor
take from, the Church. And therefore they must be allowed still all those means
absolutely sine-quibus non such things can be done: and these are means
absolutely necessary; Convening, for the making of Canons: Knowing the Fact,
for Excommunication: therefore, in case the Christian Prince will not call
them, they may assemble themselves, when the Church's necessities require such
Canons; and when the Christian Secular Courts will not, they may examine the
Facts of those who are accused to them of Delinquency: but this in order to
Church punishments only. When ever the Christian Prince or State is to them as
a Heathen, in his withdrawing and prohibiting these necessary things, then may
they behave themselves as formerly in Heathenism, i. e, do these things without
their leave, against their prohibitions. All the Plea, that a Secular State
subjecting it self to the Church can make for meddling in such Spiritual
affairs, seems to be this; that the Church shall not be troubled (now as
formerly) to do all, because the State with its more awing power will do
something for it. Which is, the assisting of the Church in her business, not
the abridging of her in her power.]

The Second Thesis. That the Clergy cannot alienate or make over and give away
to the Secular Governor,. 4 These. 2.
or to his Ministers and Delegates, any authority or office, which they have
received and been charged with by Christ, with a Command to execute the same to
the end of the world, and with a threat to become answerable to God for any
miscarriage of the people by their default therein. From which it follows, that
the Clergy's doing of either of these Two things. First, The binding themselves
for ever to any Secular Governor, never to make, or never to teach abroad and
publish to the people his Subjects any judgment or decision of theirs, made in
matters of Faith and Gods Worship, or made for reforming some Error or Heresy,
or other abuse in Gods Service, without the consent of such Governor first
obtained thereto (which Governor, as I said, tho Christian and a Believer, yet
may be a Sectarist, an Heretic, etc.) 2. Or Secondly, (which is yet worse) the
authorizing of the Secular Governor, or of those whom he shall please to choose
and nominate (who will be sure to name those rather of his own Sect) to
determine, and decide, and promulge such Spiritual matters; for the Clergy, and
in their stead: So that now not only the Clergy cannot do such things without
such Secular Governor, but also such Governor may do those things without the
Clergy. I say, these two are unlawful, as being contrary to the duties of the
Clergy, said above ( Thesis the First,) to be committed to them by Christ.

The Third Thesis.. 5. These. 3.
That the Secular Prince cannot depose or eject front the exercise of their
office in his Dominions any of the Clergy; neither absolutely, without any
cause pretended: as he may remove those Officers and Ministers under him, who
hold their places only durante beneplacite. Nor for a cause alleged: if it be
such as this; namely, for their not obeying the decisions which he or his civil
Council shall make in Spiritual matters; or for their transgressing of the
Ecclesiastical Canons; 2 nor can introduce others into the places of the
ejected; without the consent of the major part of the Clergy, or of their
Ecclesiastical Superiors (which consent if he obtain I reckon not this
deposition etc. to be his Act, but theirs:) [And here note, that what is said
of other Clergy, may be said likewise of the Patriarch, for any authority in
such Princes Dominions which he stands possessed of by such Ecclesiastical
Canons, as cannot justly be pretended to do any wrong to the civil Government.
Touching which matter see Church Gov. 1. Par.. 38. etc.]

First: The Prince cannot eject them. 1.
1. Neither without giving any cause thereof; among the rest, to oversee,
instruct and use Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, in making or publishing
Ecclesiastical Laws, and imposing censures over the flock of Christ in what
Princes Dominions soever, or in whatsoever Province or Diocese thereof, as
every one by his Ecclesiastical Superiors is appointed; as appears by their
equally exercising such Office in the three first Centuries in all Dominions
distributed into several Provincial and Parochial Governments, (the Twelve
Apostles being said at the first to have allotted to themselves several
Circuits after the same manner) even when the Supreme Power-civil not only
licenced not, but opposed and prohibited them to do it on pain of death. Of
which matter see Mr. Thorndike Right of the Church 1 chap. Seeing the Church
(says he) subsisted Three Hundred years, before any State professed
Christianity, whatsoever right it used during that time, manifestly therefore
it ought still to use and enjoy: this being the most pertinent evidence to show
the bounds of it [(i. e.) of such rights independent on any Temporal Governor]
See him 4. c. p. 169. And the Apostles themselves were they, who first set up
this Church Government in Civil States. And St. Paul made Titus Superintendent
of Creet, and Timothy of Ephesus for Spiritual Affairs, without the Secular
Governors leave; * who were, in these places, to ordain others, to preserve for
ever the Doctrines and Discipline delivered to them. For this cause (says Paul
to Titus 1. chap. 5. ver.) left I thee in Creet, that thou should set in
order the things that are left undone, and ordain Presbyters in every City, as
I had appointed thee. [Which ordaining of others signifies also Institution in
the charge, or cure, whereto they ministered (as Bishop Carleton confesses
Jurisdict. Regal Episcopal 4. chap. page 40.) Again, * Who were, in these
places, to receive Accusations; hear Witnesses; (which cannot be without
appointed Assemblies and Meetings) silence false Teachers; excommunicate
Offenders. See Tit. 1.11. Rev. 2.20. 1. Tim. 1.3.5.19. Against an Elder receive
not an Accusation, but before two or three Witnesses. [Now he (says the same
Author page 42.) that is appointed to hear Accusations, and to receive the
testimonies of witnesses, is seated in a place of judgment with Jurisdiction.]
(See more of this in Succes Clergy.. 4.) and this they did, when the Temporal
Governors of those places licenced them not, yea persecuted them. So
Athanasius, ejected by Constantius his Emperor from the charge which the Church
had committed to him of Alexandria, and Paulus from Constantinople, were
nevertheless accounted still the true Bishops of those Sees. Princes indeed may
deprive the Clergy at pleasure or according as Covenants made, of what they
bestow on them, Houses, Lands, Privileges, Jurisdictions, Lordships Temporal;
but the Offices abovenamed they bestow not. potestatem in causam, as in
personam: and the Prince (as has been mentioned in the first Thesis,) has no
authority to judge such causes merely Spiritual. To this may be added; that
neither Heathen nor Heretical Prince can justly prohibit totally all that
Clergy, whom the Church declares Orthodox, from entering into, or from preaching
and otherwise officiating in Divine matters within his Dominions. And if he put
such to death for disobeying this his Command, when as it is contrary to Gods,
and Christ's, who sends them to all Nations, in effect he puts them to death
for obeying Gods Command, and they dye Martyrs. As also the Primitive Martyrs
were put to death for not obeying the Emperors Laws concerning matters of their
Religion.

Second: 2.
As the Prince cannot thus eject or depose Clergy; so neither can he introduce
any into the place of those who are ejected or deceased, without the
concurrence of the Clergy. For such person must be ordained by the Clergy,
before he can officiate; and must have the consents or approbation of his
Spiritual Superiors; a Bishop of his Metropolitan; a Metropolitan, of his
Patriarch; and also of the major part of the Clergy of the Province which he
belongs to [I mean Clergy Episcopal] before he can be rightly ordained. See
Conc. Nic. can. 4. and 6. And Conc. Nic. 2. can. 3. Can. Apost. 31. Conc. Genesis
8.nm can. 10.12.22. Conc. Laodic, can. 13 With the Concessions of Dr. Field of
the Church, p. 581, and p. 551. And of Bishop Bramhal Vindic. p. 257. and
others quoted in Chur. Gov. 1 part.. 9. And of Mason de Minist. Angl. 4. l. 6.
c. And of Mr. Thorndike Right of the Church, 5 c. p. 248, etc. Which Canons
were purposely made to exclude for ever out of the Clergy those, who are, in
the common judgment of that Clergy, corrupt in manners, or factious in
opinions. Tho Princes therefore for the greater security of their civil
Government, and for the recompense of the great Obligations which the Church
has to their Liberality and to their Secular power, may nominate and recommend
a person to the Clergies Election; yet if they propose not any whom the Clergy
thinks fit and canonical; the Clergy may refuse such presentment; and in case
of no new presentation of a person worthy, may elect some other to teach,
officiate, etc, in any part of their Dominions: whom such Princes ought not to
refuse, if he be no way prejudicial to the good of their civil Estate. For the
Prince can neither prohibit to Christians, tho his Subjects, all Pastors; nor
yet all such Pastors, as the Governors, whom Christ has set over his people,
only think worthy. See Mr. Thorndike, Right of the Chur. 5. c. And indeed all
this is but necessary for the propogating, of the Gospel against Infidelity,
where the Prince is Heathen; and of the truth of the Gospel, against Heresy,
where the Prince is, or at least may be, a Sectarist, amongst all Nations
without depending on any ones leave; and for the preserving of the Church
uniform, entire, and incorrupt, in her Doctrine and Discipline. For if Temporal
Governors could at their pleasure, or, as they thought meet, place and displace
the Clergy, tho they cannot state all Divine matters by themselves, yet may
they make the Church's Synods (which is all one) to state them according to
their minds, either by introducing some de novo who are for them; (as Princes
can never want those who conform to, or at least comply with, their judgment;)
or by removing some who oppose them; and so making, the formerly lesser, then,
a major part in such Assemblies. Thus Constantius an Arian, by unjustly
displacing the Bishops procured Arianisme to be voted in several Eastern Synods.

cui conceditur regnum, necessario omnia censentur concessa, sine quibus regnum
gubernari non potest; and therefore that the civil power may judge and eject,
and disauthorize Spiritual persons for matters of Secular Judicature, as
Treason, and other moral and civil misdemeanors damageable to the
Commonwealth; and such I suppose was the case of Abiathar. And if upon this it
should at any time happen; that the thus ejected be numerous; and the new ones
introduced by any connivance of the rest of the Clergy and by the importunities
and threats of the Prince, should be also heterodox and factious; and by this
means the prevailing part of a Provincial, or National, Church, corrupt; yet
whilst Christ has promised to preserve the main body of his Church from such
corruption, we have some remedy from the General, for the delinquencies of such
a national Church: in that their Decrees are subjected to the Decrees of
superior Councels, nor may these decide any thing against those; the next
Thesis; which in such case we must repair to.

The Fourth Thesis:. 9. These. 4.
That a Provincial or National Synod may not lawfully make any definitions, in
matters of Faith, or in reforming some Error or Heresy, or other abuse in Gods
Service, contrary to the Decrees of former superior Synods; or contrary to the
judgment of the Church Universal of the present age showed in her public
Liturgies; which judgment is equivalent to that of a General Council of the
same age. See this Proposition amply proved in 2. Part.. 27. and 44. and 55.
etc. and in many other places of the precedent Discourses.

The Fifth Thesis: That,. 10. These. 5.
could a National Synod make such definitions, yet that a Synod wanting part of
the National Clergy, unjustly deposed or restrained; and consisting partly of
persons unjustly introduced, partly of those who have been first threatened,
with fines, imprisonment, deprivation, in case of their nonconformity to the
Prince's Injunctions in matters merely Spiritual; is not to be accounted a
lawful National Synod, nor the Acts thereof free and valid; especially as to
their establishing such Regal Injunctions.

The Sixth Thesis:. 11. 1. ^. Thesi 6th.
That the judgment or consent of some Clergymen or Bishops of a Province,
whether sitting by themselves, or joined with some of the Laity, cannot be
called the judgment and consent of the Clergy, or Church of that Province (tho
the Metropolitan be one of them) when these are only some smaller part of such
Clergy. See Can. Apost. 35. Conc. Antioch. 9. c. Neither, since the Clergy is
in its self a subordinate and united body, can the Prince, when following the
directions of some few Clergy, whom he knows or fears to differ in their
judgment from the main body thereof, be said to be guided by his Clergy, but to
go against it. For if some smaller part of the Clergy joined with the Prince
could by this outweigh the rest, what opinion can the Prince entertain so
extravagant, wherein he cannot draw some Churchmen to his side?

Much less may an Act of Parliament be urged for an Act of the Clergy, because
the Lords Spiritual sit therein;. 12. n. 2.
or because it commonly runs thus: [Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, and by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal] unless it be first showed
that the major part or the Bishops of the Nation gave their consents therein.
For since, herein, the Clergy do vote together with the Laity; and since it is
enough, if the major part of the Parliament vote any thing, to promulgate it as
an Act of all the Members thereof, and to use the form abovenamed; so long as
the others Members have no Negative voice to what is passed by this major part;
It would hence follow, that it were an Act of the Clergy, or Synodal, where,
not one, or where only some few, of the Clergy do give their consent, if so be
that the Laity, that vote with them, do equal or exceed their number. 1. Eliz.
1. c.
So An. 1. Eliz. the reintroducing of the Protestant Religion passed as an Act
of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons assembled in Parliament, when
all the Bishops, therein present, opposed it. See Camden's An. 1. Eliz. And 1.
Eliz. 1. c..

Thesis: That, Thesis 7th.
tho Secular Princes were allowed to have a decisive power in some matters of
Faith, such as are no way formerly determined (which is contrary to the First
and Second Thesis) yet, for such points as have been formerly determined on any
side, here, since a National Synod may not define any such thing contrary to
former superior Councils, much less may any Secular person define any such
things contrary to those Councils; or also contrary to a National Synod.

Thesis: That, Thesis 8th.
as touching Divine truths and matters of Faith (spoken of hitherto;) so now
for things of mere Ecclesiastical Constitution, and not Divine Command, Neither
National Synod nor Secular power may make any new Canons concerning the
Government and Discipline of the Church contrary to the Ecclesiastical
Constitutions of former superior Councils, nor reverse those formerly made by
them; at least, so many of these; as neither the Prince can show some way
prejudicial to his civil Government; nor the National Synod can show some way
more prejudicial to their particular Church, than the same Constitutions are to
the rest of Christian Churches See this Thesis proved in Chur. Gov. 2. Part..
63. And 3. Part.. 13. n. 3. And. 27. n. 2.

Theses being set down whereby to judge of the Regularity of a Reformation; let
us now view the carriage thereof here in England in the time of Henry the
Eighth, Edward the Sixth, and Queen Elizabeth; and how far it has deviated
from them. Touching which Reformation, I would desire you to read together with
these ^ay Observations what is related in defense thereof by, Dr. Hammond,
Schism, 7. c. Dr. Fern in Considerations touching the Reformed Church, 2. and
9. Chap. And Dr. Heylin's Treatise called the Reformation of the Church of
England Justified; lest I may have related some things partially, or omitted
some things considerable, in this matter.

And here,. 16. 1. Three Heads of this Discourse.
confining my Discourse to Three Heads, I will first give you an account, how
the Clergy, in Henry the Eighth's days, were at the beginning induced to
acknowledge the Kings Supremacy in Spiritual matters after another manner, than
his Predecessors had exercised it formerly: and, how far only at first they
seem to have allowed it. [I say after another manner than his Predecessors had
exercised it formerly. Because some Supremacy, namely this; of assembling a
Synod of the Clergy, upon Temporal punishments in case of Disobedience, by
their Writs (the ancient form of which see in Dr. Heylin, p. 4) when any urgent
occasions required: as likewise of enjoining to all their Subjects, as well
Clergy, as others, upon Temporal Penalties, the observance of the Decrees and
Constitutions of such Synods, or of any other former lawful Councils (such as
the Clergy shall acknowledge to have been the Decrees thereof) these
Supremacies (I say) the Princes of this Land before Henry the Eighth, had and
exercised; neither was any such Supremacy usurped, or interrupted, by the Pope.
Neither do the Roman Doctors deny such an external coactive Jurisdiction of
Princes in Spiritual Affairs; 1. as to bind their Clergy, Princes care, because
this depends much on the right Government of the Church committed to theirs.
Provided only, that these Assemblies be so timed and disposed by the Prince, as
that the authority which our Savior has committed to the Church concerning
the assembling of the same persons be no way disturbed thereby. For doubtless,
when both at the same time cannot be done, their Service to the Church is to be
preferred before that to the State. what manner of Supremacy was afterward by
little and little either challenged by the Prince; or by the Clergy or
Parliament given unto him, as his right. 3. And Thirdly how, according to this
their conceived right, those Three Princes acted.

CHAP. II. The Inducement of the English Clergy to acknowledge a Regal
Supremacy in Spirituals. I. Head.

First. Henry the Eighth, whether because scrupulous in Conscience, How the
Engl. Clergy were first induced to acknowledge a new Regal Supremacy in
Spirituals.
occasioned by his Daughter Mary's being offered in Marriage first to the
Emperor Charles the Fifth, and then to Francis King of France; and by both
refused (as is said) upon this account, because they doubted of the lawfulness
of Henry' s Marriage with her Mother: or whether because much enamoured on
another Lady Anne Bullen, Daughter to the Treasurer of his Household, and an
Attendant on the Queen [yet between whom and him it is said, that the King was
conscious of some Impediments, why he could not lawfully marry her, for which
an Act of Parliament 28. Hen. 8.7. c. never after repealed plainly declared her
Daughter Elizabeth incapable of the Crown: and of which those words in the
Dispensation procured from Clement the Seventh. Etiamsi illa tibi alias secundo
aut remotiori consanguinitatis, aut primo affinitatis gradu, etiam ex quocunque
licito vel illicito coitu, proveniente invicem conjuncta sit, do give some
suspicion.] Had a great desire, after Twenty years cohabitation, to be divorced
from Queen Katherine, because having been formerly his Brother's Wife. Cardinal
Wolsey being made the Bishops Legate together with Cardinal Campegius for the
hearing and determining this matter, tho at first he much corresponded with the
King's Inclinations, having designed his Matching with the King of France his
Sister (as is thought) from some Self-interests; yet, when he discovered the
King's Affections settled on Anne Bullen, one inclined to Lutheranisme, See Fox
p. 988. 1036.
he proves averse now to what he had formerly advanced, and delays the decision
of the Divorce so long, till at last the Pope, moved thereto by the Emperor,
Nephew to Queen Katherine, did, upon her appeal, revoke the cause to Rome, and
inhibited the Legates Proceedings. It Is said also, that some others of the chief
of the English Clergy, See Fox p. 96. and 962. Edit. 1610.
whether it were conscientiously, or out of the same dis-affection of their's
to Anne Bullen, I cannot tell, much disliked the same Divorce.

Richard the Second. Yet had the King formerly been pleased to appear before
him in Court, as the Popes Legate, and his delegated Judge, together with
Campegius, in the Cause of the Kings Divorce. Upon this he is condemned, See
Godw. Annal. An. Reg. Henr. 21.
and all his Estate seized on by the King. Tho the Cardinal pleaded: That it
was well known to his Majesty that he would not presume to execute his power
Legantine before the King had been pleased to ratify it with his Royal Assent
given under his Seal, which notwithstanding he could not produce, that and all
his Goods being taken from him. See Godwin's Annals p. 107. who also (p. 119.)
says; See Godw. Annal. p. 107, and p. 119.
that it was certain that Wolsey was Licensed to exercise his Authority
Legantine.

Wolsey; Next a Bill was given up in the Parliament held 1530. (and the Sum
demanded from the Clergy, as conspiring with the Cardinal,) of an 100000 l.
Charges, that the King had been put to, to obtain so many Instruments from
Foreign Universities, which had decided this matter. From which Universities
the King is said to have procured their Suffrages for his Divorce not without
seeing several of them with great Sums of Money. Concerning which see the
Testimonies of several Authors produced by Sanders (p. 49. etc.) Some of those
he quotes saying, that they had Money offered to themselves; some, that they
were Eyewitnesses of it received by others. [Tho (with your leave to make here
a little digression touching this Controversy) these Universities, at least
some of them, considered only the point of the unlawfulness of one marrying his
Brothers Wife, when such former Marriage was consummate by carnal knowing of
her (See the Determinations of Paris, and others in Hollinsh. (p. 924.) putting
in the Clause; so that the Marriage be consummate.) Without considering that
circumstance, whether Katherine was carnally known by her first Husband, which
was denied by the Queen and her Advocates (Prince Arthur being thought somewhat
infirm, and being but Fifteen years old when he Married her, and dying shortly
after.) You may see, if you have the curiosity, what is said for the
consummation of that Marriage in Fox Mon. p. 958. Edit. 1610. against it in
Sanders de Schism Ang l. 1. l. p. 40. Yet, tho the former Marriage had been
consummate, many Learned Men of that Age of several Nations (amongst whom were
Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and Tonstall Bishop of Duresme) whom you may find
diligently reckoned up to the number of almost Twenty by Sanders de Schism
Angli. 1. l. p. 42. 53, 54. writ Books in Justification, that the Marriage of
Henry with Katherine was a matter dispensable. For tho this was agreed on all
sides, That Papa non habet potestatem dispensandi in impediment is jure divino
naturali conjugium dirimentibus, sed in iis quae jure Canonico tantum dirimunt:
Yet some of these Authors held first, that all the Impediments named in the
Mosaical Law were not dirimentia conjugium jure divino naturali (which only now
oblige Christians:) and then secondly that, in matter of Affinity, only primus
gradus rectae lineae, as between Father and his Sons Wife, and not primus
gradus lineae, collateralis or transversae, as between the Brother and his
Brothers Wife, was such an Impediment, as did dirimere conjugium jure divino
naturali, and indispensably. Others gathered the Law in Levit. 18.16.
dispensable in some cases, from the express dispensation made therein Deuteronomy.
25.5. Now the preservation of Peace between the two Kingdoms of England and
Spain is a motive for such dispensation much more considerable, than that
mentioned in Deuteronomy. the preservation of the name and honor of the deceased. (See
Card. Cajetan de Conjug. Reg. Angl. 6. c.) And for the general judgment of the
Learned in this matter, and particularly of the Universities, after you have
read the Story in Sanders, p. 49, 50, 51. concerning them and especially
concerning Oxford, as likewise what is said by Lord Herbert. Hist. Hen. 8. p.
324, 325. See what the Act of Parliament 1. Mar. 1. c. says of them. viz. That
this Marriage betwixt Henry and Katherine was solemnized by the deliberate and
mature consideration and consent of the best and most notable men in Learning,
in those days, of Christendom. That the perverse affections of some, a very
few, persons, for their own singular glory and vain reputation, pretended the
same Marriage to be against the word of God: and to this intent caused the
Seals as well of certain Universities in Italy and France to be gotten (as it
were for a testimony) by the corruption with Money of a few light persons
Scholars of the said Universities, as also the Seals of the Universities of
this Realm to be obtained by sinister working, secret threatenings, etc. And
that Archbishop Cranmer in giving Sentence, that the said Matrimony was
unlawful, took his Foundation, partly upon his own unadvised judgment of the
Scripture, joining therewith the pretended testimonies of the said
Universities: and partly upon bare and most untrue conjectures [ i. e,
concerning the consummation of the former Marriage of Katherine with Arthur.]
And see what Lord H^rbert delivers of the hesitancy of the German Protestant
Divines (being several times and that long after the Divorce made requested
thereto by King Henry) to declare the Divorce lawful p. 448. and 379. where he
says, That for the Approbation of the Divorce proposed to the German Divines
Luther, Justus Jonas, Philip Melancthon and others, they delayed to approve it,
and the King was judiciously advised by his Agents from thence, not to require
any thing of them, which would be too hard to grant. I have made this
Digression to show you the diversity of opinions, which was in this difficult
matter (that you may see the Pope stood not alone in his judgment:) and how the
several interests of several times justified and condemned the same thing. Now
to return to our matter in hand.]

l. spent upon the Universities abroad was demanded by the Parliament from the
Clergy at home; because it was said, that the Cardinal, and some other chief
amongst them were, through their falsehood and dissimulation, the cause of this
Foreign Expense: Which Sum they resolutely refusing to contribute, the whole
Clergy are sued by the King, and condemned by the Kings Bench in a Praemunire
also, for receiving and acknowledging the Cardinals Power Legantine, exercised
by him ignorantly or presumptuously, without the Kings consent and allowance
first obtained. The Clergy, thus become liable, at the Kings pleasure, to the
Imprisonment of their Persons, and confiscation of their Estates, assemble
themselves in the House of Convocation; offer to pay for their Ransom the
demanded 100000 l.

Italy, and a near Kinsman and Favourer of Queen Katherine) that the Popes
Decrees might be of no force against him, negociates also by his Agents with
the Clergy, (whilst, in these fears,) to give him the Title of Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical matters within his Dominions; making account that, this
obtained, he had the assent of his own Clergy at his beck for the nulling of
his former Marriage. Therefore, in the drawing up of the Clergy's Petition to
the King for release of the Praemunire, it was signified from the Court ( cujus
consilii Cranmerus and Cromwellus clam authors fuisse existimabantur; says
the Author Antiq. Brittanic. p. 325.) that a Title should be prefixed, wherein
they should style the King ecclesiae and cleri Anglicani Protector and supremum
Caput, or else the Petition would not be accepted. To which with some
difficulty they agreed, so, as qualifying it with this Clause [Quantum per
legem Christi licet.] But, the King again excepting at this limitation, as
unworthy the Clergy (who either did or ought to know, and definitively instruct
others, what Christ's Law did, or did not, allow) at last upon renewed threats
this Clause also was procured to be omitted. See Antiquit. Brittannic. p. 326.
Sed Regi (says that Author) displicuit ancipitem dubiamque mitigationem and
moderationem verborum a cleri sui Synodo, quae de Christi lege aut certa fuit,
aut certa esse debuit, tam frigide proferri. Itaque Cromwellum ad Synodum
iterum mandans, eam aut tolli voluit, aut clerum incursas Sanctionum paenas
pati. Omnium igitur ex sententiis Rex sine ambiguitate ulla ecclesiae Angliae
supremum caput declaratus est. But yet this was not done; till after the
Clergy, who much alleged, that the King, or some of his Successors might, upon
this Title, ruin the Church of England in their ordering Spiritual matters
without or against the Clergy thereof, had obtained a voluntary promise from
him to this effect: That he would never by virtue of that Grant assume to
himself any more power over the Clergy, than all others the Kings of England
had assumed; nor that he would do any thing without them, in altering,
ordering, or judging, in any Spiritual matters. See Bishop Fisher's Life
published by Dr. Bailey. And this was the first Act of the Clergy, which, being
so understood, as excluding all authority of the Western Patriarch over the
Church of England, and transferring such authority for the future to the King
is contrary to the Fourth Thesis: because some such authority was conferred on
this Patriarch by Superior Councils. And which Act was so passed by them, that,
as Dr. Hammond acknowledged, (of Schism 7. c.) it is easy to believe, See
Church Gov. 1. Part. 4. and. 20.
that nothing but the apprehensions of dangers, which hung over them by a
Praemunire incurred by them, could probably have inclined them to it.

Supremacy to the King, and exclusion of the Pope's Authority out of his
Dominions, and the voiding of all appeals made hence unto him; and after the
Kings Marriage to Anne Bullen also, but before the publication thereof;
Cranmer, being now chosen Archbishop of Canterbury, upon the death of Warham,
a Favourer of the Queen Katherine's Cause, Summons her to appear before him and
some other Bishops and Commissioners; and, upon her neglect, solemnly
dissolveth the Kings former Marriage with her, and divorceth him from her.

And how far only at the first they seem to have allowed it.
But, whereas formerly till the Twenty fifth year of Henry the Eighth the Synods
of the Clergy (says Dr. Heylin. 1. p, 7.) after called by the Kings Writ,
acted absolutely in their Convocations of their own authority, the Kings or
Parliaments assent or ratification neither concurring nor required; and whereas
by this sole authority, which they had in themselves, they made Canons,
declared Heresies, convicted and censured persons suspected of Heresy, etc:
Now, they having declared the King supreme Head of the Church, instead of the
Pope the Western Patriarch, it seemed reasonable therefore that no Acts of the
Church should stand good without the concurrence of the Head: And conducing
much to this end (as I learn from the forenamed Dr) was a Petition or
Remonstrance exhibited to the King by the House of Commons (after the Ice was
broken) A. 1532. See Full^rs Appeal of Injured Innocence Pa. 2. p. 65.
In which (says he) they, desiring that the Convocation should be brought down
to the same level with the Houses of Parliament, and that their Acts and
Constitutions should not bind their Subjects, as before, in their Goods and
Possessions, until they were confirmed and ratified by the Regal power, they
showed themselves aggrieved, that the Clergy of this Realm should act
authoritatively and supreamly in the Convocation and they in Parliament do
nothing but as it was confirmed and ratified by Royal assent. An Answer unto
which Remonstrance (says he) was drawn up by Dr. Gardener then newly made
Bishop of Winchester, and being allowed of by both Houses of Convocation was by
them presented to the King. But the King not satisfied with this Answer
resolved to bring them to his bent, and therefore on the Tenth of May sent a
Paper to them by Dr. Fox (after Bishop of Hereford) in which it was
peremptorily required: that no Constitution or Ordinance shall be hereafter, by
the Clergy Enacted, promulged, or put in execution, unless the Kings Highness
do approve the same, and his advice and favor be also interponed for the
execution etc. Whereupon on the Fifteenth of the same Month they made their
absolute submission. So He. And thus the next step therefore of this
Reformation was; that, the King so requiring it, they bound themselves by a
Synodical Act for the time to come, not to assemble themselves at all without
the Kings Writ; and when assembled not to enact, promulge, or execute any
Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances Provincial or Synodical, or by whatsoever
name they shall be called, unless the King by his Royal assent command them to
make, promulge, and execute the same. See for this the Preface of the Act of
Parliament, Twenty fifth year of Henry the Eighth, 19. c. where it is said;
that the Clergy of the Realm of England had not only acknowledged, that the
Convocation of the same Clergy, is, always has been, and ought to be assembled
always by the Kings Writ; but also, submitting themselves to the Kings Majesty,
had promised in verbo Sacerdotii, that they would never from henceforth presume
to attempt, allege, claim, or put in ure, enact, promulge, or execute any new
Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances, Provincial or other, or by whatsoever other
name they shall be called; unless the Kings most Royal assent may to them be
had, to make, promulge, and execute the same. (But they gave up also their
power to execute any old Canons of the Church, without the Kings consent had
first thereto; as appears by what follows in the next Section.) The whole
Debate with all the traverses and emergent difficulties which appeared herein
(says Dr. Heylin) are specified at large in the Records of Convocation 1532,
which were well worthy the viewing. Now, if the First and Second Thesis
abovenamed stand good, this Act of the Clergy is utterly unlawful. For by this
the Prince has authority to hinder the Clergy from altering or reforming any
former settled Doctrine in his Kingdom. As King Charles also in his Declaration
before the 39 Articles manifests; that he will not endure any varying or
departing in the least degree from the established Doctrine and Discipline of
the Church of England; any varying; i.e, by the Bishops and Clergy in their
Convocation. In what case then had the Reformation been, if former Princes, in
the same language as King Charles, had used this pretended lawful power in
prohibiting Bishops etc. to attempt, enact, promulge, etc any thing contrary to
the, then, here settled, Popish Doctrines?

To advance yet somewhat further. In the Preface of the same Act of Parliament
the Clergy are also said (which thing neither Dr. Heylin, Dr. Hammond, Fern,
have sufficiently weighed in their Relations of the English Reformation) to
have humbly besought the Kings Highness, that the Constitutions and Canons
Provincial or Synodal which be thought to be prejudicial to the Kings
Prerogative Royal, or repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, or to be
otherwise overmuch onerous to his Highness and his Subjects may be committed to
the judgment of his Highness and of Thirty Two Persons, Sixteen of the
Temporalty, and Sixteen of the Clergy of the Realm, to be chosen and appointed
by the Kings Majesty; and that such Canons as shall be thought by the more part
of them worthy to be annulled, shall be made of no value; and such other of the
Canons as shall be approved to stand with the Laws of God etc, shall stand in
power. Constitutions and Canons Provincial and Synodal: not only such as were
the sole Constitutions and Canons of the Synods of this Nation, which the like
Synods may lawfully correct; but such as were also the Canons of superior
Synods, which the Synods of this Nation could not lawfully annul. This appears,
both by the practice of their abrogating and reforming of several Canons, that
were such; (nay I think such were all that were reformed:) and also by the
Tenent, (See below. 28. Statute 25. Hen. 8.21. c.) that all the Constitutions
made only by man's authority are by the King, being supreme in his Dominions, as
he thinks fit, mutable. To stand with the Laws of God: therefore any Canon, tho
it were not against the Kings Prerogative or Law of the Realm, yet if thought
by these Judges not to stand with the Laws of God, might be annulled. Shall be
thought by the more part of them. Therefore an Act of the Laity in these
Spiritual matters, if obtaining the consent only of one Clergyman, tho all the
rest oppose, nay if obtaining the consent of the King, tho all the
Clergy-Commissioners oppose, stands good, as being an Act of the major part.

Reformatio legum Ecclesiasticarum, drawn up partly in Henry the Eighth's,
partly in Edward the Sixth's time, by such Commissioners (Reprinted 1640) is
found to meddle not only with Canons repugnant to Civil Government, or with
Rites and Ceremonies; but with matters of, the Divine Offices, and Sacraments,
Heresies, etc, as appears in the very Titles of that Book. Now such Act of the
Clergy must needs be most unjust and unlawful, if the First, or Second, or
Seventh Thesis above-recited stand good

See Fox. p. 971.
wherein they allege against him the Third Canon of the Second General Council
Enacting, ut controversiae ab Episcopis Provinciarum, ubi ortae sunt,
terminentur; that all Causes shall be finished and determined within the
Province where the same began, and that by the Bishops of the same Province:
urged also by Bishop Tonstal in his Answer to Cardinal Poole. And Thirdly,
Tonstal's and Gardiner's (of whom Dr. Fern says: that none could have written
better against the usurped Papal Supremacy, Examine, Champ. 2. c* p. 69.
than these Bishops did) retracting their acknowledging of such a Regal
Supremacy: and that upon deprivation of their Bishoprics and Imprisonment of
their persons, some in King Edward's, and some in Qu. Elizabeth's days:
retracting, etc I suppose for this reason, because by sad experience they saw
it much enlarged beyond those bounds, within which only they formerly had
maintained it just. And Fourthly, Henry 8.12. c. where, in the Preface it is
said: That when any Cause of the Law Divine comes in question, that part of
the Body Politic called the Spirituality, now being usually called the English
Church, is sufficient and meet of it self, without the intermeddling of any
exterior person or persons, to declare and determine all such doubts; and
where, in the Act, it is ordered, that such Causes shall have their appeals
from the Archdeacon to the Bishop, and from the Bishop to the Archbishop of
the Province, and there to be definitively and finally adjudged. Finally, i.e,
without any further appeal to the King. Neither can it be showed, that expressly
this authority or jurisdiction, [To repress, reform, correct, and amend all
such Errors, Heresies, Abuses, Enormities, whatsoever they be, which by any
manner of Spiritual Authority or Jurisdiction ought or may lawfully be
repressed, reformed etc, any Foreign Laws, Foreign Authority, Prescription,
or any thing or things to the contrary thereof, notwithstanding,] tho it was
allowed to the King as a Branch of his Supremacy by the Parliament, was
conceded or voted by the Clergy, or pretended to be so; but was built, only by
consequence, upon the Clergy's recognizing him the supreme Head of the Church
of England; as appears in the Preface of that Act 26. Hen. 8.1. c. By these
things therefore it seems, that as yet all the Jurisdiction for determining
Spiritual Controversies, that was taken from the Pope, was committed to the
Community of the English Clergy, or finally placed in the Archbishop of
Canterbury. But you will find by what follows, that it long rested not here,
but was shortly after removed from hence into the hands of the King. And as it
was thus with the Clergy; so in the Laity also in the Parliament its self (in
the new power given of altering and dispensing with former Church Laws 25. Hen.
8.21. c.) there seems at first to have been a kind of jealousy upon the new
introduced Supremacy, left it might afterward proceed to some exorbitancy as to
changing something in the substance of Religion. Therefore in the forenamed Act
they insert this Proviso. Provided always, this Act nor any thing therein
contained shall be hereafter interpreted, that your Grace, your Nobles, and
Subjects intend by the same to decline and vary from the Congregation of
Christ's Church in any things declared by the Scriptures and the word of God
necessary, concerning the very Articles of the Catholic Faith of Christendom,
or any other things declared by the Scripture necessary for your and their
Salvation; but only to make an Ordinance by Polities necessary and convenient
to repress vice, and for good conservation of this Realm in peace, unity, and
tranquillity, from rapine and spoil, ensuing much the old ancient Customs of
this Realm on that behalf. Not minding to seek for any reliefs, succors, or
remedies for any wordly things and humane laws in any case of necessity, but
within this Realm at the hands of your Highness, which ought to have an
Imperial power and authority in the same, and not obliged in any worldly Causes
to any Superior. Upon which Proviso Bishop Bramhal has this note ( Schism
Guarded p. 63.) That if any thing is contained in this Law for the abolishing
or translation [i. e, from the Clergy] of power merely and purely Spiritual, it
is retracted by this Proviso at the same time it is Enacted.

CHAP. III. The Supremacy in Spirituals claimed by King Henry the Eighth. II.
Head.

Concerning what Supremacy was afterward by degrees conferred on, or also
claimed by, the Prince.
Now to come to the Second thing I proposed to you: Concerning what Supremacy
was afterward by degrees conferred on, or also claimed by, the Prince. After
the Title then of Supreme was thus yielded by the Clergy, as likewise, that
they would thence-forward enact or publish no Synodal Decrees or Constitutions
without the consent first obtained of this their declared Supreme, It was thus
Enacted by the Authority of Parliament 26. Hen. 8.1. c. 1. In the times of H.
the 8th.
That the King shall have and enjoy, united to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm, all Jurisdictions to the said Dignity of Supreme Head of the same Church
belonging: [which Jurisdiction how far it is understood to be extended, see 1.
Eliz. 1. c. where it is Enacted] that such Jurisdictions, Privileges, and
Preheminencies Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, as by any Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Power has heretofore been or may lawfully be exercised or used
for the Visitation of Ecclesiastical State and Persons, and for Reformation of
all manner of Errors, Heresies, Schisms, etc, shall for ever by authority of
this present Parliament be united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm. And further see the Act 37. Hen. 8.17. which runs thus. Whereas your
most Royal Majesty is justly Supreme Head in Earth of the Church of England,
and has full authority to correct and punish all mannner of Heresies, Errors,
Vices, and to exercise all other manner of Jurisdictions commonly called
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: Nevertheless the Bishop of Rome and his Adherents
have in their Councils and Synods Provincial established diverse Ordinances,
that no Layman might exercise any Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, or be any Judge
in any Ecclesiastical Court; which Ordinances or Constitutions, standing in
their effect, did sound to be directly repugnant to your Majesty's being
Supreme Head of the Church, and Prerogative Royal, your Grace being a Layman.
-- And whereas, albeit the said Decrees by a Statute 25. Hen. 8. be utterly
abolished; yet, because the contrary thereunto is not used by the Archbishops,
Bishops, etc (who have no manner of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, but by, under,
and from, your Royal Majesty) it gives occasion to evil disposed persons
little to regard and to think the proceedings and censures Ecclesiastical made
by your Highness and your Vicegerent, Commissaries, etc, to be of little or
none effect, whereby the people have not such Reverence to your most Godly
Injunctions, as becomes them; In consideration, that your Majesty is the only
and undoubted Supreme Head etc, to whom by Holy Scripture all power and
authority is wholly given, to hear and determine all manner of Causes
Ecclesiastical, and to correct vice etc: May it therefore be Enacted, that all
persons as well Lay, as those that are Married, being Doctors of the Civil Law,
who shall be deputed to be any Chancellor, Commissary, etc, may lawfully
exercise all manner of Jurisdiction commonly called Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, any Constitution to the contrary notwithstanding. And see
Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum tit. de Officio and Jurisd. omnium Judicum.
-- Rex tam in Episcopos, Clericos, etc, quam in Laicos, plenissimam
jurisdictionem tam civilem, quam Ecclesitasticam exercere potest, cum omnis
Jurisdictio and Ecclesiastica and Saecularis ab eo tanquam ex uno and eodem
font derivantur.

ab officio; of which see more below p.. 46. Not that I affirm the King did
ever claim the right of exercising, (himself,) this power of the Keys, but that
he claimed this right (which is contrary to the First Thesis) that no
Clergyman being a Member of the Church of England should exercise it in his
Dominions in any Cause, or on any Person, without the leave and appointment of
him the Supreme Head of this Church; nor any forbear to exercise, where he the
Head commanded it: As, before the Reformation, the inferior Clergy might not
exercise any Church Censure contrary to the commands of their lawful Spiritual
Superiors; which Jurisdiction of their former Spiritual Superiors was now
enstated on the King. On the King, Not as one subordinate to the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction herein: For so a Lay-person in foro exteriori or contentioso, as
it is called (which Court the Church used before any Prince was Christian) may
excommunicate sometimes, tho not ligare or solvere in foro interiori or
poenitentiali (yet for the exterior also, see what Provision is made against
this in 16. Caroli 1. Can. 13.) But as one by God primarily invested with the
disposal thereof; from whom the Ecclesiastical Governors within his Dominions
derive this authority, as you have seen in the Preface of this Act.

Hen. 8.21. c. the Supreme Power of giving all manner of Licenses,
Dispensations, Faculties, Grants, etc, for all Laws and Constitutions merely
Ecclesiastical, and in all Causes not being contrary to the Scriptures and Laws
of God, is not only taken from the Pope, but from the Clergy too, and is
committed to the Secular Power, contrary to the Eighth Thesis. [The Statute
says thus. That, whereas it stands with Natural Equity and good Reason, that
in all humane Laws, in all Causes which are called Spiritual induced into this
Realm, your Royal Majesty, and your Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons in
Parliament [where you see the Parliaments Supremacy, as to admitting or
abrogating Ecclesiastical Constitutions, joined with the Kings] have full power
and authority, not only to dispense, but also to authorize some elect persons
to dispense with those and all other humane Laws of this your Realm, as the
quality of the persons and matter shall require: as also the said Laws to
abrogate, admit, amplify, or diminish. Be it therefore Enacted, That from
henceforth every such License, Dispensation, etc, that in cases of necessity
may lawfully be granted without offending the Holy Scripture and Laws of God,
necessary for your Highness, or for your Subjects, shall be granted in manner
following: that is to say: the Archbishop of Canterbury shall have Power to
grant them to your Majesty, etc. And if the foresaid Archbishop shall refuse
or deny to grant any Licenses, Dispensations, etc; that then upon Examination
had, in your Court of Chancery, that such Licenses may be granted without
offending against the Scriptures, your Highness shall command the Archbishop
to grant them etc under such Penalties as shall be expressed in such Writ of
Injunction. And it shall be lawful to your Highness, for every such default of
the said Archbishop; to give Power by Commission to such two Spiritual
Prelates, or Persons to be named by your Highness, as will grant such Licenses
and Dispensations.] Here the Supreme Power of dispensing with Ecclesiastical
Constitutions is ascribed to the King and Parliament, as recognized Supreme
Head of the Church; and the Archbishop made his Delegate; and, after the
Archbishop, the King, or his Court of Chancery made the last Judge, what
things in such Dispensations offend against Scripture, what not.

Hen. 8.20. c. The necessity of the Metropolitan's being confirmed by the
Patriarch is taken away; and the Clergy are bound, to admit and consecrate what
person soever the King shall present to any Bishopric upon Penalty of
incurring a Praemunire; and the Consecration is to be performed by such, and so
many, as the King shall appoint. A thing contrary to the Third Thesis, and the
Canons of former Superior Councils; and ruining the Church, when the Prince is
Heretical. See the Statute.

Hen. 8.1. c. That the King should have full power, from time to time, to
visit, repress, reform, correct, and amend, all such Errors, Heresies, etc, as
is set down but now,. 25.

Hen. 8.19. c. It is Enacted by the same authority; That all such Canons and
Constitutions Provincial or Synodal which be thought prejudicial etc; as I have
set it down before,. 23.

Hen. 8.26. c. viz. That all such Determinations, Decrees, Definitions, and
Ordinances, as, according to Gods Word, and Christ's Gospel should at any time
hereafter be set forth by the said Archbishop and Bishops and Doctors in
Divinity, now appointed, or hereafter to be appointed by his Royal Majesty; or
else by the whole Clergy of England [either by the one, or by the other,
therefore is the latter not held necessary, but the former sufficient with the
Confirmation of the Head] in and upon the matter of Christ's Religion and the
Christian Faith etc by his Majesty's advice and confirmation under the Great
Seal, shall be by all his Grace's Subjects fully believed, obeyed, observed and
performed to all purposes and intents upon the pains and penalties therein to
be comprised. [Where note that whereas under the Reformation private men are
tied only to obey and believe the Definitions of Councils, when they are set
forth according to Gods Word; i. e, when private men think them to be so: Yet
here this Liberty was thought fit to be restrained; and private men tied to
believe these Definitions, when set forth as according to Gods word; i. e, when
the setters forth deem them to be so. To obey a thing defined according to Gods
Word, and to obey a thing defined as being according to Gods word, are
Injunctions very different.]

Hen. 8.12. c. set down before,. 25. ordered Appeals in Causes Spiritual to be
finally adjudged by the Archbishop of the Province: It is Enacted by
Parliament 25. Hen. 8.19. c. First, That no manner of Appeals shall be made out
of the Realm to the Bishop of Rome in any Causes or Matters of what Nature
soever. Secondly, That, for lack of Justice in the Court of the Archbishop;
Commissioners, by the Kings Highness to be appointed, shall have full power and
authority, to hear and definitively to determine every such Appeal, with the
causes and all circumstances concerning the same; and no further Appeals to be
made. These Commissioners therefore, (appointed by the King,) are the ultimate
and unappealable Judges after the Archbishop in all Spiritual matters; of
which doubtless many are concerning what is lawful or unlawful by Gods Word;
wherein according to the Canon when they were Causes of moment, Appeals were
formerly made from the Bishop to a Synod, or to the Patriarch.

Hen. 8.14 c. It is Enacted by authority of Parliament: That no speaking,
doing, or holding against any Laws called Spiritual Laws, made by authority of
the Sea of Rome, by the Policy of Man which be repugnant to the Laws and
Statutes of the Realm, or the Kings Prerogative, shall be deemed to be Heresy.
From which all that I would note is this: that the King and Parliament
undertake to be Judges of Heresy, and do declare, that no Laws of the Realm nor
the Prerogative assumed by the King have any thing of Heresy in them. -- Again;
it is Enacted by Parliament 34, 35. Hen. 8.1. c. That if any Spiritual Person
or Persons shall preach or teach contrary to the Determinations which since An.
Dom. 1540, are or shall be set forth by his Majesty as is aforementioned; that
then every such Offender offending the third time contrary to this Act shall be
deemed and adjudged an Heretic, and shall suffer pains of death by Burning.
Where the King is made the ultimate Judge of Heresy, without any Appeal, as
appears by the former-quoted Act 25 Hen. 8.19. c. contrary to the First and
Seventh Thesis. And the Protestants, in justifying this Supremacy, must allow
their own Condemnation, if teaching against any thing written in the Book
called the Institution of a Christian Man; Or, A Necessary Doctrine for all
sorts of People, set forth by the King's Authority at that time; or against the
Six Articles, which were in the same Act Established; as likewise in 31. Hen.
8.14. c. the Publishing of which Act (says Lord Herbert, p. 447.) gave no
little occasion of murmur; since to revoke the conscience, not only from its
own Court, but from the ordinary ways of resolving Controversies; to such an
abrupt decision of the Common Law, as is there [Stat. 31. Hen. 8.14. c.] set
down,. 35. n. 1.
was thought to be a deturning of Religion from its right and usual course. Now
to reflect a little upon these several Acts fore-quoted. 1. Whereas it is said
by Bishop Bramhal ( Schism Guarded. 3. p. 262. Henry the Eighth made no new
Law. See likewise his Vindic. p. 86.) 1. That these Statutes of Henry the
Eighth, Fitz-Herbert, and of the Lord Coke ( Reports,) And 2ly ( Schism
Guarded, That these Statutes do attribute no Spiritual Jurisdiction to the King
at all, save only an External Regiment by coactive Power in Ecclesiastical
Causes in foro contentioso. [Fox the First of these, if you please to compare
the Clauses of the Statutes before rehearsed, Coke ( Reports,. 35. n. 2.
Fifth Part) and with those also mentioned by Bishop Bramh. Vindic. 4. c. p.
63. etc. You shall find no such thing, if you take all and all the extent of
King Henry's Statutes. You may find Appeals to the Pope (or other Foreign
Judge,) and Bulls or Excommunications or Legations from him (except that of the
Bishop of Canterbury who was Legatus natus) to have been prohibited by former
Laws; that is, in some particular Cases, wherein the Prince conceived Himself
or his Subjects to be injured thereby in his or their Temporal Rights, Profits,
Securities, or also in some Ecclesiastical Indulgements obtained formerly from
the Pope, (See that Indulgement granted to King Edw. the Confessor. Vobis and
posteris vestris Regibus, etc. in Spelm. Conc. A. 1066 Bishop Bramhal's Vindic.
p. 66.) [This appears in that much urged Statute 16. Rich. 2.5. c. quoted in
Vindic. p. 80. where, upon pain of a Praemunire, all are prohibited to purchase
any Bulls or Sentences of Excommunication from Rome. But this is in certain
Cases only (see Vindic. p. 81.) Cases indeed Ecclesiastical; but such as were
conceived contrary to the Temporal Rights of the King and his Subjects (which,
all Ecclesiastical matters (I hope) neither are nor are pretended to be) viz.
these Cases. Popes refusing the King's or other Laity's Presentment of a Person
to the Benefices of the Church [that is of such a Person whose Orthodoxness and
Canonicalness the Clergy cannot question.] Again; The Translation by the Pope
of English Bishops out of the Realm without the Kings assent, whereby (says
the Statute) the Kings Liege Sages of his Council should be without his assent,
and against his Will carried away and gotten out of his Realm, and the
Substance and Treasure of the Realm shall be carried away, and so the Realm
destitute as well of Council, as of Substance [ surely these are Temporal
Considerations] and so the Crown of England, which has been so free at all
times that it has been in no Earthly Subjection, but immediately subject to
God in all things [ not absolutely as the Bishop represents it Vindic. p. 80.
but in all things] touching the Regality of the same Crown, and to none other,
should be submitted to the Pope, etc. [ the Regality; (that is) in those
Temporal things above named.] In these Cases Bulls, etc, from the Bishop of
Rome were prohibited, as infringing the Civil Rights. And to this Statute in
such case (it is said there) the Lords Spiritual gave their consent: But
meanwhile making Protestations (says the Statute) that it is not their mind to
deny or affirm that the Bishop of Rome may not excommunicate Bishops, nor that
he may make Translation of Prelates after the Law of Holy Church. And Richard
the Second, notwithstanding this Act, was far from the denying the Popes
Supremacy in his Realms as to many other respects, as appears by his zealous
supporting of Urban the Sixth in it. 2. Rich. 2.7.] Again you may find perhaps
Appeals, Bulls, etc, prohibited, in general, without the Kings content first
obtained thereto; But this not out of an intention of suppressing all such
Appeals, or Ecclesiastical Laws or Censures whatsoever coming from the Pope or
other Spiritual authority abroad, or out of an intention of denying these in
several Cases to be rightfully belonging unto them: but only out of an
intention to examine them first, whether any thing were contained in them
prejudicial to the Temporal and Civil Rights, and Emoluments and Privileges of
the Prince and of his Subjects, that the Mitre might not encroach upon the
Crown; both which have their certain limits of Jurisdiction, and may do wrong
one to the other. Such authority as this (then) in Church Matters you may find
exercised by former Princes of England; or perhaps some other power used by
them against the Church, and defended by the common Lawyers of those days, more
than is justifiable. But, on the other side, I think you will not find either
assumed by the Prince, or allowed to him by any Statutes before the times of
Henry the Eighth, such Powers in Ecclesiastical matters, as some of these
following. Namely; A Power to correct and reform all Errors and Heresies in
Religion by such persons, as the Prince shall appoint to judge thereof, half of
them being Laics, repealing also the former course of trial of them by the
ordinary Church-Magistrates, as you may see below,. 39. A Power to make and
reverse Ecclesiastical Laws, alter the Church Liturgies, public Forms of
administering the Sacraments, Ordinals, etc without the consent of the major
part of the Clergy or any lawful Church Authority. A Power to hinder and
prohibits the Clergy, that they may correct or reform any such Heresies, or may
make or publish any such Ecclesiastical Decrees or Laws within the Kings
Dominions without his consent thereto first obtained. Without his Consent, not
to examine, whether such their Constitutions might be any way prejudicial to
the State Temporal (for this were but meet and just) but whether such be
agreeable or repugnant to Gods Word, and dangerous to the Peoples Salvation and
Spiritual State. A Power thus in all Causes Ecclesiastical, Licenses,
Faculties, Dispensations to be the final Judge (by himself or by his Court of
Chancery or by some other Deputies whom he pleases to choose) to whom Appeal
may be made concerning what is agreeable, or what repugnant to the Holy
Scripture. A Power to restrain all Foreign Appeals and Censures from thence,
not only in all Cases mixed with the Interests of the Temporal Government, but
also in all matters merely Spiritual and of Ecclesiastical Cognizance. A Power
to prohibit or reverse any Ecclesiastical Constitutions of Councils Patriarchal
or General, tho in things wherein Temporal Regalities or Prerogatives, or the
Temporal safety and peace of the people is not concerned; but, as I said, upon
pretense of their being conceived to contain something repugnant to Gods Law. A
Power to hinder that no Ecclesiastical Governors may call any Synod or Assembly
within his Dominions, nor exercise in foro externo any Ecclesiastical Censures
without his consent. A Power to command such persons to be induced and
instituted in Ecclesiastical Benefices and Dignities, whom the lawful
Ecclesiastical Power refuses as Unorthodox or Uncanonical. See Schism Guard^d
p. 61.161. Vindic. p. 268.
Lastly, A Coactive Power in foro externo so far extended, as that it leaves,
for the Clergy (as independently belonging to them,) only an Internal Power or
Jurisdiction in the Court of Conscience: or an Habitual Power of Preaching,
Administering the Sacraments, exercising the power of the Keys in foro
conscientiae, ordaining and degrading Ecclesiastics; but without any Liberty
actually or lawfully to exercise the same in any Princes Dominions, if he
denies it: without any Power allowed to the Clergy to summon Offenders in foro
externo, and to punish them with the Spiritual Sword, either for their
convicted crimes, or for nonappearance, and this whether Secular Princes
either favor or oppose: without any Power to call or keep any public
Assemblies for public Worship, for decision of Controversies in Religion, for
making Church Laws, i. e, such as prejudice no Temporal Rights, and publishing
and imposing the same Determinations and Canons (upon Ecclesiastical Censures)
upon the Church's Subjects, in the several Dominions of Princes, whether they
consent or resist. Without any Power of their electing and ordaining future
Clergy in the several Dominions of Princes Christian as well as others;
whenever these Princes shall propose or assent to the admission of no such
persons, as they (I mean the lawful Church Authority) shall judge Orthodox and
capable. Such Powers are not mentioned, at least clearly, by Bishop Bramhal to
belong to the Clergy, but seem to be swallowed in the Coactive Power of the
Prince. Such Powers were in the possession of the Church independently on
Princes for the first Three Hundred Years. Such Powers being translated to the
Secular Governors (when Christian) do arm them (when Christians Heretical) to
change and overturn the Church in their Dominions as they please, whilst the
Clergy ought not to contradict. Such Powers are said to belong to the Prince
since the Reformation (and indeed without these the Reformation could not well
have been effected) and I think are given to them in the fore-quoted Statutes.
If these Powers are said not to belong to these Princes, let them name which of
these are not. But Lastly, such Powers cannot be showed to have been given, or
been due, to our Kings by the former Laws, unless we will believe that the Laws
of the Land then contradicted that Obedience, which those Princes yielded to
the Church; or that those Princes, even when most fallen out with the Church,
would voluntarily forego so many of their rights.

Thus much to the first Defense used by Bishop Bramh.. 35. n. 3.
That Henry the Eighth's Statutes were only declarative of the former Laws.
That King Henry the Eighth by these Statutes claimed only an External Coactive
Power in Causes Ecclesiastical in foro contentioso; if by External Coactive
Power he means the exercising of all those Powers, which I have but now
named, with Coaction and the Material Sword, then the Secular Prince, seems to
assume and exercise several of those Powers which are only the Churches rights.
But if by Coactive Power he means only the Kings calling of the Clergy
together to consult of Church Affairs, and his assisting with the Secular Sword
their Constitutions and Decrees, and making their Laws his own by Temporal
Mulcts and Penalties, and compelling particular Clergy, as well as Laity, to do
that which the Church declares to be their duty; compelling, I say, with
outward force, for herein the Bishop seems to place the Kings Power in
Spiritual matters [See Schism Guarded, p. 93. How can the Pope (says he)
pretend to any Coactive power in England, where the Power of the Militia and
all Coactive force is legally invested in the King? And p. 92. The Primitive
Fathers did assemble Synods and make Canons, etc: But they had no Coactive
Power to compel any man against his Will; the uttermost they could do was to
separate him from their Communion. And p. 166, Who can summon another man's
Subjects to appear where they please, and imprison and punish them for not
appearing without his leave? Likewise p. 168. and compare them with his former
Saying, p. 92.] If thus the Bishop will have Secular Princes to have nothing to
do in the making or hindering any Decrees or Laws of the Churchmen in matters
merely Spiritual; but only to have such a sole dominion over the Secular Sword,
as that none can use it but he, or by his leave, in the execution of such Laws,
all is well: but then the former-quoted Statutes of Henry the Eighth show much
more Power challenged, than the Bishop allows. This in Answer to the Bishop

Secondly, If it be further said here touching that particular Statute of much
concernment 26. Hen. 8.1. c. quoted before. 26, and. 25. [Namely;. 35. n. 4.
1 That the King shall have full power from time to time, to visit, repress,
reform, all such Errors, and Heresies, as by any manner of Spritual Authority
etc lawfully may be reformed, etc.] See. 25.
If it be said here; that the King has only this power therein ascribed to
him, to redress and reform the Errors and Heresies, which are declared such by
the Church, by former Councils, or by the Synods of his Clergy; First thus then
he has not all the power given him, which by any manner of Spiritual Authority
or Jurisdiction may be exercised (as it follows in that Act) because there is a
Spiritual Authority also, that may declare new Errors and Heresies, or that may
reform such Errors, as have not been by Synods formerly declared such;
Secondly, Thus the Clause ending the Act [ any Custom, Foreign Laws,
Prescription, etc, notwithstanding] is utterly useless; because no Foreign
Laws, or Prescriptions deny this Authority to Kings, to reform Errors etc in
their Dominions; so that they still confine themselves to the precedent
Judgments of the Church. Thirdly, In the Act fore-quoted 25. Hen. 8.19. c. It Is
granted to his Highness and Thirty Two Commissioners elected by him, to annul
and make invalid what former Synodal Canons they think not to stand with the
Laws of God; therefore they have power to judge, which Canons are such, and to
reform them, i. e, to teach and declare the contrary truths to them, when
thought by them Errors, against the judgment of former Synods, and without the
judgment of a new Synod; and what is this but to judge and pronounce de novo,
etc? Fourthly, Lastly; how comes the King or his Commissioners to be made the
ultimate judge (See before. 31.25. Hen. 8.19. c.) in all Appeals touching
Divine matters, if he or they cannot judge in these, what is Error? Since some
Causes and Controversies may happily come before him, not determined by former
Councils. And, for the Errors he reforms, if he is still to follow the judgment
of his Clergy what are such Errors; how are there in these things Appeals
admitted to him from the judgments of his Clergy?

If you know surely (says he) that a Bishop or Preacher erreth or teaches
perverse Doctrine, Lord. Herb. Hist. p. 536.
come and declare it to some of our Council or to us, to whom is committed by
God the high authority, to reform and order such causes and behaviors, and be
not Judges your selves of your fantastical Opinions and vain Expositions. [
Here making his Council or himself Judge of the Bishops Doctrines.] And those
words in King Henry the Eighth's Proclamation, 1543. made for the eating of
White-Meats, Milk, Butter, Eggs, (heese, in Lent: where he says That the mere
positive Laws of the Church may be upon considerations and grounds altered and
dispensed with by the public authority of Kings and Princes, In Fox page 1104.
whenever they shall perceive the same to tend to the hurt and damage of
their people. [ Unless perhaps he restrain damage here to Civil Affairs.]
Contrary to the Eighth Thesis. And those words in Cromwell's Speech, when he
presided, as the Kings Vicar General, over the Clergy assembled to state
something in Controversies of Faith then agitated betwixt the Roman Church and
Lutherans; who told them; That His Majesty would not suffer the Scripture to be
wrested and defaced by any Glosses, Fox. p. 1078.
any Papistical Laws, or by any Authority of Doctors or Councils. By which if
this be meant; that we are not obliged to embrace the Doctrine of Scriptures
according to those Determinations and Expositions which lawful Councils have
made of them, it is contrary to the Fourth and Seventh Thesis, and overthrows
the Government of the Church. See the same thing said on the Kings behalf by
the Bishop of Hereford against other Bishops urging the Doctors of the Church.
Fox p. 1079.


I will conclude with what Bishop Carleton in Jurisdict. Regal and Episcopal
Epist. dedicat. Calvin upon those Words in Amos 7.13. [ Prophecy not any more
at Bethel for it is the Kings Court;] say of these times. Bishop Carleton
relates out of Calvin, That Stephen Gardener, Bishop of Winchester, being at
Ratisbon in Germany upon the Kings Affairs, and there taking occasion to
declare the meaning of that Title, Supreme Head of the Church given to Henry
the Eighth, taught; that the King had such a power, that he might appoint and
prescribe new Ordinances of the Church, even matters concerning Faith and
Doctrine, and abolish old. As Namely, 'That the King might forbid the Marriage
of Priests; and might take away the use of the Cup in the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, and in such things might appoint what he list. And there likewise
Bishop Carleton confesses; That when Henry the Eighth took this Title of
Supreme Head, etc, tho the sounder and more judicious part of the Church then
understood the words of that Title so, as that no offense might justly rise by
it [I suppose he means; in that sense, as himself takes it; which is: For the
King to have a Jurisdiction Coactive in External Courts, binding and compelling
men by force of Law and other External Mulcts and Punishments, to what the
church in Spiritual matters defines. For this Bishop says; that the Church is
the only Judge of such matters (See before p. 4.) and in his whole Book,
written purposely on this Subject, I do not find that he gives the King any
Coactive Authority in Spiritual matters against any definition of the Church:]
Yet (says he) they that were suddenly brought, from their old Opinions of
Popery not to the love of the Truth, but to the observance of the Kings
Religion, received a gross and impure sense of these words. But this gross
sense is such, as Bishop Gardener expressed, and as I think some of these
Instances in the Parliaments Acts, etc made above do confirm; tho some Writers
in our latter times seem to be somewhat unwilling to acknowledge it. And it is
plain, that Calvin (in Amos 7.) understood those times (in which he writ) to
have given Supremacy to Kings, and particularly to Henry the Eighth in this
gross sense. Whilst he complains thus. -- Et hodie quam multi sunt in Papatu,
qui Regibus accumulant quicquid possunt juris and potestatis; ita, ut ne qua
fiat disceptatio de religione, sed potestas haec sit penes Regem unum, ut
Statuat pro suo arbitrio quicquid voluerit, and sine controversia hoe firmum
maneat. Qui initio tantopere extulerunt Henricum Regem Angliae certe fucrunt
inconsiderati homines. Dederunt illi summam rerum omnium potestatem; and hoc me
semper graviter vulneravit: erant enim blasphemi, cum vocarent ipsum summum
caput Ecclesiae sub Christo. Hoc certe fuit nimium: Sed tamen sepultum hoc
maneat, quia peccarunt inconsiderato zelo. Sed impostor ille [Stephen Gardiner]
qui postea fuit Cancellarius hujus Proserpinae, quae hodie illic superat omnes
diabolos [he means Queen Mary] Ille, cum esset Ratisponae, non pugnabat
rationibus (loquor de hoc postremo Cancellario qui Episcopus fuit Vintoniensis)
sed quemadmodum jam caepi dicere, non multum curabat Scripturae testimonia, sed
dicebat fnisse in arbitrio Regum, Statuta abrogare, and ritus novos instituere.
Si de jejunio agitur, illud regem posse populo indicere, and jubere ut hoc vel
illo die vescatur populus carnibus: licere etiam prohibene Sacerdotes a
conjugio: licere etiam regi interdicere populo usum calicis in caena: licere
regi statuere hoc vel illud in regno suo: Quare? Potestas enim summa est penes
Regem. He goes on complaining. Certum quidem est Reges, si fungantur suo
officio, esse and Patronos Religionis, and nutricios Ecclesiae. Hoc ergo
summopere requiritur a Regibus, ut gladio, quo praediti sunt, utantur ad cultum
Dei asserendum [but of whom shall they learn the right cultus Dei? Of the Body
of Churchmen? Then what will become of Galvinisme?] Sed interea sunt homines
inconsiderati [such as Archbishop Granmer and others] qui faciunt illos nimis
Spirituales. Et hoc vitium passim regnat in Germania. In his etiam regionibus
nimium grassatur [amongst the Genevois and the Swisses] and nunc sentimus
quales fructus nascantur ex illa radice; quod sic Principes and quicunque
potiuntur imperio putant se ita Spirituales esse, ut nullum sit amplius
Ecclesiasticium regimen. Non putant se posse regnare, nisi aboleant omnem
Ecclesiae authoritatem, and sint summi Judices tam in doctrina, quam in toto
Spirituali regimine. Tenendum est igitur temperamentum, quia hic morbus semper
in Principibus regnavit, ut vellent inflectere religionem pro suo arbitrio and
libidine, and interea etiam pro suis commodis. Hodie dolendae sunt nobis
nostrae vices and deplorandae. Thus he goes on complaining of the reforming
Princes in those times making themselves the summi Judices both in
Ecclesiastical Doctrines and Government; Himself meanwhile, thus, being
destitute of any Judge at all in these matters (the judgment of Seculars being
(by his sentence) invalid) of the Church opposing him. To this of Calvin may be
added what Dr. Fern says, in his Consid. concerning Reform 2. c. 6.. That the
Bishops and Clergy under Henry the Eighth may seem, at least in words and
expression, to have over-done their work; not in that part which they denied to
the Pope, but in that part which they attributed to the King. [I add, which
part wrongly attributed to the King, by consequence they faultily denied, if
not to the Pope, yet to some other, whose right it was: And then I ask what
person or persons this should be?]

CHAP. IV. The Supremacy claimed by King Edward the Sixth.
Edward the Sixth. Here we find the Power and Privileges of the Kings
Supremacy nothing diminished: 2. In the times of Edward the Sixth.
but all those by Act of Parliament confirmed to Edward the Sixth, which were
formerly conceded to Henry the Eighth.

First, Whereas there had been in former Ages several Parliament Statutes made
in Confirmation of the Determinations of the Church, and concerning the Trial
of Heretics by the Bishops their Ordinaries [As, that Act, 2. Hen. 4.15. That
none shall preach, hold, teach, or instruct contrary to the Catholic Faith, or
Determination of Holy Church; and if any person shall offend in this kind, that
the Diocesan shall judicially proceed against him; and that Act, 2. Hen. 5.7.
That, for so much as the Cognizance of Heresy belongs to the Judges of Holy
Church, and not to the Secular Judges, such persons indicted shall be delivered
to the Ordinary of the Places to be acquitted or convicted by the Laws of Holy
Church;] we find these Statutes repealed by King and Parliament 1. Edw. 6.12.
c. And when as they were again revived by Queen Mary 1, and 2. Mariae 6. c.
with this Preface: for the eschewing and avoiding of Heresies, which of late
have much increased within this Realm, for that the Ordinaries have wanted
authority to proceed against those that were infected therewith; we find them
again repealed, as soon as Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown. 1. Eliz. 1. c.
the Trial of Heresies and Heretics by the Clergy according to the
Determinations and Laws of Holy Church being admitted or excluded here,
according as the Prince was Catholic or Reformed.

Edw. 6.2. c. That all authority of Jurisdiction Spiritual and Temporal is
derived and deduced from the Kings Majesty, as Supreme Head of the Church and
Realm of England. Consequently (in 1. Edw. 6.2. c.) we find ordered, That no
Election be made of any Bishop by the Dean and Chapter; but that the King by
his Letters Patent shall confer the same to any person whom he shall think
meet, and a Collation so made stand to the same effect, as tho a
Conge-d'-eslire had been given etc. That all Processes Ecclesiastical shall be
made in the name and with the style of the King, as in Writs at Common Law, and
the Test thereof shall be in the name of the Bishop. These likewise to be
sealed with no other Seal but the Kings, or such as should be authorized by
him. Concerning which Act, thus Dr. Heylin heartily ( Hist. of Reform. p. 51.)
By the last Branch thereof it is plain, that the intent of the Contrivers was
by degrees to weaken the Authority of the Episcopal Order by forcing them from
their hold of Divine Institution, and making them no other than the Kings
Ministers only, his Ecclesiastical Sheriffs to execute his Mandates. And of
this Act such use was made (tho possibly beyond the true intention of it) that
the Bishops of those times were not in a capacity of conferring Orders, but as
they were thereunto empowered by especial License. [ Where he quoteth out of
Sanders what is set down below. 145.] Which (says he) being looked on by Queen
Mary not only as a dangerous diminution of the Episcopal Power, but as an
odious innovation in the Church of Christ: She caused this Act to be repealed,
leaving the Bishops to depend on their former [i. e, Divine] Institution; and
to act in all things, which belonged to their Jurisdiction, in their own Names
and under their own Seals, as in former times. In which Estate they have
continued, without any legal interruption, from that time to this. Thus He. Now
to go on.

Consequently we find (in 2. Edw: 6.1. c.) the King and Parliament authorizing
Archbishops, Bishops, etc. by virtue of their Act, to take Informations
concerning the not using of the Form of Common Prayer etc therein prescribed;
and to punish the same by Excommunication etc. And in Stat. 5, 6. Edw. 6.1. c.
it is Enacted likewise concerning the same Common Prayer Book Established by
Parliament. That all Archbishops, Bishops etc shall have full power and
authority by this Act to correct and punish by Censures of the Church all
persons, who shall offend against this Act and Statute. Which Clause, by virtue
of this Act, and the like, implies, that the Bishops might not excommunicate
and use the Church Censures for that matter without the King and Parliament's
License; or ought to excommunicate in all matters, wherein the King and
Parliament command it. Whereby we may understand more clearly the meaning of
that Act (forementioned p. 44.. 26.) 26. Hen. 8.1. c. and that 1. Eliz. 1. c.
That the Spiritual Jurisdiction, there ascribed to the King or Queen, involves
the Jurisdiction of Excommunication, as well as others; not for the King to
exercise this himself, but to appoint when and in what matters the Clergy
within his Realm shall execute, or not execute, it: so that they derive the
power of exercising of this Ecclesiastical Censure in his Dominions also from
the King; contrary to the Second and Third Thesis. And indeed if the Clergy may
not make nor enjoin any new or old Spiritual Laws, may not correct what they
judge Heresies, Errors, Vices, etc, without the Kings consent had thereto (See
the Acts set down before. 31, 32, 33, etc.) it is but reasonable, that they
should not excommunicate his Subjects without his consent, for not obeying such
Laws, or for being thought guilty of such Crimes. And this is the reason, I
suppose, of Dr. Heylins Observation ( Hist. of Reform. p. 94.) That in those
times the Wings of Episcopal Authority were so clipped, that it was scarce able
to fly abroad; the Sentence of Excommunication, wherewith the Bishops formerly
kept in awe both Priest and People, not having been in use and practice from
the first of King Edward: and, of that Suit of Latimer to the King in his
Sermon before him quoted ibid: That the Discipline of Christ in the
Excommunication of open Sinners might be restored and brought into the Church
of England.

Edw. 6.11. c. We find the Kings Power in Spirituals delegated to Thirty Two
Persons, half Seculars, to be nominated by him (as was done in Henry the
Eighth's days, in 35. Hen. 8.16. c. 27. Hen. 8.15. c. 25.19. c.) who are
authorized to reform the former Laws of the Church: and these reformed Laws
only, established by a major part of them, and published by the Kings
Proclamation, thence forward to stand in force. [The Statute runs thus. Albeit
the Kings Majesty ought most justly to have the Government of his Subjects, and
the Determinations of their Causes as well Ecclesiastical, as Temporal; [
therefore you see the Statutes, concerning the Bishops determining
Ecclesiastical Causes, repealed in Statute 1. Edw. 6.12. c. above-mentioned]
yet the same, as concerning Ecclesiastical Causes, having not of long time been
put in ure, nor exercised by reason of the usurped Authority of the Bishop of
Rome, is not perfectly understood nor known of his Subjects and therefore may
it please his Highness that it may be Enacted etc, that the Kings Majesty
shall, from henceforth during Three years, have full power to nominate and
assign by the advice of his Council Sixteen persons of the Clergy (whereof Four
to be Bishops) and Sixteen of the Temporalty (whereof Four to be learned in the
Common Laws of this Realm) to peruse and examine the Ecclesiastical Laws of
long time here used, and to gather, order and compile such Laws Ecclesiastical,
as shall be thought to his Majesty, his said Council, and them, or the more
part of them, convenient to be used, practiced or set forth within this his
Realm, in all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Courts and Conventions. And that
such Laws compiled by the said Thirty Two Persons or the more number of them,
and set forth by the Kings Majesty's Proclamations shall, by virtue of this
present Act, be only taken and put in ure for the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws of
this Realm, and no other: Any Law, Statute, or Prescription to the contrary
hereof notwithstanding.]

Forasmuch as, that concord and unity may be had within the Kings Majesty's
dominions [ some it seems then devising to themselves new Forms of Consecration
and Ordination cut of dislike of the Superstitions of the old] it is requisite
to have one uniform manner for making and consecrating of Bishops and Priests;
be it therefore Enacted, that such Form, as by Six Prelates and Six other Men
of this Realm Learned in Gods Law, by the King to be appointed, or by the most
Number of them shall be devised for that purpose, and set forth under the Great
Seal, shall by virtue of this present Act be lawfully used, and none other; any
Law, Statute, or Prescription, to the contrary hereof notwithstanding. Here the
King and Parliament assume power, to abrogate the former common Rituals of the
Church, and, by their Delegates, to constitute, and by their sole Act, to
authorize, new, without any consent and ratification given thereto by any
Ecclesiastical Synod. And in this new Book of Ordination was inserted this Oath
of the Kings Supremacy and renunciation of all Jurisdiction of the Bishop of
Rome to be taken by every one entering into Holy Orders. I from henceforth shall
utterly renounce and forsake the Bishop of Rome, and his Authority, Power, and
Jurisdiction. And I shall never consent nor agree that the Bishop shall
practice exercise or have any manner of Authority, Jurisdiction or Power within
this Realm: but shall resist the same at all times to the uttermost of my
power. And I from henceforth will accept, repute, and take the Kings Majesty to
be the only Supreme Head on Earth of the Church of England. And to my Wit and
uttermost of my Power I will observe and defend the whole Effects and Contents
of all and singular Acts and Statutes made and to be made within this Realm in
derogation, extirpation and extinguishing of the Bishop of Rome and his
Authority; and all other Acts and Statutes made or to be made in Confirmation
and Corroboration of the Kings Power of the Supreme Head in Earth of the Church
of England, etc. Here is the Clergy tied to swear, as to all Acts of the Civil
Power already past, so indefinitely and beforehand to all also that are to
come, which may derogate any thing from the Popes power, or add to the Kings,
in Spiritual matters; as if no bounds or limits at all were due thereto.

Edward, the whole Synod of the Clergy, if we may credit the relation of Mr.
Philpot, See Fox p. 1282.
in the Convocation 1. Mariae did grant Authority to certain persons to be
appointed [ not by them, but] by the Kings Majesty to make Ecclesiastical Laws:
[ where it seems to me somewhat strange, that the Synod should now de novo give
to the King what was before assumed as his Right.] And accordingly, a
Catechism, bearing the name of the Synod, was set forth by those persons
nominated by the King without the Synods revising or knowing what was in it;
tho a Catechism (said Dr. Weston the Prolocutor 1. Mariae) full of Heresies.
This Book being then produced in Convocation, and denied by the Synod to be any
Act of theirs, Philpot urged it was; because the Synodal Authority (says he)
was committed to certain persons to be appointed by the Kings Majesty, to make
such Spiritual Laws as they thought convenient and necessary. Which
Argumentation of Philpots seems to be approved by Dr. Fern in Consid. upon the
Reform. 2. chap. 9. sect. Here then the Synod grants Authority in Spiritual
matters, that they know not who shall in their name establish that which they
please, without the Synods knowing either what Laws shall be made, or who shall
make them: which is against the First and Second Thesis; and is far from adding
any just authority to the Ecclesiastical Constitutions of those times; or to
any Acts, which are thus only called Synodal, because the Synod has in general
given, away their Power to those who make them afterward, as themselves think
fit. Whereas to make an Act lawfully Synodical, the Consent of the Clergy must
be had; not to nominate, in a Trust which Christ has only committed to
themselves, in general another Lawgiver; viz. the King or his Commissioners;
(for (thus) King Edward will choose Cranmer and Ridley; and Queen Mary will
choose Gardener and Bonner to prescribe Laws for the Church:) but to know,
approve, and ratify in particular every such Law, before it can be valid.

Bonner in the First year of King Edward, for making such an hypothetical
Submission, as this, to the Kings Injunctions and Homilies then by certain
Commissioners sent unto him: I do receive these Injunctions and Homilies, See
Fox p. 1192.
with this Protestation, that I will observe them, if they be not contrary and
repugnant to Gods Law, and the Statute and Ordinance of the Church; the fault
imputed here to him, I suppose, being, that he refused to obey any Injunctions
of the King, when repugnant to the Statute and Ordinance of the Church; for
which Fox calls this Protestation Popish.

But the manner of this Supremacy appears yet more specially in the several
Articles proposed to be subscribed by Bishop Gardener, 45. n* 1.
upon his refusing to execute or submit to diverse particular Injunctions of
King Edward in Spiritual matters imposed upon the Clergy; the Subscription
required of him was, -- To the Book of Homilies, affirmed to contain only godly
and wholesome Doctrine, and such as ought by all to be embraced; -- To new Forms
of Common Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, -- and to the denial of
Real Presence or of Transubstantiation; if any thing in that Form may may be
said to oppose either of these: -- To the new Form of Consecration of Bishops
and Priests; -- To the disannulling and abolition of the former Church Liturgy
and Canon of the Mass, and of the Litanies to Saints, and Rituals of the
Church; -- To the abolition of Sacred Images, and Sacred Relics; -- To the
permission of Marriage to the Clergy; -- To the acknowledging, that the Statute
of the Six Articles was by Authority of Parliament justly repealed and
dis-annulled; -- To the acknowledging, that the appointment of Holydays and
Fasting-days (as Lent and Ember-days) and the dispensing therewith, is in the
Kings Majesty's Authority and Power, as Supreme Head of the Church of England:
-- To the acknowledging, that Monastic Vows were Superstitious and the
Religious, upon the dissolution of their Monasteries, lawfully freed from them:
as likewise, that the suppressing and dissolution of Monasteries and Convents
by the King was done justly, and out of good reason and ground. For all which
see the Copy of the Second, and of the Last, Articles sent to Bishop Gardener,
in Fox p. 1234, and 1235. In which Articles the Kings Supremacy is thus
expressed, in the Second of the First Articles sent to him: That his Majesty as
Supreme Head of the Church of England has full Power and Authority to make and
set forth Laws, Injunctions, and Ordinances concerning Religion, and Orders in
the said Church for repressing of all Errors and Heresies, and other enormities
and abuses; so that the same alteration be not contrary or repugnant to the
Scripture and Law of God (as is said in the Sixth of the Second Articles sent
to this Bishop.) [ Now how far this repressing and reforming of Errors, etc.
claimed by the King, did extend, we may see in those points but now named.] In
the Fifth: That all Subjects who disobey any his said Majesty's Laws,
Injunctions, Ordinances [ in such matters] already set forth and published, or
hereafter to be set forth and published, ought worthily to be punished
according to his Ecclesiastical Law used within this his Realm. Again; in the
7.11, 12.14.16. of the Third Articles sent to the same Bishop: That the former
Liturgies of the Church, Mass-Books etc, that the Canons forbidding Priests
Marriage etc, are justly taken away and abolished: and the new Forms of
Common Prayer, and of Consecration of Bishops and Priests are justly
established by Authority of Parliament, and by the Statutes and Laws of this
Realm; and therefore ought to be received and approved of all the faithful
Ministers of Gods word.

Where note; That tho, in some of these Articles,. 45. n. 2.
the Authority of Parliament is mentioned; yet in none of these is any thing
said of the consent of the Clergy as necessary to make such Regal or
Parliamentary Injunctions in Ecclesiastical matters valid. From which may be
collected; That when the Synodal consent of the Clergy is any where else
mentioned, as sometimes it is, (See the Letter of the King and Council to
Bishop Bonner, Fox p. 1186, and the Kings Message to the Rebels of Cornwall, Fox
p. 1189:) it is not to add any Authority to those Injunctions thereby; (which
Injunctions were imposed on the Clergy before any Synodal consent of the Clergy
was either given or asked:) but to propose the judgment and example of the
Clergy consenting, as a motive to render others, that stand out, conformable;
as whose judgment they ought to reverence, and whose example they ought to
follow; not, as whose Decree and Constitution they ought to obey. And if you
wonder, why the King and Parliament of those days never pleaded this last (as
you shall never find it pleaded by them); the reason (I conjecture) was
(besides that they were conscious of some changes made by them of these
Ecclesiastical Judges, displacing those who would not conform to their
Inclinations; which rendered them not so authentical) because they saw, that the
Laws of this National Clergy could stand in no force, by virtue of their Office
or any Commission from Christ; but that so would also the Laws of the Church
and her Synods, which were Superior to the English Clergy, and which were
contrary to the Laws of this National Synod; and so would void and make them of
none effect. And if the King by virtue of his Supremacy urged his, and his
Subjects, freedom from the former Laws and Constitutions of the Church
Universal; so must he, from the present Laws of his own Church National: He,
and his Subjects, being tied in no more Duty to the one, than to the other; nor
in so much.

Gardener behaved himself in this Trial; it was with great perplexity and
distraction: as neither knowing now, how, safely, to recall and recant that
Supremacy of the King in Spirituals, which he had formerly acknowledged and
sworn to; nor how, in that Duty which he owed to the Church, to obey those
particular Injunctions, which the King imposed upon him by virtue of this
Supremacy acknowledged by him; and so he incurred, for this latter, deprivation
and imprisonment. And perhaps it may be thought a just judgment from God, that
he should be thus ensnared and undone by that sense of Supremacy; of which he
had been, in Henry the Eighth's days, both at home and abroad, See. 37.
as you have heard from Calvin, so zealous an Abettor.

Edward the Sixth, with what is said in Antiquit. Brittannic. (p. 339. which
quotes for it the Archives) touching the resentment of their lost Synodal
Authority which some of the Clergy showed in a Synod called by Archbishop
Cranmer, in the First Year of King Edward's Reign, for the furthering of a
Reformation, tho he could effect nothing therein. In which Synod the Clergy
(now too late perceiving, that, not only the Pope, but themselves, had lost
their former Ecclesiastical Power; and that the King and Parliament ordered
Spiritual Affairs as they pleased, without their consents) requested, that, at
least, the rest of their Convocation might be joined, with the House of
Commons; as the Bishops were, with the Lords: that so they might have a Vote
also in passing Church matters; but this request would not be granted them. The
Authors words are these, -- Animadverterunt Praelati omnem vim authoritatemque
Synodi non modo diminutam, sed penitus fractam eversamque esse; postquam Clerus
in verbo Sacerdotis Henrico Regi promisisset, sine authoritate Regia, in Synodo
se nihil decreturos; [or indeed that the King might decree what he pleased
without the Authority of the Synod: for such a Supremacy was either granted to,
or assumed by, the King.] Qua Ecclesiasticarum rerum potestate abdicata,
Populus in Parliamento caepit de rebus divinis, inconsulto Clero, sancire; tum
absentis cleri privilegia and immunitates sensim detrahere; juraque duriora,
quibus Clerus invitus teneretur, constituere. Haec discrimina pati Clericis
iniquum atque grave visum est. Proinde petierunt, ut in Concilio inferiori
Praelati Clerique procuratores cum populo permixti de Republica and Ecclesia
una consulant etc. Thus that Author. And you may see also the Petition it self
lately Printed out of a Manuscript of Archbishop Cranmers by Mr. Stillingfleet
Irenicum 2. Part 8. c. Where, seeking too late to recover their former Steerage
in Ecclesiastical Affairs now transacted in the Court of Parliament, the Lower
House of Convocation prefers these Requests, That, Whereas in a Stat. 25. Hen.
8. the Clergy had promised in Verbo Sacerdotii never from thenceforth to Enact
etc any new Canons, Constitutions etc unless the Kings Assent and License may
to them be had etc: therefore they desire that the Kings Majesty's License may
be for them obtained, authorizing them to attempt and commune of such matters,
and therein freely to give their consent; which otherwise they may not do, upon
pain and peril premised. That either the Clergy of the Lower House of the
Convocation may be adjoined and associate with the Lower House of Parliament;
or else, that all such Statutes, as shall be made concerning matters of
Religion, may not pass, without the sight and assent of the said Clergy; [ or
(as it runs in the Second Petition) the said Clergy not being made privy
thereunto, and their Answers and Reasons not heard] That [ since the former
were annulled] Ecclesiastical Laws may be established in the Realm by Thirty
Two persons, or so many as shall please the King to appoint, etc. That all
Judges Ecclesiastical proceeding after those Laws may be without danger and
peril. That, whereas they were informed, that certain Prelates and other
Learned Men were appointed to alter the Service in the Church etc; and did make
certain Books etc: the said Books may be seen and perused by them, for a better
expedition of Divine Service etc. That such matters as concern Religion, which
be disputable, may be reasoned and disputed amongst them in this House; whereby
the Verity of such matters shall the better appear etc. Thus labored then the
poor Clergy to obtain a joint share at least with the Parliament and civil
State, in transacting the Affairs of the Church. And Dr. Heylin (in Reform.
Justified. 4. p. 21.) grants thus much, That the Censures of the Church were
grown weak, if not invalid, and consequently, by degrees, became neglected;
ever after that King Henry the Eighth took the Headship on him, and exercised
the same by a Lay Vicar General: and p. 20, That the Power and Reputation of
the Clergy was under foot; and therefore the Authority of Parliament of more
use, than afterward in times well balanced and established [ meaning those
following times, wherein the Clergy were now changed and fashioned to the
inclinations of the Prince.] And, as for these days of King Edward; what
Authority concerning Spiritual matters not only the people, but the new Divines
of Edward, acknowledged and enstated in the King and Parliament, may appear
from that Letter of Bishop Hooper, when in Prison, sent to the Synod called in
the beginning of Queen Mary: Episcopis, Decanis etc; wherein he cites them
before the High Court of Parliament, ^ox p. 1933.
as the competent Judge in those Controversies, i. e, for so far as any man can
be Judge. In this Letter, after having urged Deuteronomy. 17.8. because of the mention
made there, of a Judge besides the Priest; Vo^ omnes (says he) obtestor, ut
causam hanc vel aliam quamcunqne, ob religionem ortam inter nos and vos defer
dignemini ad supremam Curiam Parliamenti; ut ibi utraque pars coram sacro and
excelso senatu sese religiose and animo submisso, judicio and authoritati Verbi
Dei subjiciat. Vestra ipsorum causa certe postulat, ut palam e. c lites inter
nos componantur; idque coram competenti judice. Quid hoc est igitur? Quo jure
contenditis? Vultis and nostri, and causae nostrae testes, accusatores and
judices esse? Nos tantum legem and evangelium Dei in causa religionis judicem
competentem agnoscimus. Illius judicio stet vel cadat nostra causa. Tantum
iterum atque iterum petimus, ut coram competenti judice detur nobis amicum
Christianumque auditorium. Non vos fugit, quomodo public, palam, and in facie
ac in presentia omnium statuum hujus regni, in summa curia Parliamenti, veritas
verbi Dei per fidos, doctos, and pios ministros de vestra impia Missa gloriose
victoriam reportavit. Quae, quocunque titulo, tempore, universalitate,
splenduit, ubi per Sanctissimum Regem Edvardum 6. ad vivum lapidem Lydium verbi
Dei examinari, per proceres, heroas, ac doctos hujus regni, erat mandatum,
statim evanuit etc. Here that Bishop professes, when any do oppose a Synod in
a Cause of Religion, not the Synod, but the Parliament, the competent Judge
therein; and urges, if I rightly understand him, the just Authority thereof in
King Edward's time for putting down the Mass. Will he then stand to the
Parliaments judgment; which as it was then affected, would have cast him? It
seems, Not; by that he faith [ Tantum legem Dei in causa religionis judicem
competentem agnoscimus. Illius judicio stet vel cadat causa nostra.] By whose
mouth then shall the Scripture decide it; that Sentence may be executed
accordingly on him, a Prisoner for this Controversy? By the Clergy's? No. By
the Parliament's? No; for he makes sure to wave that in his Letter? By the
Scripture then its self? But this is urged, by both sides, to speak for them;
and says not one word more after the Cause heard by the Parliament, than it
did before. So that, in nominating no other final Judge, the Bishops Request
here in sum is; that his Cause may never be tried by any Judge.

CHAP. V. King Edward's Supremacy disclaimed by Qu. Mary.
Edward's Death, in the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign (a Princess otherwise
principled, The former Supremacy Disclaimed by Q. Mary and by the Bishops in
her days; and the Popes Supremacy re-acknowledged.
) all that had been done in the Two former Kings Reigns, by Prince, by State,
or by Clergy; in setting up a new Lay-Supremacy in Spirituals; in restraining
the former Power and Supremacy of the Church; in innovating the Forms, of
Divine Service and Administration of the Sacraments, of Ordination, of Church
Rites and Discipline, and Jurisdiction; in disannulling several former
Ecclesiastical Canons and Constitutions, and composing new ones; All was now,
by an equal Authority of Prince, Clergy, and State, reversed, repealed,
ejected; and Religion, (only rendered much poorer) as for Temporals, put into
the same course, which it had in the twentieth Year of Henry the Eighth; before
a new Wife, or a new Title, was by him thought on. So that any new Reformation,
to come afterward, must begin to build clearly upon a new Foundation; not able
to make any use of the Authority of the former Structure, being now, by the
like Authority, defaced and thrown down.

Mary's days, will chiefly appear to you; in the Statute 1. Mar. 2. chap,
where, the ancient Form of Divine Service etc, used in Henry the Eighths days,
is restored; as being the Service (says the Act) which we and our Forefathers
found in this Church of England, left unto us by the Authority of the Catholic
Church: And the final judgment of Ecclesiastical matters restored to the Church.
and several Acts of Henry the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth, that abrogated
some former Ecclesiastical Laws etc, or introduced new Forms, of Divine
Service, of Election and Ordination of Bishops and Priests, are repealed. And
in 1, and 2. Mar. 6. chap. where the ancient way of judging Heresies and
Heretics first at the Tribunals of the Church is set on foot again; and the
Statutes to this purpose, which were repealed upon the coming in of a new
Supremacy, are revived.

Mar. 8. c, where the Pope's Supremacy is re-acknowledged; when also (as Fox
observes p. 1296.) the Queen's Style concerning Supremacy was changed; and in
it Ecclesiae Anglicanae Supremum Caput omitted: as also Bonner Bishop of
London, being Chief of the Province of Canterbury in the Restraint of the
Archbishop, did omit, in his Writs to the Clergy, Authoritate Illustrissimae
etc legitime suffulttus. In which Statute also the whole Nation, by their
Representative in Parliament, ask pardon and absolution from their former
Schism, repealing the Oath of the Kings Supremacy, and all the Acts made
formerly in Henry the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth's time against the Popes
Supremacy: and amongst them particularly this Act of the Submission of the
Clergy, set down before. 22. and. 23; whereby the Clergy had engaged themselves
to make nor promulge no Ecclesiastical Canons without the Kings consent; and
bad also besought the King to delegate some persons whom he pleased, to reform
Errors, Heresies etc, i, e. to do the Offices of the Clergy. In which Statute
also the Clergy, in a distinct Supplication beginning, Nos Episcopi and Clerus
Cantuariensis Provinciae in hac Synodo congregati etc, calling the former
Reformation perniciosum Schisma, do petition to have the Church restored to her
former Rights, Jurisdictions, Liberties, taken from her by the injustice of
former times. [The words are, Insuper Majestatibus vestris supplicamus, pro sua
pietate efficere dignentur, ut ea, quae ad jurisdictionem nostram and
libertatem Ecclesiasticam pertinent, sine quibus debitum nostri pastoralis
officii and curae animarum nobis commissae exercere non possumus, nobis
superiorum temporum injuria ablata, restituantur; and ea nobis and Ecclesiae
perpetuo illaesa and salva permaneant: and ut omnes leges, quae hanc nostram
jurisdictionem and libertatem Ecclesiasticam tollunt, seu quovis modo
impediunt, abrogentur, ad honorem Dei etc.] Which Rights how welcome they were
to them when now regained in Queen Mary's days, we may guess from their former
complaint in the beginning of King Edward's days; where we see how much they
grieved, when they saw them lost. Sanders 2. l. p. 244. adds also, that at this
time Singuli Episcopi ( uno tantum Landaffensi excepto) peculiariter petierunt
a sede Apostolica veniam prioris gravissimae culpae, See before. 47.
and confirmationem in suo cujusque Episcopatu. Lastly in the same Statute it
is concluded: That the Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions of the Archbishops,
Bishops and Ordinaries, should be in the same State, for process of Suits,
punishments of Errors, and execution of Censures of the Church, with knowledge
of Causes belonging to the same, and as large in these Points as the said
Jurisdiction was in the Twentieth Year of Henry the Eighth.

Mary, And the Church Doctrine under King Edward condemned.
before the introduction of any new Bishops, save only some of those that were
ejected in King Edward's Reign. In which Synod the Bishop of London presided,
the Archbishop of Canterbury having been, about a Month before, by the
Council, committed to the Tower for Treason; for which he was, some Two Months
after, condemned, but afterward pardoned by the Queen. In this Synod Fox says
(p. 1282.) that the whole House of Convocation, Fox p. School.
except Six persons, did immediately assent, and subscribe to the natural
presence of Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar; and Transubstantiation: and
to the renouncing, of the Catechism put forth in the latter time of King
Edward, in the name of the Clergy, and of the new Book of Common Prayer; these
things being proposed to them by the Prolocutor. At which time (says he) Mr.
Philpot Archdeacon of Winchester was as it were astonished at the multitude of
so many Learned Men as there were on purpose gathered together to maintain old
Traditions, rather than the Truth of Gods Holy Word.

After this Synod see in Fox p. 1294.. 52. n* 1.
the Eighteen Articles sent by the Queen to the Bishops (but these Articles
such as only enjoined them the observance of former Church Constitutions, from
which the late Innovations had disobediently deviated) commanding them, to see
to the Observance, in their Diocesses, of the Church Canons used in the time of
Henry the Eighth; securing them herein from the incurring any danger from the
Laws of the Realm; see the 1. Act. The Second of which Articles requires them
to omit in their Writs: Regia authoritate fulcitus. The Third, not to require
the Oath of the Queens Supremacy, in their admission of any into Church
Preferments. The Fourth excludes Sacramentaries from all Ecclesiastical
Functions; the Synod, held in October before, having declared against them. The
Seventh excludes, according to the former Church Canons, all married Persons
from Ecclesiastical Promotions. The Ninth appoints the Divorce of married
Monks and other Religious Persons, who had formerly taken the perpetual Vow of
Continency; and the rest are to renew some or other former order of the Church.

Lastly see the Retractation made by the Clergy in Queen Mary's days, confessed
by Mason de Minist.. 52. n. 2.
3. l. 4. c. Regnante Maria alia Episcopis men's, alius animus fuit [ i, e.
concerning Supremacy:] To which all that he answers is this, Eorum subsecuta
inconstantia confessionis [prioris] soliditatem abolere non potuit. Quamvis
sententias revocarunt, suis tamen ipsorum argumentis non satisfecerunt. But,
however that he will not grant the Kings Supremacy (I mean in such a sense as
it was then maintained) to have been confuted by the Bishops reasoning; yet he
grants it to have been revoked (so much as in them lay) by their Authority.

whether this Clergy in Queen Mary's days, That Queen Mary's, Clergy was a
lawful Clergy.
who in their following Synods abrogated the Acts and Concessions of the
Clergy's former Synods in Henry the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth's days, were a
lawful Clergy? Which if they be now; note, that they will also be so in the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth's days; when also they opposed her Reformation.
Now it is questioned whether they were a lawful Clergy: a
a because many of King Edward's Bishops were, in the beginning of this Queen^s
Reign, ejected; b
b and some also burnt for Heretics, and others put into their places; g
g whilst some of them were living, and so those Sees not vacant: d
and d that without the consent of the Metropolitan, who for the three first
Years of Queen Mary was Cranmer; without which Metropolitan's consent the
Ordination of any Bishop in his Province was unlawful. See Can. Nicen. 4. Can.
Apostol. 35. Now these Bishops are numbered by Fox to have been then ejected:
Page 1289.
Cranmer from Canterbury; Holgate from York; Ridley from London; Poynet from
Winchester; Hooper from Worcester; [ he might have said from Gloucester too, for
Hooper, in the latter end of Edward the Sixth's time, held both these Sees
together in Commendam: and for Worcester, See Godw. Annal. An. Dom. 1555.
Latimer (then living) had been Bishop thereof in King Henry 's days; out of
which, for Nonconformity to the Six Articles, he was ejected, or for fear
resigned it, and was imprisoned in the Tower till King Edward 's time; yet (for
what reason I know not) could never then be restored to his Bishopric;] Barlow
from Bathe; Harley from Hereford; Tailor from Lincoln, [ but this was by death;
not by the Queen, as appears in Fox p. 1282.] Ferrars from St. David's;
Coverdale from Excester; Scory from Chichester; Besides these I find two more
mentioned by Mason de Minist. p. 248. Bush from Bristol; and Bird from Chester.
Of which Bishops (Mr. Fox says, p. 1280) Five were put out; that the former
Possessors of those Bishoprics might be restored, Bonner to London, Gardener
to Winchester, Day to Chichester, Heath to Worcester [ but Heath was afterward
translated to York in Holgates room, and Pate to Worcester in Hoopers room,]
Vesy to Excester; Besides which Tonstal was restored to Durham; a Bishopric
which, after Tonstal's Imprisonment, was first, kept void in King Edward's
days; and at last, by Act of Parliament, dissolved to increase the Kings
Revenue.

Mary's Clergy, Reply to a
notwithstanding what has been objected, you must First 1. take notice, That
the Ejection of Bishops in Queen Mary's days was not the First, Edward's time,
when Gardener, Bonner, Tonstal, Day, Heath, Vesy, That the Bishops in K
Edward's days were not lawfully ejected.
and probably some other Bishops were removed from their Sees: for I find not
the Ecclesiastical History of those times accurately written by any; nor Mr.
Fox to use the same diligence in numbering the Change of Clergy under King
Edward, as he does that under Queen Mary; yet something may be conjectured from
those general words of his, p. 1180, For the most part the Bishops were
changed, and the dumb Prelate compelled to give place to others that would
Preach. Secondly, That, Edward's time was not lawful, so many of the Bishops,
as were then ejected, were, by Queen Mary, justly restored; and those, who were
introduced into their places, justly excluded. Thirdly, That to prove the
Ejection of those Bishops under King Edward lawful; it must be done, Fourthly,
But that, in both these respects, their Ejection,

First, these Bishops being questioned about matters Ecclesiastical and
Spiritual, 1. Neither for the Judge.
their Judges were the Kings Privy Council, or his Commissioners, part Clergy,
part Laity, as the King pleased to nominate them (contrary to Third Thesis.)
Amongst whom tho the Archbishop of Canterbury was one: yet he was so, not for
his Canonical Superiority in the Church; but from the Authority he,-jointly
with the rest, received from the King, when the former Statutes, concerning the
Trial of Heretics by the Clergy, See Fox. p. 1237, and p 1202.
had been first abrogated, ( See before. 39:) whereas the Clergy only are the
lawful Judges of these matters; namely, to declare what is done contrary to the
Laws of God, and of the Church; and to depose from the exercise of their Office
the persons found faulty therein. See Thesis Third.

Secondly, The Causes Ecclesiastical urged against them, for which they were
removed from their Bishoprics, were these; 2. Nor for the Cause.
their non-acknowledgment of such a large extended Power of the Kings
Supremacy, as he then claimed and exercised in Ecclesiastical matters; their
nonconformity to the Kings Injunctions (confirmed, if you will, with the
consent of the National Synod of the Clergy) in Spiritual matters. And amongst
these especially; their not relinquishing the usage of the former Church
Liturgies, and Forms of Divine Service, and particularly the Canon of the Mass;
which had been a Service approved by the general Practice of the Church
Catholic for near a 1000 Years; in which were now said to be many Errors, See
Church G^v. 4. (...).. 39.
for which it might not be lawfully used: their not using, and conforming to,
the new Form of Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, the new
Form of Consecration and Ordination of Priests; and many other clear
Innovations against the former, not only Ecclesiastical Constitutions, or
External Rites and Ceremonies (which it was affirmed, in one of the Questions
disputed on in the first Year of Queen Elizabeth, that every particular Church
has Authority to take away and change) but also Ecclesiastical Doctrines
established by Synods superior to that of this Nation; as has been showed in
the Fourth Part of Church Govern. A Catalogue of which Doctrines and Canons I
have set down before. 45, having taken them out of the Three Copies of Articles
proposed to the then Bishop of Winchester, See Fox p. 1234, 1235.
to be subscribed. Now such Canons, whether concerning matters of Doctrine, or
of Ecclesiastical Constitution, cannot be lawfully abrogated; neither by the
King (See Thesis 1, 2.7, 8;) nor by the National Synods of this Church, (See
Thesis 4.8:) and therefore the Ejection of those Bishops in Edward the Sixth's
days, for not obeying the King, (I add, or the National Synod, had there been
any such before their Ejection,) in breaking such Canons was unjust; and
therefore they justly by Queen Mary restored, and the others that were found in
their places, justly dispossessed.

Fifthly, As for the rest of King Edward's Bishops; who, besides those Bishops
that possessed these non-vacant Sees, were ejected in Queen Mary's days: 5.
That the Bishops deprived in Qu. Mary's days were lawfully ejected
their Ejection (contrary to the other) will be justifiable; if done for a
lawful Cause, and by a lawful Judge, 1. First then; the Causes of their
Ejection were these chiefly.

First, For their being Married (which many, if not all, the Ejected were,
Cranmer, 1. B^th as to the Cause.
Holgate the Archbishop of York, Coverdale, Scory, Barlow, Hooper, Farrar,
Harley, Bird, Bush; and some of them, after having taken Monastic Vows, as
Holgate, Coverdale, Barlow, as appears in Fox and Godwin) contrary to the
Canons of the Church both Western, and Eastern (as to those that marry after
having received Holy Orders) both Modern and Ancient, even before the Council
of Nice; as is showed at large in the Discourse of Celibacy,. 18: and contrary
to the Provincial Canons of the Church of England. (See Fox p. 1051, and 177,
granting Celibacy of the Clergy to have been established here for a Law by a
National Synod in the time of Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, about An. Dom.
1080:) The Penalty of transgressing which Canons was Deposition from their
Office. See Conc. Constant. in Trullo (less strict in this matter than the
Western Church) Can. 6, Si quis post sui ordinationem conjugium contrahere
ausus fuerit, deponatur. See the same in Council. Neocaesar. before that of
Nice, Can. 1. Conc Elibert. 33. c. Affrican. Can. 37. And see the same in the
Canon of Anselme, that all Priests that keep Women shall be deprived of their
Churches and all Ecclesiastical Benefices.

Secondly, For their not acknowledging any Supremacy at all of the Roman
Patriarch, 2,
more than of any other Foreign Bishop, over the Clergy of England; contrary
to the former Canons of many lawful Superior Councils, as is showed in Church
Gov. 1. Part.. 53. etc; and also contrary to the former Provincial ones of the
English Church. And for their placing such an Ecclesiastical Supremacy in the
Prince, as to use all Jurisdiction, to reform Heresy, constitute or reverse
Ecclesiastical Laws, in the manner before expressed. Which Supremacy in the
Church, since some body in each Prince's Dominion, where Christians are, ever
had here on Earth under Christ; I say, ever; not only after that Princes became
Christian, but before: Archbishop Cranmer, rather than that he would
acknowledge it at any time to have lain in the Church, said that, before the
first Christian Emperors time, it resided in the Heathen Princes; and namely in
Nero for one; affirming also the Grand Seignior now to be the Head of the
Church in Turkey; as you may see, in the Conference between Dr. Martin and him
at his Trial, in Fox p. 1704. Which Relation if any think false, let them say,
what other answer, upon the former Suppositions there, can rationally be
returned.

3.
and administer the Sacraments, according to the former established Church
Liturgies received and used by the whole Catholic Church for near a 1000
Years; or so much as to be present at it: which Divine Service they accused,
not only of many superstitious Ceremonies; but of many Errors also, and of flat
Idolatry, in the Adoration of Bread in the Eucharist. See Fox his Preface to
the Reign of Queen Mary p 1270; and Bishop Ridley's Conferences with Latimer.
Fox p. 1560, and 1562, 1563.

4.
especially about the Holy Eucharist, such as had been formerly declared
Heresies by the Definitions of lawful Superior Councils. As 1. First the
denying of any corporal Presence of Christ, that because this Body was in
Heaven, ergo, it could not be in the Sacrament; and affirming only a Real
Presence (I give you the very words of Bishop Ridley) if taken generally, and
so as it may singnify any manner of thing which belongs to the Body of
Christ. Hence Bishop Ridley's expressing of the manner of Christ's Presence in
the Eucharist are such as these: That the Consecrated Bread is the Body of
Christ, in remembrance of him and of his death. That, besides a signification
of Christ's Body set forth by the Sacrament; the Grace also of Christ's Body,
i, e. the Food of Life and Immortality, is given to the faithful. That we
recieve the virtue of the very Flesh of Christ; the Life and Grace of his Body:
The Grace and the Virtue of his very Nature. Spiritual Flesh; but not that
which was Crucified. That Christ's Body is in the Sacrament; because there is
in it the Spirit of Christ, i, e. the Power of the word of God, which seedeth
and cleanses the Soul. That the Natural Body and Blood, even that which was
born of the Virgin Mary etc, is in the Sacrament, ver^ and realiter; and that
the difference from the Roman Church is only in modo, in the way and manner of
Being: [how is that?] for we (says he) confess it to be there Spiritually by
Grace and Efficacy; because that whosoever receives worthily that Bread and
Wine, receives effectuously Christ's Body and Blood; i, e. he is made
effectually Partaker of his Passion. But otherwise* Christ's Body is in the
Sacrament really, no more, than the Holy Ghost is in the Element of Water in
Baptism; (therefore the Question proposed thus. An Corpus Christi realiter
adsit in Encharistia? In King Edward's time was held Negatively. See Disput.
Oxon. 1549, and King Edw. 28. Article.) Thus Ridley, who spoke most clearly;
Fox. p. 1703
and whose Scholar in this Opinion Cranmer was, he being formerly a Lutheran,
and holding a Corporal Presence. See these words of Ridley, Fox p. 1598. in his
last Examination, and p. 1311, 1312. in his stating of the first Question
disputed on at Oxford: which was not about Transubstantiation, but about the
Corporal Presence of Christ, or the Real Presence of Christ's Body in the
Eucharist; which those Bishops denied, as well as Transubstantiation. The very
same with whose Doctrine, was that of Peter Martyr published in King Edward's
days, Disput. Oxon. 1^49. Fol. 88.
Illud idem corpus nos habere in coena Domini, quod Christus obtulit in Cruce,
quoad substantiam and veritatem naturae fateor, sed non eodem modo: quia
spiritualiter, i, e. per fidem ipsi percipimus; id vero substantiali and
corporali praesentia pependit in cruce. Cum Chrysostomo id ipsum nos [in
Eucharistia] habere corpus quod in Cruce fuit oblatum fatemur: Sed non est
modus recipiendi per praesentiam corpralem; sed per praesentiam fidei, quae
potest res absentes spiritualiter praesentes facere. Secondly, The denying,
that the Eucharist might be offered as a Sacrifice propitiatory; and asserting
that there was in the Eucharist no other Oblation of Christ's Body, than the
Oblation of our Thanksgiving for Christ's Body offered on the Cross. To use
Peter Martyrs words, Substantia hostiae nostrae est gratiarum actio de Corpore
Christi tradito in Crucem; Disput. Oxon. 1549.
and hac gratiarum action, fide atque confessione dixerunt Patres in Caena
offerri corpus Christi. Which matters are contrary to the Doctrines, and
Definitions of former lawful Superior Councils; if those Positions stand good,
which have been said at large in the Discourse of the Eucharist..251. etc; and
( Conc. Sacrif.). (...) etc; and which have been laid down concerning Councils,
in Chapter Gov. 4. Part: which former Positions it must not be expected that I
prove again, wherever I make use of them.

i, e. to that sense wherein themselves, contrary to the Exposition of the
Church, interpreted the Holy Scriptures: as was soberly urged to Bishop Ridley
at his Trial by the Bishop of Gloucester. Fox p. 1602. You (says he) refusing
the Determination of the Catholic Church, bring Scripture for the Probation of
your Assertions; and we also bring Scriptures. You understand them in one
sense; we in another. How will you know the truth herein? If you stand to your
own Interpretation, you are wise in your own conceit; and Vae qui sapientes
etc. Isa. 5.21. But if you say, you will follow the minds of the Doctors and
Ancient Fathers: semblably you understand them in one meaning, and we take them
in another. How will you know the truth herein? If you stand to your own
judgment; then are you singular in your own conceit, and cannot avoid the Vae.
It remains therefore, that you submit your self to the determination and
arbitrament of the Church; with whom God promised to remain to the world's end.
Thus the other side argued with them. But meanwhile what aversion they had of
submitting to the judgment of the Church, or Councils, see in the forecited
Conference of Bishop Ridley with Latimer. Where, having objected the Authority
of General Councils for the Mass, he answers thus, That, whenever they, who
rule and govern the Church, are the lively Members of Christ, and walk after
the guiding and rule of his Word; Councils gathered together of such Guides do
indeed represent the Universal Church; and have a promise of the guiding of his
Spirit into all truth: But that any such Council has at any time allowed the
Mass etc, I affirm (says he) to be impossible; for Superstition [i, e. the
Masy] and the sincere Religion of Christ, can never agree together. For
Determination of all Controversies in Christ's Religion, Christ has left unto
the Church not only Moses and the Prophets, to ask counsel at; but also the
Gospels. Christ would have the Church his Spouse in all doubts to ask counsel
at the word of his Father written. Neither do we read, that Christ in any place
has laid so great a Burden upon the Members of his Spouse; that he has
commanded them to go to the Universal Church. It is true, that Christ gave unto
his Church some Apostles, some Prophets etc. But that all men should meet
together, out of all parts of the world, to define of the Articles of our
Faith; I neither find it commanded of Christ, nor written in the Word of God.
To which Bishop Latimer nexeth these words, In things pertaining to God and
Faith, we must stand only to the Scriptures; which are able to make us all
perfect and instructed to Salvation, if they be well understood. And they offer
themselves to be well understood, only to those who have good wills, and give
themselves to study and Prayer: neither are there any men less apt to
understand them, than the prudent and wise men of the world. Thus Latimer in
application of his Discourse to General Councils. See likewise Bishop Ridley's
Disputation at Oxford; where being pressed with the Authority of the great
Lateran Council; Fox ^. 1321.
after having replied, that there were Abbots, Priors and Friars in it to the
Number of 800; he says that he denies the Authority of this Council, not so
much for that cause, as for this especially; because the Doctrine of that
Council agreed not with the word of God [i, e. as he understood this word.]
Thus he (who was counted the most Learned of those Bishops) concerning the
Authority of Councils. See like matter in the Discourse between Lord Rich and
Mr. Philpot, Fox p. 1641.

Popes and Pontificians, as they were ordinarily then Nicknamed, but of
supposed former lawful Superior Councils, were then in just force in Queen
Mary's days; notwithstanding any abrogation of them made by a National ( i e.
an Inferior) Synod; See Thesis the Fourth, and the Eighth; as also was
frequently urged against those questioned Bishops. See the Examination of Arch
Bishop Cranmer, Fox p. 1702. where Dr. Story the Queens Commissioner thus
objecteth; but receives no answer there to it; The Canons, which be received of
all Christendom, compel you to answer. For although this Realm of late time, through
such Schismatics, as you, have exiled and banished the Canons; yet that cannot
make for you; for you know: that, par in parem, nec pars in totum aliquid
statuere potest. Wherefore this Isle, being indeed but a Member of tire whole,
could not determine against the whole. Thus Dr. Story. Yet neither, in Queen
Mary's time, could the Authority of a National Synod, or an Act of Parliament
be pleaded, for such an abrogation of the old Canons or Liturgies or
Supremacies, and the establishment of new: because both the Synod and
Parliament of this Nation, in the beginning of her Reign, had pulled down
again, what those under King Edward and Henry had builded; so that those
Bishops could not hereupon ground their nonconformity: which Argument Dr.
Story there also prosecuteth against the Archbishop.

And 2^^, (...) to the J^^^
that they were Regularly and Canonically ejected, as to the Cause. And 2.
Next: so were they, as to the Judge, They being condemned, as guilty of Heresy,
2.
or other Irregularities (which are mulcted with Deposition) and so ejected, or
also degraded, and excommunicated with the greater Excommunication (further
than which the Ecclesiastical Power did not proceed) not by any Secular Court,
or by the Queen's Commissioners; but by those whom the Church has appointed,
in the Intervals of Councils, the ordinary Judges of Heresy, or other Breaches
of her Canons: Amongst whom the highest Judges are the Patriarchs; and, above
them, the first Patriarch of Rome. By whose Delegates the more Eminent Persons,
that were accused of Heresy, the Archbishop and the Bishops were here tried
(according to the Authority showed, to be due to, and to be anciently used by,
him, in Chur. Gov. 1. Part.. 9.20. etc, and 2. Part. 77;) and other Inferior
Persons were tried by the Bishop, who was their Ordinary: Queen Mary having
revived the Statutes repealed by King Henry and Edward concerning the Trial of
Heretics by the Church's Authority; as has been noted before. 49. The issue
of which Trial by the Church, if they found guilty, was either Deposition only
from their Benefice and Office, for Breach of her Canons; or also
Excommunication excommnnicatione majori, and Degradation, for Heresy and
Opposition of her Definitions hi matters of Faith; and so the yielding them up,
as now by degradation rendered Secular Persons, to have inflicted on them by the
Secular Power the punishments appointed for such crimes by the Secular Laws; as
you may see, in the Forms of the Condemnation of Cranmer, Ridley, etc Fox p.
1603, and elsewhere; and in the Profession of the Bishop of Lincoln to Bishop
Ridley, Fox p. 1597. All (says he) that we may do, is to cut you off from the
Church; for we cannot condemn you to die (as most untruly has been reported of
us) etc.

To b.
it is to be considered; Where Concern* the bu^^ing of those, wh^, in Q. Mary,
days, were by the C^u condemned of Heresy.
That the Secular Laws, not Ecclesiastical, appoint it; and the Secular
Magistrates, not Ecclesiastical, execute it: Again; That Protestant Princes, as
well as Catholic; King Edward, King James, Queen Elizabeth, as well as Queen
Mary, have thought fit to execute this Law upon Heretics. So in Edward the
Sixth's days, Joan of Kent, Anne Askews Maid (who was burnt in Henry the
Eighth's days, for denying the Real Presence) and George Paris were burnt for
Heretics. Fox p. 1180: And some other Anabaptists condemned and recanting were
enjoined to bear their Faggots. See Stow p. 596. And, in Henry the Eighth's
time, Archbishop Cranmer, in the Kings presence, disputed against Jo. Lambert
for denying the Real Presence; and the Lord Cromwell pronounced Sentence upon
him to be burnt for it. Fox p. 1024, 1026. And the same Archbishop, being as
yet only a Lutheran, says Fox p. 1115, prosecuted others upon the same
grounds; and also in the beginning of King Edward's Reign, before that the
Protector and his Party appeared much for Zuinglianisme, committed to the
Counter Thomas Dobb, a Master of Art, upon the same Account; who also dyed in
Prison. Fox p. 1180. In Queen Elizabeth's days one Jo. Jews and Matthew
Hammond were burnt for Heretics; after they were first condemned by the
Bishop, and so delivered over to the Secular Power; as those were in Queen
Mary's Reign. So also was Hacket executed then partly for Heresy and Blasphemy;
See Hollin. Qu. Eliz. A. Reg. 21. and 25.
and Two Brownists, Coppin and Thocker, hanged at St. Edmunds-bury, An. Dom.
1583 for Publishing Brown's Book written against the Common Prayer Book:
Likewise several others in her time condemned and recanting bare their Faggots.
See Stow p. 679, 680. Stow p. 1174 Cambden 's Hist. Eliz. p. 257.
In King James's time Bartholomew Legate was burnt for an Heretic. And in his
time An. 3. Jac. 4. c. a Law was Enacted concerning Hanging, Drawing, and
Quartering any who should turn Papist and be reconciled to the Pope and See of
Rome, tho a mere Laick, tho one taking the Oath of Allegiance (as several
reconciled do:) The Words are If any shall be willingly reconciled to the Pope
or See of Rome, or shall promise Obedience to any such pretended Authority;
that every such Person or Persons shall be to all intents adjudged Traitors. Is
not this putting to death for pretended Heresy? And to a Death worse than
Burning? So in Protestant States abroad, Servetus by that of Geneva, Valentinus
Gentilis by that of Berne, were burnt for Heretics, Calvin approving.

Mary's days (such as St. Austine calls Haereticis credentes) because they had
so much Obstinacy, as not to recant those Errors, for which they saw their
former Teachers Sacrifice their Life; especially when they were prejudiced by
the most common contrary Doctrine and Practice in the precedent times of Edward
the Sixth; and had lived in such a condition of life, as neither had means, nor
leisure, nor capacity, to examine the Church's Authority, Councils, or Fathers;
ordinarily such persons being only to be reduced (as they were perverted) by
the contrary fashion and course of the times, and by Example; not by Argument,
either from reason, or from authority (and the same, as I say of these Laity,
may perhaps also be said of some illiterate Clergy:) whether I say this Law may
justly be extended to such, and the highest suffering, death be inflicted
(especially where the Delinquents so numerous) rather than some lower Censures
of Pecuniary Mulcts or Imprisonment; these things I meddle not with, nor would
be thought at all in this place to justify. Tho some amongst those unlearned
Lay People I confess to have been extremely Arrogant and obstinate, and zealous
beyond knowledge; and, tho they had suffered for a good Cause, yet suffering
for it on no good or reasonable ground: as neither themselves being any way
Learned, nor pretending the Authority of any Church; nor relying on any present
Teachers, but on the certainty of their own private judgment interpreting
Scripture; as you may see, if you have a mind, in the Disputations of Anne
Askew ( Fox p. 1125.) Woodman the Iron-maker, ( Fox p. 1800.) Fortune the
Smith, ( Fox p. 1741.) Allen the Miller, ( Fox p. 1796.) and other Mechanics,
with Bishops, and other Learned Men, concerning the lawfulness of the Mass, the
Authority of the Church, the Number of the Sacraments, the manner or
possibility of Christ's Presence in the Eucharist, etc: themselves afterward
penning or causing to be penned (you may judge with what Integrity,) the
Relations, which we have of the said Disputations. See more concerning the
erroneous zeal of such like Persons in Fox Monuments later Edition Vol. 3. Fol.
242. 286. 396. 886.

Mary's Reign; And therefore others lawfully introduced in their places To. g.
1.
which if lawful, so also will be, the introduction of those who were chosen in
their rooms: tho this Introduction was, * 1. whilst they Living; or * 2.
without their, or the Metropolitan's, Consent. 1. Tho whilst they Living; if
such Election of them be, after that the other are justly ejected: Of this none
can doubt. Now most of the Protestant Bishops were ejected, at the very
beginning of Queen Mary's days, for being married; tho some of them not so
speedily sentenced for Heresy. But suppose the Introduction of the other was
whilst they living, and before their lawful Ejection: yet these Bishops that
are so (unjustly, I grant,) introduced, if, after that the others are ejected,
then their Superiors, having the power to elect into such place, do acknowledge
and approve them, from thence forward begin to be legitimate; and enjoy a good
Title.

To d. 2.
Tho without their, or the Metropolitan's, Consent. For if the Archbishop,
without whose consent the Canon permits not any Bishop to be consecrated in
his Province, be, upon just cause, and especially upon suspicion of Heresy, in
any restraint; so as he cannot safely be suffered, either in respect of the
Church, or State, any longer to execute his office, till cleared of such guilt:
here his Office is rightly administered, as in Sede vacant, by some other;
whether it be, by some Bishop of the Province, his Ordinary Vicegerent or
Substitute in such Cases; or by the Delegates of that Authority, which in the
Church is Superior to the Archbishops; or by the consent of the major part of
the Bishops of such Province. And so Archbishop Cranmer being, at Queen Mary's
first Entrance, accused, 1. of being Married (an Irregularity incurring
Deposition; and also confessed;) and 2. of Treason; and 3. of Heresy; and for
the Second of these being by the Queen's Council immediately imprisoned; and
shortly after condemned to dye, before the Consecration of any new Bishop: his
Office was now lawfully supplied by another (either by Cardinal Pool the Popes
Legate; or by the Bishop the next dignified Person after the Archbishop in the
Province; or by whomsoever the Queen should depute:) as for any exceptions,
that the Archbishop could make against it; since he acknowledged her for the
Supreme Head of the English Church. Or if, notwithstanding such his restraint
or condemnation, according to the Canon, no new Bishop could be made without
the Archbishop's consent: yet could Archbishop Cranmer justly claim no such
Authority from the Canon as indeed he never did.) 1. Because he held the
abrogation of such Canons to be in the Power of the Prince, Head of this
Church; at least when assisted with the Parliament, and major part of the
Clergy: And so then was this (arguing ad homines) abrogated by Queen Mary
appointing, Hen. 8.20. c. and 1 Edw. 6.2; where the Archbishop is necessitated
to consecrate such person, as the King, from whom all Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction is derived, shall present: or, he refusing, the King may appoint
any other two Bishops for him, to do it in his stead; ergo, so might Queen
Mary, according to these Statutes.

Mary's Clergy were a lawful Clergy; (which indeed, except for a few, and those
not yet chosen or acting in the beginning of her Reign, cannot be called in
question;) and That their reversing the former Constitutions of Henry the
Eighth, or Edward the Sixth's Clergy, as to the Authority that did it, was a
lawful Synodical Act. But in the next place, suppose that the Queen had acted
singly without or against her Clergy (but with the Approbation of those
Governors in the Church Catholic as are the lawful Superiors to this Clergy)
in re-establishing the former Profession of Religion used in Henry the Eighth's
time, before the Reformation; yet, so far as this Profession is evident to have
been according to the Constitutions of the Church, and of former Synods
Superior to the Synods of this Nation, (which Constitutions do therefore stand
still in their just force;) this Act of hers would still be justifiable:
because Sovereigns have such a Supremacy acknowledged by all due unto them, as
to use a Coactive Power in causing the Execution, within their Dominions, of
such Church Canons, as are granted to be in force; without any inferior
further License or consent thereto. Nor is this doing any more, than if the
King of England, now re-established in his Throne, should, without, or against
the Vote of the present Ministry he^e, restore the Bishops, and the
Ecclesiastical Laws again to their former office and vigor; which these men
never had any just or superior Authority to displace, or abrogate.

CHAP. VI. The former Supremacy reassumed by Qu. Elizabeth.
Elizabeth; where we find, by the Authority of the Queen and her Parliament, 3.
What Supremacy claimed etc in the times of Q. Eliz.
all the repeals of the Statutes of Henry the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth, in
order to the Regal Supremacy and Reformation, which Repeals were made in Queen
Mary's days, now again repealed [except in Two, 26. Hen. 8.1. c. and 35. Hen.
8.3. c. which give to Henry the Eighth the Title of Head of the Church of
England; which was changed by the Queen into that of Governor, as better
befitting a Woman. As for Bishop Bramha's Observation of Two other Statutes of
Henry the Eighth, unrestored by Queen Eliz. 28. Hen. 8.10. c. An Act (says he)
of extinguishing the Authority of the Bishop of Rome out of this Realm: and 35.
Hen. 8.5. c. An Act made for Corroboration of the former; if you please to view
them, and compare with them 1 Eliz. 1. c. you will find the cause to be, not
the Queens preserving and retaining here any Authority of the Pope, which Henry
renounced; but the Six Articles in the one, and the old Forms of Oaths in the
other, thought fit by her to be laid aside.] and all the Power and Privileges
whatsoever of Supremacy in Ecclesiasticals, that were conceded to Henry the
Eighth, or Edward the Sixth, That as ample a Supreacy was claimed, and by
Parliament conferred, o^ her, as on K. Hen. or Ed.
as fully transferred to Queen Elizabeth. For which see the Act 1. Eliz. 1. c.
(see the same 8. Eliz. 1. c.) running thus; That all Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Superiorities Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, as by any Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Power has heretofore been exercised, for the Visitation of
Ecclesiastical State and Persons, and for Reformation, Orders, and Correction
of the same, and of all manner of Errors, Heresies, Schisms, etc, shall for
ever, by Authority of this Parliament, be united and annexed to the Imperial
Crown of this Realm. And that your Highness, your Heirs etc, shall have full
Power and Authority, by virtue of this Act, to name and authorize such persons,
as your Majesty shall think meet [ without any being obliged as Henry the
Eighth was, that half the number should be of the Clergy] to exercise and
execute under your Highness all manner of Jurisdictions, Privileges etc; and
to visit, reform, and amend all such Errors, Heresies, Schisms etc, which by
any manner Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power may lawfully be reformed; and that
such persons shall have full power by virtue of this Act to execute all the
Premises; any matter or cause to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.
Provided always that no manner of Order, Act, or Determination, for any matter
of Religion or cause Ecclesiastical, made by the Authority of this present
Parliament shall be adjudged [i.e, by those persons] at any time to be any
Error, Heresy, Schism etc, any Decree, Constitution or Law, whatsoever the same
be, to the contrary notwithstanding [ this Proviso perhaps was put in, because
all the Bishops that were in the Parliament opposed this Statute. See Cambden
1. Eliz. Provided [again] that such persons authorized to reform etc, shall not
in any wise have Authority to determine or adjudge any matter or cause to be
Heresy, [ I suppose by Heresy is meant here any Error contrary to what ought to
be believed and practiced in Divine matters] but only, Such as heretofore have
been determined to be Heresy by the Authority of the Canonical Scriptures; or
by the first Four General Councils; or by any other General Councils, wherein
the same is declared Heresy by the express and plain words of the said
Canonical Scriptures; or Such, as hereafter shall be judged and determined to
be Heresy by the High Court of Parliament of this Realm, with the assent of the
Clergy in their Convocation [ here therefore nothing, whether by the Clergy or
other, could be de novo declared or adjudged Heresy; unless the High Court of
Parliament also adjudged it to be so]

That the Branches, Sentences, and words of the said several Acts [i. c. made
in Henry the Eighth's time touching Supremacy] and every one of them, shall be
deemed and taken to extend to your Highness, as fully and largely, as ever the
same Acts did extend to the said late King Henry the Eighth, your Highnesses
Father. The same thing also appears in the Queen's Admonition, annexed to her
Injunctions, to prevent any sinister Interpretations of the Oath of Supremacy
then imposed: which says: That the Queen's Majesty, informed that some of her
Subjects found some scruple in the Form of this Oath etc, would that all her
loving Subjects should understand; that nothing was, is, or shall be meant or
intended by the same Oath, to have any other Duty or Allegiance required by
that Oath, than was acknowledged to be due to King Henry the Eighth, her
Majesty's Father, or King Edward the Sixth her Majesty's Brother. [It proceeds,
showing those scruples that were made by some against the Oath.] And further
her Majesty forbids her Subjects to give credit to such persons, See Can^od.
H^st. El^z. p. 20.
who notify to her Subjects, how by the words of the said Oath it may be
collected, that the Kings or Queens of this Realm may challenge authority of
Ministry of Divine Offices in the Church; Wherein her Subjects be much abused.
For her Majesty neither does nor ever will challenge any other Authority, than
that was challenged, and lately used by King Henry, and King Edward; which is
and was of ancient time due to the Imperial Grown of this Realm; that is, under
God to have the Sovereignty and Rule over all manner of persons born within
these her Realms, whether Ecclesiastical or Temporal, so as no other Sovereign
Power shall or ought to have any Superiority over them [ but this Sovereignty
and Rule, I suppose, must be understood to extend to all the Particulars, which
Queen Elizabeth 's Statute but now recited allows to belong to it, and
wherein Henry the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth used or were allowed it.] And if
any Person, who has conceived any other sense of the Form of the said Oath,
[i. e. that in it the Queen challenged Authority of Ministry of Divine Offices
in the Church] shall accept the same Oath with this interpretation, sense or
meaning [i. e. that she had such Sovereignty as was challenged and lately used
by her Father and Brother:] Her Majesty is well pleased to accept every such
Person in that behalf as her Obedient Subject. Thus the Admonition; and the
same is said in the Statute 5. Eliz. 1. c, referring to the Admonition, That
none other Authority was by that Oath acknowledged in her Majesty, than that
which was challenged and used by those Two Kings. See likewise 1 Eliz. 1. c,
the Repeal of the former way of the Trial of Heretics, that was revived
according to the former Statutes by Queen Mary, leaving the Supremacy in
Spirituals to Churchmen.

Where Concerning certain q^alifications of her Supremacy urged by the Reformed.
that are noted by Dr. Fern (in his Examen. of Champny 9. c.. 16.20.) and
others, as qualifications and bounds of the Supremacy of Queen Elizabeth, seem
to come home to their purpose so far, as to render it justifiable. There are
urged by them; 1. The Style she used, in calling her self not Supreme Head, but
only Supreme Governor. 2. The Words in the Admonition, viz. Her Majesty does
not challenge any other Authority, than under God to have the Sovereignty and
Rule over all manner of Persons etc: England relating to these of the
Admonition; We give not to our Princes the ministering either of Gods Word or of
the Sacraments; the which thing the Injunctions lately set forth by Elizabeth
our Queen do most plainly testify; but that only Prerogative which we see to
have been given always to all Godly Princes in Holy Scriptures by God himself:
that is, that they should rule all Estates and Degrees committed to their
charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal; and restrain with
the Civil Sword the stubborn and evil Doers. to judge or determine Heresies,
Provided always* that such persons authorized etc. See the Words quoted before.
70.

And the Replies to them. Reply to the First.
To the First, That, if the same, and as much power be still signified by the
Queen's Title now, as was before by the other; which has been showed but now
in the Statute, in the Admonition etc: what matters the varying of words, that
alters nothing in the sense? Neither is the Title of Head of the Church, so it
be understood subordinate to Christ, incompetent to some person or other, here
on earth.

Second, To the 2d
That the words quoted out of the Admonition may indeed be taken in such a
general sense, that all sides will willingly subscribe to. For the Queen has a
Sovereignty and Rule over all manner persons born within her Realms so [ i. e.
in such manner] as no other Foreign Sovereign Power has: namely, in this
manner; to punish her Subjects whatsoever with the Temporal Sword, either for
the Breach of the Church's Canons and Decrees, or for the Breach of her own
Laws. Again; That the words may be taken in such a sense, as that, tho they
signified no more (of which presently) yet none can justly subscribe them,
supposing those things true concerning the Western Patriarch, and concerning
Superior Councils, and concerning Church Constitutions, which are laid down in
the First and Second Part of Church Government, and in the Fourth and Eighth
Thesis: namely, if they be taken in this sense: That no Foreign Power has any
Ecclesiastical Superiority or Jurisdiction in any manner whatsoever over the
Church of England (without reflecting on this Controversy at all; namely,
Whether the Sovereign Power here at home, for the judging and reforming of what
is Error, Heresy, Superstition etc, and for the abrogating or establishing the
former Liturgies of the Church, Canons of Superior, or also National Synods,
does lie in the Prince; or in some others, viz the Clergy of this Nation; or
also, in the Parliament: or in all these jointly; so that the Clergy can do
none of these things without the Prince, or Parliament; nor Prince, without the
major part of Clergy.) But these Two Senses of these words (of which the later
is not justifiable) are, both of them, too much restrained, in respect of the
intent of this Admonition, as may be gathered from the Precedents in the same
Admonition; where the Queen's Sovereignty is extended to all the Particulars,
wherein Henry the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth used or were allowed it. And
from the Statute 1. Eliz. 1. but now recited; which surely this Admonition was
not written to contradict or repeal. And from the ordinary practice of these
Princes, which shall be more showed anon; without which Practice such
Reformation could not have been effected; and therefore this Practice must be
justified. And from the Testimony of the Protestant Writers; who vindicate and
maintain a Supremacy of a much larger extent, and answerable to the Expressions
in the Acts of Parliament; even to the Prince's not only ruling over all
Persons Ecclesiastical, but judging and determining in matters Ecclesiastical,
what therein is Dissonant from, or Consonant to, Gods Word; and then
establishing it in their Dominions, tho contrary to former Church Canons, tho
without or against the Vote of the major part of their own Clergy; as shall be
showed below. 203 etc: which thing also is maintained to have been done by the
Holy Kings of Israel.

Third the same may be repeated, which is said to the Second; To the Third
and this part of the Article, tho annexed for an Explanation, is couched in
such general Terms, as that it will be subscribed to by all sides: ( Fr. a S.
Clara Expos. 39 Articles allows it; and says also: Hic Articulus a Gallis
and Parliamento Parisiensi, salva communione Ecclesiae, usurpatur.) Neither
does it contain any thing but which may well consist with the contradictory of
that Proposition, which follows there, viz. That the Bishop of Rome has no
Jurisdiction in this Realm.

Fourth. 1. That the Proviso made by the Queen and her Parliament seems only to
limit the Persons, To the Fourth. 1.
whom the Queen shall nominate for her Delegates; that they shall adjudge
nothing Error or Heresy without the consent of Parliament and Convocation (as
likewise they made another Proviso, that they should adjudge no Order of the
Parliament in Ecclesiastical matters to be Error or Heresy. See the same
Statute:) but not to limit the Queen; who holds the Supremacy of this Church,
and so these pretended Consequences thereof, as her own right, and not from
Gift, but Recognition only, of the Parliament and Clergy; and, who, in the
Statute, and, I think, in the Doctrine of our Divines, See below. 204. etc, is
acknowledged to have Power to reform Error, Heresy, Schism (which presupposes
judging what is so) without any such Proviso of consent of Councils, or
Parliament: as also the pious Kings of Judah are urged to have done the like.
Or if the Proviso limit the Prince also; That then the Practice of the
Reforming Princes will not be justifiable, nor their Reformation; who have
corrected many Doctrines without consent of Councils (nay when lawful Superior
Synods have decreed the contrary) and without consent of Convocation; and
others without consent of Parliament. But Secondly, The limitation here,
Proviso) if such thing has been determined to be Heresy by the Authority of
the Canonical Scripture (i. e. seem to them to be so) they need look no further
for consent of Councils, or Parliament, or Clergy: and no more need they to
regard Councils, tho defining the contrary, if they have not defined so by the
express and plain words of the said Canonical Scripture; of which thing they
are to judge. See before. 36. the Speech of the Lord Cromwell. Thirdly, Suppose
there be a consent of the King and Clergy, without, or against Authority of
Parliament: such thing cannot be adjudged Heresy, according to this Proviso; if
it be extended* to the Prince. Fourthly, Supposing that the Clergy and
Parliament judge something to be Error or Heresy, which former Councils,
Superior to this National Synod, have determined to be a Divine Truth: this
Proviso's allowing the Prince to follow the consent of his Parliament and
Clergy, upon pretense of the Councils not defining according to express
Scripture, will offend against the Fourth and Eighth Thesis.

But such Supremacy not acknowledged or consented to by the Clergy.
that the same Supremacy, that was acknowledged to King Henry and King Edward,
was also to Queen Elizabeth, by her Parliament. But you may observe; that
neither it (in such a sense as it was challenged) nor the Reformation, that was
effected by it, were acknowledged, or consented to, by her Bishops, or the
Clergy: I mean that Clergy which was in being at the beginning of her Reign;
which has been proved already,. 54. etc, to be a lawful Clergy. And, when
these things touching Supremacy and Reformation were passed by the Parliament,
all the Bishops, that sat there, opposed them (See Cambden A. 2. Eliz.)
probably, because in those Two former Kings days they had by Experience learnt
the Trespasses which such a Supremacy made upon the proper Rights and
Jurisdictions of the Clergy; and the Irreverence, and Libertinisme, and
Distraction which the Innovation of the Liturgies and other Religious Rites
brought into the Church; besides the unlawfulness of a part reforming against
the whole. Thus at that time the Clergy behaved themselves. Neither, in lieu
thereof, can the Concessions to these or the like things by the former Clergy
that was under Henry the Eighth, or Edward the Sixth, be here pleaded; because
these were retracted again by the Clergy in Queen Mary's time: neither can the
Concession of the Clergy of later times, in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, be urged;
because this Clergy was first changed and molded to the Queen's Religion; the
former being unlawfully ejected, as shall be showed hereafter.

CHAP. VII. The Actings of Henry the Eighth (upon such Supremacy acknowledged)
in Ecclesiastical Affairs. III. Head.

Sect. 26. concerning what manner of Supremacy it was, that these Princes
assumed, How, according to such Supremacy assumed, these Three Prieces acted in
Ecclesi^st^cal Affair^.
or also the Clergy or Parliament recognized, as their Right. In the Third
place I promised to show you, how, according to this their conceived right,
these Three Princes acted in matters Ecclesiastical

And first to begin with Henry the Eighth. First, By virtue of such a
Supremacy, he committed the former Canons and Laws of the Church, Pontificial
Laws, The Actings of Hen. 8th in Ecclesiastical Affairs. In the abrogating of
former Ecclesiast^c^l Laws, and compiling a new Body of them.
to the Arbitrament of Thirty Two Persons nominated by him, half Laics; to be
abrogated, corrected, reformed, as they, with his Confirmation, should think
meet. Nec eo contentus (says the Prefacer to the Reformatio legum
Ecclesiasticarum Reprinted 1640.) cordatus Rex [ Henry the Eighth] ut nomen,
nudosque solum titulos a se suisque depelleret, nisi and jura decretaque omnia,
quibus adhuc obstringebatur Ecclesia [Anglicana] perfringeret; huc quoque
animum adiccit, ut universam secum remp. in plenam adsereret libertatem.
Quocirca tum ex ipsius, tum ex publico senatus decreto, delecti sunt viri
aliquot, usu and doctrina praestantes, numero 32, qui penitus abolendo
Pontificio juri ( quod Canonicum vocamus) cum omni alia Decretorum and
Decretalium facultate, novas ipsi leges, quae controversiarum and morum judicia
regerent, Regis nomine and authoritate surrogarent. And thus says the King
himself, in his Epistle to all Archbishops, Barons etc printed before the same
Book; Abunde vobis declaratum hactenusfuit, quantopere, in hac nostra
Brittannia, multis retro saeculis Episcopi Romani vis injusta religioni
Christianae, verae doctrinae propagandae adversata est. Potestatem hanc huic
cum divino munere sublatam esse manifestum est: and ne quid superesset, quo non
plane fractam illius vim esse constaret; leges omnes, decreta atque instituta,
quae ab authore Episcopo Romano profecta sunt, prorsus abroganda censuimus.
Quorum loco en vobis authoritate nostra editas leges damus, quas a vobis
omnibus suscipi, coli, and observari volumus, and sub nostrae indignationis
paena mandamus. Thus the King. Where the meaning of the words, decreta quae ab
authore Episcopo Romano profecta sunt, must be extended to Decrees, not only
Pontifical, but Synodal, wherein the Pope presided; for the Canon Law is
compiled of both these: and over both these did the Kings Supremacy claim
Authority in his Dominions; and over whatsoever else seemed to him established,
not by Divine, but only by Humane Authority. See before. 22.23.27: And also the
things changed by him were not the Decrees of Popes, but of Councils.

A. D. 1536. concerning matters of Faith, Entitled Articles devised by the
Kings Highness, to stable Christian quietness and unity amongst the People;
(you may read them set down at large in Mr. Fuller's Church History 5. l. p.
216, for Mr. Fox his Epitome of them conceals many things.) It is true that
these Articles (as also the Six Articles published afterward 1539, and the
Necessary Doctrine set forth 1543.) do, for the matter of them (as they seem to
me) discede in nothing from the Doctrines of former Councils; nor have nothing
in them favoring the reformed Opinions [ for they allow Invocation of Saints,
Prayer for the Dead, and Purgatory; kneeling, and praying before, tho not to
Images; the Corporal Presence of Christ in the Sacrament; Auricular Confession;
and do not deny Seven Sacraments, (as some misrelate them) because they speak
only of Three; which Seven Sacraments are all acknowledged and treated on in
Necessary Doctrine, etc.] And it cannot be denied, that the Clergy of King
Henry also (whom he used, much more than his Successors, King Edward, and Queen
Elizabeth, in his Consultations concerning Religion) were, except in the
introducing of the Kings Supremacy, very opposite to the Reformation of other
Doctrines or Ceremonies in the Church; as appears by the Mala dogmata,
transcribed out of the Records by Mr. Fuller (5. l. p. 209.) to the Number of
67. (much agreeing with the Modern Tenants of Puritans, Anabaptists and
Quakers;) which Mala Dogmata being by the Lower House of Convocation at this
time presented to the Upper House of Bishops, to have them condemned,
occasioned the production of these Injunctions. But yet notwithstanding all
this, for the manner of the Edition of these Injunctions or Articles, it is to
be noted; that the King by virtue of his Supremacy commands them to be accepted
by his Subjects, not as appearing to him the Ordinances or Definitions of the
Church, but as judged by him agreeable to the Laws and Ordinances of God: and
makes the Clergy therein only his Counselor and Adviser; not a Lawgiver. See
besides the Title, his words in the Preface to those Injunctions: Which
determination, debatement and agreement of the Clergy (says he) forasmuch as
we think to have proceeded of a good, right, and true judgment, and to be
agreeable to the Laws and Ordinances of God etc; we have caused the same to be
published, requiring you to accept, repute, and take them accordingly [i. e. as
agreeable to Gods Laws and Ordinances.] So where in these Injunctions he
commands the Observation of Holydays, he says, We must keep Holy Days unto
God, in Memory of Him, and his Saints, upon such days, as the Church has
ordained: except they be mitigated and moderated by the Assent and Commandment
of us, the Supreme Head, to the Ordinaries; and then the Subjects ought to obey
it [such command.]

In putting forth a Model of the Doctrine of the Christian Faith, and the S^x A
ticles.
and of the lawful Rites and Ceremonies of the same, for matter of Doctrine not
much differing from the Injunctions mentioned before; which Book he Entitled, A
Necessary Doctrine for all sorts of People; adding a Preface thereto, in his
Royal name, to all his faithful and loving Subjects, That they might know
(says he) the better, in those dangerous times, what to believe in point of
Doctrine; and how to carry themselves in points of Practice. Which Book, before
the publishing thereof, after it (says Dr. Heylin, Reform. Chur. Engl.. 4. p.
23.) was brought into as much Perfection, as the said Archbishops, Bishops and
other Learned Men [appointed by the King to this work] would give it without
the concurrence of the Royal Assent, was presented once again to the Kings
consideration; who very carefully perused and altered many things with his own
hand, as appears by the Book it self extant in Sr. R. Cotton's Library: and
having so altered, and corrected it in some Passages, returned it to the
Archbishop of Canterbury [Arch-Bishop Cranmer] who bestowed some further pains
upon it; that, being to come forth in the Kings Name, and by his Authority,
there might be nothing in the same, that might be justly reprehended. For a
Preparatory to which Book, that so it might come forth with the greater credit,
the King caused an Act to pass in Parliament, 34, 35. Hen. 8.1. c.
for the abolishing of all Books and Writings comprising any matter of
Christian Religion contrary to that Doctrine, which since the Year 1540 is, or
any time during the Kings life shall be, set forth by his Highness. Thus Dr.
Heylin. Which Definitions Decrees, and Ordinances, so set forth by the King,
all his Subjects were fully to believe, obey, and observe. 32. Hen. 8. 26. c.
See before. 32. And if any Spiritual Person should preach or teach contrary to
those Determinations, or any other that should be so set forth by his Majesty;
such Offender the third time contrary to that Act of Parliament was to be
deemed and adjudged an Heretic, and to suffer pains of death by Burning. See
before. 34. By which Act therefore, amongst other things, the holding of the
Pope's Supremacy, which is contrary to the Doctrine of that Book, is declared
Heresy. And see the like ordained by Parliament concerning the Six Articles in
31. Hen. 8.14. c. where it is Enacted, That every Person that does preach,
teach, declare, argue against any of the Six Articles, being thereof convicted,
shall be deemed and adjudged an Heretic.

Of their Cognizance; not only for the declaring and punishing, but the
adjudging of it. And their Vote herein was joined at least with that of the
Clergy, if not in Authority preferred before it; as appears by these, and those
other Passages in the Statute 25. Hen. 8.14. c. mentioned before. 34; and in
the two Proviso's of the Statute 1. Eliz. 1. c. mentioned. 70. And see the
Reason given by Dr. Heylin, why Parliaments, which in former Ages abstained
from them, in this Age of Henry the Eighth began to intermeddle in stating of
matters of Religion (namely this reason, A new Supreme in Ecclesiastical
Affairs then set up) Engl. Reform. Justified p. 41. Where he first relates,
out of Walsingham, how (long since) Wickleff, having many Doctrines strange and
new, which he desired to establish in the Church of England, and seeing he
could not authorize them in a regular way, addressed his Petition to the
Parliament; laying this down for a Position, That the Parliament might lawfully
examine and reform the Disorders and Corruptions of the Church, and upon a
discovery of the Errors and Corruptions of it, divest her of all Tithes and
Temporal Endowments, till she were reformed. But neither his Petition, nor
Position (says he) found any welcome in that Parliament: [and then he goes on
thus;] To say truth; as long as the Clergy were in Power, and had Authority in
Convocation to do what they would, in matters which concerned Religion; those
of the Parliament conceived it neither safe nor fitting, to intermeddle in such
business as concerned the Clergy; for sear of being questioned for it at the
Church's Bar [the Church being then conceived to have the just Supremacy
herein:] But when that Power was lessened (tho it were not lost) by the
Submission of the Clergy to King Henry the Eighth, and by the Act of the
[Kings] Supremacy [in matters of Religion] which ensued upon it; then did the
Parliament begin to entrench upon the Church's Rights; to offer at, and
entertain, such businesses, as formerly were held peculiar to the Clergy only;
next to dispute their Charters, and reverse their Privileges; and finally to
impose many hard Laws upon them. Thus he. Which Example, of the Parliaments
meddling with Opinions and stating of Heresy, thus begun under Henry the
Eighth's Church Supremacy, has made some Parliaments since also so active
(with the assistance of some Persons, selected by them out of the Clergy, of
the same Inclinations) in altering, modelling, establishing, an Orthodox
Religion: and has emboldened Mr. Prinn (see Heylin. p. 27.) to affirm it an
ancient, genuine, just and lawful Prerogation thereof, to establish true
Religion in this Church [by which establishing if Mr. Prin means, not judging
of Truth and Error in matter of Religion, but only requiring Obedience to the
Judgment of the Church; this is willingly granted to be an establishing, duly
belonging to that Supreme Court.]

Where Codeer. the compla^^ts made by P^testaats of his abuse of the Suprenacy.
that you may see, when a Prince (together with his particular Clergy, or
rather whom out of them he shall choose, without these being linked in a due
subordination to the whole) claims such a power of composing Models of
Christian Faith; and declaring all those his Subjects Heretics, who do not
believe and obey such his Determinations; what danger, what mutability
Christian Religion incurrs, in such a Nation; as often as this Supreme and
Independent Head is not every way Orthodox. And so it happened in the Acts of
this new-sprung Supremacy of Henry; that those, who much pleased themselves in
it, whilst it run the course they would have it, in abating the former Power of
the Clergy, in throwing down Monasteries, Religious Vows, Relics, Images, etc:
yet afterward lamented it as much, when necessity of the Kings compliance with
Foreign Princes, and the influence of new evil Counselors (says Fox p.
1036.) made the same Supremacy produce a contrary sort of Fruit; which they
could not so easily digest. I mean the Six Articles, here also pronouncing
Heresy to the Opposers, and punishing the same with Fire and Faggot: and the
Prohibition and suppression of many Godly Books, as Mr. Fox calls them; but
full of Errors and Heresies, as the Supreme Head of this Church, and also as
Archbishop Cranmer (whose Declaration against them see in Fox p. 1136.) then
judged them (some of the Contents of which Godly Books, as they were then
collected by Cranmer, and other Prelates, you may see in Fox ibid.); and the
Prohibiting all Women, Artificers, Husbandmen, etc, from reading the
Scriptures; of which more anon.

Fox that sad complaint, both, in particular, concerning the Kings imposing of
the Six Articles p. 1037. That, although they contained manifest Errors, Heresies,
and Absurdities against all Scripture and Learning [ whereby we may see; how
these Supreme Heads also may deviate from, the truth; and how dangerous it is
to commit the Reformation of all Errors and Heresies into their hands, who by
this Power, instead thereof, may enjoin Errors, and Heresies; and that even
against all Scripture and Learning ( as Henry the Eighth, tho a Scholar, is
here supposed to have done;) and that even to pronouncing those Heretics, that
do not submit to such Heresy.] (he goes on) Yet such was he miserable Adversity
of that time, and of the Power of Darkness [ yet King Henry said the times were
full of Light] that the simple Cause of Truth was utterly forsaken, of all
friends. For every man seeing the Kings mind [ who was now the Legislator in
Spirituals] so fully addicted, upon politic respects, to have these Articles
to pass forward, few or none in that Parliament would appear; who either could
perceive, that which was to be defended; or durst defend, that they understood
to be true. And also in general concerning that Kings managing his Supremacy,
p. 1036. (from which Posterity might have learnt some wisdom) To many (says
he) who be yet alive, and can testify these things, it is not unknown; How
variable, the State of Religion stood in these days; How hardly, and with what
difficulty, it came forth; what chances and changes it suffered: even as the
King was ruled and gave ear, sometimes to one, sometimes to another; so, one
while it went forward, at another Season as much backward again; and sometime
clean altered and changed for a Season; according as they could prevail who
were about the King. So long as Queen Anne lived, the Gospel had indifferent
Success. [ Here (then) the Supreme Head of the Church was directed by a Woman;
and managed the Affairs of Religion accordingly.] After that she, by sinister
Instigation of some about the King, was made away, the course of the Gospel
began again to decline; but that the Lord stirred op the Lord Cromwell
opportunely to help in that behalf; who did much avail for the increase of Gods
true Religion [Here then the Supreme Head of the Church was directed by a
Laick; and managed Religion accordingly] and much more had he brought to
perfection; if the pestilent Adversaries, maligning the prosperous Glory of the
Gospel, had not supplanted his virtuous Proceedings [ Mr. Fox names not Cranmer
amongst these Worthies; because he was an Agent in many of those Proceedings of
Henry the Eighth, which displease Mr. Fox.] After the taking away of which
Cromwell, the State of Religion more and more decayed, during all the residue of
the Reign of King Henry. And amongst these Adversaries was Stephen Gardener;
who brought the King at length clean out of credit with the Reformed Religion
etc. Thus Fox describes the Steerers of the King in his Determinations
concerning Church matters. And had Mr. Fox been of another persuasion; you
would have found, in his Style, the Lord stirring up the zealous Bishop of
Winchester Gardener; and Satan raising Cromwell the Pestilent Adversary of True
Religion.

Fox's is that Saying of Old Latimer to Ridley, p. 1562, to show the miserable
fluctuating of this Nation, after its having left the rest of the Body of the
Church, and set up a new Head for its self, I refer you (says he) to your own
Experience, to think of our Country-Parliaments, and Convocations; how and what
you have seen and heard. The more part in my time did bring forth Six Articles;
for then the King would so have it, being seduced of certain. Afterward the
more part did expel the same Articles; our good Josias [King Edward] willing to
have it so. The same Articles now again (alas) [when the Lay Supreme Head was
removed] another great (but worse) part has restored. O what an Uncertainty is
this! Now to proceed in our Story.

Henry took away the just Authority of the Patriarch established by Councils,
In the consecrating and confirming of Bishops and Metropolitan.
for Confirmation of Metropolitans in this Church subject to his Patriarchy;
and necessitated also his own Clergy, under the Penalty of incurring a
Praemunire, to consecrate, and invest into Bishoprics and Arch-Bishopricks
void, any Person whatever whom he should nominate and present. Sec. before. 29.
He also took away the Patriarchs Authority, for the receiving of Appeals, and
exercising final Judicature in Spiritual Controversies; contrary to what is
showed in Chur. Gov. 1. Part: And also took away the final judging and decision
of such Controversies, not only from the Patriarch in particular, but also from
all the Clergy in general; not making the Archbishop of Canterbury, or
Convocation, but himself, or his Substitutes, the ultimate Judges thereof. See
Statute 25. Hen. 8, 19. c.. 31. contrary to the First and Second Theses.

It the putting down of Monasteries etc.
he took Possession of all the Monasteries and Religious Houses of this Land
(which were very numerous, small and great; and likewise of all Chaunteries,
Free-Chappels, Hospitals, Colleges (except those of the Two Universities;
which, upon their humble Addresses made to the King, were reprieved, Herb.
Hist. Hen. 8. p. 537;) of their Lands and Goods: Places dedicated to Pious and
Sacred uses; and put into the hands of the Church, as by the gift of the
Doners, so not without the consent of the Prince. Their Buildings he caused to
be defaced, their Churches demolished. Their Lands he enjoyed himself, setting
up a Court of Augmentation of the Revenues of the Crown; or sold, or gave to
particular Families of the Laity ( Cromwell telling him, that, the more had
interest in them, the more they would be irrevocable) to them and their Heirs,
without any condition (advantageous to Religion, Learning, or Charity) save
only one; that Hospitality and Husbandry should be preserved by them, which he
cautioned, upon the Penalty of paying every Month 6. l. 13. s. 4. d; for which
reason the King is said to have passed them away at such easy Rates. Lord
Herbert p. 376. Which Forfeitures, upon the Hospitality and Husbandry
neglected, being very great, were abolished by King James, at the Supplication
of the Parliament 21. Jac. 28. c. And all this he did without any benefit
returned to Gods Service, or to the Church, in lieu thereof; save only that
having possessed himself of 645 Monasteries, 90 Colleges in several Shires,
110 Hospitals, 2374 Chaunteries and Free-Chappels; the yearly value of all
which is cast up to have been 161100 l. (Besides the Plate, Church-Ornaments
and Treasure given in Honor of some Saints; Besides the Money made of Timber,
Lead, Bells etc; Besides the Stock also of Cattle and Corn, the Goods and
Chattles of the 376 smaller Monasteries; being valued at a low rate at 100000
l.) I say, Her^ ^377
having possessed himself of all this, he is said to have returned to Pious
Uses some 8000 l. per annum (perhaps about a Thirtieth part of what he took
away) in erecting some new Bishoprics, of Oxford, Peterborough, Chester,
Bristol, and Gloucester; and in changing of the former Monks of many of the
Ancient Cathedral Churches into a Dean and Canons. (See for what is said Cambd.
Brit. and Lord Herb. p. 377. 443, 444.) Neither does the Parliament, in giving
their consent to such alienation, caution any further concerning Pious Uses;
save only, that the King should do and use therewith his own Will, to the
pleasure of Almighty God, and to the honor and profit of the Realm. See Statute
27. Hen. 8. 28. He freed and dismissed the Religious therein from observing
those Rules of Poverty and Obedience in a Monastic Life, which they had before
solemnly vowed: I suppose by virtue of that dispensative Power; which he
finding annexed to the Pope's, conceived that he inherited by his, Supremacy.
See Fox p. 1235. where it is said, That the Persons therein bound and professed
to Obedience to a person, place, habit, etc, upon the dissolution appointed by
the Kings Majesty's Authority, as Supreme Head of the Church, are clearly
released etc. All which things are done by him contrary to the Definitions and
Canons of the Church in former Councils, concerning their Interpretation of
Sacrilege, and concerning the unlawful alienation of things, and non-violation
of persons, once dedicated and consecrated to God: And all which things were
done by him without any Concession or Approbation (that I can find) even of the
particular Clergy of this Nation; and with the great grief of the People, says
Lord Herb: p. 377. (those who got nothing by this Plunder) to see the Monks and
Nuns wandering abroad; and the Churches and Chapels perverted to secular and
profane Uses.

Fox, p. 976. Shortly after the overthrow of the Pope (says he) consequently
began by little and little to follow the ruin of Abbeys and other Religious
Houses in England; in a right Order and Method, by Gods Divine Providence. For
neither could the fall of Monasteries have followed after, unless that the
Suppression of the Pope had gone before; neither could any true Reformation of
the Church have been attempted, unless the Subversion of these Superstitious
Houses had been joined therewith. with. Whereupon the same Year the King,
having Tho. Cromwell of his Council, sent Dr. Lee to visit the Abbeys, Priories,
and Nunneries in all England; and to set at liberty all such Religious Persons,
as desired to be free; and all other that were under the Age of 24 Years:
providing withal, that such Monks, Canons, and Friars, as were dismissed,
should have given them by the Abbot or Prior, instead of their habit, a Secular
Priests Gown, and Forty Shillings of Money; and likewise the Nunns to have such
Apparel, as Secular Women did then commonly use; and be suffered to go where
they would. [ Cromwell saying, Lord Herb. page 462. That this Expulsion of the
Monks etc was no more than a restoring them to their first Institution of being
Lay and laboring Persons; and that they might keep the austerity of life, in
their several Orders, enjoined them, in any condition.] At which time also from
the said Abbeys, and Monasteries were taken their chief Jewels and Relics. And
see the words of the Statute 31. Hen. 8.13. c, where all and singular Religious
Persons, of what Order, Rule or Habit soever, are said to be put at their
liberties from the danger, servitude and condition of their Religion and
Profession, whereunto they were professed: and have free liberty given them to
purchase to them and their Heirs in Fee-Simple, Fee-Taile etc, Manors, Lands,
etc. in like manner, as tho they or any of them had never been professed, nor
entered into any such Religion. And for the ground of all this, viz. The Kings
conceived lawful Church Supremacy to act such things, see some of the Forms of
the Monks Resignations transcribed by Mr. Fuller Chur. Hist. 6. l. p. 321.
which runs thus. Whereas your Highness being Supreme Head, immediately after
Christ, of his Church in this your Realm of England, and so consequently
general, and only, Reformator of all Religious Persons there, have full
Authority to correct or dissolve, at your Grace's Pleasure and Liberty, all
Convents and Religious Companies abusing the Rules of their Profession etc
therefore etc.

The Pretenses thereof.
if you desire to know the Particulars, was this. The King tho having left to
him a very great Treasure by his Father Henry the Seventh, yet by his high
Expenses, and frequent-Engagements in Foreign Wars and the Interests of
Neighbor Princes, became very necessitous; and for the continuance of the like
Expenses stood in need of an extraordinary recruit. Whereupon, as some think,
he was first invited to this Act, by those 40 smaller Monasteries, which he saw
Wolsey (who likewise had much used in this Affair his diligent Servant Cromwell)
had obtained by grant from the Pope, Clement the Seventh, to translate this
Means of some of those Houses of Devotion, which in this Nation abounded, to
the maintenance of two Colleges built by him for the advancement of Learning;
of which Houses there was more scarcity. And he is said to have been excited
also thereto by Cromwell, who was now, after Wolsey's fall, the Kings Servant;
one already experienced in this matter; and who could best inform concerning
the Treasure attainable thereby: especially when the King, being now invested
with the Supremacy, could confer on himself the same Dispensation, for taking
more; which the Pope had done on Wolsey, for a few. The King knew also, that he
had the Laity and the Parliament ready to second him; who were willing by any
means to remove the burden of furnishing the Kings necessities from
themselves, and to give up the Church's Patrimony to save their own: and
besides, who in those days looked, with no good Eye, on the Authority of the
Clergy (against whom the Commons had formerly put up a Supplication to the
King) and the Wealth of the Monasticks; Iord Herb. p. 329. Fox. p. 960.
and who also might expect no small share in this Booty. And some reason he had
also to hope for the connivance of the Clergy, from the ancient difference,
that is between Regulars and Seculars; and from these Religious Houses being
exempted from the Jurisdiction and Visitation of Bishops; and from the access
of Benefit, which they might hope from the others mine, to some places of cure,
that were meanly provided for. Add to this; that the number of them in this
Nation was conceived to be excessive, in proportion to a well composed State,
(so the multiplying of them accidentally being their destruction): and Lastly;
that these Religious Houses were looked on as the chief Supporters of the Papal
Supremacy, and Opposers of the Regal Authority in matters Ecclesiastical: and
in Innovations in Religion, their Vow of Obedience to their Superiors leaving
them less flexible to change, and their Vow of Poverty and Single Life less
obnoxious to those fears in declaring of their minds; which others are subject
to, in respect of their Estates and Posterity, or their expectation of
Preferments.

l. annual Revenue; and this upon these Three Pretenses (see Statute 27. Hen.
8.28. c.) That the Persons living therein were very vicious; whereas (says
that Statute made for the alienation of these, before the Attachment of the
rest thought on) in the great Solemn Monasteries of the Realm, Thanks be to
God, Religion is right well kept and observed. That these small Societies were
not so capable of Reformation, as the greater.

wealth already tasted, the Kings great Expenses very craving, and his
Courtiers and Favorites not yet satisfied; from smaller beginnings he ascends
higher; and the great Monasteries also begin now to be looked after. And now
within three or four years they of the great Monasteries are so overgrown with
vice, that were so right before; that complaints are made of them: and
Visitors, Cromwell being made Visitor-General, are sent, both to discover their
crimes, and to restrain, by certain Injunctions from the King, their former
liberty. Amongst whom many heinous faults (especially as for Incontinency) are
found out: whilst the more notorious Offenders, somewhat to excuse themselves,
impeached others; and the Religious mutually recriminated one another. Upon
these Delinquencies now discovered in the great Houses, as before in the
lesser; together with many impostures and falsifications of Miracles, to
procure greater resort and gain to such Houses; Next, the more dignified and
powerful amongst the Religious are acquainted, what Penalties they have
incurred, and have seen already inflicted on others; and that the King, as
Supreme Head of this Church, might also depose their Societies, alienate and
dispose of their Estates, as he saw sit, to those who would serve God better;
but that they might one way sooner obtain, both security and pardon for their
past faults, and provision for their future livelihoods; if they would rather
preventively resign their Foundations and Possessions into the King's hands,
then stay to have them by his just power taken from them: especially, since the
King on such condition would either to the present Incumbents give other
Preferments; or allow considerable Pensions, equalling their former Income, to
the unpreferred, for their lives. And thus; many, if not all, of these greater
Foundations having seen already the lesser seized on; some persons having fair
hopes of being well provided for, others of Impunity, others also desiring more
liberty, and weary of the fetters of a Cloistered life, especially as
restrained by the new Regal Injunctions, give-up and make-over their
Monasteries, and all the Estate belonging thereto, under their Hands and Seals,
to the King and his Heirs for ever. And the King again returns yearly a vast
sum of Money in Pensions bestowed on the more Eminent of the Monasticks for
term of life. A many of which Pensions you may see set down in Mr. Fuller 6. l.
p. 304. etc; who also ibid. p. 316. makes this Relation how the Monks were
tempted with them; It was also pressed upon the Monks, Friars, and Nuns; that
they through their viciousness being obnoxious to the King's anger, this [i. e.
the taking away of their Estates] might and would be done without their
consent: So that it was better for them, rebus sic stantibus, to make a Virtue
of Necessity; the rather, because this Compliment conduced nothing to the Kings
Right, on whom the Parliament had already bestowed those Abbey-Lands; but might
add much to their own advantage, as being the way, whereby their Pensions might
be the more easily procured, largely allotted, and surely paid unto them. Thus
He. And thus the Lord Herb. p. 442. to the same purpose, Cromwell, betwixt
Threats, Gifts, Persuasions, Promises, and whatsoever might make men obnoxious,
obtained of the Abbots, Priors, Abbesses, etc, that their Houses might be given
up. Among which those, that offered their Monasteries freely, got best
Conditions of the King: for if they stood upon their right, the Oath of
Supremacy, and some other Statutes and Injunctions, brought them in danger; or
their Crimes at least made them guilty of the Law; which also was quickly
executed, and particularly on the Abbots of Glassenbury, Colchester, and
Reading; who more than any else resisted.

France and Scotland) the gleanings as it were of this Harvest, which before
lay unregarded, are now looked after; and all the Chaunteries, Free-Chappels,
Colleges (except the Universities) Fraternities etc (Dedicated also to such
pious uses, as neither the King nor Parliament of that time disallowed, viz.
offering the Holy Eucharist, distributing Alms, and saying Prayers for the
faithful deceased, as likewise the advancing of Learning, sustenance of the
Poor etc,) are thrown into the King's Lap, upon pretense of abuses found in
these too. For which see Statute 37, Hen. 8.4. c. where the reason of giving
them away to the King and frustrating the uses for which they were founded is;
lest the Priests or Governors, that enjoyed them, should sell them away and
frustrate the same uses; (as some had done already, probably for prevention of
the Storm they saw coming upon these after the Monasteries:) as if such faults
of the Incumbents were capable of no other cure; nor these Lands preservable by
Law to the Founders intentions.

Henry so odious to the memory of posterity; Reflections upon these Pre^eaces.
in them he seem many ways void of excuse, For 1. First; For the King's
Necessities, many of them seem to be faultily contracted, 1.
by (to say no worse) needless expense; and because this high-spirited and
valiant Prince would needs engage himself (as Lord Herb. p. 511. judiciously
observes) beyond what was requisite; and would be an Actor for the most part,
where he needed only to have been a Spectator. And methinks these things do not
suit well together; to pull down Religious Houses for mere necessity; Herbert.
p. 513.
and in such Expeditions to cross the Seas in a Ship trimmed with Sails of
Cloth of Gold.

Secondly, For the Precedent of Cardinal Wolsey; 1. 2.
There was nothing done in it, Power, who is not the Receiver or Possessor of
such a Gift, but rather the Doner (for without the King's Consent the Church
receives no such Gifts) can afterward resume from God and the Church the
disposal of it. Here I may say as St. Peter Acts 5. 4. Before it was so
bestowed by him, was it not his own? But once so passed away, and his Mort-main
allowed to it; it cannot then be recalled, upon any Secular Title. But
Secondly, i.e. in a prudential arbitration, for an equal or greater Benefit
thence accrewing to the Church, or Christianity. Which also was observed in his
concession of those to Cardinal Wolsey, in a time when Religious abounded, more
than Scholars; and by that Concession the Church still enjoys them. But
whither Henry the Eighth's Abbey-lands went, and what uses they have served, we
all know; and this some think, to the enriching of few, but ruin of many,
Noble Families in this Nation. See Dr. Heylin's Hist. of Reform. of Qu. Mary p.
45. and p. 67, 68.

Thirdly, Neither were the Vices of those Religious a sufficient ground of
overthrowing their Societies and Foundations; 3.
because the King might have punished, ejected, changed, the Persons, without
taking away the Houses or Maintenance (as is frequently done in all Societies;
and, particularly, in Religious Houses abroad) unless we will say, that the
English only are in such faults incurable. Neither can it be pleaded, That such
Lands are given to pious uses with such a tacit condition, That, when abused,
they may be recalled; so long as these abuses are some other way remediable:
for else, what thing is there dedicated to Gods Service; which some Possessors
do not, at some time, abuse? But if it be said, that the abuse and fault lies
chiefly in the very Institution and Laws themselves of such Foundations: Yet
are these Laws also capable of being rectified and reformed, so as God may be
holily served in such a Monastic life; as the Protestants themselves say he
was, in the Primitive times. But, if the Monastic Laws here were so corrupt;
how come the very same Laws abroad not to produce the same fruit, in Nations
said to be more inclined to such Vices? How come those Houses there, to this
day to be not only tolerated, but reverenced? Or how happened, under the same
Laws here, but three or four Years before, in the great Monasteries, Religion,
Thanks be to God, to be right well kept and observed? Stat. 27. Hen. 8.28. c.
But suppose the King had questioned the lawfulness of these Institutions; yet
was he no competent Judge thereof; it being a Theological Controversy, and
decided on the other side by the lawful judge thereof in several Superior
Councils, as is showed in Discourse of Celibacy. But indeed that which leaves
the King the more destitute of any Apology in this kind is; that, whereas the
chief fault charged upon these cloistered People was Incontinency, the King,
whilst he took away these Orders, did justify this Vow, at least of perpetual
Chastity, to be a Vow lawful, and by every one observable; as you may see in
the fourth of the six Famous Articles: and still did prohibit all such Persons,
as had taken this Vow, when in Monasteries, from marrying afterward, when they
were ejected; condemning the Transgressors hereof to suffer death. The Words of
that fourth Article are these, That the Vows of Chastity or Widow-hood by man
or woman made to God advisedly [i. e. as I suppose, deliberately; or, if you
will, with the approbation of our Spiritual Father] ought to be observed by the
Law of God; and that it exempteth them from other liberties of Christian
People, which without that [Vow] they might enjoy. The Penalty of which Article
was, That if any, after a Vow advisedly made, did marry; in so doing he should
be adjudged as a Felon; and lose both Life, and forfeit Goods without any
benefit of Clergy. See Fox p. 1037. Now if any can make this Vow [advisedly] I
see not how we can say, that the Monks do not so; unless you will say, That any
Breach of a Vow argues it not to have been formerly made with advice; but then,
why are these Religious expressly restrained afterward from Marrying? Stat. 31.
Hen. 8.6. c. where also [advisedly] seems to be interpreted the vowing after
One and Twenty Years old, uncompelled.

As for the falsification of Miracles; to discover and publish the Cheat, is
sufficient to cure the present Fault, and to prevent the like: and when the
Images were taken away, the Houses needed not to be pulled down.

etc, given for the relief of the faithful, deceased with some Imperfections,
by the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, and annual Alms, and Prayers offered to God
for them; whilst he allowed a benefit in these things; and himself left the
like Pensions; and ordered, that the same things, of which he had deprived
others deceased, should be done for himself, when deceased; as you may see at
large in his Will transcribed by Mr. Fuller. And therefore, whereas Edward the
Sixth had these things given him again by Parliament (because Henry the Eighth
dyed not long after the Donation) upon this reason; because the Opinions of
Purgatory, and Masses satisfactory to be done for them that be departed, were
vain and superstitious: Stat. 1. Edw. 6.14. c. Yet so it was, that other causes
and other grievances, than these, were glad to be invented, to make way for
King Henry to lay hands on them. Stat. 37. Hen. 8.4. c.

Fourthly, 4.
If it be said, that the Religious themselv voluntarily resigned these
Possessions into the King's hands (See Stat. 31. Hen. 8.13. c.) Yet was this
Act of their's (supposed never so free from Compulsion) invalid: because they
could not give away for ever, what they had Title to only for term of Life;
neither yet could they alienate them for their lives from that use, to which
they were dedicated; without committing Sacrilege.

Fifthly, Lastly, That which is said, 5.
of an excessive number of them in this Nation, if it be a just Apology for
taking away some, the Supernumerary; yet will it be none, for taking away all
the rest. And that which follows, concerning their averseness to the King's
Reformations, is granted; and shows indeed, that the demolishing of them was to
good purpose for attaining the Kings ends; but it shows not, that the
demolishing therefore of them is lawful; unless, first, such ends be
justifiable; and secondly, cannot otherwise be compassed. And thus much of the
Kings destroying Monasteries.

In the dispeasing with the former Church. Canous conMarriages, Fasts Holy Days
etc.
if only humane, tho Ecclesiastical, Constitution (See Stat. 25. Hen. 8.21.
recited before. 27.) He made Orders, and gave Dispensations in matters of
Marriage; against the former Ecclesiastical Canons. See Stat. 32. Hen. 8.38. c.
where it is said, By this Act we [i. e. the King and Parliament] do declare all
persons to be lawful, that be not prohibited by Gods Law, to marry. Of which
License (says Fuller Chur. Hist. 5. l. p. 236.) the King himself had the first
fruits, in marrying Katherine Howard, Cosen-German to Anne Bullen his second
Wife. [And you may find, in the Preface of the same Act, this urged also as a
motive of casting off the Pope's usurped Power in such matters, That King Henry
was otherwise by Learning, taught, than his Predecessors in times past long
time have been. For King Henry was designed by his Father for a Churchman: and
during the life of his Elder Brother, was educated in Learning, and not
unstudied in School Divinity. Lord Herbert's Hist. p. 2. Therefore in the first
Articles of Religion, which he put forth 1536, which were devised by the King
himself, and so recommended to the Convocation house by Cromwell (part of which
House, says Lord Herb. p. 405, leaned to the Lutheran Doctrine and Rites) he
took pains to peruse and moderate their Arguments on either side, adding
Animadversions with his own hand, as may be seen in the Records. And in the
second Articles of Religion, called a Necessary Doctrine for all sorts of
People, published 1543. he carefully perused them (says Dr. Heylin p. 23.) and
altered many things with his own hand, as appears by the Book still extant in
Sr. R. Cotton's Library. And in the Answer, which he writ himself to the
Yorkshire Rebels offended with the State of Religion, he has this Clause;
That he marvelled much, that ignorant People would go about to take upon them
to instruct him (who had been noted something Learned) what the Faith should
be. Without which consciousness and esteem of his own Learning and Abilities,
it is probable he would have been a more dutiful Son of the Church; Her. p. 417.
and never have owned such a Supremacy in stating Theological Controversies,
with such severe punishments to all that thwarted his Doctrines: Whereby he
seemed to act the Part, tho he assumed not the Title of the Archbishop of
Canterbury; to which place his Father is said to have designed him.] By virtue
of the same Supremacy he made Orders, and gave Dispensations in matters of
Fasts; of Holy Days; of Election and Consecration of Bishops; as you may see in
Fox, in the King's Injunctions and Proclamations p 960. 999. 1104. and before
in. 36. and. 68.

Fox p. 1035.
in his Injunctions put forth 1539. Commanding that the Holy Bread and Holy
Water, Procession, kneeling, and creeping on Good-Fryday to the Cross, and
Easter Day setting up Lights to the Corpus Christi, bearing of Candles on
Candlemas-day, Purification of Women delivered of Child, offering of Chrysomes,
keeping of the four Offering-days; paying their Tithes; and such like
Ceremonies be observed and kept; till it shall please the King to change or
abrogate any of them. [Where note, that as Colleges (see before. 87.) so here
Tithes also are conceived to be in the disposal of this Supreme Head of the
English Church.]

1.
by his Vicegerent Cromwell, first, ordered; That English Bibles should be
provided and put in every Church; and that the Parson of the Parish (say the
Injunctions 1536. and 1538. set forth by Cromwell) shall discourage no man from
the reading or hearing of the said Bible; but shall expressly provoke, stir and
exhort every Person to read the same, admonishing them nevertheless to avoid
all contention and altercation therein, and to use an honest sobriety in the
inquisition of the true sense of the same; and to refer the explication of the
obscure places to men of higher judgment in Scripture. Which Publication of the
Scriptures, in the beginning of his recession from Rome, perhaps he was the
more inclined to; for two things, wherein he pleaded much their evidence in his
justification, The one; See Fox p. 1000.
That it was unlawful for him to have his Brothers Wife. The other; That the
Pope could not, by them, claim any Jurisdiction over England: He justly
therefore relinquishing the one, because it was there prohibited; and
disacknowledging the other, because not there commanded. Also in this
Translation (as those words 1. Pet. 2. (...) were then, and till the end of
King Edward's days, rendered (...), submit your selves unto the King.) He was
declared the chief Head of the Church of England. But these words were changed
afterward, when Queen Elizabeth had refused such Title, into King as having the
Pre-eminence, and King as Supreme. But upon what ground soever it was, that he
made the Holy Scriptures common to the Vulgar for a time; afterward, when by
three or four Years experience he had seen, that so many Divisions came
thereby; the unlearned and unstable, now, as in St. Peter's time, z. Pet. 3.16.
wresting these holy writings, hard in some things to be understood, to their
own destruction (when the People had now ceased to depend on the authoritative
Exposition of their Spiritual Superiors; especially when they had also seen the
King and his Vicar Cromwell, Laymen, to judge of the Judgments of the Clergy,
and to reform their former Erments of the Clergy, and to reform their former
Errors;) after this experience, I say, by Authority of the same Supremacy. 2.
He commands again the Scriptures to be shut up and withdrawn from them,
prohibiting, upon the Penalty of a Months Imprisonment toties quoties, that any
Woman, Husbandman, Artificer, Yeoman, Serving-man, Apprentice, or Journy-man,
Labourer etc, should read them to themselves, or to others, privately, or
openly; See Stat. 34, 35. Hen. 8. 1. c. Because, says the Preface of that
Statute, his Highness perceived, that a great multitude of his Subjects, most
especially of the lower sort, had so abused the Scriptures, that they had
thereby grown and increased in diverse naughty and erroneous Opinions, and, by
occasion thereof, fallen into great divisions and dissensions among themselves.
And if you shy, that the Opinions; the King calls here erroneous, were the
Protestant Doctrines, discovered by the vulgar from the new light of the
Scriptures; First you may see the very Opinions, as the Bishops collected them,
in Fox p. 1136. etc unownable by any sober Christian. Secondly, We, who have
had sad experience what monstrous opinions the vulgar; by wresting those farted
Writings, have taken up in our days, may rationally allaw the same incident to
former times. Of the same thing I find that King much complaining, in his
Preface also to Necessary Doctrine, in this manner. Like as in the time of
darkness and ignorance [so he calls the ages of the Church preceding his own]
finding our People seduced from the Truth by Hypocrisy and Superstition, we by
the help of God and his Word have traveled to purge and cleanse our Realm from
the Enormities of the same; wherein; by opening Gods Truth with publishing of
the Scriptures, our labors have not been void and frustrate: So now we
perceive, that in the time of knowledge [so he calls his own times] the Devil
has attempted to return again, into the House purged and cleansed, accompanied
with seven worse Spirit; and Hypocrisy and Superstition being excluded, we find
entered into some of our Peoples hearts an inclination to sinister
understanding of Scripture, presumption, arrogance, carnal liberty and
contention; we be therefore constrained etc. And afterward, It must be agreed
(says he) that, for the instruction of those whose Office it is to teach, the
reading and studying of Holy Scripture is necessary; but, for the other part
ordained to be taught, it ought to be deemed certainly, that the reading of the
Scripture is not so necessary for those Folks, that of duty they be bound to
read it; but, as the Prince and Policy of the Realm shall think convenient, so
to be tolerated, or taken from it. Consonant whereunto, the politic Law of our
Realm has now restrained it, etc. [Where note that he puts the just power of
this toleration or restraint in the States, not in the Church-men's, Power.]
Sec the like complaint made by him in his last Speech in Parliament, 1545, Lord
Herb. p. 536. I am very sorry to know and hear, how irreverently that most
precious Jewel the Word of God is disputed and jangled in every Alehouse and
Tavern, contrary to the true meaning and doctrine of the same, I am sure that
virtuous and godly living was never less used, nor God never less reverenced or
honored. Thus King Henry. And this, to show you, how and when this vulgar
Theology first began; and how much then, so early, it was relented by the
Magistrate.

whom (says Lord Herb. p. 439.) he every day more and more divested of their
former Authority. And, for the beginnings of his Reformation, Archbishop
Parker in his Antiquit. Brittan. p. 325. says, that Cromwellus, cum Cranmero
Archiepiscopo, tanquam in puppi sedit, clavumque Ecclesiae Anglicanae tenuit.
Nam Praelatorum fides eo magis dubia and incerta Regi visa est; quod long a
mora and difficultate tanquam taedio abducti sint a Papa; sibique Supremi
Capitis titulum detulissent. But whether these things done with or without his
Clergy; yet the style of his Injunctions sufficiently shows, in what person
the legislative power in Spiritual matters was then conceived to reside: these
Injunctions running authoritatively, and for the submission of all men's
judgments to them; either in his own name single, as the Church's Supreme Head;
or in the name of his Vicegerent in Ecclesiastical Affairs, Cromwell (who
therefore is ordered 31. Hen. 8.10. c. in regard of this Office (and all those
who should succeed him therein) to sit in the Parliament House above the
Archbishop of Canterbury;) or in the name of the King and Parliament. The
usual Phrase of the King and Parliament in such Decrees you have seen in former
instances; where they do not ground these Decrees any further on the Authority
of the Clergy, save only on their recognizing of the Kings Supremacy; upon
which Supremacy all the rest are Super-structions.

Cromwell, (upon whom, a Secular Person too and unlearned, that the King should
derive his whole Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and Authority, you may read, in
Lord Herb. Hist. p. 402, what a wonderment it caused amongst many, as a thing
in no other time or person to be parallelled; neither in the much pleaded
Patterns of the Kings of Israel, nor in the former practice of Popes.) This
Vicegerent thus prefaceth to the Injunctions that were published 1536. I Tho.
Cromwell etc Vicegerent to our Sovereign Lord the King for and concerning all
his Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical within this Realm, to the Glory of Almighty
God, to the Kings Highness's Honor, the public Weal of this Realm, and
increase of Virtue in the same, have appointed and assigned these Injunctions
ensuing to be kept and observed of the Dean, Parsons, Vicars etc, under the
pains hereafter limited and appointed. And the like Expressions much what are
observed in the Injunctions set forth in 1538, (...) p. 1000
By the Authority and Commission of the most excellent Prince Henry, in Earth
Supreme Head under Christ of the Church of England, I Tho. Cromwell Vicegerent
etc, do, for the discharge of the King's Majesty, give and exhibit these
Injunctions following to be kept and fulfilled etc. First, that ye shall truly
observe all and singular the Kings Highness's Injunctions given unto you
heretofore in my name by his Grace's Authority etc. This is enough to show
where the legislative Power for Spiritual matters rested in Henry the Eighth's
days. After which Injunctions this is Mr. Fox's Epiphonema. By these Articles
and Injunctions (says he) thus coming forth one after another for the
necessary Instruction of the People [ but surely Mr. Fox had here forgot the
Contents of the Kings first Articles (which I mentioned before. 80.) much
contrary to the Reformed Doctrines, conformable to the Romish] it may appear,
how well the King deserved then the Title of his Supreme Government given unto
him over the Church of England [ but to moderate Mr. Fox his Acclamations here;
let me put him in mind, at another time, in his esteem, how ill he deserved it,
remembering his words set down before 84.] By the which Title and Authority he
did more good for the redressing and advancing of Christ's Church and Religion
here in England in those three years; than the Pope, the great Vicar of Christ,
with all his Bishops and Prelates had done in the space of three hundred years
before.

CHAP. VIII. The Actings of Edward the Sixth in Ecclesiastical Affairs.
THE Breach upon the Church's former Authority, Doctrines, Henry the Eighth, 2.
The Actings of K. Edward in Ecclesiastical Affairs.
No marvel if by his Successors it was much enlarged. Next then to look into
the actions of Edward the Sixth with relation to Church affairs. This Prince,
being not yet ten years old when he came to the Crown, was chiefly directed and
steered by Archbishop Cranmer; and by his Uncle the Duke of Somerset, who was
made Protector of his Person and Realm, not by the will of Henry the Eighth,
who dreaded to trust any one person with this Charge; but by the major part of
those sixteen persons, to whom in common he committed the government of his Son
and Kingdom. Of which Duke Mr. Fox says p. 1180 and 1248, That he bare great
favor to Gods word; and that he brought with him, to the State of that his
Dignity, his ancient love and zeal Of the Gospel and of Religion [he means,
reformed.] The proof whereof (says he p. 1183.1184.) was sufficiently seen in
his constant standing to Gods truth, and zealous defense thereof against the
Bishops of Chichester, Norwich, Lincoln, London, and others more, in the
consultation [about composing a new form of administering the Sacrament] had at
Windsor in the first year of the King's Reign.

So inclined was the Protector; and so inclined were many of the Council; 105.
n.1.
and some of those, who were otherwise, yet openly complied with the prevailing
party for secular ends; and, amongst these, even Dudley the great Duke of
Northumberland, the chief Agent in the later times of Edward; who confessed so
much at his death: he then exhorting the people; See Stow An. 1553. Fox p.
1280. and Goodwin p. 278. That they should embrace the Religion of their
Forefathers, rejecting that of later date, which had occasioned all the
miseries of the forepast thirty years [i. e. from the beginning of Henry the
Eighth's Supremacy:] and that, for prevention for the future, they should expel
those Trumpets of Sedition, the Preachers of the reformed Religion. [and
declaring to them] That as for himself, whatsoever he had pretended, his
Conscience was fraught with the Religion of his Fathers; but being blinded with
ambition he had been contented to make wrack of his Conscience by temporizing
etc. Which calls to my mind likewise the death of Cromwell the great Agent for
Reformation in Henry the Eighth's days; who (then) renounced the Doctrines in
this time called Heresies; and took the people to witness, That he dyed in the
Catholic Faith of the Holy Church, and doubted not in any Sacrament thereof
[i. e. I suppose, as the Doctrine thereof was delivered in those times, to be
seen in the Necessary Doctrine before mentioned] See Fox page 1086. comp. Lord
Herbert p. 462. As for those of the Council who thus complied not, they were,
after some time, expelled; as Bishop Tonstal, Wriothsley the Chancellor; and
the Earl of Arundel, Goodwin p. 242. And as the Kings chief Governors in the
Council, so his Under Tutors, who had the nearest influence upon him, Dr. Cox
and Sir John Cheek, were men much inclined to the Reformation: the one whereof
in Queen Elizabeth's days Was made Bishop of Ely; the other, being imprisoned
in Queen Mary's days, and upon it abjuring the reformed Religion, afterward
(says Goodwin page 287.) became so repentant for it; that out of extremity of
grief he shortly languished, and dyed. Such were his nearest Governors.

And the Complexion of his Parliament (for he had but one all his days
continued by Prorogation from Session to Session, 105. n. 2.
till at last it ended in the death of the King) you may learn from Dr. Heylin
( Hist. of Reform, p. 48.) The Parliament (says he) consisted of such Members,
as disagreed amongst themselves in respect of Religion; yet agreed well enough
together in one common Principle; which was to serve the present time, and
preserve themselves. For tho a great part of the Nobility, and not a few of the
chief Gentry in the House of Commons, were cordially affected to the Church of
Rome: yet were they willing to give way to all such Acts and Statutes as were
made against it; out of a fear of losing such Church Lands as they were
possessed of, if that Religion should prevail and get up again. And for the
rest, who either were to make or improve their fortunes; there is no question
to be made, but that they came resolved to further such a Reformation, as
should most visibly conduce to the advancement of their several ends. Thus he.

As for the Kings Supremacy how far now some of the complying Clergy extended
or acknowledged the just power thereof, 105. n. 3.
even as to Ordination and Excommunication, and administering the Word and
Sacraments, I think I cannot more readily show you, than by setting down the
Queries proposed concerning these things (in the first year of this Kings,
Reign) to Archbishop Cranmer, and other Bishops and Learned Men, when
assembled at Windsor for establishing a public Order for Divine Service; and
the Archbishops answer to them (printed lately by Mr. Stilling fleet out of a
Manuscript of this Archbishop. ( Iren. 2. Par. 8 chap.) The first Query is,
Whether the Apostles lacking a higher power, as in not having a Christian King
among them, made Bishops by that necessity; or by authority given them of God?
To which the Archbishop answers to the King, first in general; That all
Christian Princes have committed unto them immediately of God the whole cure of
all their Subjects, as well concerning the administration of Gods word for the
cure of Souls, as concerning the ministration of things Political; That the
Ministers of Gods word under his Majesty be die Bishops, Parsons, etc. That the
said Ministers be appointed in every State by the Laws and Orders of Kings;
That in the admission of many of these Officers be diverse comely Ceremonies
used; which be not of necessity, but only for a good order and seemly fashion
That there is no more promise of God, that Grace is given in the committing the
Ecclesiastical office; than it is in the committing the Civil. Then he answers
more particularly, That in the Apostles time, when there was no Christian
Princes, by whose authority Ministers of Gods word might be appointed etc.
Sometimes the Apostles and others, unto whom God had given abundantly the
Spirit, sent or appointed Ministers of Gods word; sometimes the people did
choose such as they thought meet thereunto. And when appointed by the Apostles;
the people of their own voluntary will did accept them, not for the Supremity,
Impery or Dominion, that the Apostles had over them to command as their Princes
or Masters; but as good people ready to obey the advice of good Counselors. A
second Query is, Whether Bishops, or Priests, were first? And if the Priests
were first; whether then the Priest made the Bishop? He answers, That Bishops
and Priests were at one time; and were not two things, but both one office in
the beginning of Christ's Religion. The third Query. Whether a Bishop has
authority, to make a Priest, by the Scriptures, or no? And whether any other
[i.e. Secular person] but only a Bishop may make a Priest? He answers. A Bishop
may make a Priest by the Scriptures; and so may Princes and Governors also, and
that by authority of God committed unto them; and the people also by their
Election. The fourth Query. Whether in the New Testament be required any
Consecration of a Bishop and Priest; or only appointing to the office be
sufficient? Answer. In the New Testament he that is appointed to be a Bishop or
a Priest needs no Consecration by the Scripture; for election or appointing
thereto is sufficient. The fifth Query. Whether (if it fortuned a Prince
Christian learned to conquer certain dominions of Infidels, having none but
temporal learned men with him) it be defended by Gods Law, That he and they
should preach and teach the Word of God there, or no? And also make and
constitute Priests, or no? [In the next Query, which I omit for brevity sake,
is mentioned also the ministering Baptism and other Sacraments.] He answers to
this and the next, That it is not against Gods Law: but (contrary) they ought
indeed so to do. The seventh Query. Whether a Bishop or a Priest may
excommunicate; and for what Crimes? And whether they, only, may excommunicate,
by Gods law? He answers, A Bishop or a Priest, by the Scriptures, is neither
commanded nor forbidden to excommunicate. But where the Laws of any Region
gives him authority to excommunicate; there they ought to use the same in such
crimes, as the laws have such authority in: And where the laws of the Region
forbids them; there they have none authority at all; and they, that be no
Priests, may also excommunicate, if the law allow thereunto. Thus the
Archbishop explains the Kings and Clergies power and right, concluding, That
he does not temerariously define this his opinion and sentence; but remits the
Judgment thereof wholly to his Majesty. This Text needs no Comment; it is plain
enough: and perhaps posterity might have done better to have covered this
nakedness of their Forefather; then to have published it after so long a
silence. Set down.
Now to proceed.

1. First more generally. It putting forth certain Injunctions and Doctrinal
Honilies; sending Commissioners through the Realm and ejecting the refractory
Clergy etc.
Thus this young Prince armed in such a sense with the Title of Supreme in
Church Affairs, and directed by such a Council, did set forth from time to time
(nothing being deferred herein by reason of his nonage, tho this much sued-for
by some Bishops,) Injunctions concerning Religion; and many of them in matters
of faith; and these contrary to the determinations and decrees of former
obliging Councils. Set them forth, sometimes with the sole authority of this
Council; sometimes also with that of his Parliament, without any precedent
consultation with, or consent of, I say not some particular Bishops, or Divines
(most of them known to be of the same inclinations with the Council, as chiefly
Cranmer and Ridley; to whom I may add Latimer, Hooper, Rogers, Coverdale,) but
of any Ecclesiastical Synod of his Clergy (the Act of which only has force in
such matters) and usually without the precedent consent of other Bishops very
considerable for their learning or place; as Gardener Bishop of Winchester,
Bonner Bishop of London; Tonstal Bishop of Durham, and one of the chosen
Governors of the Kingdom; Heath Bishop of Worcester, and others. And he
imposed the same Injunctions so set forth upon the Bishops also and the rest of
the Clergy; to be submitted to by them, as being the Orders of their Supreme
Head in Spirituals, upon penalty of suspension, imprisonment, deprivation.

Fox says in great applause of them, p. 1180; where after having told us, That
the Protector had restored the holy Scriptures to the Mother Tongue, had
extinguished and abolished Masses, and the Six Articles; After softer
beginnings (says he) by little and little greater things followed in the
Reformation of the Churches; such as before were in banishment for the danger
of the truth, were again received in their Country [to supply voided places:]
and to be short (says he) a new face of things began now to appear, as it were
on a Stage, new Players coming in [what needed this, if the old consented to
the Kings Mandates?] the old being thrust out. [therefore the consent of
Clergy, so much urged in the later end of this Kings Reign, will be that of the
new.] For the most part the Bishops of Churches and Diocesses were changed.
Such as had been dumb Prelates before, were compelled to give place to other
then, that would preach and take pains.. Besides; others also out of Foreign
Countries [which argues scarcity at home of these Clergy, who would second the
Kings Reformation] men of learning and notable knowledge were sent for and
received; among whom was Peter Martyr, Martin Bucer, and Paulus Phagius [ he
might have added to them Bernardinus Ochinus (but that this man would do him no
credit) who, we read in Coodwin, p. 281. was packed away again with Peter
Martyr in the beginning of Queen Mary 's Reign; and three of these, Martyr,
Bucer, and Ochinus, were Friars, forsaking the Cloister, and marrying Wives;
after solemn Vows to the contrary.] Of whom (says he) the first taught at
Oxford; the other two professed at Cambridge, [ sure this was so appointed, not
because the Universities here at that time were not held so learned, but
because not accounted so orthodox; as appeared shortly after in the beginnings
of Queen Mary, notwithstanding Martyrs and Bucers Lectures there.] He adds;
And that with no small commendation of the whole University [and I put in, not
without opposition of many learned men there, disputing ex animo before the
Kings Visitors against them and their Tenants; as you may see in the solemn
disputations had in Cambridge, Fox. p. 1250. etc. Where I would recommend to
your reading, when at leisure, the rational arguings, and Apologies for the
Church's Doctrines, of Dr. Glyn, and Mr. Langdale, and others, Members of the
University of Cambridge, against this reforming party, and against the
interlocutions of Bishop Ridley one of the Visitors. As for the Oxford
Oppositions, Mr. Fox has not communicated them. There is extant P. Martyrs
relation of them, Fox p. 1255.
perhaps not the most impartial; yet wherein you may find in his Opponents,
Tresham, Chadsey, and Morgan, much learning, reverence to the Church, and zeal
in their cause; and (as we may gather from his Preface) a conceived victory; of
whom there he says, Omnes anguli, plateae, domus, officinae, and aenopolia
adhuc eorum mentitos triumphos de me and (...) resonant. By which you may
guess, how the University of Oxford then stood affected. Mr. Fox proceeds;] Of
the old Bishops some were committed to one ward, some to another. Bonner Bishop
of London was committed to the Marshal see, Gardener Bishop of Winchester, with
Jonstal Bishop of Duresme, was cast into the Tower. [ to whom may be added, ^ox
p. 1280.
as appears out of Fox elsewhere, Day removed from Chicester, Heath from
Worcester, Vesy from Excester; Likewise Pate Bishop of Rochester, Goldwel
Bishop of St. Asaph, -- Bishop elect of Bangor, are said to have been banished.
And some more might be removed in like manner; who happen not to be mentioned,
because deceased before the Reign of Queen Mary; as Wakeman Bishop of
Gloucester, Holbeck Bishop of Lincoln, Skyp Bishop of Hereford, Rugg Bishop of
Norwich; as may be probably conjectured from Mr. Fox his expressions but now
rehearsed.]

Fox goes on to describe, what course the King and that his Council took in
the very beginnings of their power, before any Parliament of Synod yet
assembled, to effect a Reformation in the Church. The King (says he) following
the good Example of King Josias determined forthwith to enter into some
Reformation of Religion in the Church of England. Whereupon intending first a
general Visitation over all the Bishoprics (thereby as well to understand, as
also to redress the abuses of the same) the chose out certain wife, learned,
discreet, and worshipful persons, to be his Commissioners in that behalf; and
so, dividing them into several companies, assigned into them several Diocesses
to be visited: Appointing likewise unto every company one or two godly learned
Preachers [ by which it seems the Commissioners were Laics; unless we say they
appointed some godly Preachers to assist the Divines; see the names of those
for the Diocese of London, Fox p. 1192.] which Preachers at every Session
should instruct the people in the true Doctrine of the Gospel; and dehort them
from their old Superstition and Idolatry. And that they might be more orderly
directed in this their Commission, there were delivered unto them certain
Injuctions and Ecclesiastical Orders, drawn up by the Kings learned Council;
the which they should command, in his Majesty's behalf, to be thenceforth
observed of every person, to whom they did appertain, within their sundry
Circuits. [ These Injuctions (as we find in the Kings Preface to them) are
directed to both Clergy and Laity, for the suppression of Idolatry and
Superstition; and the extirpation of enormities and abuses; by the King supreme
authority assisted by the advice of his most dear Uncle the Duke of Somerset,
and the esidue of his most honorable Council.] And of the same universal
Visitation made by the Kings appointment thus speak the Antiquit. Britann. p.
Paulo post omnes Papales caremoniae, Missationes, Exequiae, Sanctorum
invocationes, mortuorum expiationes, precationumque formulae e templis and
christianorum caetu sublatae atque deletae sunt. Ad hanc rem a Rege visitatio
totius regni generalis decernitur: datique cum amplissimis mandatis certi
Visitatores, qui singulas Dioceses lustrarent. And in this Visitation, beside
the general Injunctions for the whole estate of the Realm (says Mr. Fox Ibid.)
there were shops only; which were by the Commissioners committed to the said
Bishops, with charge to be inviolably observed upon pain of the Kings Majesty's
displeasure. First: That they should see and cause all the Kings Injunctions,
theretofore given, or after to be given, from time to time, through their Diocese
faithfully to be observed. -- Moreover; that they should not at any time or
place preach or set forth unto the people any Doctrine contrary to the effect
and intent set forth in the Kings Highnesse's Homilies [which Homilies are the
stating of several Doctrinals in Religion] neither yet should give License to
preach to any, but to such, as they should know for at least assuredly trust)
would do the same: of whom if any offended herein, that they should inhibit and
punish him; and revoke their License.

Fox, touching the first proceedings of the King and his Council in the
Reformation, In the prohibition of Preaching till he had settled Religion.
before the calling of any Parliament or Synod. But to prosecute this matter a
little further: after the enjoining the Doctrine of the Homilies and other
matters, the King finding much reluctance and opposition to them in many also
of this Ministry licenced by their Ordinaries, or rather in the Ordinaries
also themselves, He, in the beginning of the second year of his Reign, by his
Proclamation February the Sixth, inhibited any to preach, except he were
licenced under the Seal, either of the Lord Protector, or of Cranmer,
Archbishop of Canterbury. About this time he restrained likewise the Bishops
themselves, thought too actively busy in several places of their Diocesses,
[how does this agree with Mr. Fox his dumb Prelates? See before. 107.] to
preach only in their own Cathedrals; a thing (says Winchester writing to the
Protector) the like whereof has not been known in any time. Fox p. 1224
Some seven Months after, neither finding those licenced by the Protector and
Archbishop of Canterbury conformable to the Doctrines prescribed, By a
Proclamation put forth Sept. 23, he inhibited the whole Clergy through the
Kingdom, as well (says the Proclamation) the said Preachers before licensed,
as all others, whosoever they be, to preach in open audience, in the Pulpit or
otherwise: [the reason there given] because those licenced had abused the said
authority of Preaching; and had behaved themselves irreverently and without
good order in the said preaching; contrary to such good instructions as were
given unto them: [the time of silence there prescribed] because that his
Majesty minded to see very shortly one uniform order throughout this his Realm,
and to put an end to all Controversies in Religion; for which cause at that
time certain Bishops and notable learned men by his Highness's command were
congregated; therefore he inhibited them, until the said order shall be set
forth [ which should show them what Doctrine they were to preach, The defense
made by the Protestant Divines concerning K. Edw. Proceedings in matters of
Religion.
composed by some such Bishops and other Learned, as were elected to this by
the Prince] See the Proclamation in Fuller p. 388. Lib. 7.

And thus much of the first beginnings and manner of King Edward the Sixth's
Reformation. In defense of which I find these things said by Dr, Fern, (
Consider. of Reform. 2. c. 9. etc.) Dr. Hammond, ( Schism 7, c. 14.) and other.
by the advice and consent of the Metropolitan, the Archbishop of Canterbury
(to the authority of which Metropolitant much is to be attributed. See Cart.
Apost. 34. and Council. Nicaen. 4. c. Edward's Reign: but were Provisional only,
for the public exercise of Religion and Worship; Fern p. 74, 75. 3.
Image Worship, the restoring of the Liturgy in a known Tongue, and Communion in
both kinds, and the abolishing of Romish Masses; Edward's Reformation, p. 71;)
z and that in them the King restored only what was established and used in the
ancient Church. viz. Divine Service in a known tongue; Communion in both kinds;
without Image Worship, p. 76. 4. Gardener Bishop of Winchester, p. 77. Fox p.
1219: where it is said; 'That they were of all men of all sorts obediently
received and reverently observed and executed, save only of the Bishop of
Winchester. Hammond, p. 147. Fern, p. 80.79. 5. of King Edward, it must be
granted, that an Ecclesiastical Synod acknowledged the truth and lawfulness of
the former Injunctions, constituting the same things in a body of forty two
Articles of Religion: which Articles were shortly after published by the Kings
authority with this Title prefixed. Articuli de quibus in Synodo London: An.
1552. ad tollendam opinionum dissensionem, and consensum verae religionis
firmandum, inter Episcopos and alios eruditos viros convenerat, Regia
authoritate editi. In the thirty sixth of which Articles is also ratified the
second corrected Form of Common Prayer, and the new Form of Ordination in these
words: Liber, qui nuperrime authoritate Regis and Parliamenti Ecclesiae
Anglicanae traditus est, continens modum and formam orandi, and Sacramenta
administrandi in Ecclesia Anglicana similiter and libellus eadem authoritate
editus de Ordinatione Ministrorum Ecclesiae, quoad doctrinae veritatem pii
sunt, etc. Atque ideo ab omnibus Ecclesiae Anglicanae fidelibus membris, and
maxim a Ministris verbi, cum omni promptitudine animorum and gratiarum action
accipiendi, approbandi, and posteritati commendandi sunt. l
l And also for the first new Form of Common Prayer, and Administration of the
Sacraments, it must be granted, that, in the second year, and second Parliament
of the Kings Reign, the whole body of the Clergy in Convocation gave their
approbation and consent thereto: as appears both, by the Kings message to the
Rebels of Cornwall; where it is said, That whatever was contained in the new
Common Prayer Book etc. was by Parliament established, by the whole Clergy
agreed, by the Bishops of the Realm devised; Fox p. 1189: and by the Letter of
the King and his Council to Bishop Bonner; where it is said yet more fully;
That, after great and serious debating and long conference of the Bishops and
other grave and well learned men in the holy Scriptures, one uniform Order of
Common Prayer and Administration of Sacraments has been and is most Godly set
forth, not only by the full assent of the Nobility and Commons of the late
Parliament; but also by the like assent of the Bishops in the same Parliament,
and of all other the learned men of this our Realm, in their Synods and
Convocations Provincial. Fox p. 1186. And see much-what the same said in the
Answer to the Lady Mary's Letter. Fox p. 1212. 6.

ultimum refugium; The Reply thereto.
That Princes may reform in matters of Religion and of Faith, without and
against the major part of their Clergy; of which hereafter) which is made for
the regularity of Edward the Sixth's Reformation. To which now consider with
me, what, it seems, may reasonably be replied: tho some things cannot be so
fully cleared, till I have given you the rest of the Narration of this Kings
Proceedings; to which therefore I must refer you for them. Reply to a
To a then I answer, That the Archbishop acted not, in the setting forth of
these Injunctions, as the Metropolitan; but as one of the Sixteen Counselors
whom Henry the Eighth nominated for the Government of his Son; and in the same
manner as he would have acted had he been Bishop of Asaph or Bangor. Neither
are the Injunctions grounded at all upon the Metropolitan's assent, but on the
Kings Supremacy; nor do they make any mention of him or his authority, but only
of the Council in general, and of their advice; as you may see in what is
before related. 108. Neither were those Canons, being of humane constitution
only, conceived, either by King, Council, or this Archbishop, to be of any
force under this Regal Supremacy, But secondly, Suppose them in force, and
these Injunctions published by the Metropolitan's authority, yet is not such
authority made valid in such things, when single, without the concurrence of
his Bishops, by any such Canon. For the very same Canon that says, Nihil
praeter Metropolitani conscientiam gerant Episcopi etc. says also, Nec ille
praeter omnium conscientiam faciat aliquid in eorum Paraeciis; Sic enim
unanimitas erit. See Can. Apost. 35. Thirdly, lastly: every thing set forth by
the advice of this Council is not necessarily so by the Archbishops advice or
vote, because he is one of the Council: For here the vote of the major part
(who were all Laymen save himself, and one Dr. Wotton: if Bishop Tonstal's
vote was cast out) tho it were contrary to his vote, bears the name of the
whole.

To b.
That the advice of many Bishops was used in many of the Kings Injunctions
(unless in that, touching the new Form of Common Prayer) is not evident: that
the advice of some Bishops was used in all, is credible; but those, such as
were presumed to be of the same inclinations with the King and Council (as
whatsoever color the State is of, it cannot want some Clergy of the same
complexion.) For Example; Cranmer and Ridley now called to consutation, but
Gardener, Tonstal, Bonner, Heath, etc. shut out; and in Queen Mary's days,
contra. That the advice of many Bishops used is not sufficient for to impose
Laws on the rest, where all have a decisive vote; and, where the legislative
power lies in the major part, viz. in a Synod, to prevent Innovations by such
Prelates, as are singular in their opinions.

Edward claimed by his Supremacy, according to the power, which, To g.
as I have showed above. 39. etc. was judged then to belong to it, the giving
of Laws to his Clergy, not only for rectifying their practice, but Doctrines
(only using the assistance of such Divines, or other learned men, as he thought
fit to single out for this purpose) as you may see, In his prescribing the
Doctrine of the Homilies unto them; and also, Before. 108.
In his injoyning them, that, whatsoever else should come from him, they should
see, and cause, it faithfully to be observed: In his silencing the Ministry,
till something were drawn up by certain Bishops and other learned men
congregated by his authority, that should put an end to all controversies in
Religion: before. 109: In the style of his Proclamation before the order of the
Communion; where he says: We would not have our Subjects so much to mislike
our judgment; as tho we could not discern what was to be done etc. God be
praised, we know both what by his word is meet to be redressed, and have an
earnest mind by the advice [of whom?] of our most dear Uncle, and other of our
privy Council, with all diligence to set forth the same: and In the last.
Articles to the Bishop of Winchester (drawn up (says the Kings Diary) by
Bishop Ridley, Pull^r 8. l.
and Secretary Sir W. Peter's) which required his Subscription to several points
of Doctrine, mentioned above: before. 45.

To d.
That if there was then a present necessity of providing for the public
exercise of Religion and Worship; so, this being a matter of the greatest
moment, there was also a necessity, that the judgment of the National Synod,
and not only of the Kings private Council should be had therein: lest, by
remedying such things hastily, they should be remedied amiss. 1. That it is
most probable, had the Clergy been generally consulted-with herein, they would
have discovered no such necessity: because the same Clergy, but a year ago, in
Henry the Eighth's time, at least for a major part of them, saw no necessity of
charging the Church's Service; as appears in the first, second, fifth, sixth
of the Six Articles, ratified as by the King, so by Synod. And this their
judgment not likely to be mistaken, because the judgment of the whole Catholic
Church for near a 1000 years had been the same; using the same public exercise
of Worship, which King Edward found in this Church of England, See Church
Govern. 4. Part: and therefore some of King Edward's Bishops saw a necessity of
leaving their Bishoprics, rather than to admit any change thereof.

Edward's Reformation, To e.
as will be seen by and by; and as is manifest in Queen Elizabeth's and the
modern Reformation, which our Writers contend scarce in any thing to differ
from King Edward's. But, if it be meant, that those matters were the main of
his Reformation in the beginning of his Reign, the Doctrines of the Homilies
then also imposed contradict this; and the Articles to Winchester: before. 108.
But now to come to what is said of the points here mentioned.

1.
That first, where a pretension is, that the things by the King enjoined are
things evident; z.
and established in the ancient Church; the Clergy also ought to be Judge of
this (especially when the contrary was said in King Henry's days) whether
evident, whether primitive: because to judge whether primitive requires much
learning; and is indeed the chief means, by which Controversies are decided;
namely this, the examining how former Church has interpreted the Scriptures;
which Scriptures all sides draw to their own sense.

2.
that all the Reformation made in the public Service was established in the
ancient Church; and affirmed, that the Reformation proceeded also further in
these points, than is here mentioned. Thus much is granted (to remove here that
ambiguity and deceit which lies in Universals;) That Images, and so the
veneration or worship of them, were very seldom (if at all) used in the
Christian Church for some of the first Centuries. That the public Communion
was, then, most commonly, if not always, administered in both kinds unto the
people. That the Divine Service, which then, as now, was celebrated usually in
the Latin, or Greek, Tongue, was much better, in those days, than now,
understood of the common people. Likewise it is granted, That the having the
Liturgy, or Divine Service, or the Holy Scriprures, in a known tongue is not
prohibited; nor the using of Images enjoined; nor the Priests administering and
the Peoples receiving the Communion in both kinds, if the Supreme Church
Governors so think fit, declared unlawful, by any Canon of any Council.

Edward in these things went further. For it translated not simply the former
Divine Service into a known Tongue (a thing which might easily have been done,
for Mr. Fox himself has done so much, see p. 1272. in the beginning of Queen
Mary's Reign, to expose it to laughter and lay open its Errors and
Superstitions;) but changed and altered it (of which is made no mention in z)
taking away the Sacrifice of the Mass, See Stat. 1. Edw. 6.14. c. And Articles
sent to Winchester.
and declaring such thing unbeneficial and vain either pro vivis or defunctis;
Contrary to the tenent and practice of the Primitive Church, which in such
sense offered it, as is showed elsewhere in the discourse of the Eucharist, and
in Chur. Govern. 4. Part; and Contrary to the declared judgment of the English
Clergy but a few years before; as appears in the fifth of the Six Articles: and
declared likewise the Mass Book to have many Superstitions in it, and to be
full of abuses; contrary to the long approbation of the whole Church Catholic
in the public use thereof from age to age without any considerable difference.
Again; his Reformation held no consideration sufficient to deny the Cup to the
Communicants; contrary not only to the definition of a former Superior Council,
that of Constance, and the declared opinion of the English Clergy, in the
second of the Six Articles; but contrary to the tenent and practice of the
Primitive times, who sometimes in private Communions administered it only in one
kind; as is showed in the discourse of Communion in one kind. It took away all
private Masses, as holding it unlawful for the Priest to celebrate and
communicate alone; contrary to the ancient practice of the quotidian Christian
Sacrifice, (whether any of the people communicating, or no,) offered unto God
for the impetration of his mercies upon the Church: and contrary to the
declared judgment of the English Clergy in the fifth of the Six Articles. In
which single communicating of the Priest (casually happening) if there be any
fault made, it is to be laid not on the Priests performance of this daily
Service, but on the people's indevotion and neglect to accompany him in that
holy Banquet. Whereas the Church that uses such private Masles, wishes, that
the Priest might never communicate alone, but if this sometimes happen, which
is not the Priests fault, the Church does not therefore command this Sacrifice
of the Eucharist to be omitted: quod Sacrificium a publico Ecclesiae ministro
non pro se tantum, sed pro omnibus fidelibus, qui ad Christi corpus pertinent,
celebratur. See Conc. Trid. 22. Sess. 6. cap. This loss is a worse thing than
the other indecency. Lastly, It held the veneration of Images or Saints
Relics unlawful: contrary to the definition of a former General Council, the
second Nicene; which Council also justifies it by Antiquity. Now King Edward's
Reformation proceeeding thus far, you see, interests it self not only in matter
of Practice, but Doctrine. And indeed there could be no such necessity
pretended of reforming the public Service in such a manner, had they not
judged the former frame thereof to be grounded on some erroneous opinions. But,
had the Reformation only translated the former Church Liturgies and Scriptures
into a known Tongue; administered Communion in both kinds; thought fit not to
use Images; changed something of practice only without any decession from the
Church's Doctrines: it is probable, the Church-Governors would have been facile
to license these, where they could be secure of no breach in greater, matters.

To e. Where concerni^g the Clergy's concurrence and consent to the Kings
Reformations.
To e. That the words urged out of the charge against Winchester prove not the
Clergy's reception of, or submission to, all the Kings Injunctions touching the
Reformation; but only to the first Injunctions. That whether they be extended
to the first, or to all, they must be understood in some such sense, as this;
That at that time, when this charge against Winchester was drawn, there were as
yet none other known to the Council that did by open Protestation and Letters
(as it follows in that charge) show a wilful disobedience thereto etc. Or else
the verity of them will not consist with the story of those times; which often
signify a great opposition and averseness, in many of the Clergy besides
Winchester, to the Kings proceedings in the alteration of Religion; so far as
that many were silenced, suspended, imprisoned, ejected out of their Spiritual
Preferments for this cause.

Fox p. 1192. Bishop Bonner's protestation concerning these first Injunctions
and Homilies, when they were tendered unto him by the Commissioners; which
protestation was so far from being interpreted an obedient reception or
reverent observance of them; that for it he was sent to the Fleet. And what was
done by Gardener and Bonner leading Bishops, that it was done also by many
others, I pray you review Mr. Fox's words before recited 107 That for the most
part the Bishops of Churches and Diocesses were changed [which you may compare
with what is said before (. 107.) of the many new Bishops made by King Edward]
That Learned Men were sent for out of foreign Countries; surely not because
the Leaders of the Universities were not so well studied (see their
Disputations) but because not so conformable to the new prescriptions. That of
the old Bishops some were committed to one ward, some to another: where he
names Bonner, Gardener, Tonstal; but might have mentioned also Heath, Day,
Vesy, that we know of. And to the same purpose much-what speaks Godwin p.
223. A. D. 1548; who after having commended Day and Tonstal for very learned
Pre lates, says, That the drift of the punishments of such men, when in
Henry's time they were accounted the chief Lights of our Church, he conceives
to have been, that the rest of that Order might by their Example be admonished,
without dissimulation, either to resign their Bishoprics to others that were
thought [by the present times] more worthy; or be induced [by this terror] to
conform themselves to the present Reformation of the Church, according to the
prescript of the Laws in that behalf lately enacted [i. e, by Parliament.] Thus
he. But that the imprisonment of these or of some other Clergy, as also that
the dissent of many others to the Kings Injunctions, who were not as yet
imprisoned for it, preceded the confirmation of these Injunctions by any Act of
Parliament or Convocation, appears from the very Act it self. 2. Edw. 6.1. c.
Where the Parliament desires of the King, That all persons that have offended
in the Premises [i. e, in refusing the Form of Common Prayer, or at least of
the Mass, Fox p. 1184
imposed by the King before this Act] other, than such person or persons as now
be and remain (says the Act) in the ward of the Tower of London, or in the
Fleet, may be pardoned thereof. Some Clergy therefore were imprisoned for this
cause before this Act: and more also had offended in this matter, than those
who were imprisoned; whose pardon here was begged by the Parliament.

Fox relates p. 1184; who, after he has first told us, how a new Form of
Communion was agreed on by certain learned men appointed by the King (which
Form, you must know, was not allowed, or seen, by the first Parliament of King
Edward; which Parliament appointed Communion in both kinds indeed; but this
might have been observed without altering or adding one Syllable to the Mass)
and enjoined by the Council to be duly executed both by the Bishops and their
subordinate Clergy, thus complains; Nevertheless (says he) as at no time any
thing can be so well done of the godly, but that the wicked will find some
means to deface the same: so likewise at this present, through the perverse
obstinacy and dissembling frowardness of many inferior Priests and Ministers
of Cathedral and other Churches of this Realm, there did arise a mavelous
Schism and variety of fashions in celebrating the Common Service, and
administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church.
For some zealously allowing the Kings proceedings, did gladly follow the order
thereof; and others, though not so willingly admitting them, did yet
dissemblingly and patchingly use some part of them: but many carelessly
contemning all would still exercise their old wonted Popery [i. e, in other
language, would still retain the former solemn Church Service.] Thus He. Now
this variety of fashions only mentioned by Fox if you desire more particularly
to know; we find a more punctual relation thereof in Parsons 3. Convers. of
England, 2. Part, 12. Chapter. What a Babylonical confusion (says he) in the
two first years of the Kings Reign ensued upon these innovations in all
Churches, is wonderful to recount. For some Priests said the Latin Mass; some
the English Communion; some both; some neither; some half of the one, half of
the other. This was very ordinary, to say the Introitus and Confiteor in
English; and then the Collects, and some other parts in Latin: after that
again, the Epistles and Gospels in English, and then the Canon of the Mass in
Latin; and lastly the Benediction and last Gospel in English. But that which
was of more importance and impiety; some did consecrate Bread and Wine, others
did not: but would tell the people beforehand, That they would not consecrate,
but restore them their Bread and Wine back again, as they received it from
them; only adding to it the Church's benediction. And those, that did
consecrate, did consecrate in diverse forms; some aloud, some in secret; some in
one form of words, some in another. And, after Consecration, some held up the
Host to be adored after the old fashion, and some did not; and, of those that
were present, some did kneel down and adore, others did shut their eyes, others
turn away their faces, others run out of the Church crving Idolatry. Hitherto
Parsons. View also Dr. Heylin's Hist. of Reform. p. 63.74. concerning
this-matter. Whereby we see how averse and unsatisfied diverse of the Clergy
were with the Kings alterations.

London, Fox p. 1186. complaining: That it was no small occasion of sorrow unto
them to understand by the complaints of many that the said Book; so much
traveled for, remains in many places of the Realm, either not known at all,
or not used; or if used, very seldom; and that in such a light and irreverent
sort, that etc. The fault whereof [say they to the Bishop] we must of reason
impute to you, and others of your vocation. And thus Fox in the same Page. What
zealous care was in this young King concerning Reformation by these Injunctions
it may tight well appear. Whereby we have to note not so much the careful
diligence of the King and his learned Council, as the lingering slackness and
drawing back on the other side of diverse, but especially of Bishops, and old
Popish Curates [ he means the Clergy, such as had not been changed by King
Edward:] by whose cloaked contempt, wilful winking, and stubborn disobedience
the Book of Common Prayer was, long after the publishing thereof, either not
known at all; or else very irreverently used throughout many places of the
Realm. And the same thing may be collected from the many Risings in several
Counties, that were in King Edward's days, chiefly for matter of Religion.
First in Somersetshire and Lincolnshire; then in Essex, Kent, Suffolk,
Norfolk, Cornwall, and Devon-shire; and afterward also in York shire. Which
Risings of the Laity in such numbers for their former way of Religion would not
have been, had not their Clergy justified it unto them.

Ridley, one who knew well the pulse of those times, in his Treatise, lamenting
the State of England, apud Fox p. 1616. Even of the greatest Magistrates (says
he) some spurned privily; and would not spare to speak evil of those Preachers,
who went about most wholsomely to cure their sore backs. As for the common fort
of other inferior Magistrates, as Judges etc, it may be truly said of them, as
of the most part of the Clergy, Parsons, Prebendaries, Archdeacons, Deans, yea
and I may say of Bishops also; I fear me, for the most part (although I doubt not,
but God had, and has ever whom he in every state knows to be his) but for
the most part, I say, they were never persuaded in their hearts, but from the
teeth forward, and for the Kings sake, in the truth of Gods word [i. e. in the
Protestant tenants;] and yet all these did dissemble [ he means many, for of
all it is not true. See before. 107.] and bear a Copy of a countenance, as if
they had been sound within. Hitherto Bishop Ridley. Where note; that some
outward compliance, at the first, of those Bishops, who made an open opposition
afterward, might be upon a fair pretense; because the first Acts of the
Reformation might be not so unsupportable, as the later: for the Reformation
winded and insinuated it self into the common practice by certain gentle
degrees; the greatest blow to the former doctrine and discipline of the Church
being given in the later times of this Kings Reign, when it was now by some
success grown more bold and confident. But however it be; such compliance, used
for a while, but after ward renounced, does avail nothing the Protestant cause:
since the later judgment in such matters is to be taken; especially where it is
no way corrupted by, but proceeds against, secular advantages. Again; the
perpetual outward compliance of some other Bishops contrarily affected, since
there preceded before it penalties, and fears, and the seeing of the prime
Bishops to be imprisoned and ejected for standing our, is far from an
authentical consent, and unjustly reckoned as such. For tho none can know men's
hearts but by their outward appearance; yet where men's votes are asked after
penalties, imprisonments of others, threats etc; which are so strong motives of
dissimulation: now all that conform in these, are to be presumed compilers; and
none free voters.

Ridley's I will second with Mr. Fuller's Chur. Hist. 7. l. p. 414. We find
(says he) the Bishops [of that time] divided into three sorts, zealous
Protestants, Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper, Farrer, etc. [ but these named were made
Bishops, or consecrated ( as Ridley) in King Edward 's time, all save Cranmer]:
'Zealous Papists, Bonner, Gardener, Tonstal [ he might have named so many of
the rest, as were then ejected for their Religion; Voicy, Heath, Day]: Papists
in their hearts, but outwardly conforming to the Kings [Ecclesiastical] Laws;
as Heath then Bishop of Worcester [ yet Heath was ejected] and many other
Bishops [ amongst whom, elsewhere he numbreth, S. l. p. 11.
Sampson Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, ( of whom Godwin in Catalogue of
Bishops says; That he began to show himself a Papist in the second year of
King Edward, and was put out of the Presidentship of Wales.) Capon Bishop of
Salisbury, Thirlby Bishop of Norwich, Buckly Bishop of Bangor; add Parfew
Bishop of Asaph, Kitchen Bishop of Landaff, Aldrich Bishop of Carlisle, Goodrich
Bishop of Ely, Chambers Bishop of Peterborough, King Bishop of Oxford; who all
returned to the profession of the old Religion in Queen Mary's days. Some of
these forenamed flinging up a good part of their lands to keep their ground,
and complying with the Kings commands so coldly and with such reluctance, as
laid them open to the spoil, tho not to the loss, of their Bishoprics, as Dr.
Heylin relates it in Hist. of Reform. p. 100.] And here it is worthy of enquiry
(says Fuller) why this later sort, which so complied under King Edward, should
be so stubborn and obstinate under Queen Elizabeth: whereof I can give but this
reason assigned; that growing old and near their graves they grew more
conscientious and faithful to their own (tho erroneous) Principles. Thus he. I
add; to the open maintaining of which Principles, their long experience, having
seen the arbitrary and floating state of Religion under a secular Supremacy, in
their old age excited them.

Edward's days: yet so many of them then remained still of the old Religion,
either in heart, or also in profession, that a Synod being called within five
or six days after Queen Mary's Coronation, before any new moulding of this
Ecclesiastical body, all of them, except six, voted against King Edward's
Reformation: See before. 51. To which may be added the zeal and forwardness of
the Clergy and People at the same time preventing the Queen's Edicts, in
erecting again the Altars, and using the Mass and Latin Service etc. (of which
see Heylin Hist. Q. Mary, p. 24.) All which could not have happened so soon
after King Edward's death, if during his life they had all so really and
unanimously received and observed it. Which Reformation also the Lady Mary, in
her Letter to the Council, who blamed her for inconformity to the Kings laws,
intimates; that it was not done without partiality, nor consented unto without
compulsion. See Fox p. 1212. I have offended no law (says she) unless it be a
late law of your own making, for the altering matters of Religion: which is not
worthy to have the name of a Law; both for etc, and for the partiality used in
the same. But I am well assured, that the King his Fathers Laws were all
allowed and consented to, without compulsion, by the whole Realm, both
Spiritual and Temporal etc. Thus the Lady Mary, An. Dom. 1549. which calls to
my remembrance what Mr. Fox says in commendation of the Protector: Sec
before.^04.
That, in the first consultation about Religion had at Windsor, he, in the
zealous defense of Gods truth, opposed the Bishops. I have here on purpose
thrown together thus many testimonies; to give you a fuller view of the
Clergy's temper in the time of those innovations; and to manifest the more, how
neither the Prelates (except those new ones, whom King Edward advanced); nor
the inferior Clergy, neither at first, nor at last, were so conforming to the
Kings proceedings, as is pretended out of the charge against Winchester, That
the Injunctions were by all of all sorts obediently received etc.

1. To th.
First; That whereas there was many Acts of Reformation from time to time set
forth by King Edward; we do not find, that the major part of the Clergy, in any
Convocation or Synod before the fifth year of the Kings Reign, is pretended to
have consented to any of them, save one; namely the new Form of Common Prayer
and Administration of the Sacraments, in the second year of the King: and that
consent was also had after this Book was, first, passed and made a Law by Act
of Parliament; as may be gathered: 1. Cranmer and Ridley) but not any
concurrence or authority of a Synod. See Heylin Sect 5.7 3^.
(But, had the decree of Synod preceded the Act of Parliament; this, which was
more, would rather have been mentioned, than the other, which was less.) and
which Act also by virtue of it self, see before. 40. not of arty Synodical Act,
confers authority on the Clergy to excommunicate the Opposers of this
Common Prayer Book. 2. Edward; which was authoritate Regis and Parliamenti; as
you may see in the 36 of the 42 Articles, Liber qui nuperrime authoritate Regis
and Parliamenti Ecclesiae Anglicanae traditus est, similiter and libellus eadem
authoritate editus de Ordinatione Ministrorum quoad doctrinae veritatem pii
sunt etc. Which style differs much from either of these, A Rege and Farliamento
Ecclesiae Anglicanae traditus; i. e, that it might be established by the
Church's authority; or; Ab Ecclesia Anglicana Regi and Parliamento propositus,
i. e, that, being established by the Church, it might be enjoined also, under
temporal punishments, by the State Laws. Neither do the words following in that
Article (see them recited before. 110.) Express any authoritative ratification,
but only a single testimony of their judgment concerning those Forms; or say
any thing which any other person, void of authority, may not use. Now of this
consent of the Convocations, An. 1549. to the Act of Parliament, and to the
draught of the fourteen Composers of the first Common Prayer Book, a chief
motive, (besides fear of punishment in disobeying the King and Parliaments
Injunctions or Laws,) was, as I conceive, this; because this new Form contained
in it only the omission of some former practices of the Church (as likewise the
later Common Prayer Book more omissions) but no declaration against any former
Church-practice or Doctrine; of which I shall say more by and by. And had King
Edward's Reformation been content to have staid here, See. 157.
it had been much more tolerable (tho these omissions I excuse not, as
faultless, or not offending against former Church-Canons:) But his Reformation
proceeded much further, to the condemning also of the Church's tenants and
practice; which cannot be showed to have been ratified by the first Clergy of
King Edward till the fifth year of his Government; of which I shall speak
hereafter. But, as for any other consent of the major part of the Bishops or
Clergy, proved to be yielded to the Kings other Injunctions, from the paucity
of the number of those who were imprisoned, or ejected, in comparison of the
rest; the argument is not good. First, Because many more might dissent, and
refuse obedience thereto, then were ejected or imprisoned or questioned for it.
Might? Nay did dissent; for the Parliament beggeth their pardon; see before.
120: and it is accounted a prudent policy of State, where very many are guilty,
only to punish some of the chief for Example sake. Secondly, And again many
more might be ejected, or questioned for this, than are by name mentioned in
Fox or others: and were so; if you consider the testimonies before cited.
Thirdly, But suppose only a few of the Clergy imprisoned or ejected; yet as,
where all the rest unanimously accord, this restraint of a few changes not the
Church Affairs: so when such a body is divided, and all the rest are not of one
mind; this withdrawing of a few, especially if these be the prime Leaders, and
the introducing of so many new voters, who are of a contrary persuasion, into
their rooms, (suppose, taking away six old Bishops, and putting six new ones in
their places) may render that, which was before a major and the more prevalent,
now a lesser and a weaker, part; and consequently, if they be unjustly
withdrawn, will render the Act of this major part invalid.

2.
That submittance of Convocation to the new Form of Common Prayer etc. may not
be reckoned for a lawful Synodical Act; because of the violence used formerly
upon the Clergy, enforcing, as other Ecclesiastical Injunctions of the King, so
also, the new Form of Communion, before it was proposed to any Parliament or
Convocation; for proof of which I refer you to the former testimonies; that I
may spare the taedium of repeating them. But what the inclinations of the old
Clergy were (for I speak not of the new induced by little and little into their
places by King Edward) if the hand of violence and threats of a new law-giving
civil-power had been removed from them (touching which see their sad complaint
before. 47) may be gathered, 1. both From what they did immediately before King
Edward's days in their establishing by Convocation the Six Articles; and the
the Necessary Doctrine: 31. Hen. 8.14. c.
And 2. From what they did in King Edward's days; in the very beginning of
which Archbishop Cranmer called a Synod of them, wherein he endeavored to
have effected a Reformation, but could not: See Antiquit-Brittan. p. 339. And
you see by the Testimonies forecited, how many suffered for opposing the Kings
Injunctions, and particularly this new Form of Common Prayer; and how many more
of the old Clergy are said to have opposed them in every place, where they
might hope for impunity; (insomuch as that this Book in many places was not so
much as heard of:) and how a major part even of the Bishops are by Protestants
confessed in their conformity only to have used an ontward compliance and
dissimulation. Lastly 3. From what they, so many as remained of them, did
immediately after King Edward s time, so soon as this Yoke of fear was removed
in the entrance of Queen Mary: at which time they threw-off their former
vizards; and plainly renounced not only the rest of the Reformation, the fruit;
but also the Regal Supremacy (i.e, quoad talia) the root. Nor could fear, when
the Sovereign power rechanged, ever make them (taught by long experience) to
take up again their former disguise: amongst whom the major part of those seven
Bishops chosen to compose the new Common Prayer Book, who survived to Queen
Mary's days, namely Day, Thirlby, and Goodrich ( Skyp Bishop of Hereford, and
Holbeck Bishop of Lincoln being dead before) deserted this new Form, and
returned again to the Mass. And it is probable, that some of those Bishops, who
by Queen Mary were ejected for Marriage (some of them even after a Monastic
profession) conformed themselves likewise to the old Religion: because tho they
lived here at home in so inquisitive and severe times, we find not, that they
were restrained, or proceeded against as Heretics. Such were Holgate, Bird,
Bush, etc.

Edward's first Clergy; and to be swayed only from the profession thereof by
fear: no marvel, if his Council went about reforming (at the first) by virtue
of the new Supremacy, before the calling of any Synod; save that wherein
Archbishop Cranmer was frustrated of his intentions. And Dr. Fern, Exam.
Champ. 2. c.. 8. makes this Apology for such proceeding. That Reformation of
Gods worship may be warrantably done without a foregoing Synodical vote; where
there is just and apparent cause of fearing more danger from the persons, which
are to be convocated, and the times wherein they are to assemble. To which
purpose (says he) sounds that known complaint of Nazianzen, That he saw no
good end of Councils [ spoken by reason of the prevailing faction of the
Arrians in his time] We cannot say the Sovereign Prince is bound in the way of
prudence always to receive his directions from a vote in a Synod; especially
where there is just cause of fear [ I suppose, that he means Fear, that the
Synod will go contrary to what the Prince thinks to be right:] but he may have
greater reason to ask advice from persons free from the exceptions of factious
interests; to which the most of them that should meet are apparently obnoxious.
And (says he) how far this was considerable in the beginning of King Edward's
Reign [i. e, till the King had otherwise molded the Members of the Synod] or
whether such fear made them forbear to put it at first to a Synodical Vote, I
cannot say. Thus Dr. Fern.

Heylin, Eccles. Vindic. 2. Par. 5.. p. 82. discourse of King Edward's
Reformation (to show you, that our modern Writers are not without some
apprehension of the neglect of the Church authority in it.) Which reviving
(says he) of the ancient Forms of Gods worship rather than the introduction of
a new, as the King [Edward] did here in England by his own authority, the body
of the Clergy not consulted in it; so, possibly, there might be good reason,
why those, who had the conduct of the Kings Affairs, thought it not safe to put
the managing of the business to a Convocation; [and then having showed that
such change of Religion would be both against the reputation and profit of the
Clergy, he goes on.] So that as well in point of reputation, as of profit,
besides the love which many of them had to their former Mumpsimus, it was most
probable; that such an hard piece of Reformation would not easily down, had it
been put into the power of a Convocation; especially under a Prince in nonage,
and a State unsettled. Thus he. As for that which afterward he says: That this
was passed by the Bishops, when it passed in Parliament, the Bishops making the
most considerable van of the House of Peers, It is answered by what has been
said before. 11. n. 2. And what he says, That all was confirmed by the Clergy
on the Post-fact in the Convocation of 1552: sall be answered by and by. See
likewise what the same Dr. says on the same subject in 1. Par. 6.. p. 36;
where, after doubting, whether several particulars of King Edward's Reformation
were done of the Kings mere motion, or by advice of his Council, or by
Consultation With his Bishops; (For (says he) there is little left upon record
of the Convocation of that time, more than the Articles of the year 1552) He
speaks also of Queen Elizabeth's Reformation done after the same sort, Thus
also (says he) in Queen Elizabeth's time, before the new Bishops were well
settled, and the Queen assured of the affection of her Clergy; she went that way
to work in the Reformation, which her two Predecessors [ Henry and Edward] had
done before her, in the well ordering of the Church; she published her
Injunctions etc. But when the times were better settled, and the first
difficulties of her Reign passed over; she left Church-work to the disposing of
Churchmen: who by their place and calling were most proper for it; and they
being met in Convocation did make Canons etc. And thus if a Prince, according
to the Sect which himself and his Council favors, may take the liberty, with
coactive power, to reform at the first against his Clergy: he, within a short
time no doubt, may securely leave the Church-work to Churchmen (as the Dr.
says) and justify his Reformation by his Clergy, that is, either changed
first; or terrified.

To chapter
To chapter These two I grant differ little. 1 The Clergy's first motioning to the
King, 2. or, The King's first motioning to the Clergy, a Reformation of
something in Doctrine or Manners; so that the Clergy, uncompelled or forced by
the King, establish it, before it be enjoined, or imposed on, any, to be
observed. But this following differs from the former toto coelo: viz. When the
King, directed by some particular Bishops, (whom he thinks good to advise with)
proposes to the Clergy a Reformation in Doctrine, not to be consulted on by
them and their judgment to be exhibited to him; (upon the assent or denial of a
major part of whom, as having in these things the legislative power, such
Reformation may be established or laid aside) but to be obeyed and submitted-to
by the Clergy; as the King having the legislative power in these things by his
Ecclesiastical Supremacy; to be obeyed and submitted to by them, upon penalties
of suspension, imprisonment, deprivation, etc. and when upon this in the issue
(after some of the Clergy punished) the rest do conform to the Kings commands.
Now which of these two were the proceedings of King Edward; I refer the matter
to the Story of those times, and the testimonies above produced.

ex animo and voluntary; yet this rendereth not the former Imposition or
Injunction of the King lawful or obligatory: the lawfulness or unlawfulness of
which cannot depend on an after casual event. For I ask: Suppose the Clergy
generally had opposed them, were these Injunctions justly imposed upon them by
the King or not? If not; Then neither were they justly imposed, tho the Clergy
had consented; because imposed before they consented, whose consent is held
necessary, that they may be justly imposed. But, if justly imposed; then why is
the Clergy's consent or reception of such Injunctions at all urged here to
justify them? Suppose a Prince should first decide some Theological
Controversy; and then require submission thereto, just on the same side
affirmatively or negatively, as a Synod of the Clergy would have done both
these; yet thus, he takes their office not rightly; tho he manageth it not
amiss. And such Act will not be allowable; because to the justifying of an
action two things are requisite: That the thing be right which is done; That
the person have lawful authority to do it.

to these Acts of the Kings Supremacy; which Supremacy was confirmed both by
the Clergy's Recognition and Oath. Which thing is sufficiently manifested; in
that many of the Kings Ecclesiastical Injunctions were set forth, and did exact
the Clergy's obedience to them, before any Synods consent given or asked; and
when it was yet uncertain, whether a major part would approve, or condemn them.
But, if you desire further evidence thereof, I refer you to the matter
delivered before, In. 40, 41. etc; where you may see the Parliament Acts
establishing such Laws, without pretending or involving any Synodal authority;
nay giving authority by virtue of such Act to the Clergy to execute such Laws;
and In. 45; where you may see, why it was necessary, according to their
principles, that they should do so; and In. 45; where you may see, the
obedience thought due in these matters to the regal Supremacy, and the edicts
issuing from it, required to be subscribed by Winchester: and In. 47; where you
may see the description of the exauctorated State of the Clergy in those times;
and In. 103; where you may see the usual style of Henry the Eighth (whose
Supremacy was no way remitted by his Son); and In. 107. etc. and,. 113. the
practice of Edward the Sixth; which yet will be further declared in the
following instances of his Supremacy. W hen therefore the consent of Synod or
Convocation is urged, to the people or to some single person, by the King, or
his Council; it is not urged, as an authority (see the reason. 45.) which
these, as subject to their decrees, ought to obey; but as an example, which
these, as less knowing, ought to follow. But if the bare mentioning sometimes
of the Clergy's consent argues this then thought necessary to the establishing
of such decrees; then would the mentioning of the consent of Parliament argue
as much, which is urged together with that of the Clergy; and so no
Ecclesiastical Acts of the King and Clergy would be obligatory, unless
confirmed by Parliament. But this will destroy the authority of the 42 Articles
made in the fifth year of King Edward; ratified by no Parliament.

To l
To l the Answer is prepared out of what has been already said to th. That,
before there had been any force used upon the Clergy, a Reformation was
endeavored in a Synod by Archbishop Cranmer; but repelled. That the vote of a
Convocation, after such violences first used, after Clergy restrained or
changed, is not to be reckoned free. That the major part only outwardly
complied for fear, as is confessed by Protestants; and seen both in their
former decrees under King Henry; and in their sudden recidivation (I mean the
Clergy not introduced by King Edward) under Queen Mary. That this consent of
Convocation can only be urged for the Common Prayer Book; but not for other
parts of the Reformation: which new Form of Common Prayer omitted rather than
gainsaid the former Church-tenents and practice; and these omissions not so
many in the former Book of King Edward, as in the latter. That this consent of
Convocation is not urged in the places cited as necessary to make the King and
Parliaments Church-Constitutions valid; but as exemplary, to make others more
conformable to them. That the Bishops that framed this new Form of public
Service, were but seven: whereof those who survived till Queen Mary's time,
except Cranmer and Ridley, returned to the Mass.

To m.
First, Whether there was indeed any such Synodal Act, as is here pretended in
the times of King Edward, shall be examined hereafter. But Secondly, Supposing,
for the present, that there was so; I answer, (besides that which is said in
the Reply to l and th appliable to this;) That by this time the Clergy was much
changed, according to Mr. Fox's description made thereof before. 107; a many
new Bishops introduced by King Edward; several old ones displaced; so that now,
after the State's five years reforming, Church-work, (to use Dr. Heylin's
Phrase) might more securely be committed to Churchmen: Yet that many also
then, for fear of the times, either absented themselves from this Synod; or in
the Synod were guilty of much dissimulation; as appears by their contrary votes
soon after in the beginning of Queen Mary. See before. 51.

To n.
I answer, That if such Synodal Acts were of the right Clergy, and their Acts
voluntary and unforced; the Reformation here in England from the time of such
Synods, was, as to this authority, regular and canonical; till reversed by the
like authority. But then this Reformation, as it is supposed to be made by the
Clergy, is void upon another account; viz. as being contrary to the former
definitions of lawful superior Councils; as may be seen in the several decrees
of those Councils (set down in Chur. Govern. 4. Part) compared with these 42
Articles, and the Homilies approved by them.

CHAP. IX. Continuation of the same, descending to Particulars: And of his
first Change of the Public Liturgy.
Edward's Reformation, H. More particularly
and exercising his Supremacy, and partly examined the Apologies made for it:
we will now proceed to nominate to you the several particulars of his
Reformation; which is usually covered under the name of alteration only of some
Rites and Ceremonies; as if the Doctrines of the Church suffered no change
under him.

In sending certain doctrinal Articles to be subscribed by the Bishop of Win
chester.
By virtue of such Supremacy then were sent those Articles to the imprisoned
Bishop of Winchester, to be subscribed; containing several points of Doctrine,
or practice involving Doctrine; (some of which have been named before???. 45.)
proposed to his Subscription, not as matters passed by any former Synod; but
(says the twentieth Article) as published and set forth by the Kings Majesty's
authority, by the advice of hit Highnesse's Council, for many great and godly
considerations. Fox p. 1235. Which Articles the Bishop is required there to
subscribe, publish and preach; upon the pain of incurring such Penalties, for
not doing the same, as may by his Majesty's laws be inflicted upon him.

Ia repealing the Six Articles passed by Synod in Hen 8. time. Stat. 31. Hen.
8.14. c. Fox p. 1036
and that in things of no small moment; and which, being determined, and the
observance of them enjoined as well by a Synod, as a Parliament, justly stand
in force, till a revocation of them by another Synod of like authority) were
repealed in the beginning of King Edward's Reign without any such Synod; see
Stat. 1. Edw. 12. c. and the Members of the Church of England freed from any
further obedience to them. By which it now became free for any, tho having
formerly made contrary vows, to Marry, to omit sacerdotal Confession, to preach
against the Real Presence, and the Sacrifice of the Mass; contrary to the
decrees of former Councils, and this National Synod.

Ia seizing on Religious houses and some Bishops lands, and denying the
lawfulness of Motastick Vows.
By virtue of such Supremacy this King (I mean always the Council in the Kings
name, and by his authority) not only justified the power used by his Father
over the possessions of Monasteries and Religious Houses; but declared also
Monastic Vows to be unlawful, superstitious and unobliging. Therefore the
first Article drawn up for Winchester's Subscription was this, That the late
King Henry the Eighth justly and of good reason had caused to be suppressed and
defaced all Monasteries, Religious Houses, etc. and, That the same being so
dissolved, the persons therein bound and professed to obedience to a person,
place, habit, and other superstitious Rites and Ceremonies, are, upon that
order appointed by the Kings Majesty's authority, as Supreme Head of the
Church, clearly released and acquitted of those Vows and Professions, and at
their full liberty, as tho those unwitty and superstitious vows had never been
made. Thus the Article. And hence it was, that some, formerly Monasticks, in
King Edward's days married Wives; but this Doctrine his Supremacy did deliver,
contrary to the Doctrine which his Father's Supremacy published: See before.
95. This King also continued his Fathers practice, in seizing upon that piously
devoted means, which his Fathers sudden death, after the concession of them by
Parliament, had left undevoured: I mean Chaunteries, Free-Chappels, Colleges,
Hospitals, etc. See Stat. 1. Edw. 6.14. c. But this he did upon another
pretense than his Father; by reason that his Doctrine herein varied from his
Fathers: His pretense being, the unlawfulness of offering the Sacrifice of the
Eucharist, or giving alms, for the defunct; but his Fathers pretense, who in
his Doctrine justified these, being quite another; as you may see before,. 92.
And therefore the second Act of Parliament in his, Stat. 37. H^n. 3.4 c. 1.
Edw. 6.14. c.
and in his Fathers time, that agree alike in the donation of these Revenues,
yet vary in their prefaces and motives.

Tonstal (left by his Father one of his Governors) ejected, He (I mean his
Council and Courtiers; for happy was that King of his Childhood, that it
preserved him unblameable for these things) seized upon that rich and tempting
Bishopric of Durham. Of which thus Bishop Godwin, The removing of these
obstacles [the ejected Bishops] made way for the invasion of their Widow-Sees.
For as soon as Tonstal was exauctorated, that rich Bishopric of Duresme by Act
of Parliament was wracked: the chief Revenues and Customs of it being
incorporated to the Crown; and the rest so guelded, that at this day it scarce
possesses the third part of its ancient Revenues. The hungry Courtier finding
how good a thing the Church was, had now for some years become acquainted with
it, out of zealous intent to prey. Neither could the horridness of her sacred
Skeleton as yet so work on him, as to divert his resolutions, and
compassionately to leave the Church to her religious poverty. Beside, the
infancy of the King, in this uncertain ebb and flow of Religion, made her
opportune to all kind, of Sacrilege. So that (says he) we are to thank the
Almighty Guardian of the Church, that these Locusts have not quite devoured the
maintenance of the laborers in this English Vineyard. Thus he concerning that
Bishopric; who, had he lived in these days, might hare seen the multiplied
generation of those Locusts devour his own. Besides Duresme, (for any thing I
can find) the Bishopric of Rochester after 1551 (when Scory was removed
thence) and that of Westminster after 1550 (when Thirlby was removed thence)
were enjoyed by the Crown, until Queen Mary's days; besides that of Worcester
given in Commendam to Hooper, to exercise the Jurisdiction and Episcopality
thereof, with some short allowance for his pains, says Dr. Heylin, Hist. of
Reform. under Edw. 6. p. 101. In which Author also see the spoil committed in
those days upon the Bishoprics of Bath and Wells p. 54; of Coventry and
Lichfield; of Landaff, of Lincoln, and others p. 100, 101. 129. and elsewhere.
Sure, foul things were done in this kind in those innovating times; because I
find even some of King Edward's favourite-Bishops highly to dislike them. For
Bishop Ridley in his Treatise, Apud Fox 9. 1616.
lamenting the State of England relates how he and Cranmer were both in high
displeasure [with the great ones] for repugning, (as they might well) against
the late spoil of the Church-goods, taken away only by commandment of the
higher powers, without any law or order of Justice; and without request or
consent of them to whom they did belong. And Calvin in a Letter to Archbishop
Cranmer written about An. Dom. 1551. giving a reason why the English Church was
so ill stored with good Pastors has these words, Vnum apertum obstaculnm esse
intelligo, quod praedae expositi sunt Ecclesiae reditus. So early you see, even
together with the first dawning of the Reformation, began that Sacrilege to be
committed on some Bishoprics; which our days have seen accomplished on the
rest: Lay menders of Religion ordinarily terminating in these two things; the
advancing of their carnal Liberty, and temporal Estates.

In defacing of Images.
By virtue of such Supremacy, He caused to be removed out of Churches, and to be
defaced and destroyed, all Images of Saints. Concerning which Reformation his
Council writes to the Archbishop of Canterbury in this style, We have thought
good to signify unto you, that his Highnesse's pleasure with the advice and
consent of us the Lord Protector and the rest of the Council is, that
immediately upon the sight hereof you shall give order, that all the Images
remaining in any Church within your Diocese be taken away; and also by your
Letters shall signify unto the rest of the Bishops within your Province this
his Highnesse's pleasure etc. Fox p. 1183. See likewise Stat. 3. and 4. Edw.
6.10. c. This he did when as the second Nicene Council not only had allowed,
but recommended the use of them. But he proceeded also further than this; and
declared the worshipping and veneration of any such Images or Relics to be
repugnant to Gods word, and unlawful, superstitious, idolatrous. See the 22 of
the 42 Articles; and Article to Winchester 11; and the Doctrine of his Homilies.

An. Dom. 1547) a Book of Homilies, not approved by any Synod before, nor after
till 1552, if then; in which Book were stated several Controversies of
Divinity. See Article 11 of the 42 referring to these Homilies for the stating
of Justification ex sola fide; the King forbidding the Clergy to preach any
Doctrine repugnant to the same Homilies, under pain of being silenced, or
otherwise punished. ^^injoyning administration of the Communion in both ^inds.
See before,. 108. Winchester Articles 15. Fox p. 1255.

By virtue of such Supremacy, He laid a command upon the Clergy to administer
the Communion to the people in both kinds, Stat. 1. Ed. 6.1. c. Council.
Constant. 13. sess. See before,. 118.
contrary to the Injunction of the Council of Constance; and without any
preceding confutation of a National Synod; and notwithstanding the former late
decree concerning the non-necessity thereof by the same National Synod in Henry
the Eighth's days, in the second of the Six Articles.

In suppressieg the former Church Liungies, Ordiaals, and other Rituals.
By virtue of such Supremacy, He caused to be removed and suppressed the former
Church Liturgies and Rituals for the public Prayers, for the celebration of
the Communion and other Sacraments, for the Ordinations of the Clergy. See Fox
p. 1211. The King (says he) with the body and state of the Privy Council then
being, directed out his Letters of request and strait commandment to the
Bishops in their Diocese to cause and warn all Parsons, Curates, etc. to bring
in and deliver up all Antiphoners, Missals, Grailes, Processionals, Manuals,
Legends, Pies, Ordinals, etc; and all other Books of Service, the having
whereof might be any let to the Service now set forth in English; charging also
and commanding all such as should be found disobedient in this behalf to be
committed unto ward. Saying in the Articles sent to Winchester, That the Mass
was full of abuses, Fox p. 1235.
and had very few things of Christ's institution, besides the Epistle, Gospel,
and the Lord's Prayer, and the words of the Lord's Supper: that the rest for
the more part were invented and devised by Bishops of Rome, and by other men of
the same sort [i. e. by Ecclesiastical Constitution] and therefore were justly
taken away by the Statutes and Laws of this Realm [this being the persuasion of
those times, That the King as Supreme might change, as to him seemed good, any
thing established only by humane- (tho it were Church-) authority.] And see
Stat. 3, 4. Edw. 6.10. c. Whereas the King has of late set forth and
established an uniform Order of Common Prayer etc; and whereas in the former
Service-Books are things corrupt, untrue, vain, and superstitious: Be it
enacted by the King, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, that all Missals, Ordinals, etc. heretofore used
for Service of the Church shall be utterly abolished, extinguished, etc.

And injetting u^ new Forms of celebrating the Communion.
But you must observe that all was not done at once, or at the first, but by
certain steps and degrees. For Example. The Form of administering the Communion
suffered three Alterations or Reformations one after another; the later still
departing further from the ancient Form used in the Church than the former.
First the King: assembled certain Bishops and others at Windsor in the first
year of his Reign (such as he pleased to appoint) to compile a new Form of
celebrating the Communion according to the Rule (says Fox p. 1184) of the
Scriptures of God, and first usage of the Primitive Church. Yet the Bishops at
this time so ordered and moderated the matter (which perhaps may be the reason
of those words in Fox see before. 125. See Heylin Hist. of K. Edw. p. 57.
That the Protector at Windsor in the zealous defense of Gods truth opposed the
Bishops) that the whole office of the Mass should proceed as formerly in the
Latin, even to the very end of the Canon, and the receiving of the Sacrament
by the Priest himself. Which done the Priest is appointed to begin the
exhortation in English. [We be come together at this time Dearly Beloved etc.]
as it is in the present English Liturgy. After which follows also the
disswasion of great offenders impenitent from receiving, the General Confession
and Absolution, the Prayer [We presume not etc.] and so the administration of
the Eucharist to the people in both kinds. The words of the Rubric in that
first Order of the Communion reprinted at London 61 are these, The time of the
Communion [of the people] shall be immediately after that the Priest shall have
received the Sacrament, without the varying of any other Rite or Ceremony in
the Mass (until other order shall be provided.) But as heretofore usually the
Priest has done with the Sacrament of the Body, to prepare bless and
consecrate so much as will serve the people, so it shall yet continue still
after the same manner and form; save that, he shall bless and consecrate the
biggest Chalice or some fair and convenient Cup or Cups full of Wine with some
water put unto it, and that day, not drink it up all himself; but taking one
only sup or draught leave the rest upon the Altar covered, and thus exhort the
people, Dearly beloved etc. Thus the Rubric. And this Form (as Mr. Fox goes
on) exhabited unto the King was by his Majesty's Council particularly sent to
every Bishop of the Realm, requiring and commanding them, by their Letters on
the Kings Majesty's behalf, that they should forthwith have diligent respect to
the due execution thereof etc. In which Letter the motive urged by the Council
why this new Form was drawn up and imposed, is; That the Statute of the former
Parliament, ordering that the Sacrament should be distributed unto the people
in both kinds, might be well executed, in such sort as is agreeable with the
word of God [as if for the distribution of the Sacrament in both kinds there
was any need of altering or superadding any thing to the Mass; when as, with
that same Form of the Mass it was in the public Communions, for many
Centuries, only so distributed; and when as that same Form of the Mass is urged
by Protestants, as contrary to communicating the people only in one kind; but
the true cause of altering it I shall show you by and by.] Now this new Form
was thus imposed by the King and his Council, before allowed by any Synod of
the Clergy, or Act of Parliament; which were procured afterward in the second
Parliament of King Edward. Meanwhile such alterations in King Edward's time
about the Doctrine and the Administration of this Sacrament as they were
uncanonical, so they were, in this respect, also very hurtful; in that they
occasioned (in the ignorant especially) much profaneness and irreverence toward
the Blessed Sacrament in those days; as you may partly also gather from an Act
(1. Edw. 6.1. c.) made against such irreverent speaking against it. For whereas
the Sacrament was, according to ancient custom, delivered to each Communicant
in a small round Wafer, hence they gave it the name of Round-Robin. And because
the parts thereof, that were reserved to be carried to the sick, were hanged up
over the Altar in a Pix or Box; they named it Jack in a Box; and instead of the
Sacrament of the Altar, called it the Sacrament of the Halter. (See Heylin's
Hist. of Reform. 49.63.) Such profaneness followed the remedy of what they
called Superstition.

2. Of Ordination. See 3, 4. Edw. 6.10. c.
Having likewise condemned, amongst other superstitious Books, the former
Church-form of Ordination and Consecration of Bishops and Priests, the King
caused a new Form to be prescribed, upon this pretense in the Act of
Parliament, That so concord and unity might be had, within his Majesty's
dominions, in these Ordinations. [But could not this have been done without
innovation, by strictly confining all to the use of the former Church form; or,
if these were various, to some one of them?] Stat. 3, 4. Edw. 6.12. c.
Now for the compiling of this new Form the Parliament orders, That such, as by
fix Prelates, See before,. 42.
and six others to be appointed by the King, or by the major part of them,
should be devised for that purpose and set forth under the great Seal, should
by virtue of their Act (without obtaining or requiring any ratification thereof
from any Synod) be lawfully used, and none other, any law or prescription to
the contrary thereof notwithstanding. In which new Form, amongst other things,
which were in the former, now cast out, this is one, (to the great
contradiction of all Antiquity) The Bishops conferring on the ordained
Presbyters potestatem offerendi sacrificium proprie dictum and vere
propitiatorium (see in what sense understood and explained by the Church in
Discourse of the Eucharist,. 251. etc) Deo, Missasque celcbrandi tam pro vivis
quam pro defunctis. Quod omnem superat impietatem, says Mason de Minist. p.
242. 17. c. And this is another: The Oath of Submission of the Ordained or
Consecrated to the Supremacy of the Patriarch: instead of which is prescribed
another Oath, to the Supremacy of the Temporal Prince. From which Regal
Supremacy also we find Cranmer (after fifteen years governing the Province of
Canterbury) receiving, at the coming in of a new Sovereign, a new License of
ordaining Bishops and Priests therein durante Beneplacito Regis. [The Form, as
Sanders p. 170. has set it down, runs thus, Quandoquidem omnis jurisdicendi
authoritas atque etiam jurisdictio omnimoda, tam illa quae ecclesiastica
dicitur, quam seecularis, a Regia petestate velut a supremo capite manta etc.
Ad ordinandum igitur quoscunque intra Diaecesim tuam Cantuariensem and ad omnes
etiam sacros and Presbyteratus ordines promovendum, per praesentes ad nostrum
beneplacitum duraturos, tibi damus potestatem.] And some such thing is
intimated by Mr. Prin (unbishoping of Timothy p. 80.) I must inform our Bishops
(says he) for their Learning, that all the Bishops in King Edward the Sixth's
time had special clauses in their Letters Patents authorizing them to ordain
Ministers and Deacons; as Bishop Poynet's, Scory's, Coverdale's Patents (5.
Edw. 6. pars. 1.) testify at large (and there is no wonder in this, if you
recall to mind Archbishop Cranmer's Answers to the Queries made concerning
these matters recited before. 105. n. 3.): Which Patents, if they imply such a
Supremacy Ecclesiastical in the Prince, as that he may, if he please, prohibit
any Ecclesiastical person at all from ordaining Ministers in his dominions, are
contrary to the first Thesis above.. 2. But yet this new Ordinal was not so
well purified from former Superstitions, See in Fox p. 1366. the Kings and Earl
of War wick's Letters.
but that some who were presented to Bishoprics were stumbled therewith; and
the Kings dispensation was obtained, in order to the consecrating of Bishop
Hooper, for his not observing of some things therein; and particularly for his
not taking the new Oath, either that of obedience to the Archbishop; or that
of the Kings Supremacy; which perhaps he, lately seasoned abroad with Calvin's
Doctrine, See before:.37.
could not so easily digest.

3^ of Common Prayer.
Not long after the production of the new Form in administering the Communion,
in the second year of his Reign he caused it to be reviewed; and also then to
be drawn up a new Form of Common Prayer for Mattins and Evensong, and the
Administration of the other Sacraments of the Church (if I may use the phrase
of the Act, 2. Edw. 6.1. c.): which Form composed by seven Bishops, and seven
other learned men of the Clergy chosen by the King (yet one of them Day Bishop
of Chicester, after it was done, refused to subscribe it; who was afterward
also turned out of his Bishopric. See Heylin's Hist. of Reform. p. 65. quoting
the Register of Petworth) was authorized by Act of Parliament, and at the same
time consented to (as it seems by what is urged above. 110) by a Convocation of
the Clergy: of which see what is said.126. And the pretense of making this new
Form, in the Preface of that Act, is this, That, whereas of long time there had
been in the Realm diverse Forms of Common Prayer, the use of Sarum, of York, of
Bangor and Lincoln; and besides the same, now of late much more diverse and
sundry Forms and Fashions have been used etc: to stay Innovation and Rites
concerning the Premises; his Highness, being pleased to bear with the frailty
and weakness of his subjects in that behalf, has appointed the Archbishop of
Canterbury etc. having as well respect to the most pure Christian Religion
taught by the Scripture, as to the usages in the Primitive Church, to draw and
make one convenient and meet order, rite and fashion of Common Prayer and
Administration to be had and used in his Majesty's Realms. Thus the Act. But to
remedy these innovations or diversities of Forms, how easy had it been to
establish any one of the ancient Forms? Or at least reasonable, to retain in
the new draught those things wherein all the former Church-Services agreed? And
not themselves to innovate, for the hindering of innovations? But the fact
discovers the intention.

Out of which was ejected the Sacrifice of the Mass.
For in this new draught was ejected and left out the Sacrifice of the Mass, or
the oblation to God of the Holy Eucharist, as propitiatory or impetratory of
any benefits, to the living, or to the dead; contrary to the belife of former
Church and Councils, as is mentioned before. 118. And for this reason were the
Altars in Churches commanded to be changed into Tables; that the eating might
be thought on, but not the offering. Whenas Hooper had preached before the
King, That so long as Altars remained, both the ignorant people, and the
ignorant and evil-perswaded Priest would always dream of Sacrifice: and
besides, the great men about the Court (says Dr. Heylin, Hist. of Reform. p.
95.) had promised themselves no small hopes of profit by the dis-furnishing
these Altars of the Hangings, Palls, Plate, and other rich Utensils. -- The
leaving of one Chalice to every Church with a Cloth or covering for the
Communion Table being thought sufficient. Upon the same excuse were the
Chaunteries, Free-Chappels etc. seized on, as chiefly erected for the relieving
of the deceased with the offering of this Sacrifice, and the Alms and Prayers
accompanying it; of which see before. 138. The benefit of which Sacrifice for
the dead was yet a thing the more maintainable in those days; because the new
Form still retained this manner of praying for the dead, Grant unto this thy
Servant that the sins which he committed in this world be not imputed unto him;
but that he, escaping the gates of Hell, and pains of eternal darkness, may
ever dwell in the region of light with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the place
where is no weeping, sorrow, nor heaviness, etc. See the Order for Burial, Fol.
28.

Where 1. Concerning the alterations in the first Common Prayer Book if K.
Edward's in relation to the Sac ifice of the Eucharist.
you may find in the new Communion (see Communion, Fol. 128.) all those
expressions in the former Liturgy, that signify it, diligently cancelled
(forbidding also the elevation of the Host after Consecration;) as these
following, In the Canon before Communicating; Te supplices rogamus ac petimus,
uti accepta habeas and benedicas haec dona, haec munera, haec sancta sacrificia
illibata; inprimis quae Tibi offerimus pro Ecclesia tua sancta Catholica etc.
And, Memento Domine famulorum etc, pro quibus tibi offcrimus hoc sacrificium
laudis pro redemptione animarum suarum, pro spe salutis and incolumitatis suae
etc. And, Memores ejusdem Christi filii tui, tam beatae passionis etc.
offerimus praeclarae Majestati tuae de tuis donis ac datis, Hostiam puram,
Hostiam sanctam, Hostiam inmaculatam, panem sanctum vit^ aeternae, and calicem
salutis perpetuae: supra quae propitio ac sereno vultu respicere digneris, and
accepta habere sicuti accepta habere dignatus es munera pueri tui justi Abel,
and sacrificium Patriarchae nostril Abrahae, and quod tibi obtulit summus
sacerdos tuus Melchisedech, sanctum sacrificium, immaculatam hostiam. Jube haec
perferri per manus Sancti Angeli tui in sublime altar tuum in conspectu
Divinae Majestatis tuae: ut quotquot ex hac altaris participatione,
sacrosanctum Filii tui corpus and sanguinem sumpserimus, omni benedictione
caelesti and gratia repleamur. And that in Post-Communion; Praesta, ut
sacrificium, quod oculie tuae Majestatis indignus obtuli, Tibi sit acceptabile,
and omnibus, pro quibus illud obtuli, sit, te miserante, propitianile. These
Expressions I say are cancelled, and, instead of these, the new Form makes an
oblation to God, not of the consecrated Gifts or Sacrament, (at least expressly)
but of our thanks, and of our own persons and service. But this Oblation, in
imitation of the former, it brings in immediately after the Consecration, and
before Communicating, whilst the conescrated Elements yet remain upon the
Table. This new Form I thought good to transcribe; because perhaps you may not
have the Book. Wherefore (O Lord and heavenly Father) according to the
institution of thy dearly beloved Son, we do celebrate and make here before thy
Divine Majesty, with these thy holy Gifts, the Memorial, which thy Son has
willed us to make, having in remembrance his blessed Passion etc. [ where,
whether some of the Composers ( who were of different persuasions see
before,.127, 128.) retaining the former intentions under an only-varied
expression might not extend these ambiguous words to an offering of the holy
mysteries to God the Father, as a commemorative Sacrifice of that of his Son
upon the Cross, I cannot say: but thus it goes on] Rendering unto thee most
hearty thanks for the innumerable benefits procured unto us by the same.
Entirely desiring thy Fatherly goodness mercifully to accept this our Sacrifice
of praise and thansgiving. Most humbly beseeching thee to grant, that by the
merits and death of thy Son Jesus Christ, We and all thy whole Church may
obtain remission of our sins, and all other benefits of his Passion. And here
we offer and present unto thee (O Lord) our selves, our souls and bodies to be
a reasonable, holy, and lively Sacrifice unto Thee: humbly beseeching thee,
that whosoever shall be partakers of this Holy Communion, may worthily receive
the most precious body and blood of thy Son Jesus Christ, and be fulfilled with
thy grace and heavenly benediction [ the ancienter Form, Ut quotquot ex hac
altaris participatione Sacro-sanctum Filii tui corpus and sanguinem
sumpserimus, omni benedictione etc. repleamur, seems to be thus changed,
because Christ's body and blood were held by some only to be present to, and
received by, the worthy Communicant, and not to the Symbols.] And although we be
unworthy etc. to offer unto thee any Sacrifice; yet we beseech thee to accept
this our bounden duty and service, and command these our Prayers and
Supplications [put instead of panis sanctus and calix salutes] by the ministry
of thy Holy Angels to be brought up into thy holy Tabernacle [ formerly.
Altare] before the sight of thy Divine Majesty etc.

Edward. 2 Concerning the further alterations in the second Common Prayer Book
in relation to the same Sacrifice. Stat 5, 6. Edw. 6.1. c.
But in the latter Common Prayer Book, which came out a new-reformed three
years after, there is no oblation at all made, nor no petition put up, be tween
the Consecration, and the receiving of the Holy Mysteries: but the one
immediately follows the other. The Collect of humble access [ We do not presume
to come etc.] and the Lord's Prayer with its Preface [ Divina institutione
formati audemus dicere;] and the Memorial or Prayer of Oblation; which are put,
according to the manner of the Mass, after the consecration of the holy
Mysteries, and before the receiving of them in the first Form, are all removed
in the second: and the first placed before the Elements begin to be
consecrated; and the other two placed after the holy Mysteries are removed from
the Altar or Table, and are distributed to the Communicants; and in the Prayer
of Oblation, the first part thereof [ We do celebrate and make the Memorial
etc.] is omitted. The reason of which alteration seems to be, That so the new
Service might still appear more remote, from making any oblation to God of the
consecrated Mysteries remaining on the Table; or from making any request to God
in the virtue of the Body and Blood of our Savior there present.

3. Coucern^^g the reduction of s^ne things ^ouching this matter in the new
Common Prayer Book prepared for Scotland to the first Form of K. Edward.
again, in the last English Liturgy prepared for Scotland, the sober moderation
of those, who governed the Church at this time, thought fit to reduce things,
as far, as without offense they might, to the first Form of King Edward:
restoring all these Prayers to their former place again; and re-inserting the
Memorial in the Front of the Prayer of Oblation. Moreover, in the Prayer for
the State of the Catholic Church, adding these words [We commend especially
unto thy merciful goodness the Congregation here assembled to celebrate the
Commemoration of the most precious death and sacrifice of thy Son and our
Savior Jesus Christ;] before which Prayer also they order an oblation to be of
the Bread and Wine, prepared for the Sacrament, upon the Lord's Table. All
which they seem to have done, as regretting the mistaken zeal of their
Forefathers, misled by Calvin and other foreign Reformers; but not finding
as yet a season for a more complete reduction of the Reformation to the former
universal practice of the Church of God.

Much complained of in Laudensium autocatacrisis.
Of all which things thus complains the contrary Party, who looked upon their
alterations with a zealous eye, in Laudensium Autocatacrisis p. 109. As for
that wicked Sacrifice of the Mass, which the Canon puts at the back of the
Consecration, the English [i. e. the later Reformation of Common Prayer Book
under King Edward] banisheth it all utterly out of their Book. But the faction,
to show their zeal in their reforming the Errors of the English Church their
Mother, the Book sent to Scotland,] at the back of the Consecration, their
Memento and Prayer of Oblation. 2. beginning O Lord etc. we thy humble servants
entirely desire] which the English sets after the Communion, (in a place where
it cannot be possibly abused, as it is in the Mass, for a propitiatory
Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood,) they transpose and set it just in the
old place where it stood in the order of Sarum at the back of the Consecration,
and before the Communion. 3. [may worthily receive the most precious body and
blood of thy Son Christ Jesus] they have here restored. 4. the second
Reformation under Edward] were scraped out, are plainly restored; wherein we
profess to make, and, over again, to make, before God's Divine Majesty, a
Memorial; as Christ has commanded. Which making not only the Papists, but
Heylin, speaking from Canterbury, expounds, far otherwise, than either Andrews,
Hooker, Mountague, or the grossest of the English Divines, for a true, proper,
corporal, visible, unbloody, sacrificing of Christ; for which [sacrificing]
first the Apostles, and then all Ministers, are as truly Priests, tho
Evangelical and after the order of Melchisedech, as ever the Sons of Aaron were
under the Law; and the Communion Table, as true and proper an Altar, as ever
was the Brazen Altar of Moses [ you may see Dr. Heylin 's words in Antid. p. 6.
2.] 5. Audemus dicere. Where the Papists tell us, that the Priest having
offered up, in an unbloody Sacrifice, the body of Christ, for the reconciling
of us to the Father, becomes bold to say with a loud voice, Pater noster. The
English, to banish such absurdities, put away that naughty Preface, and removed
the Prayer it self from that place: But our men, to show their Orthodoxy,
repone the Prayer in the own old place; and set before it the old Preface. 6.
The first English Prayer [ We do not presume etc.] which stood before the
Consecration (where the passages of eating Christ's Body, and drinking Christ's
Blood could not possibly be detorted to a corporal presence) yet now in our
Book must change the place, and be brought to its old Stance, after the
Consecration and Oblation, immediately before the Communion, as a Prayer of
humble access. Thus Autocatacrisis sounded the Trumpet, not without a sad storm
falling afterward upon the heads of the English Clergy.

Aad the C^lemation of the Eucharist prohibited, when note other to communicate
wi^h the Priest.
All use of the Eucharist, as a Sacrifice, being thus dis-avowed by King
Edward's Reformation, and no benefit acknowledged of this high Service, save to
the Communicants in their receiving it, and in the Priests distributing of it
to the people; in the next place the Priest was prohibited the celebration
thereof, whenever there were no other Communicants besides himself. [ Tho
this communicating of the Priest alone is no designed, but a casual, thing, as
has been said; and can only be charged upon the peoples neglect and fault: who
having the same need thereof, and benefit thereby, as the Priest, might, being
many, at least by turns, accompany him in the daily breaking of that celestial
Bread (if it were so heinous a thing for him to feed thereon alone) rather than
that this the most honorable part of the divine Service should be discontinued
in the Church; See before,.118.
contrary to the former universal practice of Christianity, and also the late
judgment, under Henry the Eighth, of the English Clergy.] It was ordered
therefore, that all those, called private, Masses should be suppressed: add
that on the Litany-days, Wednesdays and Frydays, and all other solemn days of
worship, when there was none disposed to communicate with the Priest, he, after
the Litany ended, should put upon him a plain Albe or Surplice, with a Cope,
and say all things at the Altar appointed to be said at the Celebration of the
Lord's Supper, See K. Edw. first Common Prayer Book Rubifol. 133.
until after the Offertory: and then letting alone the foresaid Celebration,
add one or two of the Collects which are annexed to the Communion; and then
turning him to the people, shall let them depart with the accustomed Blessing.

See the first Com. Prayer Book of Ed. 6. fol. 133.
(that never ceased formerly in the Church every day, or at least on all solemn
days to be offered,) by certain degrees to be omitted in this purified Church;
the practice thereof decreasing, from once a day, to once a week; from once a
week, to once a month; from this to once a year; and of late in many Churches
not to be had at all. Tho they, who in these days of King Edward made the first
breach upon the Church's former practice, as it were foreseeing this evil,
endeavored in some part to remedy or prevent it, by enjoining: That, in all
Cathedral and Collegiate Churches [ where they suppose, that there should be
still daily Communion. See King Edward 's first Common Prayer Book, Fol. 113,
compared with Fol. 123.] there should always in them some communicate with the
Priest that ministers: And that in Parish-Churches, whereas the Parishioners
of every Parish were ordered in such a course as they were wont to find the
holy Loaf formerly, now to offer every Sunday, at the time of the offertory,
the just valor and price of the holy Loaf, with all such money and other
things, as were wont to be offered with the same, out of which the Pastors were
to provide sufficient Bread and Wine for the weekly Communion; In these
Parish-Churches, I say, it was enjoined, that some one at the least [for one,
besides the Priest, was as yet sufficient] of that house in the Parish, to
which by course it appertained to offer for the charges of the Communion,
should on that Sunday receive the Holy Communion with the Priest. Which [saith
the Book] may be better done, for that they know before, when their course
comes, and may therefore dispose themselves to the worthy receiving of the
Sacrament. And by this means the Minister, having always some to communicate
with him, may accordingly solemnize so high and holy mysteries with all the
suffrages and due order appointed for the same. But in the second reformed Book
these Orders are relaxed, the weekly offering by turns for the charges of the
Communion now remitted, the Celebration of the Lord's Supper or Communion
required in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches every Sunday; and that in
Parish-Churches it should be celebrated at least three times in a year; and
that it should be celebrated in no place, at no time, unless there be three to
communicate besides him that officeates. By which, when none or only fewer than
three offered to communicate with the Priest, he was necessitated to omit this
Service, as well in Cathedral as Parish-Churches; notwithstanding any
Injunction of frequentation. But the first Innovators might have prudently
discerned, that when as the Celebration of this Service, thus, would depend
only on the peoples devotion, either a reception of the mysteries by the Priest
alone must some times be permitted, or this Sacrifice many times omitted.
[There are two Injunctions indeed, wherein these Reformers seem to have
endeavored, to some degree, the preservation of the former Devotion of the
Clergy in Prayer and Communion. The one, See the Rub. after the Communion.
this (forementioned.) That in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, where be many
Priests and Deacons, they-should all receive the Communion with the Minister
every Sunday at the least, except they [i. e. some, not all, of them] had a
reasonable cause to the contrary. See the P^^face to the Com. Prayer Book.
-- The other, this (for saying their office daily, as formerly,) -- That all
Priests and Deacons shall be bound to say daily the Morning and Evening Prayer
[yet how short this in respect of the office they quitted!] either openly, in
the Parish Church or Chapel, if at home and not being otherwise reasonably
let; or privately, except they be let by Preaching, studying of Divinity, or
some other urgent cause. But here also the two exceptive Clauses annexed [
Except they have a reasonable cause to the contrary, in the former; and Except
they be let by Preaching, studying of Divinity or some other urgent cause, in
the latter,] have rendered these Injunctions, as to the general, without vigor
and effect, or practice in this Church. Which the Prudence of those who
contrived the Scotch Liturgy well observing thought fit thus to qualify the
latter Exception: See the Preface to the Scotch Liturgy.
Of which Cause, (say they) if it be frequently pretended, they are to make the
Bishop of the Diocese, or the Archbishop of the Province the Judge and
Allower.]

Aad Invocation of Saiats expunged out of the Litanies.
Besides the Sacrifice of the Mass thus removed out of the second new Form of
the Communion; the Invocation and Suffrages of the Saints were also expunged
out of the public Litanies: When As, even in the first English Litany put out
under King Edward, after O Holy Blessed and Glorious Trinity etc. have mercy
upon us, it followed thus, Holy Virgin Mary, Mother of God our Savior Jesus
Christ Pray for us. All holy Angels and Archangels, and all holy orders of
blessed Spirits pray for us. All holy Patriarchs and Prophets, Apostlet,
Martyrs, Confessors, and Virgins, and all the blessed company of Heaven, Pray
for us. Likewise in the Parliament-Act, 3, 4. Edw. 6.10. c. it is commanded:
That in the Primers the sentences of Invocation or Prayer to Saints be blotted
and clearly put out of the same. And this contrary to the former universal
practice of the Catholic Church. See Chur. Govern. 4. Par. 98..

And the necessity of Sacerdotal Confession relaxed.
Besides this, in the same new Form is remitted the necessity of Sacerdotal
Confession, and the performing of such penitence and humiliation as the Priest
shall judge meet; and the receiving of his absolution and reconciliation for
those who are conscious to themselves of mortal sins, or grievous crimes,
before they may presume to approach to Gods Altar, and to the holy Communion of
Christ's body and blood (contrary to the former decrees of superior Councils,
and practice of the Church Catholic:) Instead whereof it is only here ordered,
That if any be an open and notorious evil liver, (so that the Congregation by
him is offended) or have done any wrong to his Neighbors, the Curate shall not
admit him to the Communion before his giving satisfaction of his repentance to
the Congregation, and at least declaring his full purpose to recompense the
party wronged: And, before the Communion, Fol. 123.
a general exhortation made, That if any be a blasphemer, adulterer, or be in
malice, or envy, or any other grievous crime, he should not come to that holy
Table, except he be truly sorry therefore, and earnestly-minded to leave the
same vices, and do trust himself to be reconciled to Almighty God, and in
charity with all the world. This is said indeed in the second Exhortation, Fol.
124.
If there be any whose Conscience is troubled, or grieved in any thing, lacking
comfort or counsel, let him come to me, or to some other discreet and learned
Priest taught in the Law of God, and confess and open his sin and grief
secretly; that he may receive such ghostly counsel, advice, and comfort, that
his conscience may be relieved; and that, of us, as of the Ministers of God and
of the Church, he may receive comfort and absolution, to the satisfaction of
his mind, and avoiding of all scruple and doubtsulness. But the words following
[viz. Requiring such, as shall be satisfied with a general Confession, not to
be offended with them that do use, to their further satisfying, the auricular
and secret Confession to the Priest; nor those also which think needful or
convenient, for the quietness of their consciences, particularly to open their
sins to the Priest, to be offended with them that are satisfied with their
humble confession to God, and the general confession to the Church.] I say
these words (which are omitted in the second reformed Common Prayer Book, I
suppose, as speaking too favorably of the use of Auricular Confession) do
argue, that thenceforth no necessity of Sacerdotal Confession was imposed upon
any, for any crime. Likewise in the Visitation of the Sick it is said; Here
shall the sick person make a special confession, if he feel his conscience
troubled with any weighty matter: which is also retained in the second Form of
Common Prayer. But here such Confession is commanded only hypothetically; not,
if he have committed, but if his Conscience be troubled with, any weighty
matter, which he has committed. Which unfortunate [If,] as experience has
showed, quickly ruined the practice of Sacerdotal Confession.

[If,] might well have been spared. For 1. every one, that has committed such
sin, as is supposed to have put him out of the State of Grace, and out of his
Baptismal Regeneration (for which only the Church requires Sacerdotal
Confession) either has, or ought to have (and probably would have, if the
Clergy taught him so) his Conscience troubled; till he has obtained a new
reconciliation to God, by those whom God has appointed to do this office for
him; 2. But if his private repentance, when this is done proportionably to his
offense, is sufficient for his reconciliation; yet what grievous sinner, after
much repentance, ought not still to be troubled concerning the unworthines of
it, till he has consulted, in such an hazard, his spiritual Father much more
knowing therein than himself? And then if all such ought to be troubled; all
ought to confess. Indeed lets trouble of mind is many times a sign of less
penitence; and, of such high offenders, those have most need of the Priest's
cure, who are least troubled. And those who are least troubled, ought to be so
much the more troubled, that they are so little troubled: and ought to go to
the Priest and confess such sin, that he may excite them to greater trouble and
sorrow for it, and may put them to some pain in searching their wound to the
bottom, that so it may be more capable of cure. And on the other side; those,
who in, and after long penitence, and even from all their life, are much
troubled for such their crimes, are likely to be the best penitents; and
consequently to have least need of Sacerdotal Confession for the examining of
their repentance: which examination, and not consolation, I imagine, is the
chief end and design of the Reformed's prescribing such Confession to those,
who are troubled. 3. But then add to this; that when once such Sacerdotal
Confession for great sinners is commanded by the Church ( i. e. by a lawful
superior Council) to be observed, as necessary, jure divino, or by divine
Institution, Now, it comes to pass, that tho such Confession were supposed not
necessary to be observed or practiced from any such divine institution; yet,
after decreed by such a Council, (as who have authority to impose it also upon
several other motives; from which they think it the most beneficial and the
securest course for such sinners so to do;) it becomes necessary to be
practiced and observed as the Church's constitution, even by those, who think
it not necessary jure divino. 4. But yet further; were not such
Church-constitution in this respect obliging; yet when as a thing is so far
disputable and doubtful, whether jure divino, as that such a judgment, as this
of a superior Council, has declared, it so; and whenas on the otherside we
our selves grant thus much, that such thing, if not necessary, is very
beneficial, and may upon this title be lawfully enjoined by the Church's
Superiors: reason will dictate here, that it is the most prudent way, both for
the Subjects of a particular Church to observe it; and for the Superiors of
such Church to enjoin it, upon pain of incurring their censures, to be
observed. But now to return to our business.]

CHAP. X. Of the Second Change of the Public Liturgy in his time.
Ia setting forth a second Form of Common Prayer than which the first was in
many things much more moderate.
THus much concerning the Reformation made in the first new Form of the Public
Service under King Edward, (to say nothing here of the first additions to the
Mass made at Windsor) much more temperate, and less varying from the former
Service than the present is; as ordinarily things do not on a sudden move from
one extreme to another. In which Book also it is to be noted; that many of the
alterations, which were made, were only omissions; As of the Sacrifice of the
Mass; of Invocation of Saints; of Auricular Confession; of Elevation of the
Eucharist ( Adoration being not-prohabited) etc. without tying any to
professing his faith to be contrary to such things as were omitted: which I
impute to the wariness and moderation of some of the Composers, who retained a
different persuasion from the rest. See before,. 127. And again, that in it
were many former usages of the Church still retained: which gave great offense
to the foreign Reformers; and to other Precisians here, who had been nursed
abroad under their Discipline. Amongst which usages retained may be numbered
these. At the Communion, in the Prayer for the estate of the Church Catholic,
a solemn Commemoration of the Saints, and other faithful departed, Fol. 128.
(which was thought fit by the late Composers of the Scotch Liturgy to be
restored again in part into the same Prayer; where is made a distinct and
different Commemoration of other faithful deceased, and of the Saints deceased)
Prayer for the dead, and that in the same manner, as formerly: See Burial of
the dead, Fol 28. (as supposing some of them in a state purgative or betterable
by such Prayers. See before,. 147.) Exorcisme [ I command thee, unclean Spirit,
that thou depart etc. Fol. 2.] and anction of Infants in Baptism. Fol. 4.
Sanctifying, or Benediction of the Water in the Font before it be used in
Baptism, Fol. 8.
(resumed by the Scotch Liturgy.) Extrcam Unction also still retained.
Consecrating only so much Bread and Wine, as shall suffice for the persons
appointed to receive the Holy Communion. And mingling Water with the Wine. Fol.
126.
Reservation of the Sacrament after public Communion to be carried home to the
sick if there be any that day to be communicated (which reservation were it
made for some longer time I see not how this difference can alter the
lawfulness thereof. Visit. Sick. fol. 22.
) The quotidian Celebration of the Eucharist in all Cathedral and Collegiate
Churrches as yet practiced, tho not enjoined. Fol. 21.
See Ruhr. Fol. 123. The Altars still left in the same Position and with the
same furniture, as formerly. The Communion-bread made in the same Figure as
formerly, only to be somewhat thicker and without any print upon them. The same
Holy Vestments, Albes, Copes, still retained. The Oblation made after
Consecration, before receiving, spoken of before. And chiefly, the retaining
still, in the Consecration and other passages of the Communion, all those
former expressions of the Mass, which imply, whether by Trans- or
Con-substantiation, a corporal presence. For such presence was not a thing
declared against, till the Fifth year of King Edw. in Art. 28. [ and then
declared against upon this Philosophical reason: because ejusdem hominis corpus
in multis locis simul esse non potest. But this part against real or corporal
Presence, with its reason, was afterward thought fit to be cast out of this
Article, when they were reviewed by Queen Elizabeth 's Synod 1562.] The
Obligation of Henry the Eighth's Six Articles being voided, all persons in this
point were then left, as it were, to their own opinion: amongst whom, as some
were Zuinglians, so a major part seem to have been in the former days of King
Edward either of the Roman, or Lutheran, persuasion. Neither is there any
mention concerning the manner of Christ's Presence in the Eucharist in the
Articles proposed to Winchester, or in any other of the Kings Injunctions: and
therefore Bonner and Gardener (when forced to preach in public) to the great
offense of some of their Auditors, made this the chief subject of their
Sermons; and many, in the public Disputations had in Oxford and Cambridge
about this matter, freely and ex animo maintained such corporal Presence. See
before,. 107. And Cranmer himself also for a long time was a Lutheran in his
opinion, till at last he was otherwise persuaded by Ridley, Fox p. 1115. and p.
1703. Neither was there such agreement between Ridley and Peter Martyr at
first: but that the one in the Oxford Disputations held a change after
Consecration in the substance of the Bread and Wine; which the other denied in
Cambridge. Fox p. 1255.

In which second Book are rectified and removed many thing which gave offense
in the former.
against which therefore were made many complaints. Calvin writ to the
Protector soon after it was set forth; where he incites him to a new
Reformation thereof: and after having found fault with. Prayer for the Dead he
goes on, -- Sunt and alia non perinde damnanda fortasse, sed tamen ejusmodi, ut
excusari non possint. Illa omnia abscindi semel praestiterit, ut nihil in
Ecclesia Dei usurpetur, quod non and ipsius verbo conform sit, and ad
Ecclesiae aedificationem pertineat; ita vero tolerandi sunt infirmi, ut ad
meliora promoveantur. After this, about 1551. Epistle, p. 135. he writ thus to
Archbishop Cranmer. -- Sic correctae sunt externae superstitiones, ut residui
maneant innumeri surculi, qui assidue pullulent. Imo ex corruptelis Papatus
audio relictam esse congeriem, quae non obscuret modo, sed propemodum obruat
purum and genuinum Dei cultum. Writ likewise to Bucer, then a Teacher of the
reformed Religion in Cambridge, that he should solicit this matter; telling
him that he was censured for too much moderation, and might thus free himself
from such an aspersion. Epistle, p. 107. -- Dominum Protectorem, ut volebas,
conatus sum hortari, ut stagitabat praesens rerum status: tuum quoque erit
modis omnibus instare, praesertim verbo; ut ritus, qui superstitionis aliquid
redolent, tollant ur e medio. Hoc tibi nominatim commendo, (...) te invidia
liberes, qua te falso gravar^ apud multos non ignoras; nam modiis consiliis te
vel authorem vel approbatorem semper inscribunt. Scio hanc quorundam animis
suspicionem altius infixam ass, quam ut eam revellere facile sit, eciamfi
nihil omittas. Bucer thus excited by Calvin, and also requested by Cranmer,
having the Book translated in to Latin, An. 1551. writes a censure thereof;
wherein he desires the alteration or omission of many things (even to the
disallowing of the use of the Surplice, and of such other vestments, as are
there appointed; of saying of the second Service at the Altar; of the
Presbyter's taking the bread in his hand, and the using of the sign of the
Cross in the Consecration; besides greater matters, of praying for the dead
etc.) Yet, of several of those things, which he would have to be changed, he
confessed, both that they were ancient, and might in some manner be inculpably
used, but yet thought it better that they should be removed: 1. because not
appointed in Scripture by word or example: 2. because they might be, or also
had been, abused'to superstition: 3. because the Church should partake as
little as might be of the same usages with Antichrist. Bucer Censur. in
Ordinat. Eccles. Angl. p. 458. 467. etc.

as well from abroad, as also by some of the preciser sort at home (says Dr.
Heylin, Reform, Justif. p. 31. and Hist. of Reform. p. 107.) and because there
had risen diverse doubts for the fashion and manner of the ministration of the
said Service, rather by the curiosity of the Minister and mistakers, than of
any other worthy cause (says the Act of Parliament: it self, 5, 6. Edw. 6.1.
c. which shows what a good opinion they had of the former Book) It was
committed to be new corrected, but by what persons we know not. The Act,
without any such Encomium of these Reviewers, as of the first Composers, faith
only, -- That the King caused it to be faithfully and godly perused, explained
and made fully perfect. Perhaps it was corrected (which is one of Dr. Heylin's
conjectures: See before,. 42.) by those who were appointed by the King about
this time to compose a Form of Ordination; which Form the Act joined with this
new Service Book. But it could not be done by the same persons, that composed
the former, at least not by all of them; because, Day before this was ejected
out of his Bishopric; and two more Ship and Holbeck, as I think, before this
deceased; and Harley and Tailor were chosen their Successors. The thing matters
not much-Thus corrected it was presented to the Parliament, and it only by them
authorized to be used.

Among the rest, Prayer for the dead and several expressions that seemed to
^^ser the Rea^or Corporal Preseace in the Eucharist.
as the Commemoration of Saints, and Prayer for the dead; many Rites in the
Administration of Baptism; the liberty of extreme Unction; the Oblation and
Prayers in the Communion; which were made immediately after Consecration,
spoken-of before. 148, 149.) above all seems to have taken a vigilant special
care for the altering and removing out of the former Form all those passages,
Which might, argue any real or corporal Presence of the Body and Blood of
Christ (whether it be by Trans- or Con-substantiation, or any other way) with
the Symbols. Whereas therefore, in the Prayer of Consecration, these words are
in the Missal, Quam oblationem tu Deus in omnibus quaesumus benedictam
acceptabilemque facere digneris, ut nobis Corpus and Sanguis fiat; dilectissimi
Filii tui Domini Nostri Jesu Christi; and so in the first Form of King Edward
these words, Hear us O Merciful Father, we beseech the: and with Holy Spirit
and word vouchsafe to bl ess and sanc tify these thy gifts, and creatures of
Bread md Wine, that they may be unto us the Body and Blood of thy most dearly
beloved Son (Both the Missal and that Form ordering the person consecrating at
this time to take both the Bread and the Cup into his hands): Instead of this,
the second Form is thus changed, Hear us, O Merciful Father, we beseech thee,
and* grant, that we* receiving these thy Creatures of Bread and Wine, according
to thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ's holy Institution; in remembrance of his
Death and Passion, may be partakers of his most blessed Body and Blood
(omitting also the Priests touching or handling the Pattin or Chalice:) which
is done according to Bucer's directions in his Censura p. 468. Whereby seems to
be avoided the acknowledging of any Presence of Christ's Body and Blood with
the Symbols; of which also Bucer says, p. 476. Antichristianum est affirmare
quicquam his elementis adesse Christi extra usum praebitionis and receptionis.
For the same reason it seems to be, that the Glory be to God on high etc. and
the Benedictus, qui venit in nomine Domini after the Sursum Corda, the one is
transferred after the Communion; and the other, omitted. Likewise; whereas in
the administering of these Mysteries, the Missal uses this Form, Corpus Domini
Jesu Christi custodiat animam tuam in vitam aternam; and so also the first Book
of King Edward the Second (as it were against the apprehending of any Real
Presence to the Symbols, or any oral feeding on that Body) removes those
words, and places instead thereof only these: Take and eat this, in
remembrance that Christ dyed for thee, and feed on him in thy heart by Faith
with thankgiving: Again; Drink this in remembrance etc: So, whereas it is said
in the first Form in the Player of humble access, Grant us so to eat the flesh
of thy dear Son Jesus Christ, and to drink his blood in these holy Mysteries;
the second omits [in these holy Mysteries.] Likewise, at the end of the
Communion-Service is added this Rubric (declaring, that kneeling at the
participation of the Sacrament is required? for a signification of the humble
acknowledging of the benefits of Christ given therein unto the worthy receiver;
and not, for giving any adoration to the Sacramental Bread and Wine there
bodily received; or in regard of any real or essential Presence of Christ's
natural Body and Blood.) Whereas its ordained in the Administration of the
Lord's Supper, that the Communicants kneeling should receive the Holy
Communion, which thing is well meant for a signification of the humble and
grateful acknowledging of the benefits of Christ given unto the worthy
receiver, and to avoid the profanation and disorders which about the Holy
Communion might else ensue: Lest yet the same kneeling might be thought or
taken otherwise, we do declare that it is not meant thereby, that any Adoration
is done or ought to be done either unto the Sacramental Bread or Wine there
bodily received, or unto any real and essential Presence there being of
Christ's natural Flesh and Blood. For as concerning the Sacramental Bread and
Wine, they remain still in their natural substances, and therefore may not be
adored; for that were Idolatry. And as concerning the natural Body and Blood of
our Savior Christ, they are in heaven and not here: for it is against the
truth of Christ's true natural Body to be in more places than one at one time.
Thus that Rubric; thought fit to be omitted in the Common Prayer Book of Queen
Elizabeth; of which see the Reason below 179. n. 2. Accordingly the Altar was
changed into a Table (the sides whereof were set North and South) set near the
Reading-place; ordered, at the Communion time, to be covered with a fair white
Linen Cloth; the other vestments prohibited; save only a Surplice for a
Priest, and Rochet for a Bishop; and to take away all Superstition, the
Communion Bread appointed to be such as is usually eaten at the Table; but the
purest of that sort that can conveniently be had, See the Rubricks of King
Edward's secondCommon Prayer Book Fol. 126. And Visita, S ck Fol. 22.
And lastly; whereas the first gives caution, that so much Bread and Wine shall
be consecrated, Where Concerning the reduction of something^ touching this
Presence made in the new Liturgy for Scotland to K. Edw. fr^st Form.
as shall suffice for the persons appointed to receive the Holy Communion;
except some shall be reserved for the Communion of the Sick: The second omits
any such caution; ordering only, that the Curate have the remains to his own
use.

But the new Liturgy composed for Scotland, well discerning what these
alterations aimed at, reduces all things to the former way; restores those
words in the Consecration [ with thy holy spirit and word etc. that They may be
unto us the Body etc.] ordering (again) the Presbyter, that officiates, to take
the Pattin and Chalice in his hands; and leaving out also the caution of
non-elevation, which was inserted, in the first Book of King Edward: removes
the words added in the delivering of the Mysteries [ Take and eat this etc.]
and instead thereof adds aster the former words the people's response [Amen]
according to the custom of Antiquity (See Dionys. Alexand. apud Eusebius. Histor.
7. l. 8. c. Leo Sermon. 6. de jejunio 7. mensis. August. ad Orosium quaest. 49.)
spoken as a Confession of their Faith, that they acknowledged that which they
received to be Corpus Domini. Lastly requires him that officiates, that he
consecrate Bread and Wine with the least, to the end there may be little left;
and that what is left be not carried out of the Church, but reverently eaten
and drunk by such of the Communicants* only, as the Presbyter, that celebrates,
shall take unto him.

Laudensium Autocatacrisis, Much complained of (...) Laudensium Autocatacrisis
p. 107. thus censures it. In the next Prayer, says he, [i. e. that of
Consecration] are put in the words of the Mass, whereby God is besought by his
omnipotent Spirit so to sanctify the Oblations of Bread and Wine, that they may
become to us Christ's Body and Blood. From these words all Papists use to draw
the truth of their Trans-substantiation; wherefore the English Reformers [i. e.
the lattor] scraped them out of their Books; but our men put them fairly in.
And good reason have they so to do. For long ago they professed, that, about
the Presence of Christ's Body and Blood in the Sacrament after Consecration,
they are fully agreed with Lutherans and Papists; except only about the
formality and mode of Presence [ here quoting Mountag. Appeal, p. 289.] They
make an express Rubric for the Priest's taking the Patin, and the Chalice in
his hand in the time of Consecration. Which taking, not being either for his
own participation, or the distribution to others, why shall we not understand
the end of it to be, that which the Mass there enjoins, their Elevation and
Adoration? The Elevation being long ago practiced by some of our Bishops; and
Adoration, when the Patin and Chalice are taken in the Priest's hands, avowed
by Heylin's Answ. to Burt. p. 137. The English indeed, in giving the Elements
to the people, retain the Mass-words; but to prevent any mischief, Autocat. p.
111.
that could arise in the people's mind from their sound of a Corporal Presence,
they put in at the distribution of both the Elements, two Golden Sentences: of
the hearts eating by Faith; of the Soul's drinking in remembrance. But our men,
being nothing afraid for the people's belief of a Corporal Presence, have
pulled out of their hands, and scraped out of our Book, both these Antidotes.
And the Mass-words thus quit of the English Antidotes must not stand in our
Book simply: but that the people may take extraordinary notice of these
Phrases, there are two Rubricks set up to their backs, obliging every
Communicant with their own mouth to say their Amen to them. The English permit
the Curate to carry home the relics of the Bread and Wine, for his private
use: but such Profanity by our Book is discharged. The Consecrate Elements are
enjoined to be eaten in the Holy place, by the Priest alone, and some of the
Communicants that day: yea, for preventing of all dangers, a cautel is put in,
that so few Elements, as may, be consecrate. And our Book will have the
Elements after the Consecration covered with a Corporal etc.

Edward's, and when revived in King Charles's time, found many Adversaries. But
did the new one escape any better? No. For when all these offensive things in
the second draught were amended according to several preciser fancies; yet
neither so did the second content all palats, for the humor of Innovation
knows no bounds. Soon after it was framed, as the chief body of the Clergy
under Queen Mary deserted both it, and the former, and returned to the old
Church Service; so the English Protestants, that were then dispersed abroad at
Franckford in Germany, fell into great dissensions about it: as some for, so
many against, it. See a fuller relation in Heylin's Hist of Reform. in Queen
Mary. p. 59. etc. And Calvin hearing the noise thereof, as he had formerly used
his Pen to the Protector etc, against the first Book; so now does he to the
English in Franckford, Calvin Ep. p. 213.
against the second; saying, In Anglicana Liturgia qualem describitis [ i. e.
the new one, which some of them then used at Franckford] mult as video fuisse
tolerabiles ineptias. Sic ergo a talibus rudimentis incipere licuit, ut doctos
tamen and graves Christi ministros ultra eniti and aliquid limatius ac purius
quaerere consentaneum foret. Si hactenus in Anglia viguisset sincera religio,
aliquid in melius correctum multaque detracta esse oportuit. Nunc cum, eversis
illis princtpiis, alibi instituenda vobis sit Ecclesia and liberum sit formam
de integro componere [he thinks it seems any Pastors have power to make to
themselves new Liturgies] quid sibi velint nescio, quos faecis Papisticae
reliquiae tantopere delectant. Amant ea quibus assueti sunt? Hoc nugatorium and
puerile est; etc. Thus Calvin. And so Bucer likewise in his censure of the
first (who died within a few weeks after he had writ it, before the compiling
of the second) has blamed many things that remain in the second. After Queen
Mary's death, the second Book being restored here again to its former
authority, many of the more zealous Reformists, both by words and writings,
made such opposition against it, that Queen Elizabeth, in terrorem, executed
two for this cause: See before,. 65. and caused Archbishop Whitgift to exact
of all those, that entered into the Clergy, a Subscription that they would use
it, and no other Form. Cambd* Eliz. An. Dom. 1583. Ecclesiastical Can. 36.
Which Subscription (the party that opposed this Book at last prevailing) was
remitted by the Parliament 1640; and, since that, I need not tell you what it
has suffered. The old Form supplanted the Mass; the pew Form the old; and then
the old one being raised again out of its ashes in the new Scotch Liturgy
(which began all the troubles) had almost brought, in the late tumults, a fatal
overthrow both upon the new one and upon it self. Thus much from. 143.
concerning this Kings new Liturgies.

In the abrogatio* of several Ecclesiastical law, co^^e^ning Fast^, C^l^bacy of
the Cle^gy etc.
tho established by former superior Councils, appointed (the Parliament
assenting thereto) eight persons (amongst whom were two Bishops Crannier and
Thirlby, and Peter Martyr) to prepare this work: Who drew up a body of them;
which was then made public, and since, reprinted 1640. But indeed it appears
not, that this Reformation of them was ever ratified by King, Parliament, or
Convocation. See the Preface to Reform. Leg. Eccl.
By such Supremacy he abrogated all former Church-laws concerning days of
fasting or abstinence: and appointed those he thought fit, by his own and the
Parliaments authority; and dispensed with whom he thought fit, for not
observing them. See Stat. 2, 3. Edw. 19. chap. Wherein after a Preface
declaring, That the Kings Subjects now had a more perfect and clear light of
the Gospel and true word of God showed, declared and opened, through the mercy of
God, by the hands of the Kings Majesty, and his most noble Father; and thereby
perceived, that one day or meat of it self is not more holy, more pure, or more
clean, than another etc. [as if the former Church, which they left, had taught
them otherwise] after this Preface, I say, the King with the consent of
Parliament first ordains, That all manner of Statutes, Laws and Constitutions
concerning any manner of fasting, or abstinence from any kinds of meats, shall,
from the first of May next ensuing, loose their force and strength, and be void
and of none effect. Then sets down the days upon which he will have abstinence
from flesh observed, upon the Penalty of paying Ten Shillings, and suffering
ten days Imprisonment; except those, who being not enfeebled with age or
sickness, shall receive a license to eat flesh from the King or his Successors.
For you must know, that the maker of a Law has power to dispense with it. But
here note, that only abstinence from flesh is enjoined on those days by this
Statute; not Fasting: nor is Fasting enjoined by any other Statute that I can
find; save only on Holy-day-Eves, by a Statute made two or three years after.
Stat. 5, 6. Edw. 6.3.^.
Neither is there any obligation for the observation of either fasting or
abstinence on these days, by any express Canon of this Church reformed (when as
now the former Church-Laws concerning this were by the Kings Supremacy nulled
in this Act;) but only, by Act of Parliament; and the end of such abstinence,
in the Parliament, Act 5. Eliz. 5. c. professed to be only upon a Politic
consideration, the increase of Fishermen and Mariners, etc. And not for any
Superstition (says that Act) to be maintained in the choice of meats or, as if
such forbearing of flesh were of any necessity for the saving of the Soul of
man; or, that it is the Service of God, otherwise, than as other Politic Laws
are and be. Tho King Edward in the forecited Statute, I confess, mentions
partly another end: viz. because that due and godly abstinence is a means to
virtue, and to subdue men's bodies to their Soul and Spirit; And I doubt not,
that many devout persons in this Church holding themselves bounden to the
former Ecclesiastical Constitutions, notwithstanding the Kings abrogation, have
still observed this duty in obedience thereto. See likewise 5, 6. Edw. 6. 3. c.
the same Regal authority appointing the Holydays. And these things are done in
Parliament, without the least mentioning or referring to any Synod.

Sta^. 2, 3. Edw 6.21. c.
That all Laws positive, Canons, Constitutions heretofore made by man only,
which prohibit Marriage to any Spiritual Person, who by Gods Law may lawfully
marry, shall be utterly void and of none effect: and this upon consideration
(as it is in the Preface of the same Act) of such uncleanness of living and
other great inconveniences which have followed of compelled chastity [ as if
the Church compelled any person to such chastity; except hypothetically, if he
will take on him such a profession. Or as if in this the Church enjoined any
thing, which she first stated not to be in every ones power to observe, if
using a just endeavor?] Now whereas it is said, in 5.6. Edw. 6.12. That the
slanderous reproach of holy Matrimony [i. e. of Priests] does redound to the
dishonor of the Clergy of this Realm; who have determined the same [Marriage
of Clergy] to be most lawful by the Law of God, in their Convocation, as well
by their common assent, as by the subscription of their hands: Such assent, as
likewise that which they say to the same purpose in the 42 Articles Art. 31. no
way opposes the Law of the Church. For things most lawful by Gods Law (as
Marriage of the Clergy is, by the Church, allowed to be) yet may be lawfully
prohibited by the Church: Whose Law in this matter the Clergy of this land
justified in the third and fourth of the Six Articles. Neither, if they had
here opposed it (as they do not) would their sentence be of any force; because
contrary to the Constitution of former superior Councils.

Articles of Religion, containing several matters of Faith, Lastly, In the
Edition of 42 Articles of Religion d^fferent from the fo^mer dect^^^e^ of the
Church.
which are there stated contrary to the definitions of former superior
Councils. Which Articles are said indeed to have been first decreed and agreed
on by a Synod of the Clergy held at London; the Title presixed to them being
this, Articuli, de quibus in Synodo London. An. Dom. 1552. ad tollendam
opinionum dissensionem and consensum verae religionis firmandum inter Episcopos
and alios eruditos viros convenerat, regia authoritate in lucem editi. But this
I cannot thus easily concede, Where whether these Articles were passed by any
Synod.
notwithstanding this Title. Thus far indeed I grant; that they seem to be
compiled or consented to by some members of that Synod, whom the King after the
Synod had appointed (the Synod leaving this business to him) to draw up such
Ecclesiastical Laws: and so I grant that de illis convenerat inter Episcopos
and alios eruditos viros qui erant pars aliqua Synodi London. But that these
Articles were published, established, or passed by that Synod, I think there is
good reason to deny, from these relations which follow.

Fuller, Hist. Eccles. 7. l. p 420. who had perused the Records concerning it,
says of this Synod or Convocation. As for the Records of this Convocation
(says he) they are but one degree above blanks, scarce affording the names of
the Clerks assembled therein (for which see also Heylin's Hist. of Reform. King
Edw. p. 121.) Indeed they had no Commission from the King to meddle with
Church-business; and no Convocation can hear complaints in Religion, nor speak
in redress thereof, till a Commission be granted unto it from Regal authority.
Now the true reason, why the King would not entrust the diffusive body of the
Convocation with a power to meddle with matters of Religion, was a just
jealousy, which he had, of the ill-affection of the major part thereof; who,
under a fair rind of Protestant Profession, had the rotten core of Roman
Superstition. It was therefore conceived safer for the King to rely on the
ability and fidelity of some select confidents cordial to the cause of
Religion, than to adventure the same to be discussed and decided by a suspected
Convocation. However this barren Convocation is entitled the Parent of those
Articles of Religion, 42 in number, which are printed with this Preface;
Articuli, de quibus etc. as is recited before. With these Articles was bound a
Catechism, younger in age, as bearing date of the next year, but of the same
extract, relating to this Convocation as Author thereof. Indeed it was first
compiled, as appears in the Kings Patent prefixed, by a single Divine
(charactered pious and learned:) but afterward perused and allowed by the
Bishops and other learned men (understand it the Convocation;) and by Royal
authority commended to all Subjects, commanded to all School-Matters to teach
their Scholars. Yet very few in the Convocation ever saw it; much less
explicitly consented thereunto. But these had formerly, it seems, passed over
their power to the select Divines appointed by the King. In which sense they
may be said to have done it themselves by their Delegates, to whom they had
deputed their authority. A case not so clear, but that it occasioned a Cavil,
at the next Convocation in the first of Queen Mary: When the Papists [i. e. all
the Convocation save six persons] therein assembled renounced the legality of
any such former Transactions. Thus Mr. Fuller, one interessed in this matter on
the other side.

Fox p. 1282. thus speaks the Prolocutor Dr. Weston to the Convocation
concerning it: For that (says he) there is a Book of late set forth; called
the Catechism, bearing the name of this Honorable Synod [i. e. the last which
sat;] and yet put forth without their consents, as I have learned, being a
Book very pestiferous and full of Heresies; and likewise a Book of Common
Prayer, very abominable: I have thought it therefore best, first to begin with
the Articles of the Catechism, concerning the Sacrament of the Altar, to
confirm the natural Presence of Christ in the same, and also
Transubstantiation. [for which conference the next Friday being appointed] Then
(says the relation) the Prolocutor exhibited two Bills unto the House; (The
one, for [the forementioned Article of the Catechisme] the natural Presence of
Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar; the other concerning the Catechism; that
it was not by that House's agreement [formerly] set forth; and that they did
not [for the present] agree thereunto) requiring all them to subscribe to the
same; as he himself had done. Whereunto the whole House did immediately assent;
except six. Jo. Philpot [one of the six Renegers] stood up and spoke first
concerning the Catechism; That he thought, they were deceived in the Title of
the Catechism, in that it bears the Title of the Synod of London last before
this; although many of them, which then were present, were never made privy
thereof in setting it forth: for that this house had granted the authority to
make Ecclesiastical Laws unto certain persons to be appointed by the Kings
Majesty; and whatsoever Ecclesiastical Laws they or the most part of them did
set forth, 3, 4. Edw. 6.11, c.
according to a Statute in that behalf provided, it might well be said to be
done in the Synod of London; although such as be of the House now had no notice
thereof before the promulgation. And that in this point he thought the
setter-forth thereof nothing to have slandered the House, as they by their
Subscription went about to persuade the world; since they (says he) had our
Synodal authority committed unto them to make such Spiritual Laws, as they
thought convenient and necessary. This concerning the questioning of this
Catechism and Articles in the beginning of Queen Mary's days; and the Answer
returned thereto. But to clear the matter a little further; We find in the same
Fox p. 1704, after this, Archbishop Cranmer, in his trial before the
Commissioners at Oxford, ( Brooks Bishop of Gloucester and others) charged
amongst other things with being the Author of this Catechism and Articles, and
with compelling men against their wills to subscribe them; the former of which
he there confesses; but denies the latter. The words in Fox are, -- 7th
Interrog. Item. That the said Tho. Cranmer did fly and recuse the authority of
the Church; did hold and follow the Heresy concerning the Sacrament of the
Altar, and also did compile and caused to be set abroad diverse Books. Answer.
Whereunto when the names of the Books were recited to him he denied not such
Books, which he was the true Author of. As touching the Treatise of Peter
Martyr upon the Sacrament, he denied that he ever saw it before it was abroad;
yet did approve and well like of the same. As for the Catechism, the Book of
Articles, with the other Book against Winchester he granted the same to be his
doings. 8th Interrog. Item, That he compelled many against their wills to
subscribe to the same Articles. Answer. He exhorted (he said) such as were
willing to subscribe: but against their wills he compelled none.

de quibus inter Episcopos and alios eruditos viros etc. they seem not the
ordinary expresion of a Synodal Act which runs more generally; as thus [de
quibus convenit inter Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, and Clerum universum] or the
like. Next, you may observe, that tho the Prolocutor in the Synod 1o Mariae
questioneth, and Philpot answers concerning the Catechism, why it should be
published in the name of the Synod; yet they both speak, not of the Catechism
taken by it self; but only of the Articles which were first printed at the end
of this Catechism, and bound up with it; which the Prolocutor therefore calls
the Articles of the Catechism, and proposes the matter of the 28th of these
Articles for disputation; and so also calls them the Catechism, because the
first title of this Book is Catechismus brevis etc. Now that they must speak of
the Articles is plain; because the Catechism as taken by it self is not at all
entitled to the Synod; but only the Articles at the end thereof. The Title of
the Catechism is only this Catechismus brevis Christianae disciplinae summam
continens omnibus Ludimagistris authoritate regia commendatus. Neither do those
words in Philpot's Answer [ that the house had committed their Synodal
authority to certain persons to be appointed by the King to make such
Ecclesiastical Laws as they thought convenient etc.] agree at all to this
Catechism; but to the Articles only. For this Catechism was made before by a
private person (that is, by the Archbishop, if we may believe his own
confession related above) and afterward approved only by some Bishops and other
eruditi viri, as the King says in the Preface thereof. Cum brevis and
explicata Catechismi ratio a pio quodam and erudito viro conscripta nobis ad
cognoscendum offerretur, ejus diligentem inquisitionem quibusdam episcopis and
aliis eruditis commisimus, quorum judicium magnam apud nos authoritatem habet;
and quia conveniens cum scripturis etc. visa est, placuit non solum eum in
aspectum lucemque proferre, sed etiam propter perspicuitatem omnibus ludorum
magistris ad docendum proponere etc. Neither is this Catechism abstracted from
the Articles any such pestiferous Book, or so full of Heresies, as the
Prolocutor complains of; being composed in general terms for Schoolboys; and
not stating, scarce touching, any controversy. Add to this, that, tho the
Catechism was not made by the Synod, yet if the 42 Articles that were then
printed and bound with the Catechism, were framed by it; neither had the
Prolocutor any reason to have fallen upon and gotten hands against the
Catechism, as being falsely ascribed to that Reverend Assembly, (when as, that,
which was far more opposite to that which he accounted the Orthodox Religion,
(namely these Articles) were known to be passed by them;) Neither would Philpot
have concealed this matter; since this known Act of the Synod composing these
Articles would have justified that Act of the Delegates composing the
Catechism; for the Doctrine of the Catechism is contained in the Articles.
But, if by this Catechism both the Prolocutor and Philpot meant the Articles
at the end thereof, (as it cannot be otherwise) then Philpot has revealed to
us all the truth concerning the composing or ratifying of them; and why, in the
impression, they were ascribed to the Synod: Namely because the Synod had given
authority to those the King should nominate, to make Ecclesiastical Laws; and
so by those persons (being Episcopi. and alii eruditi viri) were these Articles
compiled or confirmed; the Synod it seems leaving both this matter, and the
election of the persons for doing of it to the Kings care, without reserving
any review thereof to themselves, contrary to the First, Second and Sixth
Theses. But Mr. Philpot discovers the motive which this Synod (if he meant
this, and not some former Synod) might have to do this, when he mentions a
former Act of Parliament, 3, 4. Edw. 6.11. c. enstating the King in this power;
which Act was made two years before the Session of this Synod: but then this is
somewhat strange, that what was acknowledged (formerly) as the Kings right, is
(now) made by Mr. Philpot the Clergy's concession to him. Thus then were these
Articles made, not by, but after, the Synod: and this is the reason, why tho
the production of such a Body of Articles would have been by much the solemnest
Act of a Synod, that was done in King Edward's days; yet both the Records and
the Historians, Fox, Godwin, Antiquitates Britanicae, and those others, that I
have seen* are silent therein. And the Archbishop, to whom it would have been
an excellent defense, to have showed them, tho of his compiling, yet to have
been confirmed and generally subscribed by such a full Synod; yet he also
pleads no such thing. And hence we may learn the reason of that which Dr.
Heylin observes p. 25. That tho a Parliament was held at this very time, and
that this Parliament had passed several Acts, which concerned Church Matters,
as, an Act for Uniformity of Divine Service, and for the Confirmation of the
Book of Ordination 5, 6. Edw. 6.1. c. An Act declaring, which days shall only
be kept for Holy Days, and which for Fasting-days. 3. c. An Act against
striking or drawing any weapon in the Church, or Churchyard. 4. c. An Act for
the legitimating of the Marriages of Priests. 12. c.: Yet neither in this
Parliament (says he) nor in that which followed, is there so much as the least
Syllable which reflecteth this way, or medleth any thing at all with the Book
of Articles. Thus Dr. Heylin. Which Observation, as to him it affords an
Argument, that Religion reformed in these Articles therefore can be called no
Parliament-Religion; so to me, that it was also no Synodal-Religion: because we
see the Parliaments in King Edward's time corroborating or rather preventing
the Synod in all other Transactions about the Reformation. See before,. 47.
Neither can it be said improper to the Parliament to enjoin obedience to these,
as well as it had done to other Church- or Synod-decrees.

Philpot urged of the Catechism, that these Articles are Synodical; because
the Synod conceded to the King the election of such persons, who should frame
and publish these Articles, without any communicating them first to the Synod:
See the Answer returned to this before,. 42.

CHAP. XI. The Actings of Queen Elizabeth in Ecclesiastical Affairs: And of the
unlawful Ejection of the Catholics.
Edward; 3. The Acting of Qu. El^z. in Ecclesiastical matters.
now I pass to that under Queen Elizabeth, one much interessed to renew an
opposition to the Pope; in as much as his pronouncing King Henry's Marriage
with Anne Bullen her Mother unlawful, invalidated her Title to the Crown. Upon
which Mary the Queen of Scots a Catholic, All the former decrees of the Clergy
in King Henry and Edw. days being reversed by the Clergy i^ Q. Mary's d^ys
newly married to the Daulphin of France, and animated by the Pope, did also
assume unto her self the Style and Title of Queen of England (as Cousin and next
Heir to Queen Mary deceased) quartering the Arms thereof upon all her Plate and
Escutcheons. Only let me first mind you this concerning Queen Mary's Reign that
lies between; That whatever the Reformation had built upon any Synodal vote
under Henry the Eighth, or Edward the Sixth, was now revoked and demolished
under Queen Mary, by the like Synods of a legal Clergy; as is showed before.
52. The Supremacy in Ecclesiastical matters was re-acknowledged by this
National Synod, now, not due to the Civil, but to the Ecclesiastical, Chief
Governor, the Bishop of Rome, the Patriarch of the West: yet not challenged by
him in so high a degree, as these Princes used it. The Six Articles,
established by Synod in Henry the Eighth's days, as also the ancient Church
Liturgy, ancient Form of Ordination, ancient way of Trial of Heretics, ancient
Canons etc, were now by the like Synodal power again restored, and reinforced.
See before,. 48. So that the Reformation under Queen Elizabeth was to begin
upon a new foundation, without grounding any plea upon any Synodal Act or
consent of the Clergy made in King Henry or King Edward s days; either
concerning the new Supremacy, or the new Liturgy, or the new 42 Articles of
Religion, etc: since all these were by the same Synodal authority in Queen
Mary's days desclaimed. Here seems no evasion: If we accept the decrees of
later Synods, rather than of former; then Queen Mary's Synods will void King
Henry's and King Edward's: But if of former Synods, rather than of later; then
the Synods of Henry the Eighth, and of former times for the Six Articles etc.
will void King Edward's and Queen Elizabeth's too.

Elizabeth took in repairing the Reformation defaced by Queen Mary, Dr. Heylin
speaks thus of it in general. Reform. Justified, p. 37. In Queen Elizabeth's
time (says he) before the new Bishops were well settled, and the Queen assured
of the affections of her Clergy, She went that way to work in her Reformation,
which not only her two Predecessors, but all the godly Kings and Princes in the
Jewish State, and many of the Christian Emperors in the Primitive times, had
done before her; in the well ordering of the Church and People committed to
their care and government by God. And to that end she published her Injunctions
An. Dom. 1559. A Book of Orders 1561. Another of Advertisements 1562. all
tending unto the Reformation; with the advice and counsel of the Metropolitan
[him, that was first ordained so by her appointment] and some other godly
Prelates, who were then about her: by whom they were agreed on, and subscribed
unto, before they were presented to her. But when the times were better settled,
and the first difficulties of her Reign passed over; she left Church work to
the disposing of Churchmen, who by their place and calling were most proper
for it: and they being met in Convocation, and thereto authorized, as the Laws
required, did make and publish several Books of Canons etc. Thus the Doctor.
The brief of which is, That Queen Elizabeth did the Church-work at first her
self without any Synodal authority of the Churchmen (as not being assured of
their affection) till she had settled new Churchmen according to her mind; and
then she did Church-work, by Churchmen.

Her calling of a Sy^od which declares against the R^formation.
Now to mention some particulars which are of the most note. In the beginning
of her Reign the Queen together with a Parliament called also a Synod; in which
Bonner Bishop of London, in the vacancy of the Archbishopric of Canterbury,
was President; and Dr. Harpsfield was Prolocutor for the inferior Clergy. But
this Synod continued in the former resolutions made under Queen Mary; and
remained inflexible to the Queens inclinations, and the Reformation: nay,
declared against it. The full relation of which Synod I will give you out of
Mr. Fuller's History 9. l. p. 54. (who copyed it out of Lib. Synod, 1559.)
because tho somewhat long, yet it is very remarkable. The Convocation at this
time (says he) was very small and silent. For as it is observed in nature,
when one twin is of an unusual strength and bigness, the other born with him is
weak and dwindleth away: So here, this Parliament being very active in matters
of Religion, the Convocation, younger brother thereunto, was little employed,
less regarded. Yet in it; in the lower House of Convocation were passed over
certain Articles of Religion; which they tendered to the Bishops, that they
might present them to the Parliament. The Bishops likewise by their President
Bishop Bonner presented them to the Lord Keeper. Likewise in the tenth Session
of this Convocation an account was given in by both the Universities in an
Instrument under the hand of a public Notary; wherein, they, both, did concur
to the truth of the foresaid Articles the last only excepted.

The Articles together with their Preface are these, which (says he) we here
both transcribe and translate (copyed by me out of the Original) considering,
they are the last in this kind, that ever were represented in England by a
legal Corporation in defense of the Popish Religion.

Reverendi in Christo Patres ac Domini Colendissimi. Quoniam, fama publica
referente, ad nostram nuper notitiam pervenit, multa religionis christianae
dogmata publico and unanimi gentium christianarum consensu hactenus recepta and
probata, atque ab Apostolis ad nos usque concorditer per manus deducta,
praesertim Articulos infra scriptos, in dubium vocari: Hinc est, quod nos
Cantuariensis Provinciae inferior secundarius Clerus in uno (Deo sic
disponente, ac Seren. Dominae nostrae Reginae, Decani and Capituli Cant.
mandato, Brevi Parliament, ac monitione ecclesiastica solita declatata id
exigente) convenientes, partium nostrarum esse existimavimus, tum nostrae, tum
eorum, quorum curae nobis committitur, saluti, omnibus quibus poterimus modis
prospicere. Quocirca majorum nostrorum exemplis commoti, qui in similia saepe
tempora inciderunt, fidem, quam in Articulis infra scriptis veram esse
credimus, and ex animo profitemur, ad Dei laudem and honorem, officiique, and
aliarum nostrae curae commissarum animarum exonerationem, praesentibus duximus
public afferendam, affirmantes, and sicut Deus nos in die Judicii adjuvet,
asserentes.

1. Quod in Sacramento Altaris, virtute Christi verbo suo a Sacerdote debite
prolato assistentis, praesens est realiter sub speciebus Panis and Vini
natural Corpus Christi conceptum de Virgin Maria. Item naturalis ejus
Sanguis. 2. Item. Quod post Consecrationem non remanet substantia panis and
vini, neque ulla alia substantia, nisi substantia Dei and Hominis. 3. Item.
Quod in Missa offertur verum Christi Corpus and verus ejusdem Sanguis,
Sacrificium propitiatorium pro vivis and defunctis. 4. Item. Quod Petro
Apostolo and ejus legitimis Successoribus in Sede Apostolica tanquam Christi
vicario data est suprema potestas pascendi and regendi ecclesiam Christi
militantem, and fratres suos confirmandi. 5. Item. Quod authoritas tractandi
and definiendi de iis quae spectant ad fidem, Sacramenta, and disciplinam
ecclesiasticam, hactenus semper spectavit, and spectare debet tantum ad
Pastores ecclesiae, quos Spiritus Sanctus in hoc, in ecclesia Dei, posuit; and
non ad Laicos [In which Article (penned with some tender sense of the invasion
which formerly in King Henry and King Edward's days had been made upon the
Clergy-rights) both the Regal and Parliamentary power being excluded totally by
a [tantum ad Pastores] not only a definiendo, but a tractando, not only quae ad
fidem, but quae ad disciplinam ecclesiasticam spectant, I suppose made the
University so cautious to subscribe thereto.]
Quam nostram assertionem, affirmationem and fidem nos inferior Clerus
praedistus vestris Paternitatibus tenore praesentium exhibemus; humiliter
supplicantes, ut quia nobis non est copia hanc nostram sententiam and
intentionem aliter illis, quorum in hac part interest, notificandi, Vos, qui
Patres estis, ista superioribus ordinibus significare velitis. Qua in re
officium charitatis ac pietatis (ut arbitramur) praestabitis, and saluti gregis
vestri, ut par est, prospicietis, and vestras ipsi animas liberabitis.

last words and testament as it were of the ancient Clergy now expiring; seeing
their definitive authority assumed by the Laity, and, upon this, a flood of
innovations coming upon them. Which Protestation of theirs remains upon
record to all generations, to show, that, in the Reformation, the Laity
deserted their former Guides, and Spiritual Fathers the Clergy, in Henry the
Eighth's, and Queen Mary's days, all constant to the ancient Church-doctrines
(saving only Supremacy for King Henry's time;) and also in King Edward's days,
the major part of this Clergy, tho externally guilty of some dissimulation, yet
inwardly retaining the same judgment, as may be seen by what is acknowledged
above. 122. etc. and 127.

ended in the Queens proposal of a Disputation in Westminster Church, A
Disputation between the Bishops and the reformed Divines.
between some of the Bishops and others of Queen Mary's Clergy, and some of the
reformed Divines lately returned home from beyond Sea. Of which Disputation the
Lord Keeper Bacon, one of the Protestant Religion, was appointed the Moderator.
The three Questions which were proposed by the reforming party to the Bishops
to be the subject of the Conference were these, 1. It is against the word of
God, and the Custom of the ancient Church to use a tongue unknown to the
people in Common Prayer, Fox p. 1924.
and the administration of the Sacraments. 2. Every Church has authority to
appoint, take away and change Ceremonies and Ecclesiastical Rites, so the same
be to edification. 3. It cannot be proved by the word of God, that there is in
the Mass offered up a Sacrifice propitiatory for the quick and dead. Of which
questions to pass by the first (there being nothing either in the former
Convocation-Articles, or in any decree of former Church, against the lawfulness
of having the Divine Service in a known tongue; which is all that the
Reformation desires in this matter; and which could be no occasion of
difference among Christians, were all other Controversies of Doctrine well
composed.) In the second Question, it seems to me somewhat strange; that,
whereas the Convocation speaks chiefly of the authority of defining points de
fide; and contends, that the authority of defining such points belongs not to
the Laity, or to any Civil Power, but only ad Pastores; and whereas also the
main of the Reformation consists in altering such Doctrines belonging to Faith,
and not in altering some Rites and Ceremonies: yet the question here stretches
no further than to Rites and Ceremonies; and then speaks of these as alterable,
not by the Laity, or a Civil Power, but by a particular Church; i. e. as I
suppose, by the Clergy thereof. And then leaves us in the dark also; whether
this particular Church be put here as contradistinct only to other particular
Churches, on which it is independent, and has this power granted to it by all:
or be put as contradistinct to the Church, Universal, or to Superior Councils;
on which surely it has some dependence. Again; in the last question, it seems
as strange; that, whereas the Convocation in their Preface founds this Article
together with the rest on Primitive and Apostolical Tradition, as well as on
Scripture: Publico christianarum gentium consensu etc. atque ab Apostolis ad
not usque etc. And whereas the reformed, in the first question, (where seemed
some advantage) add the custom of ancient Church to the testimony of the
Scriptures; and in their Preface promise adherence to the Doctrines and
Practice of the Catholic Church (unless there be some evasion in the
limitation there used, Fox p. 1930.
where they say, by Catholic Church they mean that Church which ought to be
sought in the holy Scriptures, and which is governed and led by the Spirit of
Christ:) Yet here they use that restraining Clause [it cannot by the word of
God be proved;] the judgment of the ancient Church, the authoritative expounder
of the word of God, being indeed in this matter very clear against them. See
Discourse of Eucharist,. 92.111, etc.

Cambden, Hist. Eliz. An. Dom. 1559. That all came to nothing: for that, after
a few words passed to and fro in writing, they could not agree about the manner
of disputing. The Protestants triumphing, as if they had gotten the victory;
and the Papists complaining, that they were hardly dealt withal, in that they
were not forewarned of the questions above a day or two before: and that Lord
Keeper Bacon (a man little versed in matters of Divinity, and a bitter enemy of
the Papists) sat as Judge, whereas he was only appointed as Moderator, or
keeper of Order. But the very truth is; that they weighing the matter more
seriously durst not, without consulting the Bishop of Rome, call in question so
great matters, and not controverted in the Church of Rome; exclaiming every
where: When shall there be any certainry touching Faith? Disputations
concerning Religion do always bend that way as the Scepters incline: and such
like. And so hot were the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, that they thought
meet, that the Queen and the Authors of this falling away from the Church of
Rome should be stricken with the censure of Excommunication. But the wiser sort
resolved, that this censure was rather to be left to the Bishop of Rome; lest
they, being Subjects, should seem to shake off their obedience to their Prince,
and take up the banner of Rebellion. Thus Cambden. Now the contention about the
manner of disputing, which Cambden omits, was, what side should speak last;
which the Bishops, because of their dignity, desired to do, after having
observed: Fox p. 1924
that their cause suffered by the other side speaking last cum applausu populi,
the verity on their sides being thus not so well marked. But this the Queens
Council would not yield to them, the first agreement being pretended contrary;
and so that conference ceased.

After this Disputation followed the suppressing, sect;. 179. n. 1. The Reg^l
Su^remancy and all that K. Edw. h^d done in the Ref^rm^tio^ now re-established
by the Queen and Pa^liament.
of the Mass; of the Popes Supremacy; of the Six famous Articles restored to
their vigor by the Clergy in Queen Mary's days: the re-establishing of the
Regal Supremacy, in all those spiritual Jurisdictions, which had formerly by
any spiritual power been lawfully used over the Ecclesiastical State in these
Dominions. To which Supremacy also were restored the tenths and first fruits
given back by Queen Mary, and (upon pretense, that the Crown could not be
supported with such honor as it ought to be, if restitution were not made of
such Rents and Profits as were of late dismembered from it) all those Lands
again were resumed by this Queen, which were returned to the Church or
Religious Orders by Queen Mary. Besides which, because there were many
Impropriations and Tithes, by dissolution of Religious Houses, invested in the
Crown, the Queen kept several Bishoprics void, till she had taken into her
hands what Castles, Manors and Tenements she thought good; returning unto the
Bishops as much annual rent of Impropriations and Tithes; (but this an extended
instead of the other old, rent.) Bishoprics being thus kept void also in
following times one after another, upon several occasions (says Dr. Heylin)
till the best flowers in the whole Garden of the Church had been culled out of
it. See his History of Queen Elizabeth, p. 120, 121. 156. and before in Edw. 6.
p. 18. etc.

sect;. 179. n. 2.
Again: Now also followed the re-establishing of King Edward's later Form of
Common Prayer; but altered first in some things by eight Learned men, all of
the reformed party, and non-Bishops, to whom the reviewing thereof was
committed by the Queen. In which review (says Dr. Heylin, Hist. of Reform. Qu.
Elizabeth, p. 111.) there was great care taken for expunging all such passages
as might give any scandal or offense to the Popish party, or be urged by them
in excuse for their not coming to Church. Therefore out of the Litany was
expunged the Petition to be delivered from the tyranny and all the detestable
enormities of the Bishop of Rome. And whereas in King Edward's second Liturgy
the Sacrament was given only under this Form: Take and eat this in remembrance
etc. (see before,. 160.) The Form also of King Edward's first Liturgy was
joined to it, The Body of our Lord etc. Take and eat; lest (says that Author)
under color of rejecting a Carnal, they might be thought also to deny such a
Real, Presence, as was defended in the writings of the ancient Fathers.
Likewise the Rubric about Adoration mentioned before ibid. was also expunged
upon the same ground. And to come up closer (says he) to those of the Church
of Rome, it was ordered by the Queens Injunctions; that the Sacramental Bread
should be made round in the fashion of the wafers used in the time of Queen
Mary; that the Lords Table should be placed where the Altar stood (as also the
Altar in the Queens own Chapel was furnished with rich Plate, two fair gilt
Candlesticks with Tapers in them, and a massy Crucifix of Silver in the midst
thereof Ibid. p. 124.) that the accustomed reverence should be made at the name
of Josus; Music retained in the Church, Festivals observed etc. Thus Dr.
Heylin. And some such thing likewise was observed, if you will give me leave to
digress a little, by the Synod afterward in her days 1562 in their reviewing
King Edward's Articles of Religion, both concerning Real Presence; (For whereas
in King Edward's Article of the Lords Supper we find these words [Since as the
Holy Scriptures testify, Christ has been taken up into Heaven, and there is to
abide till the end of the world; It becomes not any of the faithful to believe
or profess, that there is a Real or Corporal Presence (as they phrase it) of
the Body and Blood of Christ in the Holy Eucharist] the alteration under Queen
Elizabeth casts these words out:) and concerning Church- Authority and Church-
Ceremonies. For whereas many of the English Protestant Clergy (that were
dispersed in Queen Mary's days) being taken with the Geneva-way, were, when
they returned, great Opposers of the Rites and Ceremonies used in the Church of
E^^land, and of Church Authority in general; therefore to King Edward's twenty
first Article was this new Clause now added', The Church has power to decree
Rites and Ceremonies, and authority in Controversies of Faith. For Queen
Elizabeth is said to have been a zealous Patroness of Real Presence. Insomuch
as when one of her Divines (see Heylin's Hist. of Queen Eliz. p. 124.) had
preached a Sermon in defense of the Real Presence on Good-Fryday 1565. she
openly gave him thanks for his pains and piety. And in Queen Mary's days she at
some time complied so far as to resort to the Mass, see ibid. p. 98. And her
Verses of the Eucharist, in answer to a Priest desiring her judgment therein,
are well known;

'Twas God the Word that spoke it,
He took the Bread and brake it;
And what the Word did make it,
That I believe, and take it.
She was also a rigid Vindicator of the Church-Ceremonies, and great Opposer of
the Puritans (see before. 162. and Dr. Heylin's Hist. p. 144. etc.) several of
whom, tho (in such a scarcity of Divines) she preferred in the beginning of her
Reign, as Sampson to be Dean of Christ Church, Whittington to be Dean of
Durham, Cartwright Lady Margaret's Professor in Cambridge etc: Yet were they
afterward no way countenanced by her, And when Alexander Nowel Dean of Paul's
had spoken less reverently in a Sermon preached before her of the sign of the
Cross, she called aloud unto him from her Closet Window, commanding him to
retire from that ungodly digression, and to return unto his Text. ( Heyl. Hist.
p. 124.) But notwithstanding a certain moderation used in this Queens days (in
comparison of those last violent times of King Edward agitated and spurred on
still further by Calvin from abroad, and by Peter Martyr and others here at
home) and that tho some reforming Acts passed by King Edward and repealed by
Queen Mary were not thought fit now to be revived (as particularly that 1. Edw.
6.2. mentioned before. 40:) Yet so it was that all the chief Acts that King
Edward's Parliaments or Clergy had made concerning the Reformation were now
revived; Sec 1. Eliz. ^. c. 2.
and all, that Queen Mary's, or Henry the Eighth's (save in the matter of
Supremacy) Parliaments or Clergy had done against it, was repealed.

But this,. 179. n. 3. B^t not by the Clergy.
tho done in spiritual matters, was done by the sole authority of the Queen and
her Parliament, without obtaining any Synod to reverse the contrary decrees of
the former Synods under those two Princes: nay further, whilst all the Bishops,
that fate then in Parliament, openly opposed these Innovations. Cambden. Hist.
Eliz. p 9. By her own sole authority the Queen likewise published certain
Injunctions to the Clergy. And now the Regal Supremacy being thus restored only
by the Civil power, an Oath of Supremacy was also drawn up and imposed on all
Ecclesiastical persons upon penalty of the Refuser's losing all their
Ecclesiastical promotion, benefice and office. 1. Eliz. 1. c. And so this Oath
being unanimously refused by all the Bishops that then sat, save only the
Bishop of Landaff, [I say all that then sat: For, by reason of a contagious
sickness that then reigned, within less than the space of a twelvemonth (says
Dr. Heylin, Hist. of Reform. Qu. Mary, p. 81.) almost one half of the English
Bishops had made void their Sees ( three Bishoprics having been void from
1557; three Bishops dying some few weeks before the Queen; three not long
after; one on the same day) which, with the death of so many of the Priests
also in several places, did much facilitate the way (says he) to that
Reformation that soon after followed:] they were all ejected out of their
Bishoprics; and with them, of the chief of the Clergy, fifteen Presidents of
Colleges, twelve Deans, twelve Archdeacons, six Abbots, Camb. p. 17.
fifty Prebendaries, lost their Spiritual Preferments, Meanwhile, many others
(says Dr. Heylin Hist. of Qu. Eliz. p. 115.) who were cordially affected to
the interest of the Church of Rome, dispensing with themselves in outward
conformities; upon a hope of such revolutions in Church Affairs as had happened
formerly.

The ejecting of the Bishops for refusing the Oath of her Supremacy. The
unlawfulness there of.
upon which depends the lawfulness or unlawfulness of the Acts of the Clergy
succeeding them, I will first set you down the form of the Oath which was this:
I do testify and declare in my conscience, that the Queen's Highness is the
only Supreme Governor of this Realm, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
things or causes as Temporal: and that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State, ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Pre-eminence,
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm: and therefore I do utterly
renounce all foreign Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities: and do promise that
from henceforth I shall assist and defend to my power all Jurisdictions,
Privileges and Authorities granted or belonging to the Queens Highness, or
united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm.

attributed and professed to the Prince; Concerning Regal Supremacy. How far it
seems to extend.
and a Supremacy denied and renounced to any Foreign power. And that I may
speak more distinctly in this matter. 1. As to the first of these, thus much is
freely conceded: That the Civil Magistrate has a Supremacy in Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical Affairs; and that such as none other has; namely this: An
external coactive power or jurisdiction committed to him by God, to enjoin to
his Subjects the observance of the Laws of the Church; and of the Laws of God,
as they are declared to him to be such by the Church: and to restrain and
punish the transgressors of them, whether Clergy or Laity, within his
Dominions, with the Civil Sword, which God has put only into his hands. So
that no Canons of the Church can be by the Ecclesiastics or others, executed
or enforced on the Subject as Laws, viz. with external Coaction, pecuniary or
corporal mulcts or punishments etc. before the Secular Prince is pleased to
admit such Canons and enroll them amongst his Laws, or to concede such coactive
power to his Clergy. How far also the Kings Supremacy may extend over all
Ecclesiastical persons concerning the Investiture and presentation of them (so
long as their canonical sufficiency is not denied by the Clergy) to such
Temporal Church-Possessions, as either Princes, or others by their permission,
have conferred on the Church (about which has been in ancient times great
Controversy between several Kings of England and the Pope) I meddle not to
determine. Let this, for the present, be granted as much as any Prince has
claimed. It is likewise conceded: that in those words of the Oath [only Supreme
Governor in Spiritual things] there is not any thing that expressly extends the
Regal Supremacy any further; which may be the only supreme power m
Ecclesiasticals in one respect, and not in another. Nor no more is there in the
thirty seventh Article of the Church of England; which expounds the Kings
Supremacy thus [That he is to rule all estates and degrees committed to his
charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and to restrain with
the Civil Sword the stubborn and evildoers.] All which he may do; and yet be
tied in all things to obey the Church her Laws, and to leave to her the sole
judgment, who are these evildoers, as to the breaking of Gods Laws, or who
stubborn and heretical persons. And such Regal Supremacy will well consist with
another; either with a domestic Supremacy of his own Clergy, in judging
Controversies and promulgating Laws in merely Spirituals; or also with a
foreign Supremacy and Jurisdiction, of a Patriarch over all the Bishops of his
Patriarchy in what Prince's Dominions soever; or of a General Council over all
Provincial or National Churches. If therefore only such a Regal Supremacy, as
this, were intended in the Oath, it cannot be justly refused. viz. If the Oath
should run thus, -- I do testify that the King is the Supreme etc. as well in
all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Causes as Temporal [that is, (as this Supremacy
is expounded in Article thirty seventh) to rule with the Civil Sword all
estates and degrees committed to his charge by God, whether they be
Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and to restrain with the Civil Sword the stubborn
and evildoers.] And if this word [such] be inserted in the words following: --
And I do testify that no foreign Prince, Prelate etc. ought to have any [such]
jurisdiction etc. And Ergo I do utterly renounce all [such] foreign
Jurisdiction etc. -- You will say, what is gained to the King by an Oath so
limited? This, that no Foreign or Domestic Power within his Dominions may,
upon any pretense of Religion or other whatsoever, either take up himself, or
license any others to take up the Civil Sword against the King; or make any
resistance to him therewith in order to any person, or cause, whatsoever. Which
thing sufficiently secures his government, and the peace of his Kingdom.

in or dine ad Spiritualia, to which no Foreign State or Prelate may lay
claim. As, besides that which is named already to belong only to the Civil
Magistrate, it shall here be granted; (as being the opinion of several
Catholics,) That no General Council has any authority to make any
Ecclesiastical Law, which any way entrencheth upon any Civil Right: Nor any
foreign Prelate has authority to use a Temporal power over Princes, (when
judged heretical,) to kill or depose them, or absolve their Subjects from their
Allegiance. Were therefore these words of the Oath understood only of such a
Foreign power, which opposes the security of the Queens Civil Government; as
Dr. Hammond urges. Schism. 7. c.. 17. Or; which lays intolerable burdens
and exactions upon the Subjects of the Land [ i. e. as to temporal matters] and
which draws after it Positions and Doctrines, to the unsufferable prejudice of
the Prince's Crown and Dignity; to the exemption of all Ecclesiastical persons
(such as makes them but half-Subjects,) to the deposing of Kings, and disposing
of their Kingdoms; as Dr. Fern urges Examine. Champ. 9. c. p. 279: it shall be
granted here, without disputing any such controversy, that the Oath, for such
thing as this, could not be justly refused.

But after these Concessions, now to review the two parts of the Oath again,.
183. n. 1. How far not.
to see what more might lie in them. First. There is a Supremacy in Spiritual
and Ecclesiastical Affairs, which the Civil Magistrate cannot justly claim;
viz. Such Supremacies as these: that a Prince may, when a Superior Council
abroad, or the major part of his Clergy at home, has or does determine against
something, which he, with some few, or a lesser part, of his Clergy, is
persuaded to be consonant to the word of God, may (I say) suppress, and forbid
the Doctrine of those, and establish and promulgate the Doctrine of these; may
thus make and publish new Ecclesiastical Articles or Canons, and correct,
suspend, or dispense with former, and that where no just pretense of their
violating any way his Civil Government. That he, without any Synodal consent of
his Clergy; or, He with it, against the decrees of Superior Councils, may
change the public Church Liturgies, her Service, or Discipline; and that when
these no way hurtful to the Civil State. That the Clergy may not assemble about
Spiritual concernments (which none deny that they may do even under Heathen
Princes) but when he pleases to call them; may teach or promulgate no
Ecclesiastical Decisions in matter of Doctrine, or Constitutions in matter of
Discipline, to their flocks, being his Subjects, unless he first give his
consent unto them, tho these concern no civil right. That he may introduce into
Bishoprics whom he approves, without the consent of a major part of the
present Episcopacy; or may displace any, or prohibit the function of their
office, within his Dominions, without any concurrence of the Clergy, and where
is no just pretense of danger to his Secular Government. Briefly; to use
Bishops Carleton's words cited before. That he may use any such Spiritual
Jurisdiction, All or most of which Supremacies are not Supremacies belonging to
the Prince, but to the Clergy, to Prelates, to Councils and Synods, Provincial,
National, or higher. As has been laid down in the first and second These; See
before sect;. 2.4.
and as will appear to any one at the first sight, if he will but empty his
fancy a little of the prime Patriarch of the Catholic Church his being
Antichrist; and of an erroneous, and Superstitious Hierarchy; and, on the
other side, of an orthodox and godly Jesias-Prince: and seriously consider,
what a mischief it will bring upon a National Church, when the supreme Secular
Magistrate thereof is an Heretic or Schismatic, and invested with the
abovenamed Supremacies in Spiritual Affairs. Nay I may further add to these,
that there is some Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Affairs, which the Protestants
themselves or the most Learned of them do not allow to the Prince: as this;
That the Prince alone without the consent of some of his Clergy may make or
impose upon his Subjects Ecclesiastical Laws, or decide such Controversies. And
secondly there is another Supremacy which all the Presbyterian Protestants do
not allow to the Prince: namely, that he may prohibit the Church Ministry and
Officers from making or imposing any Ecclesiastical: Law without his license
and consent first obtained thereto; as you may see below. 211. [Meanwhile how
both these do safely take this Oath (there being neither of these limitations
by the Oath-imposer mentioned either in it, or elsewhere with reference to it,
nay the contrary being declared concerning the later of these two Supremacies)
I see not, unless the Oath-taker may qualify his Oath according to his own
sense.] To require therefore submission by Oath to such Supremacies of the
Civil Magistrate, as these now named, is not lawful.

That submission to the Royal Supremacy in this later kind was required from
those Bishops.
1. Both from that Supremacy, which the Queen, at that very time, in these very
things, exercised, without any Synodal consent, against former Synods (a
Specimen of which you may see below. 201. in Her Majesty's Commission to the
Uncanonical Ordainers of Archbishop Parker; and to the same purpose, in Stat.
8. Eliz. 1.) and which the Kings Henry and Edward had formerly exercised. 2.
And from that Supremacy, which the Parliaments granted and acknowledged due in
these things to the Prince, as has been showed, I think, sufficiently in this
former discourse; they granting to the King all that authority and
jurisdiction, which any Spiritual person or persons had formerly; excepting
only the authority of ministry of divine offices in the Church. See before.
71. All which authority formerly thus granted by the laws and annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm, the taker of this Oath is bound to assist and
defend. (The like to which see also in the 1. and 2. Canon Ecclesiast. 1603.)
Although the former Clergy, under Henry the Eighth, had never annexed these
Supremacies to the Crown. See before.. 25; or, if they had, had again, under
Queen Mary, reversed it. Neither is it enough for our men, for the settling of
such Supremacies upon the Crown, Ham. Schis. c. 7. p. 150.
to prove, that they belong not to the Pope, as long as they may belong to the
National Clergy, and to Councils. The qualification of such Regal Supremacy,
which Dr. Fern, Examine. Champ. p. c.. 16.20. has produced as mitigating it,
see replied to before. 72. And see himself, (if I mistake him not) also
defending such Regal Supremacy, as is here affirmed to be claimed in the places
quoted below,. 205: and not only him, but many other learned Protestant
Divines. And therefore well might those Bishops understand the regal Supremacy
in the Oath, in the same latitude, as these still do allow and maintain it. But
see Mr. Thorndike ( Just Weights, 20. c) freely acknowledging what we have said
here, and desiring therefore the abrogating of this, and the enacting of a new,
Oath. -- It is manifest (says he) that not only the unlimited power of the
Pope, but all authority of a General Council of the Western Churches (whereof
the Pope is and ought to be the chief Member) may justly seem to be disclaimed,
by other words of the same Oath; and that, whereas the Pope usurped not only
upon the Crown, but upon the Clergy of this Kingdom; all those Usurpations [as
welt upon Clergy as King] are, by the Act of resumption under Hen. 8. invested
in the Crown. So that, when the Oath declares to maintain all Rights and
Preeminences annexed to the Crown, you may understand that maintenance which a
Subject owes his Sovereign against those that pretend to force his [just] claim
from Him; But you may also understand that maintenance, which a Divine owes the
Truth in asserting the Title of the Crown to all Rights [whatever now] vested
in it. Which [maintenance] he that believes that some Rights of the Church are
invested in the Crown, ought not to undertake. -- And again below: There is an
appearance (says he) that the misunderstanding of this Oath has produced an
opinion destructive to one Article of the Creed; [viz.] to the being of any
Visible Church, as Founded by God. And besides it is not possible that all
they, who are called to this Oath by Law, can ever be able to distinguish that
sense in which they ought, from that wherein they ought not, to take it. And
therefore of necessity, the Law gives great offense; and that offense is the
sin of the Kingdom, and calls for Gods Vengeance upon it. Therefore there is
great reason, why, the Kingdom should enact a new Oath etc. Thus He.

2. Concerning Foreign Supremacy in Ecclesiastical affairs: how far it is to
be acknowledged.
And therefore I do utterly renounce all Foreign Jurisdictions etc: You are
first to note. That from what is said before in the Oath [that the Queens
Highness is the only Supreme Governor in all Ecclesiastical things] it
follows; That so far as the Oath binds any to renounce all Foreign
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction or Authority, save the Queens, (that is, for any
such Jurisdiction in Spirituals, as the Queen claims, whether such
Jurisdiction be challenged by the Pope, or by a General Council etc; for here
none is excepted) so far the Oath binds him also to renounce all Domestic
Jurisdiction and Authority, (whether it be of the Archbishops, or Bishops, or
of a National Synod) in respect of, such Jurisdiction as is claimed by the
Prince. So that none, who holds any such Jurisdiction in the Clergy at home,
as others put in the Clergy or some Prelate abroad, may think that he escapes
the reach and power of the Oath, because of the word [Forreign] inserted
therein. Having given you this pre-caution then, that you swear as well against
any Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Canterbury, or the National Synod of
this Church, as of the Pope, or of a General Council concerning the
Jurisdiction that is challenged by the Prince: Now to consider the thing it
self. There may be such a Foreign or also Domestic Ecclesiastical Supremacy
and Authority, as no way opposes the good of the Civil State, nor any just
privilege of a Secular Prince; but rather much corroborated and fortifieth it:
and again as mainly tends to the unity and peace of the Church; which through
all the world is only one Corporation and Body. And such Supremacy may be
instituted and established, either by our Savior; or by his Apostles; or later
Ecclesiastical Constitution: as the varying State of the Church may stem to
require. Neither can an Authority, thus established, and relating only to
Spiritual Affairs, be justly disturbed or annulled by any Secular Governor;
neither Heathen (as is granted by all) nor Christian (as there is more reason,
that he, who is a Son and Subject of the Church, should never do it) as has
been she wed in Chur. Govern. 1. Par.. 38. and Succes. Cler.. ^^. Again there
actually is such a Supremacy for some Spiritual matters by some of the former
ways given to the Representative of the whole Church Catholic, General
Councils (which have been hitherto Foreign, and perhaps will always be so:)
which Councils have a Jurisdiction and Authority over, and whose Canons and
Decrees do oblige, particular Churches, tho the Secular Magistrate dissent or
oppose; as the Emperor Constantius opposed the Nicene condemnation of
Arianisme. Secondly, There is also given, Rome: to whom also is committed the
care of seeing to the execution of the Canons and Decrees of these General
Councils in all particular Churches: as has been showed in Chur. Gov. 1. Par.
And such Supremacy was ratified by the Clergy of this Nation; as formerly, so
in their late Synods under Qu. Mary, and also under Qu. Elizabeth: See before.
175. Art. 4. which Synods stood in force at the imposition of this Oath. Of
these Supremacies thus Mr. Thorndike ( Due way of composing differences p. 7.)
It were a contradiction for the Church of England to pray for the Catholic
Church and the unity thereof, and yet renounce the Jurisdiction of the whole
Church, and the General Councils thereof, over it self. King James
acknowledges the Pope to be Patriarch of the West; that is, Head of the
General Council of the Western Churches. And Thomas Lord Bishop of Winchester
under Queen Elizabeth being demanded, why we own him not so in effect?
Answers bluntly but truly, because he is not content with the Right of a
Patriarch. For should he disclaim the pretense of dissolving the bond of
Allegiance, should he retire to the Privileges of a Patriarch, in seeing the
Canons executed; the Schism would lie at our door, if we should refuse it [deny
such his Patriarchship.] Thus He. Now whether, upon ones demanding more than
his right; we may (afterward) lawfully deny him his right, or, for ever after,
swear that he has no right, judge you: as likewise whether the General
Councils have lost their right, together with their Head, the Pope? Again of
the Supremacy of a General Council over particular Churches, and so over this
of England thus Bishop Bramhal ( Reply to Chalced. p. 293.) upon the words in
the Oath [ and that no Foreign Prelate has etc.] A General Council, which is
no standing Court, but an aggregate body, composed partly of our selves [i. e.
of the Prelates of the Church of England] is neither included here nor
intended. General Councils then, it seems, of which the English Prelates are a
part, have a Jurisdiction, over a particular Church, not subordinate to the
Secular Governors thereof. And if a General Council be once thus admitted, I
see not how the Head thereof will be totally excluded; Metropolitans and their
Provincial Synods in all National or Provincial Churches; if the First and
Second Thesis above stand good.

That the renouncing such Supremacy was required of those Bishops.
or also Domestic, Clergy-Supremacy, is not lawful. But such was required of
these Bishops, as appears; 1. by the express words of the Oath; and 2. by the
giving of all such Jurisdiction Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, as by Any
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical power [i. e. Foreign or Domestick] had thitherto
been lawfully used over the Ecclesiastical State of this Realm, to the Queen,
at the same time, that this Oath was made; See before. 70. And 3. by the
practice of these times suitable.

Neither, here, are those Pleas good: that one may take away a just authority
from him, who has exercised an unjust. (for will Secular Princes admit this
Rule concerning themselves?) Or that any small part of the Church Catholic, if
declining to join with the whole, is not obliged to the Constitutions of the
whole; Or, not later ages to the Constitutions of the former: Or, that no
particular Church is tied to the Constitutions of Superior Councils past or
present in matter of Church Government or Discipline, but only in matters of
Faith: Or, See Church G^v. par. 1. sect;. 38.40.59. 2. Par.. 63. 3. Par.. 27.
n. 2.
that the Church of England has not given her consent to such former
Constitutions concerning such Church Government, as well as other Churches: All
which have been discussed in their places. Now if these Bishops were, thus,
unjustly ejected for refusing to take an unlawful Oath; it follows, Sac. Clerg..
that the Bishops succeeding them were unjustly introduced; and, consequently,
their Synodal Acts illegal and void.

Fern, Examine. Champ. 2. c. p. 84. That so many of Queen Mary's Bishops could
not be ejected on any other ground so as to reader the Protestant Bishops a
major part,
That, had none of these Bishops been removed, yet the Queens Reforming-Bishops
in Synod would have made a major part For (says he) of King Edward 's;] and
besides, there were many Bishoprics actually void at Queen Mary's death; which
Bishoprics being supplied [ by Queen Elizabeth] there was no fear, that the
Popish Bishops (who were very suddenly reduced to Nine by death or by quitting
the Land) should make the major part; had the business of Reformation been put
at first to a Synodical Vote. Thus He. To which it is added by others: Mary's
Bishops should have been displaced, as came into the Bishoprics of King
Edward's former Protestant Bishops unjustly cast out; the six remaining Bishops
of King Edward, with Landaff joined to them, would have out-numbred the
remainder of Queen Mary's Bishops.

Reply to a
But to these it is easily replied. To a; That 1. First it has been showed
already, That some of these six Bishops could not lawfully now act, because
justly removed from their Bishoprics in Queen Mary's days; See before,. 54.
etc.
more by and by. Secondly, That Queen Elizabeth could not justly and legally
supply the then vacant Bishoprics with any persons, Thesis, and in the
Church-Canons there-cited. To which I will add the testimony of Mr. Thorndike,
Right of the Church, 5. c. p. 248. etc. The fourth Canon (says he) of the
Council of Nice requires, that all Bishops be ordained by a Council of the
Bishops of the Province [sifieri potest.] Which Council because it cannot
always be had; therefore it is provided [there] that two or three may do the
work, the rest consenting and authorizing the proceeding. And this is that,
which the ordinance of the Apostles has provided, to keep the visible
Communion of the whole Church in unity. But when, among the Bishops of any
Province, part consent to Ordination, part not: the unity of the Church cannot
be preserved; unless the consent of the whole follow the consent of the greater
part. And therefore it seems, that there can no valid ordination be made,
where the greater number of the Bishops of the Province dissent. Which is
confirmed by the Ordination of Novatianus for Bishop of Rome. Which, tho done
by three Bishops, yet was the Foundation of that great Schism; because
Cornelius was ordained on the other side by Sixteen. Thus Mr. Thorndike.

To b.
1. First, that those may be lawful Bishops, who come into the places of other
Bishops whilst living, if the other be justly ejected, Edward's Bishops were.
Secondly, Heath, Bourne, Christophorson, See before,. 54.
and Turbervile, into the place of Holgate, Barlow, Scory, and Coverdale. (For
all of the rest, Bonner, Pate, White, Goldwell, Watson, Poole, Scot, Bayne,
Oglethorp, Thirlby, Tonstal succeeded either Catholic Bishops, or Protestant
Bishops deceased:) And those four Protestant Bishops were all married persons,
and so excluded by the Canon; and three of them, Holgate, Barlow, Coverdale,
married Monks. But of the fifteen Catholic Bishops there were only two that
came into the place of any Protestant Bishop, when living: which Protestant
Bishop had not first entered into the place of a Catholic Bishop, when living.
For Coverdale and Scory Protestants came into the Catholics Day's and Voicy's
Bishoprics in King Edward's time whilst they living. The truth of these things
you may see in Godwins Catalogue of Bishops.

CHAP. XII. The Canonical Defects of King Edward's, and Queen Elizabeth's new
Bishops.
Concerning the defects of the Qu. Protestant Bishops remaining since King
Edward's days.
save only Anthony Bishop of Landaff (whom Cambden calls the Calamity of his
See, and who I think can be much challenged by no side; in Henry the Eighth's
time, in Edward the Sixth's, in Queen Mary's, in Queen Elizabeth's, still
acquiescing for his Religion on the Princes direction) the Queen had only six
others surviving since King Edward's time, out of whom to raise her new
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy; Scory Bishop of Chicester, Coverdale of Excester,
Barlow of Bath, two Suffragan Bishops of Bedford and Thetford and one Bale
Bishop of Ossery in Ireland: amongst whom was no Metropolitan; and of whom but
one was consecrated in Henry the Eighth's days; the other five in King
Edward^s, whose times were full of uncanonical Proceedings, and liable to
several exceptions. Again two of which Bishops, Scory, and Coverdale in King
Edward's time came (as is said) into Bishoprics not void. Besides that on
another account they, as also Barlow, were lawfully ejected in Queen Mary's
days, as being married persons; two of them Barlow and Coverdale doing this,
contrary to the Canons, both as Priests and as Religious. The later of whom
also, going Beyond Sea in Q. Mary's days, there turned Puritan as they are
called; and in the troubles of Frankford was one of the Opposers of the
Common Prayer Book of England: and after his return, See Bishop Bramhal 's
Consecrat. of Protestant Bishops j^stified ^ollinshe^d p. 1309. 26. He^. 8.14.
c. 1, 2. Mar. 8. c.
at the Consecration of Archbishop Parker, refused to wear an Episcopal habit
as is found upon Record; nor would resume his Bishopric of Excester, but to
his dying day lived a private Preacher in London; William Allen in the second
year of Queen Elizabeth being made Bishop of Excester in his stead, As for the
Suffragan Bishops, as they were (in a way and manner differing from former
times,) first set up by King Henry: so were they put down again by Qu. Mary;
and quite laid aside under Queen Elizabeth.

Edward's days: Concern^^g the defect, of the n^w Bishop O^dained in Qu.
El^z^beth'^ days.
now touching the new ones who were made by Queen Elizabeth; I think not fit to
trouble my Reader here with an exact discussion of the validity of their
Orders, by reason of defects either in the Ordainers or the Ordained, since
such a discourse, for the most part Scholastic, disputing of the Character,
Matter, Form, Intention, etc. essentially required for the conferring of this
Sacrament, may better come out in a Treatise a part, then interrupt this
Historical Narration: Concerning these new Bishops and Prieststhen, I will
briefly only observe two or three things, whereof the first shall be the
judgment and esteem the Catholic Church has made of these and the like Orders,
the second, that tho these Orders be supposed valid, yet were they certainly
unlawful and against the Canons; and moreover unprofitable yea noxious to those
who conferred and received them.

As to the first, sect;. 192. 1.
the new Ordination grew so far suspected, as deficient, to Queen Mary, that in
her Articles sent to the Bishops this is one. That touching such persons as
were heretofore promoted to any Orders, Fox p. 1295.
after the new sort and fashion of Orders; considering they were not ordered in
very deed; the Bishop of the Diocese, finding otherwise sufficiency and ability
in those men, may supply that thing which wanted in them before, and then
according to his discretion admit them to minister. Bishop Bramhal indeed
urges this following passage out of Cardinal Pool's Dispensation, to prove,
Consecrat. of Protestant Bishops justified, 3. c. p. 63.
that King Edward's new Form of Ordination was judged valid in Queen Mary's
days by Cardinal Pool; by the Pope confirming his Acts; and by all the Clergy
and Parliament of England. Ac omnes Ecclesiasticas saeculares, ceu quorumvis
Ordinum Regulares, personas, quae aliquas impetrationes, dispensationes,
concessiones, gratias, and indulta, ^^m Ordines, qua^^ Beneficia Ecclesiastica,
ceu alias Spirituales mat^rias praetensa supremitate authoritatis
Ecclesiasticae Anglican^, licet nulliter and de facto obtinuerint, and ad cor
reversae [pe^^onae] ecclesiae unitati restitutae fuerint, in suis Ordinibus
andBeneficiis per nos ipsos, ceu a nobis ad id deputatos, misericorditer
recipiemus, prout multae receptae fuerunt, secumque super his opportune in
Domino dispensabimus. From which words of the Cardinal the Bishop argues;
That, If King Edward's Clergy wanted some essential part of their respective
Ordinations, which was required by the Institution of Christ; then, it was not
in the power of all the Popes and Legates, that ever were in the world, to
confirm their respective Orders, or dispense with them to execute their
functions in the Church. Thus the Bishop. But if you look narrowly into the
words of the Instrument, you may observe, that the Cardinal very cautiously
here First says not, dispensamus or recipimus in the present, as he does in
every one of his other dispensings throughout the whole Instrument, tho in
matters uncanonical, dispensamus, relaxamus, remittimus, concedimus, etc. in
the present Tense, but here dispensabimus, in the future. And Secondly says
not singlely dispensabimus; but recipiemus per nos ipsos, seu deputatos: which
reception per nos, seu deputatos, was not necessary for a dispensation with a
matter only uncanonical. And Thirdly says not recipiemus simply, but with a
prout multae personae receptae fuerunt; referring to the manner of the
reception, which had been used formerly in this Queen's days; which we find set
down in the Queen's thirteenth Article: viz. That such new ordained repairing
to the Bishop, and he finding them otherwise sufficient should supply that
which was wanting to them in respect of their Orders, as they being before not
ordered in very deed. And this is the Reason, why the Cardinal could not apply
in this Instrument a present recipimus or dispensamus for these Ordines, as he
does for other things; tho here he ingageth to make good to every one such
orders, as they then bare the title of. This is a sense of which the Cardinals
words are very capable, and seem also to favor; and which accords well with
the Histories of those times: whereas that, which the Bishop puts upon them,
makes them to contradict the public actions and proceedings both before and
after the passing of this act. For that the Cardinal, when Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the Roman Bishops held not the Orders received by the new Form
sufficiently valid quoad Characterem; as it may be gathered from Queen Mary's
thirteenth Article forecited, and first considered, no doubt, by her Bishops:
so it is clear from the Bishop of Gloucester, the Popes Legate his degrading
Ridley only from his Presbytership, See Fox p. 1604.
and not his Episcopacy: For, says he, We do not acknowledge you for a Bishop.
Which had he understood quoad Excercitium, and not also quoad Characterem; then
neither so ought he to have acknowledged him for, or degraded him as, a
Presbyter; he being, quoad excercitium, no more the one then the other. Now the
reason why he acknowledged him no Bishop quoad Characterem, was, I conceive,
upon supposition that Ridley was not ordained by the old Form; because much
offense being taken at that old Form, we may conjecture by the reason given in
the Preface of the Statute recited before. 42. that also before the new
set-form established, there were in Ordinations some varyings from the old. The
same you may see in Fox concerning Hooper made Priest by the old Form; Bishop
by the new: and therefore degraded in Queen Mary's days only as a Priest. Again
Mr. Bradford made Priest by the new Form: and therefore, in his condemnation
not degraded at all, but treated as a mere Laick. In these days likewise Bishop
Bonner writ a Book called A profitable and necessary Doctrine, etc. wherein he
contendeth, See F. a S. Clara E^chirid. p. 93.
that the new devised Ordination of Ministers was unsufficient and void:
because no authority at all was given them to offer in the Mass the Body and
Blood of our Savior Christ; but both the Ordainer and Ordained despised and
impugned not only the Oblation or Sacrifice of the Mass, but also the Real
Presence of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar. Lastly
it is probable, that Mason and others, Art. of Edw. 6.28. Art.
to whom this dispensation could not be unknown, and was so serviceable for
this Controversy, would not have left it unmentioned; could they have made any
such construction thereof as Bishop Bramhal does.

gratiam sanctificationis or charitatem, or jus ad regnum caelorum, through such
their sin; without which Charity any other fruition of the Sacrament is nothing
worth. [Of which thus St. Austine, De Baptis. 7. l. 52. c. against the
Donatists concerning their Priests giving, and others receiving the Sacrament
of Baptism from them. Habent [potestatem dandi baptismum] quamquam inutiliter
habeant: and accipitur ab eis etiam, cum inutile est accipientibus: quod ut
fiat utile, ab haeresi vel schismate recedendum est. 54. c. Infructuose atque
inutiliter [tradunt baptismum] tales talibus in eo, quod regnum Dei non
possidebunt. Haereticis correctis baptisma non incipit adesse quod deerat, sed
prodesse, quod inerat. And thus the Schools- Haereticus [ i. e. manifest ab
ecclesia praecisus] excommunicatus etc. non amittit potestatem conferendi
Sacramentum, sed licentiam utendi hac potestate, and ideo quidem confert, sed
tamen peccat conferendo: and similiter ille, qui ab eo accipit Sacramentum; and
sic non percipit rem Sacramenti [ i e. gratiam sanctificationis] nisi forte per
ignorantiam excusetur. Si sunt manifest ab ecclesia praecisi, ex hoc ipso,
quod aliquis accipit Sacramenta ab eis peccat, and per hoc impeditur, ne
effectum Sacramenti consequatur. Thus Aquinas, p. 3.64. q 9. a.] And then what
great difference in the giver of such Sacraments, not to have true Orders, and
not to have the power to use them? Or in the receiver of the Sacraments, not to
have true Sacracraments, and not to be benefited by them? Excepting only such,
who living in such a separate Society are by their invincible ignorance excused
from fault; to whom it is granted, that such Sacraments are effectual. When
they return to the unity of the Church indeed, then his true Orders formerly
received become to the one usable, and the true Sacraments formerly received to
the other profitable. But this is in effect all one, as if then the one first
de novo received Orders; 3.
and the other the Sacraments. Whether their Ordination unlawful according to
the Church C^^^^.


3. But again, tho I do not here state the question; Whether they had such due
Ordination and Ordainers as to be truly and essentially Bishops: Yet their
Introduction and Ordination, if valid, seems several ways uncanonical and
unlawful: places of others unjustly expelled. 2. See These. 3.. 6.7.
which consent is a thing most necessary for preservation of the Church, both
in true Doctrine and in Unity. Of which you have heard but now Mr. Thorndike's
Testimony. Who, in the same place, applying his Doctrine to this very fact,
goes on thus; Now it is manifest, that the Ordinations, by which that Order
[of Bishops] is propagated in England at and since the Reformation, were not
made by consent of the greater part of Bishops of each Province; but against
their mind, tho they made no contrary Ordinations. And by the same means it is
manifest, that all those Ecclesiastical Laws, by which the Reformation was
established in England [i. e. by these new Bishops] were not made by a consent
capable to oblige the Church; if we set aside the Secular power, that gave
force unto that which was done [by the Bishops] contrary to that rule, wherein
the unity of the Church consists. But in other parts, the Reformation was so
far from being done by Bishops and Presbyters, or any consent, which was able
to conclude the Church by the Constitution of the Church; that the very Order
of Bishops is laid aside and forgot, if not worse, i. e. detested, among them.
Upon which precedent it sounds plausibly with the greatest part among us; that,
the unity of the whole being [thus] dissolved by the Reformation [i. e. by the
Reformers either being against Bishops, or being Bishops made against the
consent of the former Bishops:] the unity of the Reformation cannot be
preserved, but by dissolving the Order of Bishops among us. The like he says
before, p. 248. If the Clergy of that time [i. e. in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth 's Reformation] had been supported in that power, which, by the
premises [set down and justified in his Book] is challenged on behalf of the
Clergy; this Reformation could not have been brought to pass, 3. and faction,
as likewise to appoint a certain place and bounds for the exercise of his
Jurisdiction, no Bishop, by the Church-Canon, can be made without the consent
of his Superior, the Metropolitan; nor Metropolitan without the consent of the
Patriarch: See Chur. Gov. 1. par. 9..
who is to ordain or confirm the Metropolitans under his Patriarch-ship; either
by imposition of hands himself, or by appointing his Ordainers, (at which time
his Bull for authorizing the Ordainers was used to be read) and by Mission of
the Pall: See Conc. Nic. 4. c. Can. Apost. 34. Council Chalced. 27. c. and 16.
Act. 8. General Council, 10. c. confessed by Protestants: by Dr. Field, 5. l.
31. c. p. 518. and 37. c. p. 551. Without the Patriarch's assent none of the
Metropolitan's subject unto them might be ordained. What they bring proves
nothing, that we ever doubted of. For we know the Bishop of Rome had the right
of Confirming the Metropolitans within the Precincts of his own.
Patriarch-ship. By Bishop Bramhal, Vindic. 9. c. p. 297. What power the
Metropolitan had over the Bishops of his own Province, the same had a Patriarch
over the Metropolitans, etc. Wherein then consisted Patriarchal Authority? In
ordaining their Metropolitans, or confirming them, in imposing of hands, or
giving the Pall, etc. And indeed what defense can the Church have from frequent
Schism, if two or three, or a few Bishops, dissenting from the whole, may not
only make other persons of the like inclinations Bishops to govern the people
with them; but also may make new Metropolitans to preside over themselves? But
Archbishop Parker was thus ordained by two Bishops of the same Province,
without and against the consent, of the Patriarch; and of the Archbishops
Vicegerent, side vacant, the Bishop of London; and of the other Metropolitan,
the Archbishop of York. Neither did he receive any Spiritual Jurisdiction at
all from any Ecclesiastical Superior; but merely that which the Queen (a
Lay-person) by these men, her Delegates in this employment, did undertake
(according to the warrant of the Statute 1. Eliz. 1. contrary to the First and
Third Thesis above) to confer upon him. Which Delegates of here is were none of
them at that time possessed of any Diocese, ( Barlow and Scory being then only
Bishops Elect of Chicester, and Hereford; and Coverdale never admitted or
elected to any; and Hoskins a Suffragan) nor, had they had Diocesses, could
have had any larger jurisdiction save only within these; at least, being single
Bishops, could have no Metropolitical Jurisdiction; which yet they conferred on
Parker, not on their own surely, but on the Queens score. And then, might not
she at pleasure take away and strip Parker again of all that Jurisdiction,
which he held only on her gift? See above the First and Third These.
4. Of their four Bishops, that undertook to ordain Parker, three, Barlow,
Coverdale and Scory, were upon several accounts justly before deprived or their
Bishoprics; Hoskins the Suffragan, See before,. 58.189.190.
these had their office formerly taken away, and never after restored. Neither,
their authority standing good, See before,. 190.
is one or two Bishops a competent number for Ordination. 5. The Form of the
Ordination of these new Bishops, Edward the Sixth's time; so it was revoked by
Synod in Queen Mary's days; and by no Synod afterward restored, before their
Ordination. Revoked also by an Act of Parliament in Queen Mary's days, and not
by any Act restored, 1. Mar. 2. c.
till long after the Ordination of Queen Elizabeth's first Bishops, viz. in 8.
Eliz. 1. Upon Bonner's urging hereupon, that the Queens, were no legal, Bishops.

Coverdale, Scory, Where Concerning the Queen as Supreme in Ecclesiasticals her
dispensing with the former Ecclesiastical Laws for their Ordination.
etc. for the Ordination of her new Archbishop Parker, etc. was glad, out of
her Spiritual Supremacy, and Universal jurisdiction, (which the Parliament had
either given, or recognized to belong to her; and had enacted also, That Her
Majesty might assign, name and authorize any person being natural born Subjects
to her Highness to exercise all manner of Spiritual Jurisdiction, [of which
Jurisdiction one Act is that of Ordaining.] See 1. Eliz. 1.) to dispense, and
give them leave to dispense to themselves, with all former Church-laws, which
should be transgrest, in the electing, consecrating, and investing of this
Bishop. The words in her Letters Patents to them are these, Mandantes, quatenus
vos eundem in Archiepiscopum and pastorem ecclesiae praedictae confirmare and
consecrare etc. velitis. Supplentes nihilominus Suprema authoritate nostra
regia, si quid in vobis aut vestrum aliquo, condition, statu, aut facultate
vestris, ad praemissa perficienda desit eorum, quae per leges ecclesiasticas in
hac part requiruntur aut necessaria sunt, temporis ratione and rerum
necessitate id postulante. [Which Dispensation some would restrain only to
these Ordainers their using of the new Ordinal before it was licensed again by
a new Parliament after the repeal thereof by Parliament in Queen Mary's day.
Bish. Bram. Consecrat. of Protestant Bishop^ 4. c. P. 94.
But this was a scruple started afterward by Bishop Bonner; and not now dreamt
on. Nor did the new Ordinal want sufficient Lay-licence, having the Queens; nor
had the Parliament been defective in re-licensing it (for which see ibid.
Bishop Bramh. p. 96:) nor are those words in the Dispensation -- Si quid in
vobis condition, statu etc, rerum necessitate id postulante, applicable to
it.] And these are the words in the Instrument of Archbishop Parker's
Confirmation -- Nos etc, praedictam electionem Matthaei Parker in
Archiepiscopum etc, Suprema authoritate regia nobis in hac part commissa
confirmamus. Supplentes ex suprema authoritate regia nobis delegata, quicquid
in nobis aut aliquo nostrum etc. And, notwithstanding this regal Dispensation,
yet afterward, Diverse questions [ to give you it in the words of the Statute 8.
Eliz. 1. c.] by overmuch boldness of speech and talk, amongst many common sort
of people being unlearned, growing upon the making and consecrating of
Archbishops and Bishops within this Realm, whether the same were and be duly
and orderly done according to the Law or not? [ give me leave here to suppose
that these scrupulous people meant according to the Ecclesiastical Law; for
what does the observing of the Civil Law concern them in the ordaining of their
Spiritual Governors?] which is much tending to the slander of all the State of
the Clergy, being one of the greatest States of this Realm; It is answered to
them in the same Statute thus, That the Queens Majesty in her Letters Patents
etc, had not only used such words, as were accustomed to be used by King Henry
and Edward, but also had put, in those Letters, diverse other general words,
whereby her Highness by her Supreme power and authority had dispensed with all
causes, or doubts, of any imperfections or disability, that could be objected
against the same. So that to all those that will well consider of the supreme
and absolute authority of the Queens Highness [i. e. in Ecclesiasticals] which
she had used and put in ure in the making and consecrating of the said
Archbishops and Bishops, See it before,. 70
it is evident, that no cause of scruple, ambiguity, or doubt, can be justly
objected against the said Consecrations, etc. Thus the Act. And this is
proposed for the satisfaction of those, whose chief solicitude was concerning
the transgressing the Laws of the Church, in these Church matters. And the
Answer seems in effect this, That tho these Bishops were ordained contrary to
the Laws of the Church, yet they were ordained according to the Laws of the
Land: and that this was sufficient to warrant the Ordination; because these
Laws of the Land had given authority to the Queen to dispense with any
repugnant Laws of the Church.

Elizabeth's change of her Clergy. And here I think meet to prosecute no
further this Subject; this reformed Clergy being such persons, as would act
according to the pleasure of a reformed Prince; and therefore it is not
strange, if the Prince acted no more against, but by, them; and began now anew
to use the Synod more, than the Senate, in the transaction of Spiritual Affairs.

CHAP. XIII. The Opinion of several Protestant Divines concerning a Reformation
in Religion made against a Major Part of the Clergy.
The opinion of several Protestant Divines touching the lawfulness of the
Prince's reforming of Religion in matters of doctrine against the major part of
his Clergy, when to him seems a necessity that requires it.
after all the rest; that, as it has been affirmed here, that the Reformation
was not effected by the Clergy of this Nation, but by the Princes and their
Council against the inclinations of the much major part thereof: So some of the
ablest of the reformed Divines, tho they contend, that our Princes did not so;
Yet, as if they doubted much, whether they should be able to make this good, do
reserve this as a secure retreat for themselves; that a Prince, when there is a
necessity that requires it, of which necessity the Prince is to judge, or in
cases extraordinary, of which cases the Prince is to judge, may lawfully reform
Religion, both in matters of Doctrine and Discipline, contrary to the major
part of the Clergy (these Learned Men defending the Secular powers herein by
the example of the good Kings of Israel.) Upon which also they make no scruple
to join Communion with those Transmarine Protestants, whom all grant to have
reformed against all their Spiritual Superiors: Nay also, in the beginning of
this work, such Reformers were sent for from abroad to assist them here against
the contrary current of the Clergy of this Land. And indeed it seems but
necessary that they should patronize this Tenent; because if they should once
maintain, That no Reformation is valid, which is done against the major part of
the National Clergy; by the same reason they must assert, that the Reformation
of no National Clergy is valid, which is done against a major part of the
Patriarchy; or of the Church, or Council; to which this National Clergy will be
found to owe obedience.

Field. He, The Opinion of Dr. Field.
after these specious Concessions, We do not make our Princes with their Civil
States supreme in the power of commanding in matters concerning God and his
Faith and Religion without seeking the direction of their Clergy. Of the Chur.
5. l. 53. c.
Again: We do not attribute to our Princes with their Civil Estates power newly
to adjudge any thing to be Heresy, without the concurrence of the State of
their Clergy; but only to judge in those matters of Faith, that are resolved
on, according to former resolutions. [Where the Dr. seems to leave the Prince
no liberty to judge or establish any thing in matters of Faith according to his
own opinion: but, in matters formerly determined confineth him to the judgment
of former Councils; in matters not formerly determined, to the judgment of his
Clergy [i. e. the major part thereof:] Yet, after such specious Concessions, I
say, he proceeds, as it were to protect the Reformation, on this manner,
Touching errors of Faith or aberrations in the performance of God's Worship and
Service, there is no question, but that Bishops and Pastors of the Church, to
whom it appertains to teach the truth, are the ordinary and fittest Judges:
and that ordinarily and regularly Princes are to leave the judgment thereof
unto them. But because they may fail [ they; i e. the Bishops and Pastors of
the Church, and not only single persons, but Synods of them; else single
persons failing may easily be reduced by Synods, and a minor by the major part,
and so long the Prince judges with his Clergy not against them; and the
Judgment of such things being made by this major part is still ordinary and
regular. Neither needs the Prince to remove the matter from these, to other,
Judges] either through negligence, ignorance, or malice, Princes having charge
over Gods people; and being to see, that they serve and worship him aright, are
to judge and condemn them [the foresaid Clergy] that fall into gross errors
contrary to the common sense of Christians; or, into any other Heresies
formerly condemned [I conceive he means, condemned by former Councils.] And
tho there be no general failing [in the Clergy:] yet if they see violent and
partial courses taken, they may interpose themselves to stay them, and cause a
due proceeding; or remove the matter from one sort of Judges to another [ I
suppose he means, either from the whole Clergy to Secular Judges; or from
that part of the Clergy tho more which he dislikes, to some others of the
Clergy tho fewer whom he approves: for to remove the matter from fewer to more
is regular and ordinary. But here he speaks what the Prince may do
extraordinarily.] Thus Dr. Field.

Andrews his observation against him: Tort. Tort. p. 372.
Ad extraordinariam potestatem confugere non solet quis, nisi cui deplorata res
est.) here seems to six the Prince, as one that cannot fail through negligence,
ignorance or malice to others, or at least cannot fail so soon, as the whole
body of the Clergy may; (what not fail in ignorance of Divine matters sooner
than they?) As one that has a charge over Gods people, and is to see, that
they worship God aright: as if the Clergy had not such charge much more than
he; or, as if he could judge what was right in Gods Worship, better than they.
Again: he represents this body, or the major part of this Clergy as those that
may fall into gross errors contrary to the common sense of Christians; and into
Heresies condemned, he means, by former Clergy. But why may not those former
Clergy be supposed by the Prince to have erred sometimes contrary to the common
sense of Christians, as well as the present Clergy? And if the present Clergy
may err against common sense in Spiritual matters; why may not the Secular
Prince sooner? And why should not they discern former condemned Heresies,
better than he? Or if in all these things the Prince be liable to mistakes, to
sects, and sides, and partialities, as much as they: why are not they made his
Judges in these Spiritual matters, who cannot be denied to be his Spiritual
Fathers in respect of his Christianity; rather than he theirs? But however this
Dr. plainly says: that there may be some cases, wherein, concerning errors in
Faith, or aberrations in the performance of Gods Worship, the Prince may judge
and condemn the whole Clergy; or may remove the matter from their, to a
Secular, judgment, or to such other Ecclesiastical Judges, as he shall choose;
who hardly can ever want some amongst the Clergy, suting with his desires.

Mason de Minist. Angl. He, Of Mr. Mason. De Minist. Ang. 3. l. 3.^.
after having thus expostulated with his Adversary [ Quis enim nostrum unquam
affirmavit Principes in causis fidei and religionis supremos esse cognitores
and judices? De hac a Cardinale Bellarmino and aliis Pontificiis ecclesiae
Anglicanae illata injuria sic olim conquestus est doctissimus Whittakerus --
Affirmat Jesuita hunc judicem non esse Principem aliquem saecularem. Respondeo:
Hoc quoque nos dicimus.] Thus states this matter to Philodoxus, p. 272.
Pastorum est dubia Legis explicare: Regum vero veritatem cognitam [sibi]
promulgare and subditis cujuscunque sint ordinis [ i. e. whether Clergy or
Laity] imperare. [But here I cannot but ask one question: May not the Clergy
then veritatem cognitam, quandocunque rex contra nititur, promulgare subditis
suis, in illius regno, quorum animarum curam gerunt? Now to go on] Regis enim
est (says he page 273.) ex praestituto legis omnia facere. Adhibebit igitur
media, quae hac in causa adhiberi par est: leget scripturas, orabit Dominum,
and juris divini peritissimos consulet. Nec tamen splendidis hominum titulis
aut suffragiorum numero, aut locorum privilegiis, tantum deferet, quantum
veritati [ i. e. that which he conceives to be truth:] paucis secundum
scripturas docentibus [ i. e. whom he conceives to teach so] potius credet,
quam 400 pseudoprophetis pro cultu Baalis contendentibus. [And after such
consultation, then] Illius est serenitatis suae edicta sancire and promulgare.
So 3. l. 4. c. he says concerning his opposing Councils, Imperator etiam in
sacrosanctis fidei mysteriis pro veritate [ i. e. quae sibi videtur] jubere
potest, Concilii decreto in contrarium non obstante. And, Penes Imperatorem
esse potestatem Conciliorum constituta sacris Scripturis consentanea [ i. e.
quae sibi videntur, aut aliis paucis] confirmandi, contraria vero cassandi,
agnoscit Leo [but he mistaketh Leo.] And Neque ad Primatum Regium quicquam
interest, See below,. 211.
sive praelucentes Synodorum sententias habeat rex, sive non habeat. Sive enim
veritatem caelestem ipsi dignoscant, sive a praelatis suis edocti ediscant,
dummodo pro veritate [ i. e. quae sibi videtur] jubeant and leges condant, vere
se exhibent supremos gubernatores. Thus Mr. Mason.

No. But only that, in which he finds them to judge aright and according to
the Scriptures; which judgment he may entertain, tho it be a smaller part of
the Clergy that judge so. Here therefore the King judges, when, or which of
the Clergy judges aright, and which otherwise: and is at his liberty, to
follow therein any number of them. And neither is he thus a Judge for
himself-only, judicio discretivo, as they call it; but for others too, judicio
decisivo (which the Clergy are not) so far, as to promulgate and command all
his Subjects, and amongst them the Clergy, to obey that which he, upon
consulting the Clergy and hearing their reasons, judges to be according to
Gods word: and this without the consent of the Clergy at all; or at least of
the major part of them. But they may not promulgate what they judge according
to Gods word in such Controversies without the Kings consent. And yet quis enim
nostrum unquam affirmavit, Principes in causis fidei and religionis supremos
esse cognitores and judices? I would fain speak it plainly, if I could. A
Controversy is agitated in Religion; the King consulteth his Clergy about it;
they give him their reasons, why such a Proposition is agreeable to the
Scriptures. He considers the Scriptures and their reasons, and judges, upon
it, that their reasons are faulty; and that they define not juxta legem etc;
and that the contradictory Proposition, which perhaps some few of the Clergy
compared with the rest, or perhaps none of them maintain, is according to
Scripture. Whereupon he publishes this contradictory Proposition to all his
Subjects, Clergy as well as Laity, by his edicts; and requires their obedience
thereto. Is not the Prince then a Judge of such Controversy, as well as, nay
rather than, the other, and over, and after, the other? Commanding obedience to
him from the other? It Is true: that Mr. Mason and others acknowledge in matters
of Religion no visible judge on earth, that is infallible. But he acknowledges
a Judge, judicio discretivo for himself; and this is every private man. Again
he acknowledges a Supreme visible public Judge on earth, judicio decisivo; so
far as to command such a Doctrine to be received by all his Subjects
Ecclesiastical and Laick for a truth, which he, by his judicium discretionis,
holds to be so. And this is every Christian Prince within his own Dominions.
Therefore Mr. Mason sticks not to say elsewhere; Nihil impedit, quin Principes
doceant suo modo, i. e. regali. De Minist. 3. l. 6. c.
Nam qui legem salutarem sancit, is quid faciendum sit docet. Docet (inquam)
omnes suos subditos, etiam Episcopos; eosque, si forte in hujusmodi legem
incurrant, [ i. e. his Spiritual Law, made by him sometimes against their
consent, when by his judicium discretivum he discovers them to err] juxta
eandem judicare potest. However this is clear out of Mr. Mason; 1. that, Regis
est veritatem cognitam promulgare, and subditis, cujuscunque sint ordinis,
imperare. And 2. that, in consulting his Clergy about such truth, he ought not
suffragiorum numero tantum credere, quantum veritati; and ought paucis secundum
scripturas docentibus [ i. e. in his opinion, which Prince is, casually, of an
able, or weak, judgment, as other men are] potius credere, quam 400 non
docentibus secundum scripturas. Which I undertook to show you. Therefore King
Edward shall rather believe Cranmer and Ridley, and Queen Elizabeth Dr. Cox and
Mr. Grindale docentibus veritatem, ( i. e. most commonly, that Doctrine, to
which such Princes have been formerly educated and accustomed,) than 400 in a
Synod teaching the contrary.

Andrews; Of B sh^p Andrews.
who after he had declared thus in Tort. Tort. p. 380. Rex noster vestrum illud
( quod ad primatum pontificium proprie pertinere dicitis) docendi munus, vel
dubia legis explicandi, non assumit: Yet in his Resp. ad Apolog. cap. 14. p.
332. to Bellarmine urging Deuteronomy. 17. etc. That the supreme decisive judgment in
divine matters belongs to the Priests, thinks fit to answer thus; Rex
adibit Sacerdotes; ubi tamen hoc fecerit, cum in Deuteronomio dicere jubeantur
sacerdotes and docere juxta legem Dei, See the like Tort. Tort. p. 370.
leget exemplar suum Rex (quod sibi descripsit, ut secum habeat) ut sciat an ex
ea respondeant. E Malachia sciet, cos a quibus requirere jubetur legem,
interdum recedere de via, and scandilizare plurimos in lege: quare recurret
denuo ad exemplar suum. A Christo autem discet, ut Pharisaeos e cathedra
docentes audire, ita a Pharisaeorum fermento, i. e. doctrina aliqua, cavere. --
Pascua petet; nec sibi Pastor erit, sed sibi tamen gustabit: and, si amarum
pabulum and noxium, gustabit, ut Christus acetum: quod, cum gustasset, noluit
bibere. Where the Prince is allowed both to try and reject the Clergy's
doctrines; when, upon tasting, he finds the doctrine to be pabulum amarum and
noxium, and the Clergy, recedere de via and non docere juxta legem Dei. And
then, since the Prince does not taste and try only for himself, as private
persons do, but for all his Subjects also; consequently it will belong to him,
veritatem cognitam promulgare, and subditis suis cujuscunque sunt ordinis
imperare against the Priests, when recedentes e via. Wherein the Bishop's,
concurs with Mason's, Doctrine. Again: Cap. 1. to Bellarmine urging a place of
S. Ambrose he replies thus; Verum laudat Ambrosium, St. Ambros. Ep. 2. l. 13.
Epist.
qui negat in causis ecclesiasticis Imperatorem idoneum cognitorem [ i. e.
judicem] Quem? Valentinianum juniorem, imberbem, nec dum baptizatum, totum ex
matris arbitrio pendentem, quae ipsa (...). Sed esto. Quid hoc ad rem? Non de
cognitione causarum hic agitur, ad quam non tam fortasse semper idoneus Rex
(qui saepe immatura aetate, saepe infans, saepe Marti magis addictus, quam
Mercurio.) Agitur de authoritate, quae idoneos cognitores det. in causis
ecclesiasticis non esse idoneos cognitores; using a non tam fortasse semper;
and catching at Valentinian's being junior, imberbis, nec dum baptizatus, ex
matris arbitrio pendens, etc. When as S. Ambrose gives his reason plainly, for
that the Emperor was Laicus. (But upon this word the Bishop thought not fit to
touch) Quando audisti (Clementissime Imperator) (says St. Ambrose) in causa
fidei laicos de Episcopo judicare? What? not, quando Episcopus recedit de via,
quando non docet juxta legem; then shall not the Prince recurrere ad exemplar
suum etc? 2. The Bishop in allowing, at last, [ut det idoneos cognitores] I
think will be found to allow, what he would fain wave. For what means he by
dare idoneos cognitores? The authority to call a Council or Synod of the
Clergy, those Judges whom our Lord Christ has given us for these matters; to
be changed or altered by no other Lord whatever; whose final judgment in these
matters the Prince himself is to stand-to and follow? See 3. These.. 5, 6.
But this cannot be his meaning; because after their teaching and judgment, the
Prince is to recurrere ad exemplar suum: a fermento e cathedra docentium
cavere: not only sibi, but subditis suis gustare; whether their Pabulum be
dulce and salutare, or amarum and noxium; and accordingly to recommend, or
prohibit it to his people. Or means he, that, amongst this Clergy that are
not all of one judgment (for example, some reformers, a smaller part; some
anti-reformers, a greater;) the Prince may authorize those of them, whom he
judges the more orthodox, to be the cognitores in causis ecclesiasticis? But
thus, amongst these Cognitores differing, for the Prince to choose and decide
which party of them shall decide such controversies, is all one in effect, as
for himself to decide such controversies; He allowing such and not another to
be teacher, from first a judging and an approving of, his Doctrine.

Andrews, tho speaking much on this Subject, to speak out plainly concerning
this branch of Supremacy; Whether the Prince may reform any thing in matters of
Faith against the major part of Church-Governors or against Synods: Yet is this
the chief point of Supremacy which sustaineth the English Reformation. Amongst
all the parts of the Regal Primacy, which he reckons up p. 373. and again p.
380, 381. against Tortus, this is not, that I can discern at all, directly
spoken to. He says indeed p. 380. Regi jus nullum esse vel fidei novos
articulos, vel cultus divini novas formulas procudendi. But here novos may be
opposed either to the former decrees of the Synods and Councils of the Church;
or only to the Scriptures; and he may mean the later. Again, p. 365. to Tortus
saying; Regi ex officio incumbere, ut qui in doctrina sunt abusus and
corruptelas tollat; sed post ecclesiae declarationem: he answers; Nos vero
citra declarationem omnem, ubi repurgatae sunt corruptelae per Reges, docemus.
Where you may observe this still left in doubt: Whether Rex contra
declarationem etc. may do such things; and yet, if the King be bound to consult
the Church first in such matters, according to Mal. 2.8, his reforming will
still be either secundum; or contra; and not citra only. Neither is it
credible, but that both Hezekiah and Josiah etc. consulted with the Priests in
their Reformation. Again, p. 369. he says: Authoritate Rex propria resecare
potest superstitiones quas sacerdotes ipsi tolerant; but he says not; quas
sacerdotes ipsi docent nen esse superstitiones. Again, p. 364. he speaks thus
of a thing done. In Israele praecipuae in re religionis parts penes Regem
extiterunt; vel uno hoc argumento, quod per sacrae historiae seriem totam
mutato novi regis animo mutata semper est facies religionis. Nec Pontifices
unquam vel praestare poterant, ut fieret mutatio in melius; vel ne fieret in
pejus, impedire. And p. 368. Passim per fastos sacros quod in religione fit, a
rege fieri diserte dicitur, Regis factum esse: Pontificis haud unquam, nisi ex
Regis mandato. But I hope he will not hence infer; that summa religionis is not
penes Pontifices, if the Prince apostatizeth from the true Religion; or that
the Church Governors may do nothing contra Regis mandatum; nor may oppose him
and teach the people contrary to his Reformations; where they judge that he
reformeth not aright (what did the Church-Governors for the first 300 years?)
Especially since p. 377. (which I desire you much to mark) he allows such
Ecclesiastical Primacy as the good Kings of Israel used, not to all, but only
to Christian, Princes; and to Christian Princes, not all, but only those not
heretical; and I suppose he would say also, not schismatical (for if the Prince
were heretical or schismatical he well saw the mischief of such a power) so he
says there. Interim autem sit vel infidelis [Princeps] sit vel haereticus;
Oretur pro eo, non minus quam pro Nebuchadonozar; nemo vitae ejus insidietur,
non magis quam Ahasueri. Fidem penes semet habeant Christiani subditi coram
Deo, caeteris in rebus pietatem colant. Non ergo id agitur, ut ecclesiae
persecutores ecclesiae gubernatores habeantur etc. And something toward this
says Mr. Mason, de Minist. 3. l. 5. c. if I rightly understand him. Regibus,
qui vel non sunt christiani; vel si christiani, non tamen orthodoxi; vel si
orthodoxi, non tamen sancti, primatus competit quidem, sed secundum quid: i. e.
quoad authoritatem, non quoad rectum and plenum usum authoritatis; quoad
officium, non quoad illustrem executionem officii [none such therefore may
execute any Ecclesiastical Primateship, unless the Author seek for some refuge
in the Epithets rectus, plenus, and illustris.] And the same says Bishop
Bicson. When the Magistrate does not regard, but rather afflict the Church, as
in times of infidelity and heresy; who shall then assemble the Pastors of any
Province to determine matters of doubt or danger? [To which question he
answers] The Metropolitan. Now if no Prince heretical, tho Christian, has any
Primacy in Ecclesiastical Affairs; before we yield such Primacy to a Prince, we
must know, whether he be not heretical; and who can so rightly judge of this,
as the Church or Clergy? And then, will not the Church (and is it not right
to,) judge him such, when he opposes her present or former definitions in
matters of Faith? See Church Govern. 3. Part,. 42. And what just Supremacy,
then, for matter of Doctrine, is left here to the Prince, but an authorizing by
his coactive power the Church's decrees? Which Regal Supremacy all sides allow.
But, as I said, this is contrary to what Bishop Andrews says elsewhere; that
the Princes Supremacy may oppose the Clergy, when they do ( i. e. when he
thinks they do) recedere de via, and non docere juxta legem Dei etc.

Thorndike, who writing very rationally and resolutely in vindication of the
Church's authority, Of Mr. Thorndike.
as using his Pen against modern Sectarists, yet takes care also to save the
Phenomenon of the Reformation. He therefore, in his Right of the Church, 5. c.
p. 248. after he had with much freedom showed, That the Succession of the
Clergy in such a Government as that the visible Communion of the whole Church
might be perpetually kept in unity, See before,. 188.
was a Law ordained by the Apostles: and That the Reformation made in England
had plainly violated this Law, in that the new Bishops that were introduced
were made without and against the consent of the former (some of his words are
cited before. 200.) takes this course to solve this difficulty, and to
preserve the English Reformation, notwithstanding this, from being unlawful or
schismatical. To come then (says he) to the great difficulty proposed: it is
to be acknowledged, that the power of the Church, in the persons of them to
whom it is derived by continual Succession, is a Law ordained by the Apostles,
for the unity of the Church etc. But withal it is to be acknowledged, that
there are abundance of other Laws given the Church by our Lord and his
Apostles, whether they concern matters of Faith; or matter of Works, etc. which
proceeding from the same, if not a greater, power, than the Succession of the
Church, are to be retained all, and every one of them with the same religion
and conscience [as the succession of the Church.] Again, I have showed indeed,
that the secular power is bound to protect the Ecclesiastical, in their
determining all things which are not [otherwise] determined by our Lord and his
Apostles; and to give force and effect to the acts of the same. But in matters
already determined by our Lord and his Apostles, as Laws given to the Church,
if by injury of time the practice become contrary to the Law; the Sovereign
power, being bound to protect Christianity, is bound to employ it self in
giving strength, first, to that which is ordained by our Lord and his Apostles.
By consequence, if those, with whom the power of the Church is trusted, shall
hinder the restoring of such Laws; the Sovereign power may and ought, by way of
penalty to such persons, to suppress their power; that so it may be committed
to such as are willing to submit to the superior Ordinance of our Lord and his
Apostles. Here Mr. Thorndike holds, that the Secular power may restore any law,
which Christ or his Apostles have ordained, not only against a major part, but
all, the Clergy, and Governors of the Church: and may, for a penalty of their
opposing it, suppress their power and commit it to others, tho they also be
established by another Law Apostolical. Which was the thing I undertook to show
you.

Who shall judge, whether that be indeed a Law ordained by our Lord or his
Apostles, which the Prince would introduce or restore, and the succession of
the Clergy does oppose? Which Clergy sure will never confess such to be a law
of our Lord, but always will profess the contrary: nay will say, that the
succession of the Clergy shall keep, teach, and maintain, our Lord's laws to
the end of the world? This question he asks not; he solveth not; as writing
against the Presbyterians, who will not ask it him. But what can he say? Shall
the Clergy judge? They deny it to be the Lord's law, what he, against their
consent, would restore. Shall the Prince judge? But this is most unreasonable,
that the judgment of a Laick shall be preferred before the whole succession of
the Clergy in Spiritual manters. And what mischief will come hereupon, if he
judge amiss? And here let me set before him his own rules: Right of Chur. 4. c.
p. 235. Such a difference falling out [saith he, i. e. between the secular
power and the Bishops] so that to particular persons it cannot be clear, who is
in the right [as how can it be clear to particular persons, which is not to
their guides in those matters; and which is not to other particular persons,
who also think the contrary clear?] it will be requisite for Christians, in a
doubtful case, at their utmost perils, to adhere to the guides of the Church,
against their lawful Sovereigns. But, if this his answer, that the Prince may
suppress the Apostolical power of the Clergy, when this goes against other our
Lords or the Apostles Laws, be unsatisfying to the great difficulty he
proposes, I know not what other can possibly be returned to that his
objection. And I wonder that this considerative man, who holds not the Pope to
be Antichrist, or the Hierarchy of the Church to be the followers of
Antichrist, should make such a supposition as this: that the Apostolical
Succession of the Clergy should oppose our Lords or the Apostles laws, so far,
as that we shall depend on the Laity to restore them, and to protect
Christianity against their Guides.

Heylin. Whose testimonies justifying King Edward and Queen Elizabeth's
reforming by their own sole authority; Of Doctor Heylin.
or only with the advice of some few of their Clergy, where they perceived that
the rest would not comply, See before,. 129. Yet, this their reforming I have
showed to have been, for some part of it, in matters of Doctrine and Faith. To
which former testimonies I will add here; Reform. J^stisted, p. 86.
1. First, what he says concerning the Clergy's not having any lawful power to
conclude any thing in Spiritual matters that may bind King or Subject, Thesis.
It is true (says he) the Clergy in their Convocation can do nothing now, but
as their doings are confirmed by the Kings authority. And I conclude; it stands
with reason, that it should be so. For since the two Houses of Parliament can
conclude nothing, which may bind either King or Subject in their civil rights,
until they be made good by the royal assent; so neither is it fit nor safe,
that the Clergy should be able, by their Constitutions and Synodical Acts, to
conclude both Prince and People in Spiritual matters [what not in such, as
Prince and People grant to entrench upon no civil Right?] until the stamp of
Royal Authority be imprinted on them. [ What if such supreme Governor be an
Heretic, an Arrian, an Anabaptist, etc? Ib. p. 84.2.
] 2. England's having lawful power to act without his Clergy; as the Clergy,
having conferred on him all their power, which they formerly enjoyed in their
own capacity. Which was Philpot's Plea recited before,. 168. contrary to the
Second Thesis. The Kings of England (says he) had a further right as to this
particular; which is a power conferred upon them by the Clergy (whether by way
of recognition, or concession, I regard not here) by which the Clergy did
invest the King with a supreme authority, not only of confirming their Synodal
Acts not to be put in execution without his consent, but in effect to devolve
on him all that power which firmly they enjoyed in their own capacity [ amongst
which Powers ( p. 85.) he names this, To reform such Errors and Corruptions,
as are expressly contrary to the word of God] And to this we have a parallel
case in the Roman Empire; in which the supreme Majesty of the State was vested
in the Senate and People of Rome, till by the Law, which they called Lex Regia,
they transferred all their power on Caesar and the following Emperors. Which
Law being passed, the Edicts of the Emperor were as binding, as the
Senatus-consulta had been before. Whence came that memorable Maxim in
Justinians Institutes, Quod Principi placuerit, legis habet vigorem. The like
may be affirmed of the Church of England. The Clergy had self authority in all
matters which concerned Religion; and by their Canons and Determinations did
bind all the Subjects; till by acknowledging King Henry the Eighth for the
Supreme Head, and by the Act of Submission not long after following, they
transferred that power upon the King and his Successors. After which time
whatsoever the King or his Successors did in the Reformation, as it had
virtually the power of the Convocation; so was it as good in law, as if the
Clergy in their Convocation particularly and in terminis had agreed upon it.
And tho in most of their proceedings toward Reformation the Kings advised with
such Bishops as they had about them, or could assemble without trouble; yet was
there no necessity, that all or the greatest part of the Bishops should be
drawn together for that purpose, no more than it was anciently for the godly
Emperors to call together the most part of the Bishops in the Roman Empire for
the establishing of the matters which concerned the Church; or for the godly
Kings of Judah, to call together the greatest part of the Priests and Levites,
before they acted any thing in the Reformation of those corruptions and abuses,
which were crept in amongst them. Thus Dr. Heylin, p. 84.

p. 80, 81.
That, whereas Reformation may be, first, in corruption of manners or abuses in
Government; secondly, in matters practical; thirdly, in points of Doctrine; so
many of his Bishops and others of his most able Clergy as he thinks fit to call
unto him, and having their consent and direction in it, may in case of
intermission or corruption, restore such practice to its primitive luster [tho
he do it against the major part of his Clergy or Synod, as you may see, p. 83.]
3. He intimates; That if the Reformation be in such points of Doctrine, as have
not been before defined in such manner; the King, only with a few of his
Bishops and Learned Clergy tho never so well studied in the point disputed, can
do nothing in it. That belongs only to the whole body of the Clergy in their
Convocation rightly called and constituted. So he says, p. 85. That the King
cannot determine Heresies. if any point of doctrine has been determined by a
former General Council (I add, or lawful superior Council) the King neither
against, nor without, (I add, nor with) the major part of his Clergy, can
reform, or establish the contrary of, such doctrine.

Heylin condemns. Again, concerning all these limitations, I ask; when all or
the major part of Clergy affirms, that such things are not corruptions in
manners, nor abuses in Government; that such practices are not primitive, nor
universal; that such doctrines are not formerly so determined; and none or a
smaller part of the said Clergy says the contrary: How will Dr. Heylin here
direct the Kings Supremacy? Will he here allow him, after hearing all, to
follow his own judgment? Or that of the fewer against his Synod, or the major
part thereof? It seems in some things he will not allow it; (See Limitation the
fourth) and it seems unreasonable to be allowed in any of the rest. For why
should not a Synod discern corruption in manners, as well as he, or some few?
Or why may not he mistake and miscall their reason, passion, or partiality? But
if the Prince follow the major part of his Clergy in their judgment of what are
corruptions, what are formerly defined etc. then cannot the Prince be said or
supposed to reform such corruptions etc. against this major part; whose
judgment in this Reformation of them he follows.

Fern, Of Doctor Pern. Exam. Cha. 9. c. 19.. p. 290.
who speaks somewhat more particularly in this matter. He, first, affirms
indeed in behalf of the Clergy, that the Bishops and chief Pastors of the
Church are the immediate, proper and ordinary, Judges in defining and declaring
what the Laws of Christ be for Doctrine and Discipline. -- And, That they have
a coercive power in a Spiritual restraint of those that obstinately gainsay,
as far as the power of the Keys, put into their hands by Christ, for Spiritual
binding and loosing, will reach. And that this power is coercive or binding
upon all such as are willing to be Christian and continue in the Society of the
Church [I suppose therefore upon Christian Princes also, if obstinately
gain-saying] And 20.. He quoteth, 1. Eliz. 1. That the judging of Heresy is
restrained, for Heresies past, to the Declaration of the first General
Councils, and for such as shall arise, to the assent of the Clergy in their
Convocation. And. 15. he says: It is a mistake to think, that the Prince by
his supreme power in Spiritual things is made supreme Judge of Faith, and
decider of all Controversies thereunto belonging, and may ordain what he thinks
fit in matters of Religion. -- Again, Ibid. he affirms; that the Prince's
giving public establishment [to the doctrine defined by the Clergy and
evidenced to him] is not in order, to our believing (as the Romanists use
fondly to reproach us, in saying our belief follows the State;) but to our
secure ind free profession and exercise of Religion. For Kings and Princes are
not Ministers by whom we believe, as Pastors of the Church are. 1. Cor. 3.9.
And. 21. That we must attend to the evidence of truth given in or propounded by
the Pastors of the Church, who have commission to do it in order to our
believing; and must yield obedience to the establishment of the Sovereign,
either by doing and conforming thereunto, or by suffering for not doing
according thereunto. And. 25. That it is the office of the Pastors of the
Church to evidence what is truth and conformable to Scripture, and that in
order both to our and to the Prince's believing. -- Again. 21. he affirms,
that the immediate and ordinary judgment of matters of Religion belongs to
Bishops and Pastors of the Church in order to our believing: but that a
secondary judgment is necessary in the Sovereign; for his establishing by Laws
that which is evidenced to him upon the judgment and advice of the Pastors of
the Church [ or (as. 23.) for his being satisfied, that what is propounded as
Faith and Worship is according to the law of Christ, before he use or apply his
authority to the public establishment of it:] and this upon a double reason.
[the first of which is] In respect of his duty to God, whose Laws and Worship
he is bound to establish by his own Laws within his dominions, and is
accountable for it, if he do it amiss; as the Kings of Israel and Judah were.

That Princes are not bound to follow the directions of the Clergy any further
than they are evidenced to them. See 9. c.. 21. Princes are not mere
Executioners of the determinations and decrees of the Church Pastors, nor bound
blindly or peremptorily to receive and establish, as matter of Faith and
Religion, whatsoever they define and propound for such. But they are to do
their work so, as it may by the demonstration of truth be evidenced to the
Sovereign Power. take the directions of the whole Clergy, or of a Synod, where
they fear the Synod will not go aright. 2. c. 8.. Reformation of Gods Worship
(says he) may be warrantably done without a foregoing Synodical vote (p. 73.)
especially when there is just cause of fear that the most of them that should
meet are apparently obnoxious to factious interests: And (p. 72.) If the Prince
by the law of God stands bound to establish within his dominions whatsoever is
evidenced to him, by faithful Bishops and Learned men of the Church, to be the
law of Christ, shall he not preform his known duty, till the vote of a major
part of a Synod give him leave to do it? [ And here I suppose Dr. Fern will
grant, that the Prince is bound also to establish Christ's Law ( in which he is
accountable if he do amiss 9. c.. 21.) whenever it should happen to be
evidenced to him by any other, tho none of, or contrary to, the Clergy;
provided, that be first consult and hear the reasons of some at least of his
Clergy.] 3. That Princes may prohibit the decrees even of General Councils,
when they are evidenced to them non docere legem Christi (9. c. 28.. General
Councils being the greatest and highest means of direction, which Kings can
have in matters of Religion, but still with the limitation quatenus docent
legem Christi [of which I suppose the Prince must judge] it being possible,
that the major part should be swayed by factious or worldly interests;
therefore Kings and Emperors (says he) may have cause given them, upon
evidence of things unduly carried, to use their supreme power for forbidding of
their decrees: as was done by Theodosius against the second Council of Ephesus,
and by the Kings of France against the Conventicle of Trent, forbidding the
decrees of it to be received for the space of forty years. 4ly 9. c. 21.. He
approves -- The concession of the Clergy under Henry the Eighth, verbo
Sacerdotis, not to enact or promulge or execute any new Canons or Constitutions
without the Kings assent. [ Which assent, were it required only for securing
the Prince, that nothing be acted in such Synods prejudicial to his civil
rights, it is willingly allowed; but it is extended further, for the Prince's
prohibiting any other decrees whatever, when not evidenced to him to be made
juxta legem Christi; against which if any thing be done in his dominions, he
remains accountable to God, as you have seen before.]

Fern has said. He seems 1. first to grant that the Clergy can publicly
establish nothing against or without the Prince's consent. etc; as that their
definitions, if not evidenced to, may be suppressed by, the Prince, nor ought
to come abroad to their flocks. And how consists this with what he says 9. c..
21. That, in order to our believing, we must attend to the evidence of truth
given in or propounded [I suppose he means, to us] by the Pastors of the
Church? Again; how consists this with the Clergy's coercive power (9. c. 19..)
upon the Prince, if Christian, when obstinately gainsaying them? Unless his
gainsaying can never be called obstinate? Will not this follow from hence,
that the Clergy might not promulgate Anti-Arrianisme in the Empire, until they
had evidenced it ( i. e. by his approbation thereof) to Constantitus the then
Emperor? 2. When he says, That a Prince is not bound to take the directions of
the whole Clergy, or of a Synod, but only of some faithful Bishops, etc. when
he has just cause to fear faction in such Synods; he seems in this only to
keep a gap open for justifying they past Reformation, and, in effect, to
affirm, that the Prince may go therein against his Clergy. For since the Clergy
is a subordinate and regularly-united body, he that takes directions only from
some of them, whom he knows or doubts and fears to be different in their
judgment from the main body, takes directions not from the Clergy, but from
those that are against them, as has been laid down in the sixth Thesis. I mean
against them, that are the Judges in Spiritual matters, and the Definers of
things in Controversy, and Judges of Heresy, what has been, or ought to be,
condemned, as such. Without whom therefore the Prince cannot certainly know,
what is, or is not, such. As for that which is said, that the establishments of
the Prince are not in order to our believing; if Dr. Fern means, that the
Prince does not propose, what is evidenced to him to be the law of Christ, to
his Subjects, with a requiring of them that they should believe, that it is the
law of Christ; the contrary is clear at least in the practicals enjoined, all
which necessarily involve Faith. See Chur. Gover. 2. Part, 34.. 3. Part, 12..
But if he means, that the Subjects cannot justly be necessitated to believe,
what the Prince establishes: so neither are they, what the Clergy
establishes, in his, opinion; who I think allows to all men judicium
disoretivum in respect of any Church Authority. 3. truths to any one, by reason
of different understandings, education, passions and interest, is a thing very
casual; so that, what is easily evidenceable to another, may happen not to be
so to the Sovereign power; when not patient enough to be informed; misled and
prepossessed by a faction; not so capable as some others, by defect of nature
or learning; facile to be persuaded by the last Speaker, etc: what an uncertain
and mutable condition would Church Affairs be put in (as we see they have been
here in England since the times of Henry the Eighth) when all the influence of
the authority of the Clergy upon the people is cast upon this evidenceing first
of their matters to the present Sovereign Power.

Theodosius's Act urged by Dr. Fern, the Story in brief is this. The second
Ephesine Council was General in its Representation, but not in the free votes
of the Representatives, nor in the acceptance thereof by all or the major part
of Catholic Churches. In it, paucis imprudentibus (about some Ninety in all)
obviantibus sacramento verae divinitatis and humanitatis Jesu Christi by
necessary consequence (which was established in the Council of Nice superior to
this in number, and universally accepted) Ex iis, qui convenerant, rejectis
aliis (amongst which the Legates of the Bishop of Rome and Western Churches)
aliis subscribere coactis a militibus cum fustibus and gladiis, reclusis in
ecclesia usque ad vesperam. Upon such reasons the Bishop of Rome, See cons.
Chalced. Act. 1.
and th Synod of the Occidental Churches with him, not accepting the decrees of
this Council supplicated the Emperor, See Leo. Epist. 23. ad Theod.
not to confirm, but cassate, the Acts thereof, and defendere contra haraeticos
inconcussum ecclesiae statum, sending him the Canons of the Council of Nice.
Now thus a Prince both may and ought to cassate the Acts of an illegal Council,
(such as you see this is but now described to be) when a major Ecclesiastical
power, I mean the greater part of the Church Catholic, declares it to him to
be factious, and opposing the truth and definitions of former General Councils
universally accepted. Neither does the Prince. herein exercise any Supremacy,
but that which all allow; namely the defending and protecting of the Church's
judgments. But therefore a Prince may not oppose the Acts of a Council when
himself, or a few others, against the main body of the Church, judge it to have
been factious; or to have opposed, or not to have sufficiently evidenced, the
truth. The former was the case of Theodosius: The later, of the Reformers. Of
which Theodosius, how religious an observer he was of the Church's decrees; and
how free from challenging any such Supremacy, as to alter or establish any
thing against them; see his cautious message to the first Ephesine Council when
he sent Candidianus to preside therein. Council. Epoes. Tom. 1.
-- Ea lege Candidianum Comitem ad sacram vestram Synodum abire jussimus, ut,
cum quaestionibus and controversiis quae circa fidei dog mata incidant nihil
quicquam commune habeat. Nefas est enim qui S. Episcoporum Catalogo ascriptus
non est, illum ecclesiasticis negotiis and consultationibus sese immiscere.
From which all that I would gain is this; That Theodosius was of opinion, that
no Lay-person whatsoever might so far interest himself in Religious and
Episcopal Controversies (not, as to make himself Arbitrator of the Conciliary
proceedings to see that the votes thereof be free from Secular violence, and
all things therein regularly carried, etc. for this is his duty who bears
that Sword, which keeps men most in awe; but) as to make himself Arbitrator
of the Councils Definitions; to examine, whether they are made secundum, or
contra, legem Christi; and to prohibit them, when not evidenced to him by the
Council to be so; because he is Custos utriusque Tabulae: for in these things
it is his duty to submit to whatever is the judgment of those, who are
appointed by Christ to interpret to Princes his Law. A Prince therefore may
void the Acts of a Council freely, on this account; because such Council is
unduly carried, and its decrees not accepted by the Catholick-Church, and so
because its doctrines are not the doctrines of the Church: but never on this
account; because such Council has made some definition to him seeming contrary
to the Law of Christ; or has not evidenced, to him, their definition to have
been according to it. So that a lawful Regal Supremacy, in confirming any
definitions of the Clergy made in Spiritual matters, omitteth that clause of
limitation, which is every where put in by Dr. Fern, [when evidenced to it to
be the law of Christ] or [when the law of Christ is not evidenced to be
contrary to their definitions] which is indeed the chief Pillar of the
Reformation: and changes it into this limitation [when evidenced to it to be
the Law or Judgment or Sentence of the Church.]

The instance in the King of France his forbidding the decrees of the Council
of Trent has been largely spoken to in Chur. Gover. 4. Part, Faith or Doctrine
were opposed by the French King, but only some decrees concerning Reformation.
2 His opposition of it further, than he can pretend it to have some way
encroached on his civil rights, is, not justifiable; and, by his own Clergy, as
well as the rest of the world, disallowed.

Judah, inculcated so frequently by all these Writers, is copiously spoken-to
in Succession of Clergy,. 38.68. 1. Judah had a charge of conserving the true
Religion by their coactive power, with temporal punishments on offenders; and
were justly blamed for their defects herein: So had the Priests, by their
coercive power, with their Spiritual censures; and were as justly blameable, as
the Prince, in any neglect thereof. -- 2. Judah ought not and did not both, in
their Reformations of Religion, ask counsel of the Priests, and exactly follow
their advice and decrees; except in such matters of duty, as were not
controverted at all, nor contradicted by the Priest. Now where no doubt is made
by any party, there needs no consultation; and the Prince may tell the Priest
of his unquestioned duty, without asking his leave. -- 3. It cannot be showed,
Judah ever reformed any thing against the judgment of the whole body, or of the
major part of the Priests. I mean those Priests, who continued in their former
profession of the Law of Moses, and did not professedly relinquish it, and
openly apostatize to Idolatry: with whom being extra ecelesiam, the Prince had
nothing to do. [such a thing is not said there, therefore it was not] but
rather ought to infer [ the contrary to this is not said there, therefore it
might be.] -- 5 The Kings part in the Reformation being acted with Temporal
power, therefore was successful and went through with the business: and having the
chief, or only, success, therefore is most spoken of, especially, in those
Books, which were written for Histories of the Kings Acts. And indeed when have
not Princes (by reason of this their Secular power) had the greatest reputation
for altering of Religion, even where the Clergy have been most active? See the
doctrine of Bishop Bramhal and Dr. Hammond in this point of Supremacy set down
already in Chur. Gover. 1. Part,. 39. etc. -- And of Bishop Bramhal in Cathol.
These. Head. 9.. 17.

The Ecclesiastical Supremacy of these Princes transcending that ch l^eaged by
the Patriarchs.
Thus much concerning the English Reformations under the three Princes, Henry
the Eighth, Edward the Sixth, and Queen Elizabeth; what manner of
Ecclesiastical Supremacy was conceded to, or recognized in, them; what,
exercised by them. Where it is evident, that tho these Princes pretended only
to translate upon themselves the Supremacy formerly used by the Patriarch (not
forgetting to seize on most of the profits thereof:) yet theirs was far from
being restrained within the same bounds, as the Patriarch's was. For, whether
we review, the pretended innovations introduced into the Church Catholic,
before, or those introduced since the Council of Trent, by the Patriarch's,
concurrence, We cannot say of them; that He, without, out, or assisted only
with some few of, the Clergy imposed them upon the world by his single
authority, without, or contrary to, the votes, of the major part of the Clergy,
as King Edward and Queen Elizabeth did: Who had they called a Synod of their
Clergy, and then behaved themselves in it, as Constantine in the Council of
Nice, i. e. left all in pure Spiritual matters to their disposal; judge what
would have been the issue. But it seems, by the proceedings forementioned in
this Discourse, that the Secular Supremacy took it to be the Prince's right to
establish in their dominions, with, or without, the major part of the Clergy (
which, they were instructed, might fall away from the truth, a tenent the
Patriarch owns not) what they apprehended to be the Law of Christ, upon
evidence of Scripture ( i. e. to them so seeming) by whomsoever manifested unto
them. From which apprehensions, in single, and unstudied, persons, very
mutable, and having no such fixedness, as the body of the Church has (being
tied by so many subordinations to several degrees of Superiors,) newer and
newer Reformations for ever do flow and multiply without end, as we see at this
day. And so it is also, that these Acts of Supremacy coming from the hands of
the Temporal power, whatever way they incline, have much more strength and
validity, in case of opposition, than those coming from the Spiritual; this
Sword not wounding, to sense, so deep, as the other; and therefore is such a
Supremacy, where Prince's judgments are liable to mistakes, much the more
dangerous.

Germany (who, Several Protestants denying such a Supremacy du^ to Princes.
being in some respects subordinate to another, could not so well settle this
Supremacy on themselves) in the dawning of the Reformation did well foresee;
and were as loath to acknowledge the Emperor Supreme, as the Pope: Nor would
they ever allow of this Title assumed by Henry the Eighth; out of a jealousy,
that Charles the Fifth should claim the same. And for this reason, it is
thought that, no Accord was made, tho much attempted, between them and this
King. See Lord Herbert's Hist. p 378, and 448. The Protestants of Germany
(says he) would not allow the King's Supremacy, lest they should infer an
investing of the same authority in the Emperor, whose absolute power they
seemed to fear, more, than that of the Pope himself. And this suspicion
alienated secretly the mind of our King: who saw, that, if he embraced their
Reformation, they would abridge his power [i. e. regulate or alter the point of
his Supremacy.]

Calvin and other Reformers, as I have showed before; See before,. 37.
and has remained still in the reformed Presbyterian Clergy of Scotland, and
in those Sects called Puritanical in England, and elsewhere (which is said to
have rendered both Queen Elizabeth and King James much more averse from the
Presbyterian Government and Discipline:) who discharging the authority of the
Pope, of Councils, such as the Church has had, of Bishops; yet have
endeavored to reserve the Supremacy, as touching all Ecclesiastical Affairs to
the Officers of their particular Churches: as the power of calling and
constituting their Assemblies at time and place as they think fit; the making
of Ecclesiastical Constitutions and Ceremonies; the correcting and ordering all
things pertaining to the Congregation, tho without the Kings consent, and
against his will; unless he be pleased to be included in the number of the
Church Officers, there to enjoy a single vote; requiring the Civil Magistrate
to be subject to this their power. To which purpose are those Positions of
theirs, Seatch. Discipline, 2. l. 1. c.
As the Ministers, and others of the Ecclesiastical State are subject to the
judgment and punishment of the Magistrate in external things, if they offend;
so ought the Magistrates to be subject to the Kirk Spiritually, and in
Ecclesiastical Government. And to submit themselves to the Discipline of the
Kirk, if they transgress in matter of Conscience and Religion. All men as well
Magistrates as Inferiors, ought to be subject to the judgment of the National
Assemblies of this Country in Ecclesiastical causes, Scot. Disc. 2. l. 12. c.
without any re or appellation to any Judge Civil, or Ecclesiastical, within
the Realm. See Dr. Heylin's Reform. Just. p. 88, and Rogers on Art. 37. p. 216.
and 218. and the two Books of the Scottish Discipline. To which may be added
those passages of the English Presbyterian in their Confession of Faith, An.
Dom. 1647. cap. 30, and 31. which say, -- That the Lord Jesus as King and Head
of his Church, has therein appointed a Government in the hand of
Church Officers, distinct from, the Civil Magistrate. -- And, that, if the
Magistrates be open enemies to the Church, the Ministers of Christ of
themselves by virtue of their office may meet together in such Assemblies, --
And there may Ministesrially determine Controversies of Faith; set down rules
for the better ordering of the public worship of God and Government of his
Church; receive complaints, and authoritatively determine the same. Which
decrees and determinations, if consonant to the word, are to be received [and
therefore may be divulged] with reverence and submission, for the power whereby
they are made, as [this power] being an Ordinance of God. All this (they
affirm) the Church Officers may do of themselves, by virtue of their office, if
the Magistrate be an open enemy to the Church. And all this they did, King
Charles's Supremacy giving no consent thereto, but opposing it. And then for
the meaning of open enemy, I have reason to suppose, they will pronounce a
Popish, an Arrian, any heretical, Prince such, as well (tho perhaps not every
way so much) as an Heathen.

Henry the Eighth. Who, as at the fiest they swallowed the Oath of it, not
without some straining: so afterward, when, by long experience they had seen
such Church-laws issuing from it, as they thought very grievous and dammageable
to the Church, and found uncontrollable by their power, they very stoutly, to
the loss of their Bishoprics, made resistance to the same Oath, in Queen
Elizabeth's days: and also in Qeeen Mary's days, upon some respiring, took care
to reverse as well the Supremacy of Henry the Eighth, as the Injunctions of
Edward the Sixth. And those Bishops only, who came to their Bishoprics and
Church Government by the high-hand of such Supremacy, have since maintained it.

CHAP. XIV. The CONCLUSION.
Conclusion of this whole Discourse of Chur. Gov.
I pray you consider a lit with me, how matters stand with the Reformation
generally in application thereto.

Where Concerning the benefit that may be hoped for from a future free General
Council for the settling of present Controversies.
1. First it seems clear: That in Controversies of Religion (which Christ has
foretold shall arise) and in contests concerning the true sense of his word, he
has not left his people under the Gospel without some visible Judge thereof,
beside the words of the Gospel; since he did not leave his people under the Law
without such Judge, beside the words of the Law. See what has been said of
this in Success. of Clergy,. 6. etc. And, in such Controversies concerning the
meaning of the Scriptures, for any party to fly only to the same Scriptures to
judge this matter between them and their adversaries, is, as if Titius and
Sempronius, suing one another at the Law, would have no other judge in the
matter, but Justinian's Code or Pandects, about the meaning of which they are
already in the debate. 2. But, if it seem reasonable, that, in such Controversy
concerning the understanding of Scripture, there should be some other Judge
besides Scripture; secondly it is out of question, that the Church Catholic,
which has such ample promises from our Savior, should be this Judge sooner,
than any particular person or Church therein: and, if the Church Catholic,
then a legal General Council thereof; since this is the highest and ultimate
way, whereby the Church Catholic is capable of declaring her judgment; as has
been showed in the 2. Part,. 22. etc. 3. Hence therefore 3ly are the Reformed
forced, as it were, in their debates of Religion to refer their matters to, and
not to decline, the decisive judgment of a future legal and free General
Council. 4. But this seems by consequence to oblige them somewhat further;
and that in this their appeal to, and acquiescence in, a future General
Council, they cannot reasonably refuse the judgment of such Councils fore-past,
as have been legally General. 5. And again 5ly that, to denominate any former
Councils to have been such, they cannot rationally require any fuller
conditions, than have been set down in 2. Part,. 4. unless they will make
either no Councils at all; or not all those, which themselves allow, to have
been General. And 6ly if they will thus stand to the judgment of former legal
General Councils; then it seems they ought also to stand to the doctrines,
which are cleared to them to be held and taught by the Church Catholic of that
age, wherein they reformed: since we may presume, that had a Council thereof
been collected in the same times; they would in it have testified the same
doctrines, which the Catholic Church then held., But thus the Reformation will
be cast; since I think it is sufficiently cleared in 2. Part,. 30. etc. that
the doctrines they opposed, at least for the most of them, were not only the
Tenants of the Roman or other. Churches adhering to it, but of the whole Church
Catholic of that time: a thing which is of great weight, and ought diligently
to be examined. And, 7ly, if they will submit to a General Council; I do not
see how, in the absenee of a General, their duty does not bind them to submit
also to a Patriarchal, Council; as being, tho inferior to General, yet superior
to any Provincial, or National, one, within the same Patriarchy. And, if submit
to such; I see not why they should reject the judgment of the Council of Trent,
as to the Protestant Controversies free and unforced: there needing to be used
no illegal or indirect proceedings herein; because the Fathers, in condemning
these, did unanimously agree; as has been showed at large in Par. 4.. 70. by
Soave's testimony in particular to these points.

etc:) that, in respect of these, they have reserved to themselves liberty to
yield, or withdraw, their obedience, as they see fit. From which we may gather,
that, if they see need thereof, they will in like manner limit the future, and
so render it as unobliging to them, as former have been. 2. That they have been
so scrupulous about the Universality, legal actings, etc. of past Councils
beyond what seems requisite (See 2. Par.. 4.) that, of eighteen or not much
fewer, General Councils, which the other side accepts, they acknowledge only
four or very few more: and not these four for all those decrees, wherein the
rest of the Church admits them. See 4. Par.. 92.95. 3. That they maintain,
that, tho all the Church-guides never shall, yet the major part of the Church
guides and of such Councils may, dangerously err, to the imposing of false
belief and false worship, and pars melior a majore vinci. See 2. Part,. 29.
Which tenent will overthrow the authority of such future Council also; because
it can hardly happen in so great n Body, but that there will be some
dissenters; and then they will not be tied to a major part. 4. That, for a
future Council they demand such a one, for the universality of it, as probably
can never be had: and such voters therein, as is contrary to the former
customs of the Church, and such other conditions, as are several ways
unreasonable, and destructive of having Church Matters governed by the Church.
See, concerning these, the 4. Part,. 65, 66. etc. Tho, were all such their
conditions observed, excepting only one, that nothing done in such Council
should oblige, till their consent first obtained, I see not, but that things
will thus also go against them because as the major part of the Clergy of
Christianity, so of the Laity and Princes, were they made the Judges in that
Council, are opposite to the Reformation. 5. That they do set up the authority
of Provincial or National Synods, in some cases, See 2. Part, 29.44.
against General (the ill consequences of which introducing such an
Aristocratical, or rather so many several Monarchical, Governments into the
Church, as there are several Metropolitans or Primates, see in 2. Part,. 78. n.
2.) and do hold this a sufficient foundation of Reformation; tho indeed so
much, if the things said in this 5th Part stand good, cannot be pleaded for it.
Now all these guards and fences of the Reformed seem to me to render a future
Council, were it never so universal and free, of none effect, as to ending
Controversies; unless it pass on their side: and again seem to argue an
Autocatacrisis in them, as to the judgment of the Church Catholic, and of
Councils; viz. that they apprehend, they should be cast by those, whom yet they
show a willingness to be tried by. Especially when as, after now an 140 years
divulging of their doctrines, their reasons, and their demonstrations; they
see, that, tho at the first (perhaps out of novelty) their opinions made a
wonderful progress and growth: yet, for above half of this age, the Reformation
has stood at a stay; and of late has rather lost ground, and is grown
decrepit and much abated of its former bulk and stature.

relying on the testimony of his conscience or judgment; 1. either that he does
nothing against it; which security many of all sects, not only living, but
dying, have (for sickness ordinarily has no new revelations of truth in it)
and what sect is there, that has not had Martyrs? The Roman party many at
Tiburn, and the Protestant, in Smithfield; and even Atheism it self has had
those that have dyed for it, Vaninus, and others: 2. Or that he has taken
sufficient care to inform it; which thing also all sects show themselves
confident-in. I say let none think himself secure in any of these things, so
long as his conscience witnesses still to him this one thing, namely, his
disobedience and inconformity to the Church Catholic. I mean to the major part
of the Guides thereof, as formerly explained in Chur. Gov. 2. Part,. 8. etc.
24. etc. (a disobedience which Luther and the first Reformers could not but
acknowledge; Epistle to Melancthon 145.
Nos discessionem a toto mundo (says facere coacti sumus.) And let him know,
that his condition is very dangerous, when he makes the Church-guides of his
own time, or the major part thereof, uncommunicable-with in their external
profession of Religion; when, for the maintaining of his opinions, he begins to
distinguish and divide between the doctrine of Scripture, and the doctrine of
the Church; between the doctrines of the Catholic Church of the former ages,
and of the Catholic Church of the present; between the Church's orthodoxness
in necessaries, and in non-necessaries, to salvation; when he begins to
maintain the authority of an inferior ecclesiastical judge, against a superior;
or of a minor part of the Church-guides, against a major. Which whosoever does,
tho perchance he wants not many companions, had need to be sure, and sure
again, that he is in the right: because this thing, in the day of judgment,
will hinder all those, that err, from pleading invincible or inculpable
ignorance, when as they do grant, both that God has given them, beside the
Scriptures, guides of their Faith; and that they have in their judgment
departed from these guides, i. e, from a major part of them; which, in a Court
consisting of many, is the legal Judge. I say; In the Name of God let every
Religious Soul take heed of such Autocatacrises.

FINIS.
SIR,
WEll knowing your Fidelity and Loyalty to your Prince; lest you should be
offended with some expressions in this discourse concerning the limited
authority of the supreme Civil Power in Spiritual matters, I must pre-acquaint
you with these three things. 1. That there is nothing touched herein,
concerning the Temporal Prince his supreme power in all Civil or Temporal
matters whatever; nor in such, as it is dubious, whether they be Spiritual or
Temporal: but only concerning the Supremacy in things that are purely Spiritual
and Ecclesiastical. Namely such, as Christianity has de novo, by our Saviors
authority and commission, introduced into the world, and into the several Civil
States thereof, which do voluntarily subject themselves unto its laws: and
such, as the Church Governors, our Saviors Substitutes from the beginning,
have lawfully exercised in several Princes dominions, when the same Princes
have prohibited them the exercise of such things under pain of death. Which
things you may see numbered by Bishop Carleton below 3. or by Dr. Tailor, or by
the Kings Paper, Ibid. 2. That there is nothing asserted here concerning the
lawfulness of any Spiritual power's using, or authorizing any others to use,
the material or temporal Sword in any case or necessity whatsoever; tho it were
in ordine ad Spiritualia. 3. That I know not of any Ecclesiastical powers in
this Discourse denied to the Prince, but which (or at least the chiefest of
which) all other Christian Princes, except those of the reformed States, do
forego to exercise; and do leave to the management of the Clergy; and yet their
Crowns, notwithstanding the relinquishing this power in Spirituals, subsist,
prosper, flourish: And not any, but which the Kings of England have also
foregone, before Henry the Eighth. Now; no more Supremacy in such
Ecclesiastical matters, as are delegated by Christ to the Clergy, and are
unalienable by them to any Secular power, can belong to the Princes of one
Time, or of one Nation, than do to any other Prince of a former Time, or a
diverse Nation; Because what are thus the Church's Rights, no Civil or
Municipal law of any Kingdom, in any time, can lawfully prejudice, diminish,
or alter; Nor may any such Secular laws, made, be urged as authentical for
showing what are, or are not, the Church's Rights. And therefore in respect of
the foresaid Clergy-Rights the Kings of England can have no more privilege or
exemption, than the King of France; nor, in England, Henry the Eighth, than
Henry the Seventh; Nor can any person, in maintaining the Church's foresaid
Rights, be any more now a disloyal Subject to his Prince in these, than he
would have been in those, days.

CORRIGENDA.
Page 2. line 38. of Christians. p. 3 l. 16. to Heathen. p. 6. l. 15. l. 19. c.
p. 8. l. 1. page 236. p. 35. l. 37. page 53. p. 38. l. 10.. 24. p. 41. ult.
from denying, p. 53. l. 16. page 34. p. 56. l. 17. Mariae, p. 106. l. 7.. 340.
p. 180. l. 18. Edward, the. p. 184. l. 5.. 194. p. 210. l. 8.. 204. p. 211. l.
10.. 197. p. 215. l. 37. that tho no. p. 226. l. 22. their words.

ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE EIGHT THESES Laid down, and the INFERENCES, Deduced from
them, in a DISCOURSE ENTITLED Church Government. PART. V. Lately Printed at
OXFORD.

They went out from Us, because they were not Us: for if they had been of Us,
they would have no doubt have continued with Us; but they went out that they
may be made manifest, that they were not all of Us.

1 John 2.19. Sheldonian Theater, Oxford

OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER. Anno 1687.

Imprimatur.

JO. VENN Vice-Can. Oxon.
Jun. 2. 1687.
To the UNIVERSITY READER.
THESE Papers neither have, nor need any other recommendation, then that of the
Cause which they maintain. They are extorted by the importunity of those
Adversaries, who have endeavored to wound us in all our nearest concerns, The
Honor of our University, the Authority of our Church, and the Rights of our
Sovereign. The Laborious Author of the Discourses spared no pains to shake the
foundations of our Religion; and the designing Publisher has with no
inconsiderable expense, endeavored a farther advantage from them, by casting a
reproach upon these Seminaries of our Education. But it is justly hoped, that
their designs against the University will prove as successless as their
attempts on the Church; Of which we know, that though the Rains descend, the
Floods come, and the Winds blow, yet it cannot fall, for it is founded upon a
Rock. The hopes of our Enemies abroad have been entertained, and the solicitude
of our Friends awakened by the news of our Oxford Converts daily flocking into
the bosom of the Roman Church. But we hope All men are by this time convinced
that they deserve as little consideration for their Number, as they do regard
for their accomplishments. No one need to be alarmed at the Desertion of Six or
Seven Members, who shall consider their dependence on One who by the Magazines,
which He had stored up against Us, shows that He has not now first changed his
Complexion, but only let fall the Vizour. Nor ought we more to regard the
Insinuations of those, who tell us of the secret Promises of such as have not
openly Professed, as having no other ground but the confidence of the Reporters.
But be it as it will, God covers us with his Feathers, and under his Wings will
We trust; We will neither be afraid of the arrow that flies by day, nor for
the Pestilence that walks in darkness: But we least of all fear any danger
from this praesent attempt of our Author, since the Regal power seems engaged
with our Church in one common defense; For she is no farther concerned in this
present Controversy, then as she is accused to have been too great a friend to
the Praerogative of the Crown. And certainly that Doctrine which invades the
just Rights of the Prince, can hope but for few Proselytes amongst those, who
have constantly defended them in their Writings, asserted them in their
Decrees, and upon all occasions vindicated them with their Swords. For We do
not lie open to the imputation of a conditioned and distinguishing Loyalty, who
have showed our readiness to imitate the glorious examples of our Fathers, and
were prepared (had not Gods good Providence prevented our service) to have
transcribed that Copy lately at Sedgmore, which they set us formerly at
Edgehill. And in truth our steady fidelity to the Prince is so unquestionable,
that our Enemies have been pleased to ridicule what they could not deny, and
have made Passive Obedience bear a part in our Charactery, when the Muse has
been inclined to Satyr.

As for our Author and his Theses there is nothing here advanced which was not
in King Edwards time fully answered by Protestant Writers; and had he written
in Henry the 8th's Reign, he might have received a Reply from a Roman Catholic
Convocation; So vain is it to urge Us now with the stale pretenses of a
Foreign Jurisdiction, which our Ancestors of the Roman Communion ejected with
so Universal a consent, and which our Fathers of the Reformation resisted even
unto death; I mean those Glorious Prelates, who here dying seal d the truth of
our Religion with their Blood, and left it as a Legacy to us their Children, by
us to be conveyed to the Generations yet to come.

Animadversions on the Eight Theses etc.
AS that Person, who would prove himself a genuine Son of the Church of
England, had need of more Sincerity then this Editor showed, whilst He professed
to be of Her Communion; so one, who has the ambition of appearing a potent
Enemy against her, had need of greater Strength then he has either produced of
his own, or borrowed from others, since he has been her declared Adversary. Had
he continued still to dissemble his Faith, and affected an aequilibrium betwixt
both Churches, His writings would have been more suitable to such a Character;
where the attentive Reader will find the Church of England but weakly attacq'd,
and that of Rome as faintly vindicated. But since some Motives have prevailed
with him to assume the Name of another Church, as that which he has left has no
great cause to lament the loss of such a Member, so that which He would seem to
have fled to will have little reason to boast that She has gained a Proselyte.
For how plausibly soever He may discourse of Church-Autority, He abounds in too
great a Plerophory of his own sense, to submit himself either to a Convocation
at home, or Council abroad; and although he would appear an Enemy to Luther, he
seems at this very time to be drawing up a novell Scheme of Doctrines, and
modelling to himself a new Church.

Hence it is that in one of his Treatises he has deserted the ancient Plea of
Transubstantiation, upon which the Tridentine Fathers founded their Adoration
of the Host; and from which all the great Champions of that Church have
constantly deduced it. Hence his modifying the Council's Sacramentum into Res
Sacramenti, his prescinding from the Symbols, his certain inferior cult only
due to them, his stripping them even of the Schoolmens latricall, qualified,
secondary, improper, accidental coadoration; and such other his abstractive
Notions of that Worship, as do indeed befit a Nominal Philosopher, but have no
agreement with the avowed doctrines and practices of the Roman Communion. Hence
it is that in the Discourse we are now upon, We read nothing of the Dominus
Deus Papa of the Canonists; Nothing of the Vicar of Christ; the Holy,
Apostolic, and Infallible See which their former Writers have endeavored to
establish Jure divino; Nothing of the Supreme Pastor, Governor and Head of
Christ's Church, the Successor of S. Peter, and other Titles which even our
Representers of late (whose business it has been to mollify) have furnished
us with; No not so much as of the modest Bishop of Meaux's Primacy of S.
Peter's chair and common Center of Catholic Unity; but instead of these we are
told of a Western Patriarch, one who pleads the Prescription of some Years for
his Authority, and thinks himself hardly dealt with, page 214.
that because He claims more then his due, that which is his due should be
denied him. Hence it seems to be that He is so wary in giving us his own
Opinions; that He disputes so much, and affirms so little; that he bounds all
his Positions with so many limitations that they seem contrived on purpose for
subterfuges; and that He very cautiously ventures not any farther then He
thinks, though falsely, the Authority of our Writers will bear him out. Hence those
Concessions (which will perhaps by that Party be judged over-liberall) That
Images, and so the veneration or worship of them were very seldom, if at all,
used in the Primitive Church. That the public Communion was then most
commonly, if not allways, administered in both kinds unto the People. That the
Divine Service which then, as now, was celebrated usually in the Latin or Greek
Tongue, was much better in those days then now understood of the Common people.
That the having the Liturgy, or Divine Service, or the Holy Scriptures in a
known tongue is not prohibited, nor the using of Images enjoined; nor the
Priest's administering, and the people's receiving the Communion in both kinds,
if the Supreme Church Governors so think fit (and we say they ill discharge
the Office of Church Governors, who do not think fit our Saviors Institution
should be observed) declared unlawful by any Canon of any Council. Ancient
Council he means, for latter Councils have declared these unlawful. These are
large grants from a Romanist, and which give a great shock to their so much
magnified pretense of Universal Tradition. Had this Author lived in those Ages
when the Secular Prince countenanced the beginnings of Reformation, He would
have scarce lost any thing for his too rigorous adhaesion to the C. of Rome.
For he thinks it probable that had the Reformation only translated the former
Church Liturgies and Scriptures into a known tongue; Where by the way it seems
something unintelligible how they should change practice without decession from
Doctrines, if Doctrines enjoined such Practices, page 2.. 2.
and if according to him, Errors in practice allways presuppose some Error in
matter of Faith. But at least we may expect He would have outwardly complied,
since he notes, That some outward compliance at the first, page 140.. 123.
of those Bishops, who made an open Opposition afterward, might be upon a fair
Pretense, because the first Acts of the Reformation might not be so
insupportable as the latter. Where it is worth our Observing, that the very
first Act, which gave life to the Reformation, was shaking off all manner of
Obedience to the Sea of Rome, then which I believe his Holiness, contrary to
this Author's Sentiments, thinks no Act more unsupportable.

These things considered, We could not have had a more easy Adversary then
this Gentleman, and the Church has less reason to fear his open Opposition,
then had he still continued in her bosom. For it seems not to be his Province
to publish what is Material against us, but to publish Much. But, God be
thanked, our Religion is not established upon so weak a basis, as to be
overthrown by a few Theses unprov'd, and falsely applied. Nor is it any wonder
if that arguer does not convince, who uses for Principles Conclusions drawn
from Praemisses, which the world never saw, and then assumes such things as
every one acquainted with History is able to contradict. Certainly his
University-Readers will not be very fond of the Conclusion of that Syllogism,
whose Major is a petitio principii, and Minor a downright fals-hood in matter
of fact. They no doubt are surpised to find Consequents come before their
Antecedents, and Church Government part the 5th to have stepped into the World
(somewhat immaturely methinks) before the other four. But the Lawfulness of the
English Reformation was to be examined, and it would have took up too much time
to show why he imposed upon us such a Test.

It might therefore be thought seasonable enough to examine the Truth of his
Theses, when he shall be pleased to communicate to us whence they are inferred.
In the meanwhile, it may not be unuseful to consider what disservice he had
done to our Cause, had his success aequal'd the boldness of his attempt. After
all his Theses and their Applications, his Correspondent Alpha's and Beta's,
his perplexed Paragraphs, his intricate Paratheses, and his taedious Citations,
what Doctrine of the Church of Rome has he established, or what principle of
Ours has he disproved? Should we grant that the Clergy only have power in
Controversies of Religion, that the Secular Prince has no Authority to reform
Errors in the Church, that our Princes did wrongfully usurp such an Authority,
and that our Reformation was not the act of the Clergy; will it hence follow
(which yet is to be proved by this Author, e're he can persuade us to entertain
any favorable Opinion of Popery) That the second Commandment ought to be
expunged out of the Decalogue? that Idolatry is no Sin? or worshipping of
Images no Idolatry? that Transubstantiation is to be believed in despite of
Sense, Reason, Scripture, and Antiquity? the Service of God to be administered
in an unknown tongue, as it were in mere contradiction to Saint Paul? and the
Communion to be celebrated in one kind notwithstanding our Saviors, Drink ye
all of this. It is indeed our happiness, that the Reformation was carried on by
the joint concurrence of the Civil and Ecclesiastical power; that We are united
together by common Rules for Government and Worship agreed on by the Bishops
and Presbyters in Convocation, and made Laws to us by the Authority of the
Sovereign: We are allways ready to prove that the Church of England being a
National Church, and not Subject to any foreign Jurisdiction, owed no
Obedience to the Bishop or Church of Rome, and therefore might without their
leave reform her self, and that accordingly our Religion is established by such
Laws as want no authority either Civil or Ecclesiastical, which they ought to
have. This is a Plea which we shall be allways prepared to justify; and a
Blessing for which we thank God, and for the continuance of which we shall
never cease to pray. But now had those which we esteem corruptions of the Roman
Church never been cast out, or were they reestablish'd (which God in his mercy
forbid) by as good authority as that by which they are now abolished; Yet even
then we could not submit to such Determinations, and being concluded by an
antecedent Obligation to God durst not obey even lawful authority commanding
unlawful things. He therefore that would gain a Proselyte, who acts upon
prudent and Conscientious principles, in vain entertains him with Schemes of
Church Government, since the things contested are such as no Government in the
world can make lawful; It would be more rational to show (were not that an
attempt long since despaired of) that the particular doctrines and practices to
which we are invited, are agreeable to the word of God; or that it does not
concern us, whether they be, or not. For if either it may be proved, that the
Errors of the Church of Rome were so great, that there was a necessity of
reforming them, that every National Church has a right to reform her self, that
this right of the Church of England in particular was unquestionable, that she
used no other then this her lawful right, and that accordingly the Reformation
was effected by the Major part of the then legal Church Governors: Or if in
failure of this (which yet we say is far from being our case) it may be proved,
that where evident Necessity requires, and the prevailing Errors are manifest,
there the Civil power may lawfully reform Religion without the concurrence of
the major part of the Clergy, for Secular Interests averse from Reformation; Or
if lastly, supposing no such Reformation made by lawful authority, but the Laws
which enjoin such erroneous Doctrines, remaining in their full force and
vigor, every private Christian can plead an Exemption from his Obedience to
them, by proving them evidently contradictory to the known laws of God; if any
one of these Pleas are valid, all which have by our Writers been proved to be
so beyond the possibility of a fair Reply, then Nothing which is aimed at in
these Papers can affect us, and though the author would have showed more skin in
proving his Question, yet he had still betrayed his want of prudence in the
choice of it.

By what has been said, the Reader will be induced to think that these Papers
do not so much concern the Church of England, as the State; and that a Reply to
them is not so properly the task of a Divine, as of a Lawyer. The Civil power
is indeed manifestly struck at, and an Answer might easily be fetched from Keble
and Coke. He may persuade himself that he acts craftily, but certainly he acts
very inconsistently, who erects a Triumphal Statue to his Prince, and at the
same time undermines his Authority; in monumental Inscriptions gives him the
glorious and astonishing Title of Optimus Maximus, and yet sets up a superior
Power to his. If neither Loyalty nor gratitude could persuade him to speak more
reverently, yet out of wariness he ought to have been more cautious in laying
down such things, as seem to have an ill aspect on his Majesty's proceedings.
For it may seem very rash to deny,. 5. p. 12.
that the Prince can remove from the Exercise of his Office any of his Clergy
for not obeying his Decisions in matters of a Spiritual Nature, when a Reverend
Prelate suffers under such a Sentence;. 7. p. 14.
to assert that the Prince, ought not to collate to Benefices, where the Clergy
have Canonical exceptions against the Person nominated, whilst a Friend of his
thus qualified enjoys the benefit of such a Collation; to find fault with the
Reformers that they gave their Prince leave to dispense with Laws and
Constitutions Ecclesiastical,. 28. p. 36.
when he himself is in that case most graciously dispensed with. How far the
Regal power extends it self in these cases, especially as it may be limited by
the municipal laws of the Realm, I am not so bold as to determine; but where
such Rights are claimed by the Sovereign, and actually exercised, there it
becomes not the modesty of a private Subject to be so open and liberal in
condemning them. But then above all he renders his Loyalty justly questionable,
when he tells us it is disputed by the Roman Doctors, and leaves it a Question,
Whether in case that a Prince use his coactive Jurisdiction in Spiritual
matters against the Definitions of the Church,. 16. p. 20.
then the Pope has not also virtually some Temporal coactive power against the
Prince? namely to dissolve the Princes coactive Power, or to authorize others
to use a coactive power, against such a Prince in order to the good of the
Church? Now I appeal to the judicious Reader, whether the substance of that
infamous Libel, which was part of a late See Sidney's Trial.
Traytour's Indictment, and which was written by way of Polemical Discourse, as
he pleaded, might not if managed by this Author's pen have been thus warily
expressed; Whether in case that a Prince use his coactive Jurisdiction in Civil
matters against Acts of Parliament, then the Parliament has not also virtually
some temporal coactive power against the Prince; namely, to dissolve the
Princes coactive power, or to authorize others to use a coactive power against
such a Prince in order to the good of the State? Such bold Problems as these
ought not to be left undecided; and one who had any zeal for his Prince, would
scarce let the Affirmative side of the Quaestion pass without affixing a brand
on it.

These Expressions among others He might well be conscious would be offensive
to any SIR of known Fidelity and Loyalty to his Prince; and therefore such
person's good Opinion was to be courted in an Epistle Apologetick. But
certainly it was expected that the kind Sir should read no farther then the
Epistle; for if he did, he would find himself miserably imposed upon. The
Author in this Epistle praeacquaints him with these things.

1. That there is nothing touched in this Discourse concerning the Temporal
Prince his Supreme power in such matters, as it is dubious whether they be
Spiritual or Temporal, but only in things which are purely Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical.

2. That he knows not of any Ecclesiastical powers in this Discourse denied to
the Prince, but which, or at least the chiefest of which, all other Christian
Princes except those of the Reformed states do forego to Exercise.

3. Nor of any, but which the Kings of England have also foregone before Henry
the Eighth.

Now I shall humbly beg leave to undeceive the unknown Sir, and to represent to
him that in all these he is misinformed. As to the first, 1. That there is
nothing touched in this Discourse concerning the Temporal Prince his Supreme
power in such Matters as it is dubious whether they be Spiritual or Temporal
but only such as are purely Spiritual and Ecclesiastical.

Now if by dubious he means such things as He does not doubt, but they are
Spiritual, then this does not reach our case; because We may doubt whether some
things are not Temporal, which He doubts not but they are Spiritual; But if by
dubious He means such things as are doubted by no body but that they are purely
Spiritual, then are we agreed; since neither do We allow the Temporal Prince
any power in things of which We our selves doubt not but they are purely
Spiritual. That there are some Powers merely Spiritual, appropriated to the
Clergy and incommunicable to the Prince, no true Son of the Church of England
will deny; but now although the substance of those Powers be immediately from
God, and not from the King, as those of Preaching, Ordaining, Absolving etc.
Yet whether these are not subject to be limited, inhibited, or otherwise
regulated in the outward Exercise of them by the Laws of the Land, and the
Authority Regal is the thing quaestion'd. This cannot perhaps be better expressed
then in the words of the Reverend Bp. Sanderson; The King does not challenge to
himself as belonging to him by Virtue of his Supremacy Ecclesiastical the power
of Ordaining Ministers, excommunicating scandalous Offenders, or doing any
other act of Episcopal Office in his own Person; nor the power of Preaching,
Administering the Sacraments, or doing any other act of Ministerial Office in
his own person: but leaves the performance of all such acts of either sort unto
such persons, as the said several respective powers do of divine right belong
to, viz. of the one sort to the Bishops, and of the other to the Priests. Yet
does the King by Virtue of that Supremacy challenge a power as belonging to him
in the right of his Episcopacy not prejud. to Reg power p 22
Crown, to make Laws as well concerning Preaching, Administering the Sacraments,
and other acts belonging to the Function of a Priest, as concerning Ordination
of Ministers, proceeding in matters of Ecclesiastical Cognizance in the
Spiritual Courts, and other acts belonging to the Function of a Bishop: to
which Laws as well the Priests, as the Bishops are subject, and ought to submit
to be limited and regulated thereby in the Exercise of those their several
respective Powers; their claim to a Jus Divinum, and that their said several
powers are of God notwithstanding. Now to apply this; That the deciding
Controversies of Faith, and Excommunicating Offenders, etc. are the proper
Province of the Clergy, we deny not; but that the indicting Synods in order to
such Matters, or making Laws to regulate the Exercise of them are purely
Spiritual, is not so undoubted as He would persuade us. Again, that the
Spiritual Authority which is to be exercised in the Episcopal or Sacerdotal
Functions can be derived from none but those spiritual persons who were
invested with that Authority, and power of delegating it to others, is willingly
allowed; but that collation to Benefices can be the act of none but the Clergy
will not be hence inferred. For the Spiritual Authority it self, and the
application of it to such an Object are very different things. The power by
which a Clergy man is capacitated for his Function is derived from the Bishop
which ordains him; but the applying this Power to such a Place, the ordering
that the Ecclesiastical Person shall execute that Authority which he derived
from the Church in such a peculiar part of the Kingdom is not without the reach
of the Civil Jurisdiction; and therefore Collation to Benefices (in the sense
this Author understands it) should not have been reckoned by him amongst those
things of which it is not doubted but they are purely Spiritual. Another power
of which he abridges the Prince, and by consequence would have to be esteemed
purely Spiritual, is the deposing from the Exercise of their Office in his
Dominions any of the Clergy for transgressing of the Ecclesiastical Canons. Now
that the Secular Prince should have an Obligation from God over all Persons in
all Spiritual matters to bind them by Temporal Punishments to the Obedience of
the Churches or Clergy's determinations, and decrees (as he words it) and yet
that the Exercising this power, their performing what they are obliged to by
God, should be without the reach of their Authority, seems to me a paradox. That
the Christian Emperors in the Primitive times challenged such a power is plain
from the undoubted testimony of the Learned Petrus de Marca. Cura principum
Christianorum olim non solum Haereticorum furoros compressi, contumacia
Episcoporum aut Clericorum adversus Synodorum sententias rebellium ab externa
potentia repressa; sed etiam Principum studio prohibiti Episcopi ne legibus
secularibus vel Canonibus violatis injuriam subditis inferrent De concord. l.
4. cap. 1. par. 2.
Who tells us, that by the care of Christian Princes, Heretics were represt,
the contumacy of Bishops and Clergymen against the Decrees of Synods punished,
and Bishops restrained from oppressing their subjects by the violation of the
Canons. If we inquire how the Princes secured the Keeping of the Canons;
Canonum custodiae duobus modis prospiciebant Principes, tum delegatione
Magistratuum, qui vetarent ne quid contra Canones tentaretur, tum exactis
poenis a contumacibus si quid perperam gestum esset. lb par 4.
He tells us they did it by these 2 Methods. 1st. By delegating Magistrates to
see they were observed. 2ly. By punishing those who were guilty of the breach
of them. And he particularly mentions Deprivation inflicted by the Secular
power for violation of the Canons. In manifestissima violatione, canonibus
factam injuriam iis poenis Principes ulsciscebantur, quae legibus irrogatae
erant, nempe expulsione a sede. Deturbationem enim illam quae vacantem
Ecclesiam redderet sui arbitrii esse putabant; non autem regradationem vel
dejectionem ab Episcopali dignitate, quae erat poena mere Ecclesiastica. Ib.
par. 6.
For that, they thought removal from the Sea within the reach of their
Jurisdiction, though not Degradation, which is a punishment merely
Ecclesiastical. (Which neither did the Reforming Princes ever think in their
power to inflict.) And he Ibid.
there gives instances of Bishops so deprived. And indeed this seems to be a
Necessary branch of power, which naturally flows from his being Custos Canonum,
which he is proved by this Author at large to be. How far the Prince may
abridge himself of this power by the laws of the Land, I meddle not; it
suffices to show that it is not originally a power merely Spiritual. And from
this and the former Instances the Reader will be able to judge the truth of
that assertion, That there is nothing touched in this Discourse concerning such
Matters, as it is dubious whether they be Spiritual, or Temporal.

Come we now to that other assertion of his, That he knows not of any
Ecclesiastical powers in this Discourse denied to the Prince but which (or at
least the chiefest of which) all other Christian Princes except those of the
Reformed States do forego to exercise.

Now if by the chiefest, which he excepts, he means preaching the word, and
administering the Sacraments, Excommunicating, and absolving; neither do the
Reformed States challenge the Exercise of these; and as for others it will
appear that the Princes of the Roman Catholic Communion extend their Supremacy
as far as the Reformed.

And here it may not be improper to instance in that right which the Kings of
Spain enjoy in Sicily, which seems to extend even to those Spiritual powers
which our Author calls the chiefest. And this I find ushered in by a
Roman Catholic Writer with an assertion quite Hist. of Eccl. Rev by a Learned
Priest in France. p. 116.
opposite to that which is laid down in this Epistle. It even surpasses (says
he) that which Henry the Eighth of England boldly took when he separated from
the Church of Rome. The King of Spain as King of Sicily pretends to be Legate a
latere, and born Legate of the H. See; so that he and his Viceroys in his
absence have the same power over the Sicilians as to the Spiritual that a
Legate a latere could have. And therefore they who execute that Jurisdiction of
Sicily for the King of Spain have power to absolve, punish, and excommunicate
all sorts of persons, whether Laics or Ecclesiastics, Monks, Priests, Abbots,
Bishops, and even Cardinals themselves, that reside in the Kingdom. They
acknowledge not the Popes Authority, being Sovereign Monarchs as to the
Spiritual. They confess that the Pope has heretofore given them that
privilege: (So that his Holiness it seems thought even those chiefest Powers
of the Church alienable) but at the same time they pretend that it is not in
his power to recall it; and so they acknowledge not the Pope for head, to whose
Tribunal no Appeal can be made because their King has no Superior, as to the
Spiritual. Moreover this right of superiority is not considered as delegate,
but proper; and the King of Sicily or they who hold Jurisdiction in his place,
and who are Laymen take the title of Beatissimo and Santissimo Padre
attributing to themselves in effect in respect of Sicily what the Pope takes to
himself in regard of the whole Church; and they preside in Provincial Councils.
As for the title of Head of the Church which taken by the Reformers so much
offends our Discourser, this Critical Historian farther observes; It was matter
of great astonishment that in our age Queen Elizabeth took the title of Head of
the Church of England. But seeing in the Kingdom of Sicily, the Female succeeds
as well as in England, a Princess may take the title of Head of the Church of
Sicily, and of Beatissimo and Santissimo Padre. Nay it has happened so already
in the time of Jean of Arragon and Castile the mother of Charles the 5th: So
that this Critic concludes that it may be said there are two Popes, and two
sacred Colleges in the Church, to wit, the Pope of Rome, and the Pope of
Sicily, to whom also may be added the Pope of England.

What Jurisdiction Spiritual the King of France challenges will best be learnt
from the Liberties of the Gallican Church, published by the learned Pitthaeus
and to be found in his Works. Two of them which seem to come home to our
purpose are these.

Le Rois tres Chrestiens ont de tout temps selon les occurrences and necessitez
de leur pays, assemble ou fait assembler Synodes ou Conciles Provinciaux and
Nationaux, esquels enter autres chooses importantes a conservation de leur
estat, se sont aussi traitez les affairs concernans l'ordre and discipline
Ecclesiastique de leurs pays, don't ils ont faict fair Reigles, Chapitres,
Loix, Ordonnances, and Pragmatiques Sanctions sous leur Nom and autorite: and
s' en lisent encor aujourd huy phisieurs es recueils des Decrets receus par
l'Eglise Universelle, and aucunes approuvees par Conciciles generaux.
The most Christian King has had power at all times according to the
occurrences and necessity's of his own affairs, to assemble or cause to be
assembled Synods or Councils Provincial and National; and therein to treat not
only of such things as tend to the preservation of his State, but also of
affairs which concern the Order and Discipline of the Church in his own
Dominions; and therein to make Rules, Chapters, Laws, Ordinances, and
Pragmatick sanctions in his own Name and by his own Authority. Many of which
have been received among the Decrees of the Catholic Church, and some of them
approved by General Councils.

Le Pape n'envoy point en France Legates a latere avec faculte' de reformer,
juger, conferer, dispenser, and tells autres qui ont accoustume d'estre
specifiees par les Bulls de leur pouvoir, si non a la' postulation du Roy
tres-Christien ou de son consentement: and le Legate n' use de ses facultez qu'
apres avoir baille promise au Roy par escrit sous son sein, and jure par ses
Saints Ordres de n' user desdites facultez e's Royaume, pays, terres and
Seigneuries de sa sujettion si non tant and si longuement qu'il plaira au Roy;
and que si tossed que le dit Legate sera adverty de sa volonte' au contraire, il
s' en desistera and cessera Aussi qu' il n' usera des dites facultez si non
pour le regard de celles don't il aura le consentement du Roy and conformement a
iceluy sans entreprendre ny fair chose au Saints decrets. Conciles generaux,
Franchises, Libertez, and Privileges de L'Eglise Gallicane and des Universitez,
and estatez publiques de ce Royaume, Et a cette fin se presentent les facultez
de tells Legates a la Cour de Parliament, ou else sont veus, examinees,
verifiees, publiees and registrees sous tells modifications que la Cour voit
estre a fair pour le bien du Royaume: suivant lesqnelles modifications se
jugent tous les process and differents qui surviennent pour raison de ce, and
non autrement.
The Pope cannot send a Legate a latere into France, with power to reform, judge,
collate, or dispense, or do such other things which use to be specified in the
Bull of his Legation, except it be upon the desire or with the approbation of
the most Christian King. Neither can the said Legate execute his Office until
he has promised the King in writing under his seal, and sworn by his holy
Orders, that he will not use the said Legantine power in his Kingdom,
Countries, Lands and Dominions any longer then it shall please the King; and
that so soon as he is admonished of the Kings pleasure to the contrary he will
cease and forbear; and that whilst he does use it, it shall be no otherwise
exercised then according to the consent of and in conformity to the King,
without attemping any thing to the prejudice of the Decrees of General
Councils, the Franchises, Liberties, and Privileges of the Gallican Church,
and the Universities, and public Estates of the Realm. And to this end they
shall present the Letters of their Legation to the Court of Parliament, where
they shall be viewed, verified, published and registered with such Modifications
as that Court shall think fit for the good of the Realm; and all processes
shall proceed according to such restrictions, and no otherwise.

In these two Liberties, we find the Authority of the French King farther
extended, and the Papal power more limited, then our Author can be contented
the Regal Jurisdiction should be enlarged, and the Patriarchal confined by the
Reformed. What power the most Christian King claims in confirming Canons we may
learn from Petrus de Marca De Conc. l 6. c. 34. par. 2. Nunquam discedere
oportet ab hac certissima Regula, deliberationes Ecclesiae Gallicanae
considerari non posse aliter quam velut consilium Regi datum, easque executioni
non posse mandari absque consensu and confirmatione ejus.
who lays it down for a Rule which never fails, That the deliberations of the
Gallican Church can be looked upon no otherwise then as Counsel given to the
King; and that they cannot be put in execution without his consent and
confirmation. And he there says, that the King may praeside in Councils as
Tanquam caput, comme Chef Ibid.
Head. An ex co quod Suprema Canonum protectio ad Regem pertinet, sequatur eum
jubere posse ut observentur, non expectata etiam sententia Ecclesiae Gallicanae?
And in another place proposing to himself this Quaestion, Certum quidem est
earum constitutionum obseruationum fore sanctiorem, si conderentur cum generali
Cleri consensu; quoniam unusquisque eam rem obtinere modis omnibus cupit quam
ipse suo judicio comprobaverit. Nihilominus aeque certum est Regem ex sententia
Concilii sui, quod auget aut minuit prout ei lubet, posse latis edictis
decernere ut Canones observentur, ac circum stantias and modos necessarios
addere ad faciliorem eorum executionem, sive etiam ad veram eorum mentem
explicandam, eosque accommodare ad utilitatem Regni lib. 6. c. 36. par. 1.
Whether, since the supreme protection of the Canons does belong to the King,
it thence follows that He can command that they be observed without expecting
the sentence of the Gallican Church? He answers, * that it is indeed certain
that the Observation of them will be the more sacred, if they be made with the
Universal consent of the Clergy, because every one desires that that should
take place, which he himself approves of: But then, that it is aequally
certain, that the King with the advice of his Council, may by his Edicts
decree, that the Canons be observed, and may add such Modes and Circumstances
as are necessary for the better Execution of them, and accommodate them to the
Interest of the State. This Authority he confirms from the Examples of the first
Christian Emperors, and the former French Kings, and adds expressly Utuntur
adhuc eo jure Reges Christianissimi. Ib par. 3.
That the most Christian Kings still use that right. And now methinks the
revising of the Canons by the Kings of England, especially when humbly besought
to do it by the Clergy, should not be an Invasion of the Churches rights, when
the French Kings even without such Interposition of the Church, exercise the
same Right, and yet do, according to our Author, leave to the management of the
Clergy all power in Spirituals. I might here insist upon Collation of
Benefices, which the French Kings challenge by right of the Regale; but I shall
choose rather to mention the assembling of Councils, because a French King in
the last Century seems to have doubted whether his Clergy might convene without
his consent; as appears from that bold Speech of his Ambassador in the Council
of Trent, which because it gives us some insight into the freeness of that
Synod, I shall beg leave to transcribe the latter part of it from Goldastus
Collect. Constitut. Imperial. T. 3. p. 373 Pii quarti imperium detractamus,
quaecunque sint ejus judicia and sententiae rejicimus, respuimus, and
contemnimus. Et quanquam, Patres Sanctissimi, vestra omnium Religio, Vita, and
eruditio magnae apud Nos semper fuerit and erit Autoritatis, cum tamen nihil a
vobis, sed omnia magis Romae, quam Tridenti agantur, and quae hic publicantur
magis Pii Quarti placita, quam Concilii Tridentini decreta jure aestimentur,
denunciamus* and protestamur quaecunque in hoc conventu, hoc est, solo Pii nutu
and voluntate decernuntur and publicantur ea neque Regem Christianissimum
probaturum, neque Ecclesiam Gallicanam pro decreto Oecumenici Concilii
habituram. Interea quotquot estis Galliae Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates,
Doctores, Theologi, Vos omnes hinc abire Rex Christianissimus jubet, redituros
ut primum Deus Optimus Maximus Ecclesiae Catholicae in Generalibus Conciliis
antiquam formam and libertatem restituerit, Regi autem Christianissimo suam
dignitatem and Majestatem.
We refuse to be subject to the Command of Pius the 4th, All his judgments and
decrees we refuse, reject, and contemn; and although, most Holy Fathers, Your
Religion, Life, and Learning was ever and ever shall be of great Authority with
Us, Yet seeing You do nothing, but all things are managed rather at Rome, then
at Trent; and the things that are here published are rather the Placita of Pius
the 4th, then the Decrees of the Council of Trent, We denounce and protest here
before You all, that whatsoever things are decreed in this Assembly by the
will and pleasure of Pius, neither the Most Christian King will ever approve,
nor the French Church ever acknowledge for the Decrees of an Ecumenical
Council. In the mean time the Most Christian King commands all you his
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Doctors, and Divines to depart hence; then to
return, when it shall please God to restore to his Catholic Church the ancient
methods and liberty of General Councils, and to the Most Christian King his
Honor and Dignity. Now I leave it to the Reader to judge whether any Reformed
States ever assumed to themselves greater Authority over the Ecclesiastics,
then this R. Catholic Prince, or Whether ever any Protestant expressed himself
with greater warmth concerning this Council, then that Protesting Ambassador.
It might be easy to show how much power the Venetian Republic exercises in
Spirituals, had not this been done so lately by another Pen. But what has been
said may suffice to evince, that this Epistolographer imposed upon the
credulity of his Sir, when he told him, that he knew of no Ecclesiastical
powers denied to the Prince but which (or at least the chiefest of which) all
other Christian Princes, except those of the Reformed State, do forego to
exercise.

But our Discourser perhaps presumed his Friend a Stranger to sorreign affairs,
and therefore thought he might the more securely use a Latitude in his treating
of those; it remains therefore to examine whether he has been a more faithful
Relator of our own History, and what truth there is in his last Epistolary
assertion, that he knows not of any Ecclesiastical powers in this Discourse
denied to the Prince, but what the Kings of England have foregone before Henry
the 8th. Now whatever in relation to a power in Spirituals is in this Discourse
accused of Novelty seems easily reducible to these two Heads:

1st. A Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical denied to the Western Patriarch: as
appears by our Princes taking away all manner of Foreign Jurisdiction,
prohibiting all appeals to the Sea of Rome, all Bulls from it, and in general
all Intercourse with it.

2ly. The same Supremacy invested in the Sovereign; as appears by King Henry's
assuming the title of Head of the Church; by the Kings making Ecclesiastical
Laws; by that Synodical act of the Clergy not to assemble or promulgate any
Canons without his leave; by that power granted to the King to visit
Ecclesiastical persons, and to reform Errors and Heresies; by his collating to
Benefices without consent of the Clergy; and by hindering Excommunications in
foro externo.

Now in Answer to this charge of Novelty; It is confessed that the Pope did for
some Years usurp such a superiority; but then, as it is granted that he did de
facto claim such a power, so that it did de jure belong to him is denied; and
not only so, but farther we affirm, that he neither from the beginning
challenged such a power, nor was he afterward in so full possession of it, but
that our Princes have upon Occasion vindicated their own right against all
Papal, or, if he pleases, Patriarchal Encroachments. And here waving the
dispute of right I shall confine my self to matter of Fact, that being the only
case here controverted.

Where 1st of the Supremacy of the Western-Patriarch. That when Austin came
over to convert the Saxons, no such Supremacy was acknowledged by the British
Christians is evident from the celebrated Answer of Dinoth Abbot of Bangor to
Austin requiring such subjection. Notum sit Vobis etc. Spelm. Conc. p. 108.
Be it known unto you that we are all subject and obedient to the Church of
God, and the Pope of Rome; but so as we are also to every good and pious
Christian, viz. to love every one in his degree and place, in perfect Charity,
and to help every one by word and deed, to attain to be the Sons of God; and
for other Obedience I know none due to him whom you call the Pope, and as
little do I know by what right he can challenge to be Father of Fathers. As for
us we are under the rule of the Bishop of Caerleon upon Vske, who is to
overlook and govern us under God. This is farther manifest from the Spelm A. C.
601.
British Clergy twice refusing in full Synod after mature deliberation to own
any such subjection. That appeals to Rome were a thing unheard of till Anselms
time appears from the application of the Bishops and Barons to him to dissuade
him from such an attempt; Inauditum in regno suo esse and usibus ejus omnino
contrarium, quemlibet de Principibus and praecipue Te tale quid praesumere.
Eadm. p. 39.30.
telling him it was a thing unheard of in this Kingdom, that any of the Peers,
and especially one in his station should praesume any such thing. That Legates
from Rome were for 1100 Years unheard of in this Kingdom, we may learn from a
memorable passage in the same Historian concerning the Archbishop of Vienna
reported to have the Legantine power over England granted him A. C. 1100 Quod
per Angliam auditum in admirationem omnibus venit, Inauditum scilicet in
Britannia cuncti scientes quemlibet hominum super se vices Apostolicas gerere
nisi solum Archiepiscopum Cantuariae. Ead. p. 58. 41.
The News of which being come to England was very surprising to all people,
every one knowing it was a thing unheard of, that any one should have
Apostolical Jurisdiction over them, but the Archbishop of Canterbury. And the
event of that Legacy was suitable, Quapropter sicut venit, ita reversus est, a
Nemine pro Legato susceptus, uec in aliquo Legati officio functus. Ibid.
for as he came, so he returned, being taken by no one for a Legate, nor in any
thing discharging the office of a Legate. That the Church of Canterbury owned
no Superior Bishop to her own but Christ, appears from her being called, Ger.
Dorob. Coll. Hist. Angl. 1663. 24. Col. 1615. 60.
Omnium nostrum matter communis sub sponsi sui Jesu Christi dispositione; and in
another place, Matter omnium Anglicanarum Ecclesiarum, quae suo post Deum
proprio laetatur Pastore. That appeals to Rome were prohibited in King Henry
the 2ds time is manifest from the famous Capitula of Clarendon, amongst which
this is one Article. If any appeals shall happen they ought to proceed from the
Archdeacon to the Bishop, and from the Bishop to the Archbishop, and if the
Archbishop shall fail in doing Justice, the last Address is to be made to the
King. That Doctrines prejudicial to the Popes power were then publicly
maintained, appears from these Propositions amongst others censured by Becket.
1st. That none might appeal to the Sea Apostolic on any account without the
Kings leave. 2d. That it might not be lawful for an Archbishop or Bishop to
depart the Kingdom and come at the Popes Summons without the Kings leave. 3d.
That no Bishop might Excommunicate any who held of the King in capite, nor
Interdict his Officers without the Kings leave. Which propositions so censured
are selected out of the Capitula of Clarendon; to the Observation of which all
the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ecclesiastics (even Becket himself
amongst the rest, though afterward falling of) had obliged themselves by a
solemn Oath, acknowledging them to be the customs of the King's Predecessors;
to wit, Henry The 1st his Grandfather, and others, and that they ought to be
kept inviolable by all. To what party the Bishops were inclined in these
differences betwixt the King and Becket we cannot better learn then from
Baronius, whose severe animadversion on these Praelates, (wherein he teaches us
what Kings are to expect if they displease his Holiness, and how dreadful his
Fulminations be when they come out with full Apostolic vigor) the Reader may
peruse in the Episcopi Angliae suffraganei Sancti Thomae literis ejusdem sui
Archiepiscopi Apostolica legatione fungentis exagitati, resilientes, haud (ut
par erat) parere mandatis, salubres admonitiones suscipere, Catholicae
Ecclesiae utilitati consulere, vendicantes eam a miscrrima servitute
studuerunt, sed ex adverso oppositi pro Rege contra ipsum scriptis, verbis,
factisque repugnant, ac tantum abest ut (quod eorum muneris erat, ad quod and
suis eos literis excitaverat ipse Sanctus) adversus Regem pro Ecclesia starent,
redarguerent, and comminarentur; o^^entantes quae in arcu sagittae paratae
erant ad feriendum, censuras nimirum Ecclesiasticas ab Ecclesia Romana
Apostolico vigore prodeuntes, ut potius adversus eundem pro Ecclesiae liberate
pugnantem Sanctissimum Virum bella cierent, telis oppeterent jurgiorum, in
scandalum omnium ista audientium Episcoporum Orthodoxorum. Bar. An. A. C. 1167.
Margin. A like warm Expostulation upon these proceedings we meet with in
Stapleton (de tribus Thomis, in Thoma Cant.) Quid aliud hic Henricus secundus
tecte postulavit, quam quod Henricus Octavus completa jam malitia aperte u
surpavit, nempe ut supremum Ecclesiae caput in Anglia esset?
What did this Henry the 2d tacitly demand, but that which Henry the 8th
afterward openly usurped, viz. to be Supreme Head of the Church of England?
and again Quid hoc est aliud, nisi ut Rex Angliae sit apud suos Pap^?
what was this, but that the King of England should be Pope over his own
Subjects? So that according to this Author, Henry the 8th was not the first of
that name who pretended to be Supreme Head of the Church. It would be too
tedious here to recite the several Statutes made in succeeding Reigns against
the Popes Encroachments, viz. the 35 of Edw. 1 25 Edv. 3. Stat, de
provisoribus. 27 Ed. 3. c. 1. 38 Ed. 3. c. 1.2. 4. stat. 2. 2 Ric. 2. c. 3. 12
R. 2. c. 15. 13 R. 2. stat. 2. cap. 2. 16 R. 2. c. 5. 2 Hen. 4. cap. 3. 2 Hen.
4. cap. 4. 6 Hen. 4. cap. 1. which speaks of horrible mischiefs and a damnable
custom brought in of new in the Court of Rome. 7 Hen. 4. cap. 6.8. 9 Hen. 4.
cap. 8. 3 H. 5. c. 4. Which see collected by Rastal under the title of
Provision and Praemunire. fol. 325. It may suffice to add the Opinion of our
Cokes Inst. l. 4. c. ^4.
Lawyers that the Article of the 25 of Hen. 8. c. 19. concerning the
prohibition of appeals to Rome is declaratory of the ancient laws of the Realm;
1. Eliz. c. 1.
and accordingly the Laws made by King Henry the 8th for extinguishing all
foreign power are said to have been made for the Restoring to the Crown of
this Realm the Ancient right and Jurisdictions of the same. Which rights are
destructive of the Supremacy of the Pope, as will farther appear by our 2d
Inquiry, how far the Regal power extended in Causes Ecclesiastical? Where

1st. As to the title of Head of the Church, we find that Twisd c. 5. par. 2.
King Edgar was reputed, and wrote himself Pastor Pastorum, the Vicar of
Christ, and by his Laws and Canons assured the world he did not in vain assume
those titles; Chap. 5. par. 14. c. 6. par. 8.
That our Forefathers styled their Kings Patrons Defenders, Governors? Tutors,
and Protectors of the Church. And the Kings Regimen of the Church is thus
expressed by King Edward the Confessor in his laws. Rex quia Vicarius summi Regis
est, ad hoc est constitutus, ut regnum terrenum, and populum Domini, and super
omnia Sanctam veneretur Ecclesiam ejus, and regat, and ab injuriosis defendat.
Leg. Edv. Conf. apud Lamb. Where it is plain that he challenges the power of
Governing the Church as being the Vicar of God, so that it was but an Artifice
in Pope Nicholas the Second to confer on the same King as a privilege
delegated by him, what he claimed as a right derived immediately from God Vobis
and posteris vestris Regibus Angliae committimus advocationem ejusdem loci, and
omnium totius Angliae Ecclesiarum, and ut vice nostra cum Concilio Episcoporum
statuatis ubique quae justa sunt.
. To you (says that Pope to the Confessor) and your Successors, the Kings of
England we commit the Advowson of that place, and power in our stead to order
things with the advice of your Bishops. Where by the way if we may argue ad
hominem this Concession gives the King of England as much right to the
Supremacy over this Church, as a like Grant from another Pope to the Earl of
Sicily, gives the King of Spain to his Spiritual Monarchy over that Province.
But the Kings of England derive their Charter from a higher Power. They
challenge from St. Peter himself to be 1 Pet. II. 13.
Supreme, and from St. Paul that Romans XIII. 1.
every Soul should be subject to them. And the extent of their Regal power may
be learned from St. Austin who teaches us In hoc Reges, sicut eis divinitus
praecipitur, Deo serviunt in quantum Reges sunt, si in Regno suo bona jubeant,
mala prohibeant, non solum quae pertinent ad humanam societatem, verum etiam
quae pertinent ad divinam Religionem. Aug. contra Cresc^n l. 3. c. 51.
that the Divine right of Kings, as such, authorized them to make Laws not only
in relation to Civil Affairs, but also in matters appertaining to divine
Religion. In pursuance of which.

2ly. As to the power of making Ecclesiastical Laws; That the Kings of England
have made Laws not only concerning the External Regimen of the Church, but also
concerning the proper Functions of the Clergy, namely the Keys of Order and
Jurisdiction, so far as to regulate the Use of them and oblige the Persons
entrusted with them to perform their respective Offices, is evident to any one,
who shall think it worth his leisure to peruse such Laws yet extant. A
Collection of the Laws made by Ina, Alfred, Edward, Ethelstan, Edmund, Edgar,
Ethelred; Canutus, and others we have, published by Mr. Lambard, in which we
meet with Sanctions concerning Faith, Baptism, Sacrament of the Lord's Supper
Bishops, Priests, Marriage, Observance of Lent, appointing of Festivals, and
the like. And here it may not be unseasonable to urge an Authority which our
Editor cannot justly decline; I mean Mr. Spelman jun. in his Book de Vita
Alfredi written by him in English but Published in Latin by the Master of
University College in Oxford, in the Name of the Alumni of that Society. This
Author, speaking of the Laws made by King Alfred in Causes Ecclesiastical,
makes this Inference from them. Hae leges hactenus observationem merentur, quod
ex iis constat, etiam illis temporibus, Reges Saxonicos Alfredum and Edvardum
sensisse se Suprematum habere tam in Ecclesiasticos, quam in Laicos, neque
Ecclesiam, quae in ipsorum ditione esset, esse quid peregrinum, vel Principi
alicui extraneo subditam, domi autem Civitatis legibus solutam, quod Anselmus,.
Beckettus, aliique deinceps insecuti acriter eontenderunt. Vita Alfr. lib. 2.
par. 12.
These Laws do therefore deserve our particular Observation, because from them
it is evident that the Saxon Kings Alfred and Edward were of Opinion that they
had a Supremacy as well over Ecclesiastical persons as Laymen; and that the
Church which was within their Dominions was not out of their Jurisdiction, or
subject to a foreign Power and exempted from the Laws of the Country, as
Becket, Anselm, and others afterward fiercely contended. And again; Ex ipsius
(Alfredi) legibus constat vel Suprematum ilium Romanum istis quidem temporibus
nondum eo modo, quo posterioribus saeculis, sese extulisse, scilicet ut
Christiani Principes angustius regnarent; vel si eatenus pertigerit, non tamen
eo usque se ei adjeci sse Alfred. lb.
From his (King Alfred's) laws it is evident either that the Roman Supremacy
was not yet risen to that height as in after Ages, so as to lessen the
Jurisdiction of Christian Princes, or if it was, yet that King Alfred did not
so far subject himself to it. Nay so far was King Alfred from paying any such
Subjection that we are told Rex viam ingressus est, qua universali isti
Imperio, quod crassis temporibus recens extruxerant (Pontificii) and absolvere
deproperarant, ruinam and excidium, minaretur. l. 3. par. 98.
He found out away to ruin and destroy that Universal Empire which the
Romanists in those dark Ages had newly founded and were hastening to finish.
Which is spoken in reference to his restoring the second Commandment expunged
out of the Decalogue, of which thus that Author; Neque hoc sane penitus
omittendum, videtur, quod inter Decalogum recitandum secundum quidem Praeceptum
de sculptilibus non faciendis ex usu secundi Concilii Niceni ante centum annos
celebrati suo loco plane praetermissum est Veruntamen ut ex ipso Sanctorum
Bibliorum contextu quod deest suppleretur, post decimum quod dicimus mandatum
aliud insuperad justum Numerum absolvendum, adjicitur. Non tibi facies Deos
aureos. Quod, cum ab ipso Rege subjungutur, Ecclesiam jam turn corrupti
dogmatis arguit, rectae autem confessionis Regi testimonium perhibet. l. 2.
par. 5.
And here it may not be passed over, that in reciting the Decalogue, the second
Commandment concerning the not making of graven Images was according to the use
of the 2d Nicene Council, which was celebrated. am 100 Years before, in its
place omitted. But that this defect might be supplied out of the context of the
Holy Bible, after that which we call the Tenth Commandment, another was added
to complete the just Number, in these words, Thou shall not make to thy self
any Gods of Gold; Which being added by the King himself as it does argue the
Church to have been corrupt in her Doctrine, so it is a testimony of the Kings
Orthodoxy. From which one Instance it is plain that, contrary to the
pretensions of our Author, King Edward the 6th was not the 1st that took upon
him to Reform Liturgies; for King Alfred here restores the Decalogue to its
primitive Integrity: to judge what is agreeable to the word of God; for He
supply's the defect, which he finds in the Missal, from the Scriptures: to
judge contrary to the Determinations of the Church; for the Church is here said
to have been corrupt in that Doctrine in which the King was Orthodox; to alter
the Constitutions of General Councils because repugnant to the law of God; for
this Omission of the Commandment was ex usu secundi Concilii Niceni, and the
Worshipping of Images here forbidden was introduced by that Council which the
Romanists acknowledge General. These passages cited I take to be some of the
perperam scripta which the Publisher of that life mentions in the Errores
(Authoris) retinuimus, and perperam scripta medicari potius, quam tollere
maluimus.
Praeface. And accordingly we find that whatsoever is advanced against the
Papal Authority in the Text is qualified in the Comment, and it is plain that
King Alfred was a greater Adversary to the power of the Pope then his Alumnus
the Annotator; so that it is matter of surprise to find him appear in the
Frontispiece of this Treatise of Church Government, who was so great an Enemy
to the Anti-regal designs of it.

3ly. As to the power of calling Synods, we need no more to clear this point
then the very words of the Statute by him urged: 25 Hen. 8. c. 19. Where it is
said, that the Kings Humble and Obedient Subjects the Clergy of the Realm of
England had acknowledged according, to the truth that the Convocation of the
same Clergy is, always has been, and ought to be assembled only by the Kings
Writ: Which is farther evident from the ancient form of calling and dissolving
Synods by a Writ in each case directed to the Archbishop of Canterbury, as may
be seen in Dr. Heylin Ref. Justif. p. 1. c. 2.
. The Clergy did indeed before this act of King Henry 8th promulge and execute
those Canons by their own authority, which they here promise not to put in
Execution without the King's consent But since no such Canons could be put in
ure till made; nor be made but by the Clergy assembled; nor the Clergy be
assembled but only by the King's Writ; this executing of Canons did in effect
as much before this Statute as after depend upon the King's pleasure.

4ly. As for visiting Ecclesiastical Persons, and reforming Errors and
Haeresies by proper Delegates, this is a necessary consequence from the
Supremacy they challenged. Without such a Power how shall the Confessor regere
Ecclesiam, and ab injuriosis defendere? If such a Power as this be inconsistent
with the Principles even of Roman-Catholiques, Whence is it that we find
Articles sent from Queen Mary to Bp. Bonner to be put in Execution by him and
his Officers within his Diocese? Whence is it that we find a Commission
directed to some Bishops to deprive the Reformed Bishops? But to speak of
former times, if our Kings had not such a Power, Whence is it that in King
Henry the fourth's Reign upon the Increase of Lollardy We find the Clergy thus
petitioning that Prince in the Names of the Clergy and Praelates of the Kingdom
of England, Quatenus inclytissimorum progenitorum and antecessorum vestrorum
laudabilia vestigia gratiose considerantes dignetur vestra Regia celsitudo pro
conservatione dictae Ecclesiae Anglicanae ad Dei laudem etc. super novitatibus
and excessibus praedictis in praesenti Parliamento providered de remedio
opportuno. Tw. c. 5. par. 19.
That according to the Example of his Royal Predecessors He would find out some
remedy for the Haeresies and Innovations then praevailing? Whence is it that we
find a Commission from that King as Defender of the Catholic Faith to empower
certain Persons to seize upon Haeretical Books, and bring them before his
Council, and such as after Proclamation be found to hold such Opinions, to be
called and examined before two Gommissioners, who were of the Clergy. Ibid.


5thly. As for Collation of Benefices. Our learned Lawyers assure us that all
the Bishoprics are of the King's Foundation, and that they were Originally
Donative, not Elective; and that the full right of Investitures was in the
Sovereign who signified his pleasure therein per traditionem baculi and annuli
by the delivery of a Ring and Crosier Staff to the Person by him elected and
Nominated for that Office. Cokes Instit. l. 3. S. 648.
Accordingly we find in the Statute of Provisors Ed. 3. A. 28. "the King called
Advower Parantount of all Benefices which be of the Advowrie of people of Holy
Church. And it is there said, That Elections were first granted by the King's
Progenitors upon a certain form and Eondition, as to demand License of the King
to choose, and after Election to have his Royal Assent, and not in other
manner. That if such Conditions were not kept, the thing ought in reason to
resort to its first Nature.

Lastly as for Hindering Excommunications in fore externo, It is one of the
Articles of Clarendom; That None that hold of the King in capite nor any of his
Household Servants may be Excommunicated, nor their Land interdicted, unless our
Lord the King, if he be in the Kingdom, be first treated with, or his Justice,
if he be abroad; so that he may do what is Right concerning him. And amongst
the Articuli Cleri. c. 7. It is complained that the King's Letters used to be
directed to Ordinaries that have wrapped their Subjects in Sentence of
Excommunication that they should assoil them by a certain day, or else that
they do appear and answer, wherefore they excommunicated them. This short
account, however imperfect, may suffice to show that the Regal power in
Spirituals challenged by King Henry the 8th was not quitted by his
Predecessors. And if the Reader desires a more full account of these things I
shall refer him to Dr. Hammond's Dispatcher Dispatched c. 2. Sect. 5. Bishop
Bramhal's just Vindication c. 4. Repl. to the Bishop of Chalcedon c. 4. Sch.
guarded c. 12. Sect. 3. as also to Sr. Roger Twisden in his Historical
vindication of the C. of England in point of Schism; Which Learned Author has
by a through insight into History, Law Books, Registers, and other Monuments of
Antiquity enabled himself to give full and ample satisfaction to every
unpraejudic'd Reader concerning this Subject; and to convince him that this
Author knew very little either of the English History or of his own Book, if He
knew not of any Ecclesiastical powers in this Discourse denied to the Prince,
but which were foregone by the Kings of England before Henry the Eighth.

As for what he adds, that no more Supremacy in such Ecclesiastical matters, Ep.
as are delegated by Christ to the Clergy and are unalienable by them to any
Secular power, can belong to the Princes of one time or of one Nation, then do
to any other Prince of a former Time, or a diverse Nation, We willingly
acknowledge it, since no such powers belong to any Prince, at any time; or of
any Nation. But then there is a Supremacy in Ecclesiastical matters delegated
by God to the Prince, which may be invaded by a Forreigner under a forged
pretense of his being Head of the Church; and here Secular Laws may be made for
the protection of such Rights, and for the punishment of those who shall either
invade them, or vindicate such Invasion. And that person who under praetext of
maintaining the Churches rights shall impugn the just Authority of his Sovereign
may be more a disloyal Subject in these days, when this Authority is by the Laws
vindicated from Foreign Usurpation, then he would have been in those days,
when such Usurpation was tolerated, and connived at.

Having dwelt hitherto on the Epistle, and discovered so much Insincerity in
that, which yet was to bespeak the Reader's good Opinion of the ensuing
Discourse, We have no great reason to expect any fairer dealing in the
prosecution of his design. And here I shall be excused if I be the shorter in
the Examination of his Theses, both because they are such as being proposed
only and not proved, it lies in our power to accept, or reject them at
pleasure; as also because they have already undergone the Censure of a Noble
Pen, and have not been able to abide a fair Trial. Some of them are so
ambiguously expressed that they may be either true or false according to the
different construction they are capable of. The fals-hood of others is
self-evident; But then for the better vending of these, some truths are
intermixed according to the policy of Luther's Antagonist observed by his
Biographer Consid. concerning Luther 48. p. 90.
, Who, to make his bad wares saleable, diligently mixeth some small stock of
good with evil, so to make this more current, and all easily swallowed down
together by the imprudent and credulous.

Another Artifice much practiced by our Author is that he lays down his
Propositions in general terms, but afterward restrains them by such
limitations, which if adhered to would make them utterly disserviceable to his
Cause; but then when they come to be applied, the Theses are referred to at
large without any regard to such limitations. Thus when in his first Thesis he
has proposed That it is not in the just power of the Prince to deny giving the
Ministers of Christ license to exercise their Office,. 3. p 4.
and their Ecclesiastical Censures in his Dominions. He means he says in
general, for he meddles not with the Prince, his denying some of them to do
these things whilst he admits others. Now if this Restraint be observed, then
all which he would establish from this Thesis will come to Nothing. For he will
not, I believe, presume to say that the Reforming Princes ever laid a general
Interdict upon all the Clergy to prohibit them the exercise of their
Ecclesiastical Functions. This is an Act which the Reformation detests, and
which we leave to the charitableness of the Universal Pastor, who by Virtue of
our Savior's Command of Pasce oves; challenges to himself a power of depriving
the flock of all Spiritual food. Thus again, When in his third Thesis he has
asserted that the Secular Prince cannot eject from the exercise of their Office
in his Dominions any of the Clergy,. 5. p. 12.
nor consequently the Patriarch from any Authority which he stands possessed of by
Ecclesiastical Canons, He restrains such Canons to those only that cannot
justly be pretended to do any wrong to the Civil Government. Now he knows that
all Canons which would obtrude upon us a foreign usurped Authority are by us
pretended (whether justly or not, they will best judge who impartially weigh
our Reasons) injurious to the Civil Government. Another Limitation of this
Thesis is that the Civil power may judge, and eject,. 8. p. 16.
and disauthorize Spiritual Persons for Moral and Civil Misdemeanors damageable
to the Commonwealth; But this Limitation is forgot when from this Thesis He
would prove the ejection of the Bishops, in Queen Elizabeth's time unlawful;
For their Deprivation was for refusing the Oath of Supremacy made first by
Roman Catholics in King Henry the 8th's time, and revived by Queen Elizabeth;
so that the Justice of it depends merely on the Right of the Civil power to
make Oaths for the better security of their Government, and to impose such
Penalties as are expressed in the Law on the Violators; and if such Refusal be
damageable to the Commonwealth (as it was then judged) then the Deprivation of
those Refusers will be justifiable according to his own Principles. Thus again
in his 8th Thesis When he has laid down, That as for things of mere
Ecclesiastical Constitution,. 14. p. 18.
Neither National Synod, nor Secular power may make any New Canons contrary to
the Ecclesiastical Constitutions of former Superior Councils, nor reverse those
formerly made by them. He restrains it to those only as neither the Prince can
show some way prejudicial to his Civil Government, nor the National Synod can
show more prejudicial to their particular Church, then the same Constitutions
are to the rest of Christian Churches. (Where by the way methinks it should
suffice if they were aequally prejudicial, for one Church is never the less
wronged because another suffers.) Now we desire no more then the benefit of
this limitation; for if the Prince may reverse such Constitutions when
prejudicial to Civil Government, and the National Synod when praejudicial to
their particular Church, and each of These are Judges of such praejudice, (for
neither does Aequity admit, nor does He appoint any other Arbiter) then each of
these have as much power granted them as they challenge, which is only to alter
such Constitutions as are prejudicial to them. Having praemis'd thus much in
general, and cautioned the Reader against this piece of Sophistry, which runs
through the greatest part of this Discourse, I shall now proceed to a
particular survey of his Theses.

As for the first and second, I shall at present grant him that favor which he
seems to request of all his Readers, i.e. suppose them to be true, and shall
content my self only to examine what Inferences he deduces from them. And here I
cannot but commend his Policy for setting his Conclusions at so great a
distance from his Praemisses, for they are commonly such as would have by no
means agreed to stand too nigh together.

From his first and second Thesis, that the Clergy have power to determine
Controversies in pure matters of Religion, and to judge what is divine truth,
what are Errors; and that they cannot alienate this Power to the Secular
Prince;. 22. p. 29.
he infers That that Synodical Act of the Clergy in K. Henry the Eighth's time,
whereby they promise not to Assemble without the King's Writ, nor when
Assembled to execute any Canons without the King's consent, is unlawful. Now it
is to be observed that the Clergy neither do deny that they have a Power to
determine Controversies in pure matters of Religion, which is what the first
Thesis would prove; nor do they transfer such a Power on the King, which might
be against the Tenor of the second. The utmost which can be deduced hence is,
That the Clergy did for prudential motives limit themselves in the Exercise of
one branch of their Spiritual Power; and it will be difficult for this Author
to prove that He, who has a power jure divino, may not by humane Laws be
limited in the Use of it. Husbands have a power over their Wives, Fathers over
their Children, and Masters over their Servants by the Law of God, and yet this
power may be regulated by the Laws of the Land.. 27. p. 36.
Thus the Priest has a power to bind and loose from our Savior's Commission,
and yet according to this Author, before the Reformation the Inferior Clergy
might not exercise any Church Censure contrary to the Commands of their lawful
Spiritual Superior. Thus also if a General Council have power to determine
matters of Faith, then according to his Principles they have power to convene
in order to such Determination, and this power of theirs is unalienable; and
yet the Romanists will not allow that such Conventions may be made at pleasure,
but that the hic and nunc are determinable by the Pope, who only has power to
indict Councils, and to give Authority to those decrees, which yet derive their
power from the Council's being infallible, and from the Holy Ghost assisting
them.

Another Act, which from the same Thesis he accuses of Injustice, is the
Clergy's beseeching the King's Highness that the Constitutions and Canons
Provincial and Synodal,. 25. p. 31.
which be thought prejudicial to the King's Prerogative Royal, or repugnant to
the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, or to be otherwise overmuch onerous to his
Highness and his Subjects may be committed to the judgment of his Highness, and
of 32 Persons, 16 of the Temporally, and 16 of the Clergy of this Realm to be
chosen and appointed by the King's Majesty, and that such Canons, as shall be
thought by the more part of them worthy to be annulled, shall be made of no
value, and such other of the Canons as shall be approved to stand with the Law
of God etc. shall stand in power. Now it is to be considered that the Laws,
which the Clergy here desire may be revised, are of a far different Nature, and
therefore the Inspection of them may well be committed to different Judges.
Some of them were supposed prejudicial to the King's Praerogative Royal, or
repugnant to the Laws of the Realm, and here the Lay-Commissioners, being
persons of the upper and lower House of Parliament (see the Stat.) were, the
best Judges; Of others it was to be inquired Whether they were agreeable to the
word of God or not, and here the Clergy were ready to give their Determination.
And although they both acted in a joint Commission yet no good reason seems
assignable why both Lay and Ecclesiastical Judges should be appointed, but
that, the matters to be examined being of different cognizance, those which
related to Civil Affairs should be determined by the Temporalty, those which
were of a Spiritual Nature by the Spiritualty. And if so, then the deciding of
these matters is not transferred from the Spiritualty to the Temporalty, but
from one part of the Clergy to another. And this He himself, after all his
descants upon this Act, confesses, For, whatever sense the words in the
Praeface of this Act were or may be extended to,. 26.10.
I do not think the Clergy at first intended any such thing, as to make the
King or his Commissioners Judges of matters of Faith or Divine truth: and for
this Opinion of his He gives us his Reasons in that, and the subsequent pages.

Another Act, which is by this Author judged contrary to his first Thesis, is
that Statute of King Henry the eighth which orders that no speaking, holding,
or doing against any Laws called Spiritual Laws made by Authority of the Sea of
Rome, which be repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, 34. p. 39.
or the King's Praerogative shall be deemed to be Haeresie, from which he
infers that the King and Parliament undertake to be Judges of Haeresie. Now the
King and Parliament do not here in my Opinion take upon them to decide matters
of Faith, but only to Enact that in such a case the Subject shall not suffer
the Punishment usually inflicted on Haereticks; Whether such speaking or doing
be Haeresie or not, they have power to ordain that it shall not be deemed so i.
e. the Speaker shall not suffer as an Haeretick. Something parallel to this we
have in that Statute of much concernment (to use our Author's expression of
another Act) made 23. Eliz. c. 1. Wherein it is enacted that The Persons who
shall withdraw any of the Queens Majesty's Subjects from the Religion
established by Law to the Romish Religtion, shall be to all intents adjudg'd as
Traitors, and shall suffer as in cases of High Treason, and the like of Persons
willingly reconciled. Where without disputing whether every such Reconciler, or
Reconciled, is necessarily for that Act ipso facto a Traitor, all that is here
enacted is that he shall suffer as such; For it is undoubtedly within the reach
of the Civil Power to ordain where they will inflict or not inflict their
Secular Punishments, without being accountable for this to any Authority under
God's. And it seems very hard that if a Subject expresses himself, or acts
against such Laws of a Forreigner as are repugnant to the Laws of his own
Country, there the Prince cannot exempt him from a Writ de Haeretico comburendo
without invading the Churches right.

Another Act condemned by Virtue of his 1st and 2d Theses is The Convocation's
granting to certain persons to be appointed by the King's Authority to make
Ecclesiastical laws,. 43. p. 56.
and pursuant to this, 42 Articles of Religion published by the Authority of
King Edward in the 6th Year of his Reign. Now not to engage my self in a
dispute Whether these Articles were not really what in the Title praefix'd they
are said to be? Articuli de quibus in Synodo London, A. D. 1552. ad tollendam
opinionum dissentionem, and consensum verae Religionis firmandum inter
Episcopos and alios eruditos Viros convenerat, Regia autoritate in lucem editi,
I shall only accept of what is by him granted that de illis convenerat inter
Episcopos and alios eruditos Viros qui erant pars aliqua de Synodo London..
166. p. 187.
So that here is only a part of the Synod employed in drawing up these
Articles, and not any Jurisdiction Spiritual transferred from Ecclesiastial
persons to Secular, which was by him to have been proved.

Another Inference, which he deduces from these Theses, is the Unlawfulness of
the Oath of Supremacy.. 185. p. 214.
Now how far the Regal Supremacy is by us extended, will best be learnt from
our Articles. Art. 37.
The King's Majesty has the chief power in this Realm of England, and other his
Dominions: Unto whom the chief Government of all Estates of this Realm, whether
they be Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all causes does appertain, and is not or
ought not to be subject to any foreign Jurisdiction. So far for the extent of
this power; but now for the restraint. Where we attribute to the King's Majesty
the chief Government, by which Titles we understand the minds of some
slanderous folks to be offended, We give not to our Prince the ministering
either of God's word, or of the Sacraments, the which thing the Injunctions
also, lately set forth by Q. Elizabeth do most plainly testify, but that only
Prerogative which We see to have been given always to all Godly Princes in Holy
Scriptures by God himself, that is, that they should rule all Estates and
degrees committed to their charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or
Temporal, and restrain with the Civil Sword the Stubborn and evil doers. It is
therefore by our Author to be proved that they who give no more to their
Prince, then has been given always to all Godly Princes in Holy Scripture by
God himself, do alienate to the Secular Governor any Authority or Office which
they (the Clergy) have received and been charged with by Christ, with a command
to execute the same to the end of the World; which being a Contradiction I
leave it to him to reconcile.

That by this Oath, or any other Act of Queen Elizabeth a greater Power was
either assumed by her self, or given to her by Others, then is consistent with
that Authority that is given by our Savior to the Church will be very difficult
for any Reasonable man to conceive who shall have recourse to the Injunction of
this Queen to which this very Article refers us; Sparrow's Collection page 83.
Land. 1684.
Where she declares that she neither does nor ever will challenge any Authority,
but what was challenged and lately used by the Noble Kings of famous memory
King Henry the 8th, and King Edward the 6th, which is and was of Ancient time
due to the Imperial Crown of this Realm; that is, under God to have Sovereignty
and Rule over all manner of Persons born within these her Realms, Dominions,
and Countries, of what Estate either Ecclesiastical or Temporal soever they be;
so as no other foreign Power shall or ought to have any Superiority over them.
And if any Person that has conceited any other sense of the form of the said
Oath, shall accept the same Oath with this Interpretation, sense, or meaning;
Her Majesty is well pleased to accept every such in that behalf as her good and
Obedient Subjects; and shall acquit them of all manner of penalties contained
in the act therein mentioned, against such as shall peremptorily and
obstinately refuse to take the same Oath. So that it is evident from this
Injunction that it is no way here stated what Authority belongs to the Church,
and what to the Civil Magistrate, farther then that the Queen (as justly she
might) challenged what was due of Ancient time to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm, and neither did nor would challenge more; but what that was, is not here
determined; and she is content without such Determination, if any Person would
take this Oath in such a sense as only to exclude all foreign Jurisdiction
whether Ecclesiastical or Civil.

Another Act which He finds repugnant to his his 1st. page 36.
Thesis is King Henry the Eth's claiming a right that no Clergyman, being a
Member of the Church of England, should exercise the power of the Keys in his
Dominions in any Cause or on any Person without his leave and appointment. But
it is to be remembered that the Ecclesiastical Censures asserted to belong to
the Clergy in the first Thesis have reference to the things only of the next
world; but the censures here spoken of, are such as have reference to the
things of this world. The Habitual Jurisdiction of Bishops flows, we confess,
from their Ordination; but the Actual exercise thereof in public Courts after
a coercive manner is from the gracious Concessions of Sovereign Princes.

From the 1st and 2d Thesis he farther condemns the taking away the Patriarch's
Authority for receiving of Appeals, page 99.
and exercising final Judicature in Spiritual Controversies, as also the taking
away the final judging and decision of such Controversies not only from the
Patriarch in particular, but also from all the Clergy in general, not making
the Archbishop of Canterbury or Convocation, but himself or his Substitutes
the Judges thereof. For which he refers us to Stat. 25. H. 8.19. c. But in that
Statute I find no mention of a Patriarch, or Spiritual Controversies, but only
that in causes of Contention having their commencement within the Courts of
this Realm no Appeal shall be made out of it to the Bishop of Rome, but to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and for want of Justice in his Courts to the King in
Chancery; Upon which a Commission shall be directed to such Persons as shall be
appointed by the King definitively to determine such Appeals. Here is nothing
of determining Controversies in pure matters of Religion, of deciding what is
Gods word, and divine Truth, What are Errors in the faith or in the practice of
Gods Worship, and Service, nor any of the other Spiritual powers by him
enumerated in the 1st Thesis; Or if any such Quaestions should be involved in
the Causes to be tried, Why may not the Commissioners, if Secular, judge
according to what has been praedetermin'd by the Clergy? or let us suppose a
case never yet determined, How does he prove a power of judging in such causes
transferred on secular Persons, since if Occasion required, the Delegates might
be Persons Ecclesiastical?

But not only the Acts of State and Church, but the Opinions of our Doctors are
to be examined by his Test, and therefore from the same Theses he censures that
Assertion of Dr. Heylin Heylins Ref. Justified, part. 1.. 6.
p 240.
, that it is neither fit nor reasonable that the Clergy should be able by their
Synodical Acts to conclude both Prince and People in Spiritual matters, until
the stamp of Royal Authority be imprinted on them. Now it is plain to any one
that views the Context, that the Dr. speaks of such a concluding the Prince and
people in matters Spiritual, as has influence on their Civil rights. For he
there discourses of the Clergy under King Henry obliging themselves not to
execute those Ecclesiastical Canons without the Kings consent which formerly
they had put in Execution by their own Authority. But the Canons so executed had
the force of Civil Laws, and the Violators of them were obnoxious to Secular
punishments. The Dr. therefore very justly thought it unreasonable any should
be liable to such Punishments without His consent, who only has the power of
inflicting them; Nor is this inconsistent with our Authors first Thesis (had he
at so great a distance remembered it) which extends Church-Autority only to
Ecclesiastical Censures, which have reference to things not of this, but the
next World.

These are the Inferences which I find deduced, from his first and second
Theses in the several parts of this Discourse, which had they been as
conclusive, as they are false, yet I do not find but that his own party (if
that be the Roman Catholic) had suffered most by them. For if the Supremacy
given to King Henry was so great an Invasion of the Churches right, what shall
we think of that Roman Catholic Clergy, who so Sacrilegiously invested him
with this Spiritual power? If that Synodical Act was betraying the trust which
the Clergy had received from Christ, what shall we think of those Pastors, who
so unfaithfully managed the Depositum of their Savior? If denying the Popes
Authority was so piacular a Crime, what Opinion shall we entertain of those
Religious Persons in Monasteries, who professing a more then ordinary Sanctity,
and being obliged by the strictest Vows of Obedience so Burn Ref. l. 3. p. 182.
resolutely abjured it? What of those Learned in the Convocatis undique dictae
Academiae Theologis, habitoque complurium biorum spatio ac deliberandi tempore
sasatis amplo, quo interim cum omni qua potuimus diligentia, Justitiae zelo,
religione and conscientia incorrupta perscruta remur tam Sacrae Scripturae
libros quam super iisdem approbatissimos Interpretes, and eos quidem saepe and
saepius a nobis evolutos, and exactissime collatos, repetitos, and examinatos,
deinde and disputationibus solennibus palam ac public habitis and celebratis
tandem in hanc Sententiam unanimiter omnes convenimus ac concordes fuimus viz.
Romanum Episcopum majorem aliquam Jurisdictionem non habere sibi a Deo collatam
in sacra Scriptura in hoc Regno Angliae quam alium quemvis Episcopum. Antiq.
Oxon lib. 1. page 259.
University, who after a solemn debate, and serious disquisition of the cause,
so peremptorily defined against it? What of the Ref. l. 2. p. 142.
Whole Body of the Clergy, whose proper Office it is to determine such
Controversies, Page 2.
and to judge what is Gods Word, and divine Truth, what are Errors, who in full
Synod so Unanimously rejected it? What of the leading part of those Prelates,
Ibid. p. 137.
Gardener, Bonner, and Tonstal, who Wrote, Preached, and Framed Oaths against
it? What of the Ibid. p. 144.
Nobles and Commons, Persons of presumed Integrity, and Honor, who prepared
the Bill against it? What lastly of the Sovereign a declared Enemy of the
Lutheran Doctrine, and Defender of the Roman Catholic Faith, who past that
Bill into a Law, and guarded the Sanction of it with Capital punishments? If
all these acted sincerely, then it is not the Doctrine of the Reformed, but of
the Romanists which is written against: If not, we seem to have just
praejudices against a Religion which had no greater influence over its
Professors, then to suffer a whole Nation of them perfidiously to deny that,
which if it be any part, is a main Article of their Faith? But to return to our
Author, What shall we judge of his skill in Controversy who from Principles
assumed gratis, draws Deductions which by no means follow, and which if they
did follow, would be the greatest Wound to that cause which he pretends to
Patronize? But because he has offered something under this first Thesis, why
the Prince should pay an implicit Obedience to his Clergy, I come now to
consider it. He tells us therefore that the Prince professes Himself with the
rest of the Christians as to the knowing of Spiritual Truths a Subject and
Scholar of the Church; and he earnestly claims a Supreme power and confesses
an Obligation from God over all Persons in all Spiritual Matters to bind them
upon Temporal Punishments to Obedience of the Churches (or Clergy's)
Determinations and Decrees. But here he either willingly misrepresents, or
ignorantly mistakes our Principles; For the Prince claims a supreme power over
all persons, to bind them by temporal Punishments to the Obedience not of the
Churches, but of Christ's Laws; or of the former, no farther then they are
agreeable with the latter. But, says He, if the Prince means here only where
himself first judges such their Decrees Orthodox and right, this power is in
effect claimed to bind all persons in all Spiritual matters only to his own
Decrees; whilst he praetends an Obligation both of himself and His Subjects to
the Churches. But, what if the Prince judge such Decrees neither Orthodox nor
right? Must he here give them the Authority of Civil Sanctions? This is to
establish Iniquity by a Law; and a power is claimed in effect to bind all
persons to the Decrees of the Clergy, whilst, as has been said, He praetends an
Obligation of Himself and Subjects to the Laws of Christ. But he goes on and
tells us, That all Texts of the New Testament do ordain Obedience of Churchmen
to the Pagan Princes, that then Reigned, no less then to others. From which I
suppose he would infer an exemption from Obeying the Prince in Spiritualibus.
But supposing that all Texts do aequally ordain Obedience to Princes Pagan, and
Christian, yet the Obedience to a Christian Prince will be of greater latitude,
since because he professes the true Religion, his Commands in Spirituals not
contradicting our Saviors will exact our Compliance. Obedience in licitis is
all the Subject ow's to a Prince either Christian on Infidel; but the Christian
Prince will oftener challenge my Obedience, because he more rarely transgresses
the bounds of licita. If as he adds, all Princes are obliged with the Sword
which God has given them to protect and defend his true Religion, and Service
in their Dominions, whenever it offers it self to them; Since many Religions
offer themselves, it becomes the Prince to take Care which is the true; and not
to take, whatever is offered; which would be utterly destructive of our Authors
Principles. As for the Acts of Ancient Councils obliging even without the
Emperors consent, We own their Obligation over their proper Subjects, so far
as they were agreeable with the Laws of Christ, and his Apostles; and urge the
Authority of Emperors no farther then as adding their Civil power to the
Spiritual Power of the Church. And here we challenge no other Power to our
Princes, then was exercised by Christian Emperors, that is, to call Synods,
and to have a liberty of confirming, or not confirming their Decrees by Civil
Sanctions. As for what he cites out of our Writers, all amounts to no more then
this, that there are some Offices peculiar to the Church; Which neither do we
deny, nor did our Princes ever invade these Functions. But because from hence
He would insinuate that the Prince has no power at all in Causes
Ecclesiastical, etc in his Citations from these Writers comes up to that
Character which the Book of Educ Ox. 1677 p 86.
Book of Education gives us of the SLY, the CLOSE, and the RESERVED, who take
notice of so much at serves to their own designs, and misinterpret and detort
what You say even contrary to Your intention; I shall as briefly as may be show
that their Concessions are far from giving any Countenance to his Cause. Bishop
Andrews does indeed say (as all other of our Church) Potestatis mere
Sacerdotalis sunt Liturgiae, Conciones. i. e. dubia legis explicandi munus;
claves, Sacramenta, and omnia quae potestatem ordinis consequuntur; But then
there are other Ecclesiastical powers which he challenges to the Prince; viz.
In iis, quae Exterioris politiae sunt, ut praecipiat, suo sibi jure vindicat,
Tort. p. 380.
To have Supreme Command in the exterior Polity of the Church; Custos est non
modo secunadae Tabulae, sed and primae. p. 381.
To be keeper of both Tables; Quodcunque in rebus Religionis Reges Israel
fecerunt, id ut Ei faciendi jus sit ac potestas. Ib.
To exercise all that Power which the good Kings of Israel did; Leges
Autoritate Regia ferendi, ne blasphemetur Deus, ut jejunio placetur Deus; ut
festo honoretur. Ib.
To make Ecclesiastical Laws; To Delegandi qui de lege sic lata judicent Ib.
delegate Persons to judge in causes Ecclesiastical; To Siqui in Leges ita
latas committant, etsi, Religionis causa sit, in eos Autoritate Regia
animadvertendi Ib.
punish the breach of those Spiritual Laws; To Non ut totus ab lieno ore
pendeat, ipse a se nihil dijudicer. Ib.
learn the will of God not only from the Mouth of the Clergy, but also from the
Scripture; To Omnibus omnium ordinum jus dicendi. Ib.
have authority over all Persons; To Abiathar ipsum, si ita meruit, Pontificatu
abdicandi. 382.
eject even the High Priest if he deserve it; To Excelsa diruendi. i. e.
peregrinum cultum abolendi. Ib.
pull down High Places Sive in Idololatriam abeat Vitulus aureus; sive in
Superstitionem Serpens aeneus, utrumque comminuendi. Ib.
; and to Reform the Church from Idolatry and Superstition. These He claims to
appertain to the Prince Haec Primatus a pud nos jura sunt, ex jure divino. Ib.
Jure Divino.

The next Author is Dr. Carlion. He amongst other rights of the Church reckons
Institution and Collation of Benefices, which this Writer marks with Italian
Characters, and makes much Use of. But this Apostolical Institution and
Collation by the Bishop alluded to, does also involve in it Ordination, even as
the Ordination (which is observed by himself Page 13.
from the Bishop) signified also Institution in the charge and cure. But the
Collation challenged by our Princes is of another Nature, and signifies no more
then the Nominating a Person to be Ordained to such an Office, or presenting a
Person already Ordained to such a Benefice; And the right of Investitures
(which is the same with such a Collation) is by this Bishop Jurisd. ^eg. Ep. p.
137.
asserted to Emperors. This being cleared which was by him on purpose
perplexed, If we take the extent of the Regal power from this Bishop, He tells
Id. p. 10.
us, That Sovereign's as Nursing Fathers of the Church are to see that Bishops
and all Inferior Ministers perform their faithful duties in their several
places, and if they be found faulty to punish them.

His next Author is Mr. Thorndike, Who is as large as any one in the
Vindication of the Churches rights; and Yet He tells us Epilog. Page 391.
, that No-Man will refuse Christian Princes the Interest of protecting the
Church against all such Acts as may prove praejudicial to the common Faith. He
holds (as this Writer with great concern Church Government, page 390.
observes) that the Secular power may restore any law, which Christ or his
Apostles have ordained, not only against a Major part, but all the Clergy and
Governors of the Church; and may, for a Paenalty of their opposing it,
suppress their power and commit it to others, though they also be established by
another Law Apostolical. Thus that considerative man, who held not the Pope to
be Antichrist, or the Hierarchy of the Church to be followers of Antichrist
Church Government, page 391.


Bishop Taylour (his next Author) does with the rest assert, that the Episcopal
Office has some powers annexed to it, independent on the Regal; But then he
farther lays down these Rules, Ductor Dub. l. 3. c. 3. r. 4.
That the Supreme Civil-power is also Supreme Governor over all Persons, and
in all Causes; Ibid. r. 5.
Has a Legislative power in Affairs of Religion and the Church; Ibid. r. 7.
Has Jurisdiction in causes not only Ecclesiastical, but also Internal and
Spiritual; Ibid. r. 7. n. 9.
Has authority to convene and dissolve all Synods Ecclesiastical; Ibid. r. 8.
Is (indeed) to govern in Causes Ecclesiastical by the means and measure of
Christ's Institutions, i. e. by the Assistance and Ministry of Ecclesiastical
Persons; Ibid. r. 8. n. 6.
but that there may happen a case in which Princes may and must refuse to
confirm the Synodical decrees, Sentences, and Judgments of Ecclesiastics; Ibid.
l. 3. c. 4. r. 8.
That Censures Ecclesiastical are to be inflicted by the consent and
concurrence of the Supreme Civil power.

The next Author cited is the Learned Primate Bramhal; and We have here reason
to wonder that one Who praetends to have been conversant in his Writings, dares
appear in the Vindication of a Cause, which the Learned Author has so long
since so shamefully defeated. As for the right of Sovereign Princes, This
Archbishop will tell Bp. Br. Works Tom. 1. p. 88.
him, That to affirm that Sovereign Princes cannot make Ecclesiastical
Constitutions under a Civil pain, or that they cannot (especially with the
advice and concurrence of their Clergy assembled in a National Synod) reform
errors and abuses, and remedy Encroachments, and Usurpations in Faith or
Discipline, is contrary to the sense and practice of all Antiquity, and as for
matter of Fact He will instruct him, Ibid. p. 76.
that our Kings from time to time called Councils, made Ecclesiastical Laws,
punished Ecclesiastical Persons, saw that they did their duties in their
calling etc. From this Bishop's acknowledgment, that the Bishops are the proper
Judges of the Canon, this Author that He may according to the Language of a
Educ. p. 98.
modern Pen, as well waken the Taciturn with Quaestions, as silence the
Loquacious with baffling fallacies, takes Occasion briskly to ask whether this
Bishop does not mean here that the Bishops may both compose and execute Canons
in the King's Dominions, and use Ecclesiastical Censures by their own Authority?
But see, says He, the Bishops deprived of the former power in the Reformation.
To which I answer that the power of which they were deprived in the Reformation
was only of such an executing the Canons as carried with it pecuniary and
corporal Punishments, and this power the Bishop has told him they could not
Exercise by their own Authority. And here it were to be wished that our Author
in reading this Bishop's Works had made use of his advice, Ibid. p. 156.
To cite Authors fully and faithfully, not by halves, without adding to, or new
moulding their Autorities according to Fancy or Interest.

The next Advocate against Regal Supremacy is King Charles the First; But if we
may take a draught of that Blessed Martyr's Sentiments from his own
Portraiture, E I K. (...) Adv. To the Pr. of Wales.
He did not think his Authority confined to Civil Affairs, but that the true
glory of Princes consists as well in advancing Gods Glory in the maintenance of
true Religion, and the Churches good; as in the Dispensation of Civil power
with Justice, and Honor, to the public Peace. Ibid. cap. 17.
He thought himself (as King) entrusted by God and the Laws, with the good both
of Church and State, and saw no reason why he should give up, or weaken by any
change, that power and Influence which in right and reason He ought to have
over both. He thought himself obliged to preserve the Episcopal Government in
its right Constitution, (not because his Bishops told him so, but) because his
Judgment was fully satisfied that it had of all other the best Scripture
grounds, and also the constant practice of Christian Churches. He was no Friend
of implicit Obedience, but after he has told the Prince, Adv. to the Pr. of
Wales.
that the best Profession of Religion is that of the Church of England, adds I
would have your own Judgment and reason now seal to that Sacred Bond which
Education has written, that it may be judiciously your own Religion, and not
other Men's Custom, or Tradition, which you profess. He did not give that
glorious Testimony to the Religion established in the Church of England, that
it was the best in the World, not only in the community as Christian, but also
in the special Notion as Reformed; and for this reason requuired and entreated
the Prince as his Father, and his King, that he would never suffer his Heart to
receive the least check against, or disaffection from it; till he had first
tried it, and after much search, and many disputes thus concluded.

These are the Sentiments of our Authors, in which if I have been overlong,
the Reader will excuse me, that I choose rather to intermix something useful
from these great Pens, then to entertain him altogether with the Paralogisms
and prevarications of this Writer. There is nothing that remains considerable
under this first Thesis, but his Sub-sumption, that whatever powers belonged to
the Church in times of persecution, and before Emperors had embraced
Christianity, are, and must still be allowed to belong to her in Christian
States. Which I conceive not altogether so Necessary that it must be allowed,
and I am sure by our Authors it is not. As for Convening of Councils (the power
of greatest concern) Bishop Sermon. of the right of Assemblies.
Andrews to this Quaestion ( What say you to the 300 Years before Constantine?
How went Assemblies then? Who called them all that while?) returns this Answer.
Truly as the people of the Jews did before in Egypt under the tyranny of
Pharaoh: They were then a Church under persecution, until Moses was raised up
by God a Lawful Magistrate over them. The cases are alike for all the world. No
Magistrate did assemble them in Egypt, and good reason why; they had none to
do it. But this was no bar, but when Moses arose, authorized by God, and had
the Trumpets by God delivered to him, He might take them, keep them, use them,
for that end, for which God gave them, to assemble the Congregation -- Shall
Moses have no more to do then Pharaoh? or Constantine then Nero? See also Field
of the Church. l. 5. c. 52.
Dr Field.

His Third Thesis is, That the Secular Prince cannot Soave Hist. of Conc. Tr.
Page 77.
depose or eject from the exercise of their Office in his Dominions any of the
Clergy, nor introduce others into the place of the ejected. But the Quaestion
here is not, Whether the Prince can eject any of the Clergy from the Exercise
of their Office, but, Whether he can depose any for not Exercising it? While
the Clergy faithfully discharge their Office, the Prince ought to protect them;
and if for this they suffer, no doubt but they are Martyrs. But it is possible
they may abuse their power, and then it is to be inquired, Whether Civil Laws
may not inhibit them the Use of it? This Author holds the Negative, and tells
us 1st. They cannot eject them at pleasure, without giving any cause thereof.
But he does not pretend that the Reforming Princes ever ejected any without a
Cause given. And therefore he adds 2ly, Neither may Princes depose them for any
Cause which concerns things Spiritual; but with this Limitation, without the
consent of the Clergy. I could wish he had here told us what he meant by things
Spiritual. For things, as well as Persons Spiritual are of great Extent. (d
Pope Paul the 3d told the Duke of Mantua, that it is the Opinion of the
Doctors, that Priest's Concubines are of Ecclsiastical Jurisdiction.) But he
gives us his reason for his assertion; Because it is necessary that a Judge to
be a competent one have as well potestatem in causam, as in Personam, and the
Prince as has been mentioned in the 1st Thesis has no Authority to judge such
Causes purely Spiritual. Now the power denied to the Prince in the 1st Thesis
is to determine matters of Faith. But may not the Prince judge whether an
Ecclesiastic deserves Deprivation without determining a Matter of Faith? May
not he judge according to what has been already determined by the Church? Or
may not he appoint such Delegates as can determine matters of Faith? Or are all
the Causes, for which a Clergyman may be deprived, merely Spiritual? By Virtue
of this Thesis he proves the Ejection of the Western Patriarch unlawful. page
37.
Now was not this Matter of Faith already determine by the Clergy? Had they not
unanimously decreed, That he had no more Authority here, then any other foreign
Bishop? And can the King be said here to have acted without the consent of the
Clergy? And yet that matter of fact is applied to this Thesis. As for the
Ejection of the Bishops in King Edward's time; is not that confessed to have been
for not acknowledging the Regal Supremacy? page 70.
But this was a matter which wanted no new Determination, for the
Church-Autority had decided it in their Synod in King Henry's Reign. But it is
said, the Judges were not Canonical, as being the King's Commissioners, part
Clergy, part Laity. But neither was the cause purely Canonical; for denying the
Supremacy was not only an infringment of the Canon, but also a Violation of an
Act of Parliament. As for the Bishops, Bonner and Gardener, they were accused
for not asserting the Civil power of the King in his Nonage. Nor do they plead
Conscience for not doing it, but deny the Matter of Fact Burn. His. Ref. part.
2. l. 1. p. 127. 165.
The same Objections were then made against their Deprivation, as are reassumed
by this Author now; and therefore it may suffice to return the same answers.
That the Sentence being only of Deprivation from their Sees, it was not so
entirely of Ecclesiastical Censure, but was of a mixed nature, so that Laymen
might join in it; and since they had taken Commissions from the King for their
Bishoprics, by which they held them only during the Kings pleasure, they could
not complain of their Deprivation, which was done by the King's Authority.
Others who looked farther back, remembered that Constantine the Emp. had
appointed Secular Men to enquire into some things objected to Bishops, who were
called Cognitores, or Triers; and such had examined the business of Coecilian
Bishop of Carthage, even upon an Appeal, after it had been tried by several
Synods; and given Judgment against Donatus, and his party. The same Constantine
had also by his Authority put Eustathius out of Antioch, Athanasius out of
Alexandria, and Paul out of Constantinople; and though the Orthodox Bishops
complained of their particulars, as done unjustly at the false suggestion of
the Arrians, yet they did not deny the Authority of the Emperors in such cases.
Ibid. p. 127.
But neither is the Archbishop of Canterbury by this Author allowed to be a
proper Judge; and that, because He did not Act by his Canonical Superiority in
the Church, but by the Authority he jointly with the rest received from the
King; As if he had ever the less the power of a Metropolitan, because He was
also the King's Commissioner. By this way of arguing the Decrees of Ecumenical
Councils will be invalid, because they were called to determine Controversies
by the command of Emperors. But how Uncanonical soever King Edward's Bishops
are said to have been, He does not except against Queen Mary's Bishops, though
they in depriving the Reformed, acted by Commission from the Queen. As for the
Bishops ejected in Q. Elizabeth's time, it has been already said it was for a
Civil cause, i. e. refusing the Oath of Supremacy; which why it should be
lawful in her Father's time, and unlawful in here is; why it should be contrived
by Roman Catholics in that Reign, and scrupled by the same Roman Catholics in
this; Why it should be inoffensive, when expressed in larger terms, and
scandalous, when mitigated; whence on a sudden the Refusers espied so much
Obliquity in that Oath, which they had all took before probably either as
Bishops or Priests in the reigns of King Henry the 8th, and Edward the 6th;
whence this change of things proceeded, unless from secret intimations from
Rome, or their own Obstinacy, will not easily be conjectured. As for his Note,
that what is said of the other Clergy, may be said likewise of the Patriarch,
for any Authority which he stands possessed of by such Ecclesiastical Canons, as
cannot justly be pretended to do any wrong to the Civil Government. He has been
often told by our Authors, that Patriarchs are an Humane Institution; That as
they were erected, so they may be dissolved by the Prudence of Men; that as
they were erected by leave and confirmation of Princes, so they may be
dissolved by the same; that the Bishop of Romes Patriarchate does not extend
beyond the sub-urbicary Churches; that we are without the reach of his
Jurisdiction, and therefore that the power claimed over us is an Invasion; that
did not Popes think fit to dispense with themselves for Perjury, having sworn
to keep inviolably the Decrees of the Eight first General Councils, they would
not in plain opposition to the (...). Can. 6. (...). Can. 7. Here the Council
decrees that Ancient Customs should prevail; that the Privileges of all
Churches in their distinct Provinces should be kept inviolable. We desire the
Bishop of Rome's Patriarchate over the Britannic Churches should be proved to
be an Ancient Custom; and if not that the Privileges of these Churches may be
preserved.
Nicene and The Fathers of the Ephesine Council having decreed that the
Cyprian Prelates should hold their rights untouch^d and unviolated, according
to the Canons of the Holy Fathers, and the Ancient Customs, Ordaining their own
Bishop, and that the Bishop of Antioch who then pretended Jurisdiction over
them, (as the Bishop of Rome now does overs us) should be excluded, add
farther. (...) etc. Conc. Ephesians. Can. 8. Let the same be observed in other
Diocesses, and all Provinces every where, That no Bishop occupy and other
Province, which formerly and from the beginning was not under the power of him
or his Predecessors. If any do occupy any Province, or subject it by force, let
him restore it* Now we plead the Cyprian Privileges, and desire we may be
exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome till it is proved that He
or His Predecessors did from the Beginning exercise any power in these Churches.
Ephesine Canons pretend to any Jurisdiction over us; That they so invading
ought to be judged by a free Ecumenical Synod if such an one could be had; but
that this Remedy being praecluded us, Each National Church has liberty to free
her self from such Usurpation; that the Church of England pleads the benefit of
this Right; and her Sovereigns having power to transfer Bishoprics, might
remove the Patriarchate from Rome to Canterbury, and justly exclude any
foreign Prelate from Jurisdiction within their Territories; But that the power
claimed by the Pope (however mollified by the Novices of that Church) is more
then Patriarchal, and that it is not our Rule (which this Author so much
dislikes) but Pope Leo's the Ep. 54.
1st, that propria perdit, qui indebita concupiscit. This plea of a Western
Patriarchate is fatally confounded by that one plain Period of Bishop True Dif.
part. 2.
Bilson. As for his Patriarchate, by God's law he has none; in this Realm for
Six Hundred years after Christ he had none; for the last 6 Hundred years
looking after greater matters he would have none; Above or against the Princes
Sword he can have none; to the subversion of the Faith, and Oppression of his
Brethren he ought to have none; He must seek farther for Subjection to his
Tribunal; this land owes him none.

So much for the first branch of this Thesis; the 2d is, that as the Prince
cannot eject, or depose the Clergy, so neither can he introduce any into the
place of those, who are ejected, or deceased without the concurrence of the
Clergy. If by the concurrence of the Clergy, he means that the Person assigned
by the Prince to any sacred office cannot execute it till he be ordained by the
Clergy, No one will deny it; Or if he think that the Ordainer ought to lay
hands on none but whom he esteems fit for the discharge of so sacred an Office;
here also we agree with him; But how does it follow that because Ordination,
which is consecrating Men to the work of the Holy Ministry, is the proper
Office of the Clergy, the Prince may not recommend to the Church a fit Person
so to be consecrated, or assign to the Person already consecrated, the place
where he shall perform that Holy Work? As for the Canons by him alleged, they
being Humane Institutions are not of Aeternal Obligation, but changeable
according to the different State of the Church. If the 31st Apostolic Canon,
which excommunicates all who gain Benefices by the Interest of Secular Princes,
and forbids the People to communicate with them, still oblige; then we are
exempted from Communion with the Bishop of Rome. How comes the latter part of
the 6th Canon of the Nicene Council which concerns the Election of Bishops
still to be valid, and the former part, which limits the Jurisdiction of
Patriarchs, so long since to be null? Why must the C. of England accept the 2d.
Nicene Council in matters of Discipline, which the Petr. De Marc. l. 6. c. 25..
8.
Gallican Church rejected in matters of Faith? Were the Canon of the Laodicean
Council, here cited, pertinent to the purpose, as it is not, (it being directed
only against popular Elections) yet why must that be indispensable, when
another Canon, which enumerates the Canonical books of Scripture, has so little
Authority? It is plain the manners of Elections have varied much in the diverse
States of the Church. The Apostles and Apostolical Persons nominated their
Successors; afterward Bishops were chose by the Clergy, and the people; after,
by the Bishops of the Province, the Metropolitan ratifying the choice; In
process of time Emperors, when become Christian, interposed and constituted and
confirmed even Popes themselves Marca. de Conc. Imp. and Sac cap. 8.
. Nor is this Power of Princes repugnant to Holy Scripture, in which we find
that 1 King. c. 2. v. 35.
King Solomon put Zadok the Priest, in the Room of Abiathar; That 2 Chr. 19.11.
Jehosaphat set Amariah the Chief-Priest over the People in all matters of the
Lord: That He v. 8.
set of the Levites, and of the Priests, and of the Chief Fathers of Israel,
for the Judgment of the Lord, and for Controversies. As for his alleged
Inconvenience, that, if temporal Governors can place, and displace the Clergy,
they will make the Churches Synods to state divine matters according to their
own minds, and so the Church will not be praeserv'd incorrupt in her Doctrine
and Discipline, They who maintain the just rights of the Prince are not obliged
to defend the abuse of them; there is perhaps no power ordained for our good,
which may not be perverted to mischief; were this right of placing and
displacing left to a Patriarch or a Synod, yet either of these might so manage
their trust that a corrupted majority of Clergy might state divine matters
according to their own mind, and so the Doctrines of Christ be changed for the
Traditions of men. But to these objected Injuries which the Church may suffer
from a bad Prince, we ought to oppose the benefit she receives from the
Protection of a good one; Nor is it more true that Constantius an Arrian, by
his unjustly displacing the Orthodox Bishops, procu'd Arrianism to be voted in
several Eastern Synods, then that the succeeding Emperors by justly displacing
the Arrian Bishops procured the Nicene Faith to be received in succeeding
Synods. But for these mischief, which a National Synod is liable to, our
Author has found out, as he thinks, a Remedy in his

Fourth Thesis, That a Provincial, or National Synod may not lawfully make any
definitions in matters of Faith, or in reforming some Error, or Heresy, or
other abuse in God's Service contrary to the Decrees of former Superior Synods,
or contrary to the judgment of the Church Universal of the present Age showed
in her public Liturgies. But there is a Thesis in our Bibles, which seems to
me the very contradictory of this. For says the Prophet expressly, Hos. 4.15.
Though Israel transgress, yet let not Judah Sin. Though ten tribes continue
corrupted in their Faith, yet let the remaining Tribe take care to reform her
self. For that Judah had sinned, and consequently was here commanded to reform
is plain from the words of Scripture, where it is said, that 2 King. c. 17. v.
9.
Judah kept not the Commandments of the Lord her God, but walked in the
Statutes of Israel which they made. But this argument of National Councils
reforming without the leave of General has been managed with so great Learning
and Demonstration by Archbishop Laud in his Discourse with Fisher, and his
Lordship's Arguments so clearly vindicated by the Reverend D. Stillingfleet,
that as it is great Praesumption in this Author to offer any thing in a cause
which has had the Honor to have suffered under those Pens, so neither would it
be modest in me to meddle any farther in a Controversy by them exhausted. I
shall therefore proceed to his

Fifth Thesis, That could a National Synod make such Definitions, yet that a
Synod wanting part of the National Clergy unjustly deposed, or restrained; and
consisting partly of persons unjustly introduced, partly of those who have been
first threatened with Fines, Imprisonment, and deprivation, in case of their
Nonconformity to the Princes Injunctions in matters purely Spiritual, is not
to be accounted a lawful National Synod, nor the Acts thereof free and valid;
especially as to their establishing such Regal Injunctions. Now how this is
pertinent to our case I can by no means conjecture. For it has been showed that
neither were the Antireforming Bps. unjustly deposed, nor the Reformers
unjustly introduced. But what he means by the Clergy's being threatened with
fines, imprisonment, and Deprivation in case of their Nonconformity to the
Prince's Injunctions may be learnt from another passage in his Discourse, where
he tells us that the Clergy being condemned in the Kings Bench in a Praemunire
for acknowledging the Cardinal's power Legantine, and so become liable at the
King's pleasure to the Imprisonment of their Persons, and Confiscation of their
Estates, page 26.
did to release themselves of this Praemunire, give the King the title of
Ecclesiae and Cleri Anglicani Protector, and Supremum caput. Which Act, says
he, so passed by them, that, as Dr. Hammond acknowledges, It is easy to
believe that Nothing but the apprehensions of dangers, which hung over them by
a Praemunire incurred by them could probably have inclined them to it. But here
we have great reason to complain of the unpardonable praevarication of this
Author in so foully misrepraesenting Dr. Hammond. Which that it may be the more
perspicuous, and that the Reader may make from this Instance a true judgment of
this Writer's sincerity, it will be necessary to transcribe the whole passage
as it lies in the Doctor. Sch. c 7.. 5.
Though the first act of the Clergy in this was so introduced, that it is easy
to believe that nothing but the apprehension of dangers which hung over them
(by a Praemunire incurred by them) could probably have inclined them to it, and
therefore I shall not pretend that it was perfectly an Act of their first will
and choice, but that which the Necessity of affairs recommended to them, Yet
the matter of right being upon that occasion taken into their most serious
debate in a Synodical way, and at last a fit and commodious expression
uniformly pitched upon by joint consent of both Houses of Convocation, there is
no reason to doubt, but that they did believe what they did profess, their fear
being the Occasion of their Debates, but the Reasons and Arguments observed in
debate, the causes, as in all Charity we are to judge, of their Decision. Thus
the Doctor. Now this Prevarication is the more culpable, because it is not an
Original, but copied from Mr. Sergeant, whom this Writer cannot but be
praesumed to have known to have falsified it. For Bishop Bramhal (in whose
writings we find him very conversant) had detected this mis-quotation in Mr.
Sergeant, and severely Reprimands him for it. His words are so applicable to
our Author, that I cannot excuse my self the Omission of them. Bp. Br. Worcester.
Tom. 1. p. 360.
He cites half a passage out of Dr. Hammond, but he does Dr. Hammond notorious
wrong. Dr. Hammond speaks only of the first Preparatory Act which occasioned
them to take the matter of right into a serious debate in a Synodical way; he
applies it to the subsequent Act of renunciation after debate. Dr. Hammond
speaks of no fear but the fear of the Law, the Law of Praemunire, an Ancient
Law made many ages before Henry the 8th was born, the Palladium of England to
preserve it from the Usurpations of the Court of Rome; but Mr. Sergeant
mis-applieth it wholly to the fear of the King's violent cruelty. Lastly, he
smothers Dr. Hammond's sense expressed clearly by himself, that there is no
reason to doubt, but that they did believe what they did profess, the fear
being the Occasion of their debates, but the reasons or Arguments offered in
debate, the causes (as in all charity we are to judge) of their Decision. He
uses not to cite any thing ingenuously. This Author must be thought to have
read these passages, and yet ventured the scandal of promoting this Forgery,
though without the Honor of being the first Inventor of it. Such practices, as
these, require little Controversiall skill, but much forehead; and we have
seen a Machine lately publicly exposed for this laudable Quality of imbibing
whatever is blown into it is Mouth, and then ecchoing it forth again without
blushing. Whether this be not our Author's Talent, let the Reader judge; as also
what Opinion we ought to have of his Modesty, who after all this has the
confidence to desire us to read, together with these his Observations on the
Reformation, Dr. Hammond of Sch. c. 7. (the very Chapter whence this is cited)
least, says he, I may have related some things partially, or omitted some
things considerable in this Matter. As for this Objection of the Clergy's being
awed by fear in this Act, he himself has unluckily cited a passage from the
(then) Lady Mary, which shows the vanity of it. p. 142.
I am well assured (says She speaking of Edward VI. in her Letter to the
Council) that the King his Father's Laws were consented to without compulsion
by the whole Realm both Spiritual and Temporal. I shall say nothing more to
this Thesis but oppose another to it, That could an Ecumenical Synod make
definitions contrary to the word of God, yet that a Synod wanting the greatest
part of Christian Bishops, unjustly excluded, and consisting partly of Persons
unjustly introduced, partly of those who have been first bribed with Money, and
promises of Church-praeferment, or praeengag'd by Oaths to comply with the
Usurpations of a praetended Spiritual Monarch, is not to be accounted a lawful
Ecumenical Synod, nor the Acts thereof free and valid, especially as to their
establishing such usurpations. This is a Thesis, which needs no Application. I
proceed to his

Sixth Thesis. That the Judgment and consent of some Clergymen of a Province,
when they are the lesser part, cannot be called the judgment and consent of the
Whole Clergy of the Province. This Assertion, that a lesser part is not aequall
to the Whole, is the only thing which looks like Mathematics in the whole
Discourse; and the Reader may hence be convinced that our Author does sometimes
travel in the Educ. p. 119.
High road of Demonstration. But here we desire it may be proved, either that
the Reformation was not effected by the major part of the Clergy, or that a
minor part judging according to truth are not to be obeyed rather then the
Major part judging contrary to it. In the mean time it is easily replied, that
the judgment and consent of some few Bishops ( Soave Hist, Conc. Tr. p. 153.
suppose 48. Bishops, and 5. Cardinals giving Canonical Authority to books
Apocryphal, and making Authentical a translation differing from the Original)
cannot be esteemed the judgment and consent of the Catholic Church.

7th. Thesis. That since a National Synod may not define matters of Faith
contrary to former Superior Councils, much less may any Secular Person define
contrary to those Councils, or also to a National Synod. The defining matters
of Faith we allow to be the proper office of the Clergy; but because every one
must give an account of his own Faith, every one is obliged to take care that
what he submits to the belief of, be consistent with his Christianity: I am
obliged to pay all submission to the Church-Autority, but the Church having
bounds, within which she ought to be restrained in her Determinations, if she
transgresses these Limits, and acts against that Christianity, which she
professes to maintain, I may rather refuse obedience, then forfeit my
Christianity. If in a cause of this moment I make a wrong Judgment, I am
answerable for it at Gods Tribunal, not because I usurped a right, which was
never granted me, but because I misused a Liberty which was indulged me. This
we take to be the case of each private Christian; and farther, that the Prince
having an Obligation not only to believe a-right, and Worship God (as is
praescrib'd) himself, but also to protect the true Faith and Worship in his
Dominions, ought to use all those means of discovering the Truth, which God has
afforded, viz. consulting the Pastors of the Church, reading the word of God
etc. And that, having discovered it, He may promulgate it to His Subjects by
them also to be embraced, but not without the use of that Judgment and
Discretion which to them also is allowed. If here it happens that the Civil and
Ecclesiastical power command things contrary, there is nothing to be done by
the Subject but to enquire on which side God is; and if God be on the King's
side by a direct Law in the matter, He is not on the Churches side for her
Spiritual Authority. Thus a good King of Israel might 2 King. 38.22.
take away the High places and Altars, and say unto Judah and Jerusalem, Ye
shall Worship before the Altar at Jerusalem, because such a Command was
justifiable by the Law of Moses; Nor is it any Praejudice against it, 2 King.
23.9.
That the Priests of the High places refused to come up to the Altar at
Jerusalem. Thus might King Alfred restore to the Decalogue, and to its
Obligation the Non tibi facies Deos aureos, though Veneration of Images was
commanded by the second Nicene Synod. And though the Councils of Constance and
Trent had thought fit to repeal Our Savior's Institution, yet King Edward
might revive the Ancient Statute, Mat. 26.27.
(...).

As for his Eighth Thesis it has already been proved to be Felo de se, and that
the limitation destroys whatever the Proposition would have established. When
the Gallican Church shall have received all the Decrees of the Council of
Trent, and the Roman Church observed the Canons of the first General Councils,
When the Western Patriach shall have rechang'd his Regalia Petri into the old
regulas Patrum; it may then be seasonable to examine, How far National Churches
are obliged by things of mere Ecclesiastical Constitution.

I should now proceed to examine the Historical part of his Discourse; but that
I understand is already under the Consideration of another Hand, from which the
Reader may shortly expect a satisfactory account. But I may not omit for the
Reader's diversion a Grammatical Criticism which our Author has made upon the
little particle as. page 38.
It is enacted the 32d. Hen. 8.26. c. That all such Determinations, Decrees,
Definitions and Ordinances, as according to God's word, and Christ's Gospel
shall at any time be set forth by the Archbishops, Bishops, and Doctors in
Divinity appointed by his Majesty, or else by the whole Clergy of England, in
and upon the matters of Christ's Religion etc. shall be by all his Grace's
Subjects fully Believed, Obeyed, etc. Upon which he makes this learned Note.
Whereas under the Reformation private Men are tied only to obey and believe the
Definitions of Councils when they are set forth according to God's word. i. e.
when private Men think them to be so, yet here this Liberty was thought fit to
be restrained, and private men tied to believe these Definitions when set forth
as according to God's word. i. e. when the setters forth believe them to be so.
To obey a thing defined according to God's word, and to obey a thing defined,
as being according to God's word, are Injunctions very different. Now a little
skill in Honest Walker's particles would have cleared this point, and a
Schoolboy that was to turn this passage into Latin, would have known that as
is put for which; Accordingly Keble abridging this Statute makes it run thus,
All Decrees and Ordinances which according to Gods word, etc. But this it is
for people to meddle in Controversy at an Age when they have forgot their
Grammar. Notwithstanding therefore this Aristarchus, We still retain the
Liberty of believing and obeying only such things, which be defined according
to God's Word. For which we are much blamed in the Conclusion of this Discourse.

p. 260.
In rejection of the Church's Judgment (says he) let none think himself
secure in relying on the Testimony of his Conscience or judgment. But what
reason soever he may have to undervalue the Testimony of a good Conscience, we
think it advisable from St. Paul, 1 Timothy c. 1. v. 19.
to hold faith, and a good conscience which some having put away, concerning
faith have made Shipwreck; Of whom are -- But says he, let none think himself
secure in any of these things, so long as his Conscience witnesses still to
him this one thing, namely his Disobedience and Inconformity to the
Church-Catholic. But our Consciences do not witness to us any disobedience to
the Church-Catholic, but only to that Church which falsely praetends to be
Catholic. He means to the Major part of the Guides thereof. But the cause has
not yet been decided by Poll, that we should know which side has the Majority.
Let him know that his Condition is very dangerous, when he makes the
Church-Guides of his own time, or the major part thereof, incommunicable-with
in their external profession of Religion; There was a time then, when to
believe the Consubstantiality of the Son was a dangerous Condition; and this
perhaps made Pope Liberius externally to profess Arrianism. When for the
maintaining of his Opinions he begins to distinguish and divide between the
doctrine of the Scripture, and the Doctrine of the Church. But why not
distinguish, where the Church her self distinguishes, and says, Christ indeed
in the Scriptures instituted so, but I institute otherwise; as in the case of
denying the Cup. Between the Doctrines of the Catholic Church of the former
ages, and of the Catholic Church of the present. But here again the Church her
self distinguishes, when She tells us that Conc. Constable. Sess. 13.
licet in primitiva Ecclesia sub utraque specie Sacramentum reciperetur, Yet
now the contrary Custom habenda est pro lege quam non licet reprobare. Between
the Church's orthodoxness in Necessaries, and non-necessaries to Salvation. If
there be no difference betwixt these, why does a Guide in Controv. Disc. 1 c.
6. par. 56.
Friend of the Author tell us of an Obedience of Assent in the one, but of
Non-contradition only in the other? When he begins to maintain the Authority of
an Inferior Ecclesiastical Judge against a Superior. But what if this be only
where the Inferior Judge agrees though not with his immediate Superior, yet with
the Supreme? Or of a minor part of the Church-Guides against a Major. But that
is not a case yet fairly decided. When they grant that God has given them,
beside the Scriptures, guides of their Faith. But those Guides themselves to be
guided by the Scripture. And that they have in their judgment departed from
those Guides. i. e. the major part of them. But this we would have proved.
Which in a Court consisting of mapy is the legal Judge. Guides and Judges are
different things; but we hope when this Court sits, the Judges will consult the
Scripture, the Statute they are to go by, and if they judge according to that,
they will judge well.

These are the Doctrines of blind-Obedience which this Author so studiously
inculcates. For sice Doctrines are taught us different from Scripture, we are
advised to use another way of discerning Doctrines, then what the Gospel
prescribes. Our Savior bids us, Mat. 16.6.12.
Beware of the leaven. i. e. the doctrine of Pharisee's, though sitting in Moses
his Chair. We are now advised to embrace all the doctrines of those that sit in
the Chair of S. Peter. Christ bids us, Mat. 24.4.
Take heed that no man deceive us though coming in his Name. We are now told that
they who come to us in the Name of Christ cannot deceive us. St. Paul says,
Gal. 1.8.
that If an Angel from Heaven preach to us any other Doctrine then that which
he preached, Let him be accursed. Now, if we do not embrace whatever a
Patriarch from the West preaches, though never so contrary to the Gospel, we are
concluded under an Anathema. The Apostles tell us, that they 2 Cor. 1.24.
have no Dominion over our Faith; but their Successors exercise a Despotic
power in requiring a servile Obedience to all their Dictates. S. Paul's
practice was to Gal. 2.11.14.
withstand Peter to the face, When he saw that he walked not uprightly
according to the truth of the Gospel; but St. Peter's Successor pleads that in
no case he may be withstood, because it is impossible, but that he should walk
uprightly in the truth of the Gospel. The inspired Divine bids us Rev. 18.4.
Come out of Babylon, that we may not partake of her Sins; Our modern
Theologists advise us to come back into Babylonia apud Joannem Romanae urbis
figura est. Tertul. adv. Marc. l. 3. c. 13. Roma quasi secunda Babylonia est.
Aug. de Civit. Dei. l. 18. c. 2.
Babylon, for that She only is impeccable.

Imprimatur.

GILB. IRONSIDE. Vice-Can. Oxon.
October. 19. 1687.
REFLECTIONS ON THE HISTORICAL PART OF Church Government, PART V.

He, that is first in his own cause, seems just; but his Neighbor comes and
searches him.

Prove. 18.17. Sheldonian Theater, Oxford

OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER. Anno 1687.

The Introduction.
THE Pamphlet proposes to relate the English Reformation, and to examine the
lawfulness of it. Now from an Examiner we might justly expect Argument, and
from a Relator, Truth. How he argues I find considered by the Animadverter: Two
small defects he has been charged with. 1st. That he proceeds upon dubious or
false Premises; 2ly, That were they granted, his Conclusions would not follow.
It is my business to examine his Narrative, which yet is not so purely
Historical, but that it is perplexed with dispute. For it is peculiar to this
Author that when he should reason, he barely affirms, as if he was writing an
History; but when it is his business to relate, being conscious that the stream
of Authority is against him, he is forced to dispute it out as if he was proving
a Problem. But his arguing is such, as the Cause would bear; and his History
such, as it necessarily requires. The former has gained him no great credit
with the Men of Reason; and this, I doubt, will little recommend him to the
Honest and Ingenuous. But I forbear to prejudge the cause, and desire nothing
may be farther charged on him, than it is proved. I pretend to no Critical
skill in the History of the Reformation, and I am beholden to the Author that I
need it not. His prevarications lie so open, that a Novice in History may
detect them. Should I give a complete Catalogue of 'em, I should out-swell the
bulk of Church Government; but I consider that every one, who desires to know
this Author, may not be willing to be charged with a Volume. I shall therefore
confine my self to such only, as are worthy of this Writer, and beyond the aim
of a common Undertaker.

A Reply to Chapter the 2d.
IT Might inquired, why this Author dates the Reformation from the days of King
Henry, since the Principal Actors in those times were such, as the
Smithfield-Protestants had no reason to think Reformers. I might therefore wave
the three Chapters 2d. 3d. 7th.
Chapters, that concern that Reign, were I not by the justness of an Answer
obliged to my Author's method. But before I enter upon this subject, I would
acquaint the Reader once for all, that the glory of these Fables is owing to
the Pen of the inimitable Sanders: Who was so great a Master of Invention, that
no Ingenuous Author would have condescended to transcribe him. He does not
however pay such an implicit deference to the established Character of that
great Original, but that he dares refine upon those Strokes, which seemed
incapable of improvement. That he may give us a taste of what we are to expect
in the body of his History, he entertains us in the first entrance into it with
a false and groundless aspersion of the Marriage of King Henry with Ann Bullen.
Sanders for the deeper blackening of Q Elizabeth tell's his Readers that King
Henry, before his Marriage with Ann Bullen, had known her Sister, and her
Mother, and that she was his Natural Daughter. This he affirms with an air of
Authority, without offer of proof, as became one, who addressed himself to a
Spanish Reader; but our Author, who could not expect so great a resignation of
Reason, presents this Calumny in a better dress, and suborns Parliaments and
Popes to support it. The King, was conscious of some Impediments why he could
not lawfully marry her, for which an Act of Parliament 28. Hen. 8.7. c. never
after repealed, plainly declared her Daughter Elizabeth incapable of the Crown:
and of which those words in the Dispensation procured from Clement the seventh,
Etiamsi illa tibi alias secundo aut remotiori consanguinitatis, aut primo
affinitatis gradu, etiam ex quocunque licito vel illicito coitu proveniente
invicem conjuncta sit, do give some suspicion. If ever Sanders's Title was
endangered, this Period shakes it; for certainly never was Assurance so perfect
in Idea as that of this Author; Who in a knowing age, Protestant Country, and
Learned University, to prove that the King was conscious of some Impediments
very calmly refers us to a Albeit those Acts [concerning the ratification of
the King's Marriage with the Lady Ann Bolen] were then made, as it was thent
hought, by Your Majesty, Nobles, and Commons upon a pure, perfect, and clear
foundation, thinking the said Marriage then had between Your Highness, and the
said Lady Ann in their Consciences to have been pure, sincere, perfect, and
good; and so was reputed, accepted, and taken in the Realm till now of late
that God has caused to be brought to light certain just, true, and lawful
Impediments unknown at the making of the said Acts -- Albeit that Your Majesty
not knowing of any lawful Impediments entered into the bonds of the said
unlawful Marriage etc. 28. Hen. 8. c. 7. Pultous Coll. Land. 1632.
Statute, which in express words says that the King knew not of any
Impediments. The Act: does, as any one may see, mention some Impediments, for
which the Marriage is declared unlawful; but withal plainly says they were
unknown to the King; and then how could they be such as this Author from this
Statute would have us understand? This Act of illegitimating Elizabeth, he
says, was never after repealed. From which I gather that our Author is
much-what of the same Opinion, as to Q. Elizabeth's Legitimacy, with his
Brother the Author of the late Test, though it seems he is better bred, than to
use his expression. But I cannot think that one, whose Circumstances have made
it so much his concern to consult the Statute-book, could be ignorant of the
Repeal of this Act, and therefore am of Opinion that this Clause was inserted
only, that he might throughout observe a Decorum, and maintain his Character.
Not to mention the 35 of Hen. 8. c. 1. which provides for the Succession of the
L. Elizabeth, I desire the Reader to cast his Eye on the Margin There is
nothing, which We Your Subjects for our parties can, may, or ought more firmly,
entiredly, and assuredly, in the purity of our hearts think, or with our mouths
declare and confess to be true, then that Your Majesty our Sovereign Lady is,
and in very deed, and of most mere right ought to be, by the Law of God, and
the Laws and Statutes of this Realm our most rightful and lawful Sovereign,
Liege, Lady, and Queen: and that Your Majesty is rightly, lineally, and
lawfully descended, and come of the blood Royal of this Kingdom, in and to
whose Princely person without all doubt ambiguity, scruples, or question, the
Imperial Estate of this Realm is invested and -- For which Causes we Your said
Subjects as thereunto constrained by the Laws of God and Man can no less do
then humbly beseech Your Majesty that it be enacted etc. -- And that all
Sentences, Judgments, and Decrees had, made, declared, set forth, published,
and promulged: and also as much of every Clause, Article, Branch, Matter, or
thing contained or expressed in any Act or Acts of Parliament, as be in any thing
repugnant, contrary, or derogatorie to this our said Declaration etc. shall be
utterly frustrate, void, and of none effect, and also shall and may be
canceled, defaced, and put in perpetual Oblivion etc. -- 1st. Eliz. c. 3.


, where he will find the Act of Illegitimacy repealed in Expressions so full
and vigorous, that it is hard to imagine what could tempt our Author to so
extravagant an Assertion, but the ambition of exceeding all Examples. But the
citing of an Act, which, when consulted, proves the contradictory of that for
which it was referred to; and the denying the Repeal of a Statute, which is
abrogated in as plain words as possible, do not furnish Matter enough for a
Parenthesis with this Author. To close it therefore a passage is cited from a
Dispensation, which he has procured from Clement the seventh. Since he urges us
with this Dispensation, it is to be hoped that he esteems it genuine. If so, we
have met with a Bull, wherein the Marriage betwixt King Henry and Katherine is
declared null and invalid. But he, who in this Paragraph cites a passage from
Pope Clement's Bull of Divorce, will, in the next Paragraph but one, for and
against the Divorce according as different Interests inclined him; but this is
a truth, which it ill becomes a Roman-Catholic to confess. All Histories agree
that a Bull was brought over by Cardinal Campegio; but that this, which our
Author refers to, could be the Copy of that or of any other Bull is absurd to
imagine. For though false Latin and incoherence are perhaps no arguments of its
being spurious, yet there is in it one Blunder, which I dare not think his
Holiness could be guilty of. The Pope after he has declared the Marriage of
King Henry with Catharine, as being his Brother's Relict, null, gives the King
license to contract See the Bull in Anti-Sanderus, or in Lord Herbert's Hist.
of King Hen. 8th. p. 279. Land. Edit. A. 1683.
cum quacunque alia muliere, modo ne sit Relicta dicti Fratris tui. i. e. with
any other Woman provided it be not the same Woman; Which one, who had not an
aversion to a quibble, would call a Bull of his Holiness's. As for the Clause
of Dispensation here cited, Luther in all his sallies has not miscalled that
Prince, if he was so fatally stupid, as that when he pretended scruples of
Conscience for having married the Relict of his deceased Brother, he could at
the same time desire the Pope to dispense with his Marrying within the same
degree of Affinity. The whole series of the original Instructions, Messages,
and Letters, which past between Rome and England on that Occasion, are all In
Dr. Burnet's Collections Vol. 1st. Land. 1679.
extant, in which there is not the least mention of a matter of so grand
importance. We have also the Burnet's Hist. of Ref. Vol 1. Coll. p. 31.
Decretal Bull, which was desired in favor of the King and drawn up in England
to be subscribed at Rome, which yet contains not any such Dispensation. But I
need not insist any longer in proving this Bull to be inauthentical, since I am
certain it is more this Author's Interest than ours, that it should be so. I
doubt not but the Reader is satisfied from this one specimen, wherein he finds
so much falsehood crowded up into so little room, what esteem he ought to have
of this Writer's Integrity.

Cardinal Wolsey when he discovered the King's affections settled on Ann Bullen,
one inclined to Lutheranism, he proves averse now to what he had formerly
advanced, and delays the decision of the Divorce so long, till at last the Pope
revoked the Cause etc. I confess there is other Authority for this besides
Sanders, higher than whom this Author seldom rises. But Dr. Burnet, whom the
Author, or at least the Editor ought in justice to have consulted, has made it
appear from undoubted Records that this is a Mistake. Burn. V. 1. p. 55.
The joint thanks of the King and Ann Bullen to the Cardinal for his diligence
and industry in their behalf; the Burn. V. 1. Coll. p. 80.
tears and supplications of Dr. Bennet the Cardinal's Agent to the Pope, that
He would not avocate the cause, but leave it in the hands of the Legates; and
the Ibid. p. 81.
Apologetic Letter of the Pope to Wolsey, wherein he excuses himself for having
avocated it, and thereby grieved the Cardinal, stand upon Record to the
contradiction of this dream of Sanders, and to the shame of those, who, after
these Authentic Registers are published to the world, go on without remorse to
transcribe that hardy Writer.

It is said that some others of the chief of the English Clergy, whether it
were conscientiously, or out of the same disaffection of their's to Ann Bullen,
I cannot tell, much disliked the Divorce. It is said, that is, by Sanders, whom
our Author faithfully translates. That some others disliked the divorce. i. e.
besides Wolsey, who did not at all dislike it. Of the chief of the English
Clergy. The Bishops use to be esteemed the chief of the Clergy; but we are
assured from the Authority of all our Historians, that all the Bishops did under
their Hands and Seals declare the Marriage unlawful, except Fisher, who does
not amount to our Author's some others. Whether it were out of Conscience, or
out of the same disaffection of their's to Ann Bullen, I cannot tell. How
awkward this Author is, when he would seem to be impartial? Had they disliked
the Divorce, He ought in Charity to have judged it was out of Conscience; if
their disaffection to A. Bullen was the same with the Cardinal's, we have found
it was none at all.

After the fall of Wolsey, a Bill was given up in the Parliament held 1530 (and
the sum demanded from the Clergy as conspiring with the Cardinal) of an 100000
l charges that the King had been put to, to obtain so many Instruments from
Foreign Universities, which had decided this Matter. Here indeed Sanders
failed our Historian, and therefore this was supplied from Dr. Baylie, a
fabulous Writer, who affects too much the (...) of Oratory to be a slave to
truth. The Book being not in all hands, the Reader will excuse me if for his
Diversion, and to show him what Authors this Writer of Church Government builds
upon, I entertain him in the He begins his Legend thus. "At the time when as
the Stars of Heaven frowned upon the Nation to behold Innocence swaying the
Scepter of this Land so misbecomingly, in the seven and thirtieth Year of the
Reign of the most Noble (though unfortunate) King Henry the sixth, and in the
Year one thousand, four hundred, fifty and nine after the time that a Virgin
Daughter had produced her Father, and a Creature her Creator, (when the blessed
Vine sprang from the same Grape it bare, and the root of Jesse shot from the
Spring) the Divine Providence brought forth under succor, whose after growth
made it soon known to the world how worthily he received the 2 Names (which
both his Christendom and his Parents bestowed upon him within the Collegiate
Church and Town of Beverly situate within the Province of York, about eight
score miles distant Northwards from the Head-City of the Nation) viz. of John
and FISHER. He goes on to compare him with John the Baptist not without Ob and
Sol. One of his Comparisons it, that the First died for saying to King Herod,
it is not lawful for thee to take thy Brother's Wife. The second for saying to
King Henry it is not lawful for thee to put away thy Brother's Wife. Having
showed how deservedly the name of JOHN was bestowd upon the Subject of his
History, he next shows that he deserved also to be called F^SHER being indeed
(as indeed he was) a true FISHER of men. So much may suffice to give the Reader
a just Idea of this Author's Intellectuals. The Conclusion shows how servilely
he employed them in flattering the Usurper Cromwell, whom that party hoped to
make a Proselyte. "Oliva vera is not so hard to be construed Oliverus, as that
it may not be believed that a Prophet rather then an Herald gave the common
Father of Christendom the now Pope of Rome ( Innocent the tenth) such Ensigns
of his Nobility (viz. a Dove holding an Olive Branch in her Mouth) since it
falls short in nothing of both being a Prophecy, and fulfilled, but only his
Highness running into her Arms, whose Emblem of Innocence bears him already in
her Mouth. Life and Death of J. Fisher. Land. 1655.
Margin with the Prologue and Epilogue of that Comedy which the Author of it
call's, The Life and Death of John Fisher Bishop of Rochester: When He has read
it, he will excuse me, if I decline the trouble of so much as considering what
relies upon the sole Authority of that raving Legendarie.

From which Universities the King is said to have procured their suffrages for
his Divorce not without feeing several of them with great Sums of Money.
Concerning which see the Testimonies of several Authors produced by Sanders, (
p. 49. etc.) some of those he quotes saying that they had Money offered to
themselves; some that they were Eye witnesses of it received by others. I once
indeed thought that Sanders was the most impudent and shameless Writer, which
ever pretended to History; But am now afraid, having seen those Forgeries, for
which that Author has been so deeply stigmatized, brought upon the Stage again,
some may be apt to think there is one Person in the World who has a fairer
title to that Character, than He. For as if Sanders had not enough of
imposture, even his Testimony is by this Writer corrupted. Some of those saying
they had Moneys offered to themselves. But the Some, the they, and the
themselves do with Sanders amount only to one, and he no other then Cochlaeus.
Nor was Money offered to him for his suffrage, as it is here represented, but
on condition He would write a book in Defense of the King's cause, or give
himself the trouble of collecting the Sentences of the German Universities in
favor of it. So that, were Cochlaeus a Person of credit, and we obliged to
believe him, this would be capable of a fair Interpretation, and the Money
might justly be presumed offered not as a Bribe, but a Reward. Some that they
were Eyewitnesses of it received by Others. But the some, and the
Eyewitnesses are again but one unknown Bishop of Brasile. As for this Calumny
of Sanders concerning the buying of Subscriptions, the Reader will find a full
Confutation of it in Burn. Hist. Vol. 1. p. 89. 90. and.
Dr. Burnet, who amongst other undoubted Evidences of the falsehood of this
Scandal, has given us the Original Letters of the King's Agents, wherein with
the greatest earnestness imaginable they labor to satisfy the King, that his
Instructions not to corrupt Subscribers had been religiously observed.

Though with your leave to make a little digression concerning this Controversy,
these Universities, at least some of them, considered only the point of the
unlawfulness of one Marrying his Brother's Wife, when such Marriage was
consummate by carnal knowing her, Without considering that Circumstance whether
Catherine was carnally known by her first Husband. It is only his Modesty to
call this a Digression, for it is as much to his purpose, as that which goes
before, or follows after. It is true that some of the foreign Universities do
mention the Consummation; But See these Censures of the Universities. Bur. V.
1. Coll. p. 89.
they put no other Terms in their Answer then was proposed to them in the
Question; so that this is no Argument that their Sentence did not reach the
King's case, but that the Consummation by Arthur was not then doubted of, since
the Question was proposed by the King's Agents indifferently; sometimes with,
sometimes without that Limitation. It is therefore an impertinent Observation
which is here made of their not considering whether Catherine was carnally
known or not by her first Husband, since they were desired only to answer a
speculative Question, not to judge of a matter of fact.

Prince Arthur being thought somewhat infirm and being but fifteen years old
when he Married her, and dying shortly after. In Latin thus, Sand. de Sch. p.
2. Edit. Colon. 1628.
Eo quod Arthurus decimum quintum aetatis annum vix dum attingens, ex lento
praeterea morbo laboraret, cujus tabe post quintum mensem confectus ex hac vita
migravit. So the 2 Deponents, Sanders, and this Author. But the Sea the
Depositions taken from the Original Records. Herbert. p. 270.
Witnesses examined upon Oath before the Legates deposed that Pr. Arthur was
above fifteen at the time of his Marriage, of a good and Sanguine Complexion,
vigorous, and robust, that he bedded with his Princess every Night, and that
the decay of which he died was imputed to his excesses in the Bed.

You may see if you have the curiosity what is said for the consummation of
that Marriage in Fox, against it in Sanders. Not to indulge our curiosity too
far, it may with modesty be affirmed, that the forsan cognitam in the Sea the
Bull, and Breve in Lord Herbert. p. 264.
Bull and the cognitam without forsan in the Breve, (and these words not put
into the body of either, as a Clause to make the Dispensation more large, but
in the Preamble as part of the matter of Fact represented to the Pope) the Bur.
V. 1. p. 35.
not giving Prince Henry the title of Prince of Wales for half an Year after
Arthur's death, the Lord Herbert. p. 270.
Solemn benediction of the Nuptial Bed, the Ibid.
Depositions of so many honorable Witnesses of their being constantly bedded
together, the Fox's Acts and Mon. p. 1051. Edit. Land. 1583.
proofs taken by the Spanish Ambassadors of the consummation of the Marriage,
and the Lord Herbert. p. 271.
Expressions of Prince Arthur to his Servants which implied the same, are
greater Arguments for the Affirmative, then any thing which is by Sanders, or
can be by this Author, advanced for the Negative.

Though the former Marriage had been consummate many Learned Men of that Age of
several Nations ( amongst whom were Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and Tonstal
Bishop of Duresme) whom you may find diligently reckoned up to the Number of
almost Twenty by Sanders, wrote books in Justification that the Marriage of
Henry with Catherine was a matter dispensable. It has been already said that
all the Bishops except Fisher had given it under their Hands and Seals that the
King's Marriage was unlawful. In all the Memorials of those times, Fisher is
the only Bishop we find mentioned to have wrote for it. If Tonstal wrote for
it, yet the Bishop of Duresme did not; For Tonstal's book according to Sand. p.
42.
Sanders, who is this Man's Author, was given in to the Legates, and Tonstal
then was Bishop of London. Lord Herbert. p. 402.
Being afterward made Bishop of Duresme he was sent with others to persuade
Katherine to acquiesce in the Divorce; he used several Arguments to convince
her of the justice of it; She urging his former Opinion in favor of her cause,
he replied that he had only pleaded for the amplitude and fullness of the Bull;
but that the Consummation of the former Marriage had now been judicially
proved, the second Marriage declared by the Sentences of the Universities
incestuous and contrary to the Law of God, and therefore by the Pope's Bull,
however ample, indispensable. Which is a Demonstration against what this Author
asserts that Tonstal was one who justified the second Marriage, though the former
had been Consummate. Sanders his diligence in reckoning up those who wrote for
the Queen's cause, we do not question, but we much doubt his Veracity. It
required an extraordinary diligence to find a book written by a Sand. p. 53.
Bishop of Bristol 13 Years before ever there was such a Bishop-rick. But
should we grant Sanders's full tale of almost twenty these are neither to be
compared in Number, nor Authority with those, who wrote against it. An Burn.
Hist. V. 1. p. 106.
hundred books were shown in Parliament written for the Divorce by Divines and
Lawyers beyond Sea, besides the Determinations of twelve the most celebrated
Universities of Europe. To which might have been added the Sea the Abstract of
what was written for the Divorce Burn. V. 1. p. 97.
Testimonies of the Greek, and Latin Fathers, the Opinions of the Scool-men,
the Authority of the Infallible Pope, who in our Author's Introduction granted a
Bull of Divorce, and the Sentence of one more Infallible then He, the Lev.
18.16. and c. 20.21.
Author of the Pentateuch.

This was agreed on all sides, that Papa non habet potestatem dispensandi in
impedimentis jure divino naturali conjugium dirimentibus, sed in iis quae jure
Canonico tantum dirimunt. This was not so Universally agreed as our Author
would persuade us, for those, Burn. Hist. Vol. 1. p. 103.
who wrote for the Queen's Cause, pleaded that the Pope's power of dispencing
did reach farther then to the Laws of the Church, even to the Laws of God, for
he daily dispensed with the breaking of Oaths and Vows though that was expressly
contrary to the With us the third.
second Commandment. And when the Question was debated in the Convocation, One
Id. ibid. p. 129.
voted the Prohibition to be Moral, but yet Dispensable.

Others gathered the Law in Levit. 18.16. dispensable in some cases from the
express Dispensation made therein Deuteronomy. 25.5. But on the other side it was then
answered Ibid. p. 105.
that the Provision about marrying the Brother's Wife only proves the ground of
the Law is not in it is own Nature immutable, but may be dispensed with by God
in some cases; but because Moses did it by divine Revelation, it does not
follow that the Pope can do it by his Ordinary Authority.

For the general Judgment of the Learned, and particularly for the
Universities, after you have read the Story in Sanders concerning them, and
especially concerning Oxford, as likewise what is said by Lord Herbert, See
what the Act of Parliament 1o Mariae says of them. What the general judgment
of the Learned was, has been intimated already; What were the Sentiments of the
Universities, will best be learnt from their solemn Determinations; After I
have read the Story in Sanders concerning them and especially concerning
Oxford, I am very well satisfied that I have been abused; and that the rather
when I see what is said by Lord Herbert Lord Herbert. p. 352.
, who on purpose publishes an Original Instrument to confute the lie of Sanders
who had called the Resolution of our Universities in a sort surreptitious. As
for the Act of Queen Mary, it was the Act of a Queen in her own cause, and the
25 Hen. 8.22. c. is as great a proof of the Lawfulness of the Divorce, as this
is of the Unlawfulness of it. What censures were past upon this Act, when made,
may be seen in Burn. Hist. V. 2. p. 254.
Dr. Burnet.

The Act mentioning certain bare and untrue conjectures upon which Archbishop
Cranmer founded his sentence of Divorce, This Author will have these relate to
the consummation of the Marriage of Katherine with Arthur. But this is but a
bare conjecture of his, and very probably untrue. For Cranmer See the Abstract
of the grounds of the Divorce Burn. V. 1. Coll. p. 95.
thinking the Marriage of a Brother's Wife unlawful, and the Essence of all
Marriage to consist not in the carnalis copula, but in the conjugal pact, might
upon these Principles conclude the Marriage with Henry unlawful, though that with
Arthur had been proved not consummate, and therefore need not build on any
conjectures concerning the Consummation. Though had he founded his judgment upon
that supposition, It, if I may so speak with due reverence to an Act of
Parliament, was neither a bare conjecture, nor untrue.

As for the Hesitancy of the German-Protestant Divines to declare the Divorce
lawful. I cannot conceive why it is urged by this Author who certainly does not
prefer the Judgment of these Protestant-Doctors to the contrary Determination
of the Roman-Catholic Universities. It has been observed upon this Author's
writings that he is no great Friend of either Communion, of which We have here
a very good Confirmation; when to prove the illegality of K. Henry's Divorce,
he declines the Authority of the Roman-Catholic Universities, as Mercenary, and
appeals to the German Divines, whom he will have to be of his Opinion. Now what
can be a greater blemish to the Roman Communion, then that those great Bodies,
which may justly be supposed it is greatest Strength, should so cheaply barter
away their Consciences? Or what more Honorable testimony given to the Leaders
of the Reformation, then that their judgment should be appealed to in an
instance which makes it appear that their Integrity could not be so far swayed
by the prospect of a common reformed Interest, as their Adversaries are said to
have been by the scandalous temptations of a Bribe? But this is not a single
instance how much more he regards his Hypothesis, then the honor of his
Communion. Thus below, Edward's Reformation was not Universal, he accuses those
Clergy, that did comply, of Hypocrisy; and to show there were some
non-complyers, he instances in the frequent Rebellions of the Romanists which
he says would not have been, had they not been justified to them by the
Clergy. The most bitter Adversary to the Church of Rome would wish her such
Advocates.

I have made this Digression to show you the diversity of Opinions, which was
in this difficult Matter (that you may see the Pope stood not alone in his
judgment) and how the several Interests of several times justified and
condemned the same thing. I am very well convinced, though not from our Author's
proof, that the Pope stood not alone in his judgment. For certainly He that
holds both sides of a Contradiction cannot be singular in his Opinion. The Pope
judged for the Divorce in the 17th Paragraph, when the Dispensation was
procured from him; but here in the 19th he judges against it. But our Author
mistakes that Pope's Character, when he represents him as passing Sentence
according to the merits of the Cause, it being certain that in this whole
procedure He acted by no other Principles, then his Passions or Interest. And
therefore this Author observes a greater Decorum when, telling us in the same
Page, that the King had now no hopes of obtaining a Divorce from the Pope; he
does not pretend the Reason to have been because the Pope was convinced of the
Unlawfulness of it, but because at the same time he stood much in aw of the
Emperor victorious in Italy, and a near Kinsman and Favourer of Queen
Katherine. He needed not therefore to have instanced in the different Opinions
of diverse Men, since the actings of the Pope alone would sufficiently have
convinced us that the several Interests of several times justified and
condemned the same thing.

Now to return to our Matter in hand. So that it seems he has digress'd for 2
Pages to no other purpose then to show that his Paratheses are of the same
Stamp with his Parentheses.

The aforesaid Sum of 100000 l spent upon the Universities abroad etc. This is
again a transcript from Dr. Bailie, and I need say no worse of it.

The King, he says, excepted at the Limitation of [Quantum per legem Christi
licet] in the Title given him by the Clergy, and so at last upon renewed
threats this Clause also was procured to be omitted. See Antiquit. Britannic.
The Author knew, or might have known, that the Author of the Antiquities was in
this mistaken. For Dr. Burnet Hist. V. 1. p. 112. from the Cabala p. 244.
has upon this passage in A. Bp. Parker observed, that King Henry, when the
Province of York demurred upon granting the King the Title of Head, as
improper, in his Answer to them urges that Words are not always understood in
the strictest Sense, and mentions the Explanation made in the Province of
Canterbury, that it was in so far as is agreeable with the Law of Christ,
Accordingly it is represented as passed with this Qualification by our other
Herbert p. 348. Full. Eccl. Hist. Book 5. p. 184. Dr. Heylin Ref. Justif. 2.
Historians.

He refers us again to Dr. Bailie. But the Reader, I presume, has had enough of
him already.

The excluding the Patriarch is, he says, contrary to his 4th Thesis. It is
pity these Theses were not written in the last Century for the Use of those
Roman-Catholics who excluded the Pope. They could find no grounds for the Papal
Authority from Scripture, Antiquity, or Reason; but they might perhaps have been
convinced from our Author's Theses, which are an Authority distinct to all those.

This Paragraph concludes with the mangled Citation from Dr. Hammond which has
already been animadverted on, and is a sore which if I do not here again touch
upon, it is because I would not gall him too much.

Cranmer is said to have divorced the King from Q. Katherine after he had
excluded the Pope's Authority out of his Dominions. Burn. V. 1. p. 131. compared
with p. 144.
was pronounced in May 1533, and the Extinguishing Act did not pass till March
following: Cranmer in the Sentence is called Legate of the Apostolic See. By
this Instance it is plain how implicitly our Author follows Sand p. 73.
Sanders in his Chronology, as well as History.

Warham a favourer of the Queen's cause; Sand. p. 55.
Varamus qui summo studio Reginae parts adjuverat, says Sanders. This
favourer of the Queen's Cause when the Marriage was first proposed, Burn. V. 1.
p. 35.
declared it was contrary to the Law of God; He induced Ibid. p. 36.
the Hen. the 8th.
Prince when of Age to enter his Protestation against it; Ibid. p. 38.
He subscribed and persuaded the other Bishops to subscribe to the unlawfulness
of it; He earnestly pressed Fisher to concur, and upon Refusal made another set
that Bishop's Name and Seal to the Resolution of the other Bishops. These are
some of the favors, which Warham showed to the Queen's Cause.

The Clergy having declared the King Supreme Head of the Church, it seemed
reasonable that no Acts of the Church should stand good without the concurrence
of the Head. This is a wild and senseless Calumny; the C. of England thinks no
Acts which are purely Spiritual want the King's concurrence; her Sacraments and
her Censures she esteems valid independently on all humane Authority; her
Charter she derives immediately from Christ. The Clergy did indeed bind
themselves not to promulge and execute any Canons without the King's leave; but
the execution, of which they abridg themselves, is such as has influence on
the Civil Rights of the Subject, and therefore necessarily required the
concurrence of the Supreme Civil power.

He cites from Dr. Heylin an Answer made by Gardener (and allowed by the
Convocation) to a Parliamentary Remonstrance. But either my Reform. Just. in
the Historical Tracts Edit. Land. 1681.
Edition of Heylin, or (which I am the rather apt to think from the infidelity
of his other citations) this Author deceives me.

The next Paragraph descants upon the request of the Clergy that the Laws
Ecclesiastical might be reviewed by 32 Commissioners. never sufficiently
weighed by Dr. Heylin, Dr. Hammond, nor Dr. Fern. The business of those
Advocates was to defend the Reformation, and it is one of our Author's
pertinent remarks, that they did not meddle with what was not reformed. The
Reformation of the Canons was a design, of which Nothing worse can be said,
than that it did not take effect. If it trouble him that Canons contrary to the
King's Prerogative, Laws of the Land, good of the Subject, and Laws of God
should be reformed, no Honest man can pity him. If he quarrels with the
competency of the Reviewers, that has been spoke to by the Animadv. p. 36.
Animadverter. If by Canons Synodal he will understand the Constitutions of any
other Synods but those of this Nation, it is out of his wonted pride to outface
the Statutes. For the Forasmuch as such Canons, Constitutions, and ordinances
as heretofore have been made by the Clergy of this Realm, cannot now be viewed,
examined, and determined by the* King's Highness, and the 32 Persons according
to the Petition of the Clergy -- 25. Hen. 8.19. c.
Act expressly limits the Review to those Canons which had been enacted by
English Synods, and had no need to meddle with any other, since We never did
own the Authority of any but what were so established.

I need not speak any thing to the 25th Paragraph,. 25.26.
because what is said there, is unsaid in the 26th. But our Author has a
Supposal here which may deserve a Remark. He supposes that Gardener retracted
his acknowledgment of a Regal Supremacy for this reason, because by sad
experience he saw it much enlarged beyond those bounds within which only they
formerly had maintained it just. same Author will suppose that Gardener was
ensnared in King Edward's time by that Sense of Supremacy, of which he had been
a Zealous abettor in King Henry's; and this Sense, which Gardener had of King
Henry's Supremacy, in another Paragraph is said to have been gross and impure,
Autocatacritical.

If it can be worth our while to look back upon what has been performed in this
Chapter, We shall find that Nothing farther has been advanced, then that the
Clergy gave King Henry the Title of Supreme, promised to enact no new Canons
without the King's Assent, and requested that the Old ones might be Reformed.
The rest of his Discourse is only flourish, which our Author made Use of that
he might have the greater scope for his Invention. All that is matetial in 7
Leaves might have been comprised in fewer Words, and this would have heightened
our Esteem of the Author, though it might have deprest the price of the Pamphlet.

A Reply to his 3d Chapter.
Henry is still the Topic, i. e. He is still writing against his Forefathers
the Roman-Catholics. The Extent of this Supremacy he takes from Acts of
Parliament; Repealed, and not Repealed make no difference with him. All the
Expressions, which seem to extend the Supremacy, are invidiously raked
together; and those, which limit it, craftily suppressed. The Statutes are put
upon the rack, and because the Text does not speak plain enough, our Author has
added his Gloss.

He tells us that the Clergy having given the King the Title of Supreme, the
Parliament vested in him all Jurisdiction to the said Dignity belonging. The
Parliament gave the King no New Jurisdiction, but restored the Old; nor did
they place in him any Power but what was recognized by the Clergy, who
certainly did not delude the King with the Complement of an empty Title. The
extent of this Jurisdiction annexed to the Crown He will have us learn from the
1st of Q. Elizabeth; but it seems more proper to learn it from the words of the
same Statute of King Henry. His Comments upon the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
here ascribed to the Prince, might have been spared, if he had attended to an
easy distinction frequently met with in our Writers. They divide
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction into Internal, the inward Government which is in
the Court of Conscience; or External, that which is practiced in exterior
Courts; That proceeds by Spiritual Censures; this by force and corporal
Punishments; That is appropriated to the Clergy, and incommunicable to the
Secular power; this is originally inherent in the Civil Supreme, and from him
derived to Ecclesiastic Governors. Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction when said to be
annexed to the Crown ought to be understood in the latter Sense. This also
answers what is here cited from the Reformatio Legum, though what is urged thence
needs no Reply, that Book having never been ratified by any Autoritative Act of
our Church.

In Virtue of this Jurisdiction translated to the King by another Act of
Parliament 25. Hen. 8.21. c. the Supreme power of giving all manner of
Licenses, Dispensations, Faculties etc. For all Laws and Constitutions merely
Ecclesiastical, and in all Causes, not being contrary to the Scriptures, and
Laws of God, is not only taken from the Pope, but the Clergy too. Nothing is
done in that Act by Virtue of any new-Jurisdiction translated to the King, but
by this power originally inherent in the Sovereign. Every Government has a
right to dispense with it is own Acts, and nothing farther is challenged in that
Statute. No Ecclesiastical Constitutions had ever the force of Laws in this
Kingdom, but from the Legislative power of the Realm: and the same power, which
gave them life, might dispense with them. This the Act says is evident not
only from the wholesome Acts made in King Henry's Reign, but from those made in
the time of his Noble Progenitors. It was not therefore a power now first
attributed to the Prince, but his Ancient Right, for some Years indeed usurped
by the Pope, but now vindicated. This is the true import of that Statute, which
when it is fairly represented is at the same time justified. The power of
granting Licenses is indeed taken from the Pope, to whom it never rightly
belonged; but not from the Clergy, it being expressly provided in the Act, that
all Licenses be granted by the Archbishop, or 2 Spiritual Persons. In case of
the Archbishop's refusal, the Court of Chancery is to judge whether such
refusal be out of Contumacy; which power of the Chancery if it be contrary to
our Author's 8th Thesis, it ought the rather to be excused since the p. 34.
Animadverter has observed that that Thesis is contrary to it self. His Notion
of the Parliament's coordinacy, with the King in the Supremacy I leave to the
Censure of the Learned in the Law; this Act I am sure whence he infers it,
positively asserts the King to be Supreme.

By Virtue of the same Supremacy translated to the King, the necessity of the
Metropolitan's being confirmed by the Patriarch is taken away. The Statute
whence he collects this mentions neither Metropolitan nor Patriarch. It enacts
indeed that no Person of this Realm shall be presented to the Bishop of Rome,
otherwise called the Pope, to or for the office of Bishop or Archbishop of this
Realm. But the Archbishops of this Realm are such Metropolitans as ow no
Subjection to any Patriarch, and therefore have no necessity of being confirmed
by him. Nor does the Statute take away any such Necessity, for it supposes
none. The King's Presentation to a Bishopric, against which he is so warm, was
no new Usurpation, but an ancient Right: had he lived some Centuries before the
Reformation, he would have had this Grievance to complain of.

The 2 next Paragraphs he tells us he had set down before,. 30. and 31.
and I see no reason why they are repeated, but for the Reader's mortification.
The 32d Paragraph is that which has got the particle See the Animadv. p. 65.
as in it. The said Archbishop, when no Archbishop had been mentioned before
is another of our Author's Idioms in the same Period. The Act here descanted
upon, expired with King Henry, and it will be time enough to consider it, when
it is revived again. If Prohibition of appeals to Rome, and making the King the
last Appellee be an Act of the Reformation, Henry the 2d, and all his Bishops
(except Becket) were Reformers.

Edward, and yet make up part of that accumulative charge which is laid on the
Reformation. Even the Six Articles are urged, which drained the blood of so
many Reformers. But the Protestants in justifying the King's Supremacy must
allow their own Condemnation if teaching any thing contrary to the six Articles
etc. That is, all those who own an Authority, must justify the abuse of it; They
who obey the just Commands of their Prince, must obey him when he commands what
is unjust. Father Walsh acknowledges, I suppose, the Pope's Supremacy; but he
thinks himself severely dealt with, when he is censured for not being a Rebel.

Having quoted several Acts he comes to reflect upon them a little. viz. for
six Pages. First he copes with Arch Bishop Bramhal, but I should be unjust to
that Prelate's memory, if in so unequal an engagement I should think he wanted
my Assistance. What is said by the Bishop is not said only, but demonstrated.
This Author has urged nothing against him, but what he might have fetched from
the Bishop's own Confutation of Sergeant. The Question here discust has already
been debated in the p. 20.
Animadversions, and, if the Reader desires to be farther satisfied, I cannot
more oblige him then by sending him to the Most Reverend and Learned Author. He
will find there a just and solid Vindication of a Noble Cause, which suffers
when it falls into weak management, and is made part of an Occasional Pamphlet.
Having catechized the Bishop he next canvaseth that Statute of much
concernment, that the King shall have power from time to time to Visit,
Repress, and Reform all such Errors, and Heresies as by any manner of Spiritual
Authority lawfully may be Reformed. But this Act will be without the reach of
our Author's cavils if it be observed; That the Power, by which the King Visits
and Reforms, is not Spiritual, but Political; That a Power is not given him to
declare Errors, but to repress them,; that the determination of Heresy is by
Act of Parliament limited to the Authority of Scriptures, 4 first General
Councils, and assent of the Clergy in their Convocation; that the King has not
all the Power given him which by any manner of Spiritual Authority may be
lawfully exercised, (for he has not the power of the Keys) but a power given
him to reform all Heresies by Civil Authority, which the Church can do by her
Spiritual; That it is impossible it should be proved that this power of
Visiting and Reforming is a necessary Invasion of the Office of Spiritual
Pastors, because when the Prince does it by them, commanding them to do the
Work, and exacting of them a discharge of their duty, He does this without
Usurping their Office, and yet does it by a power, distinct from, and
independent on their's: And lastly, that the Prince is obliged to take care
that all Acts of reforming be executed by their proper Ministers, because else
he transgresses the Power prescribed in this Statute, so to reform Errors as
may be most to the pleasure of Almighty God. The Application is obvious, and
will satisfy the Reader that our Author must part with a whole Paragraph, if
He will, as he pretends,. 35. n. 4.
remove the Mis-interpretation of this Act.

Henry's, and some words of Cromwell; which were very justifiable, if it were
either necessary that we must defend them, or the Defense not obvious to every
one who thinks. His Conclusion of this Chapter amounts to no more then that
Bishop Gardener was too great a Courtier, and Calvin too credulous; gross in
his sense of the Supremacy, and the other zealous against it so misrepresented.
Which will then begin to be pertinent, when it is proved that Gardener was a
Protestant, and Calvin a son of the Church of England. There is so little in
this Chapter which affects the Reformation, that it cannot be worth
recapitulating.

A Reply to Chapter the 4th.
comes to the times of Edward the 6th. Now then he first begins to remember the
Title of his Book. Here he finds all the Supremacy confirmed to Edward the
Sixth, which was formerly conceded to Henry the 8th. And yet the Reformers are
accused of Innovation, for continuing what they found established by
Roman-Catholics, he complains of the Repeal of several Statutes made in
confirmation of the Determinations of the Church. Church is meant the Church of
Rome, and it is no great Crime in a Reforming Prince that he did not think
himself obliged to punish with Death all her Determinations. These Statutes now
repealed were revived by Q. Mary, and again repealed by Q. Elizabeth. Which
amounts to no more then that Q. Mary was a Roman-Catholic, and Q. Elizabeth a
Catholic Reformed. Hence he infers by way of Corollary, that the trial of
Heresies and Heretics by the Clergy according to the Determinations and Laws
of Holy-Church was admitted or excluded here, according as the Prince was
Catholic or Reformed. This sentence, carries two faces, and is capable of two
very different Constructions. Either it may signify that the Clergy were, or
were not the tryers of Heretics, according as the Prince was Romanist or
Reformed,
and then it is false; Or that the Determinations of Holy Church (You must
understand the C. of Rome) were or were not the Rule of such Trials, according
as the Prince was of the Roman or Reformed Communion, and then it is
wonderfully impertinent.

seeker goes on, and finds it affirmed in an Act of Parliament, that All
Jurisdiction Spiritual and Temporal is derived from the King as Supreme Head of
the Church and Realm of England. But if he had pleased He might have found too,
that this Act is repealed, and that therefore we are under no Obligation to
defend it. But if Jurisdiction be understood in the limited sense before
explained, this Act has no poison in it. And so it will be understood by any
one, who consults the Context. But this Act has been so largely and distinctly
discussed by a Learned Bishop Sanderson's Episcopacy not prejudicial to Regal
power.
Casuist that a farther disquisition of it is needless. The change of Election
of Bishops by Conge d'eslire into Collation by Letters Patent is a bad
instance of the King's Supremacy; for if such collation infers a Regal
Supremacy, those, who have read that Bishoprics were originally Donative, not
Elective, will be apt to conclude that the King's of England were always
Supreme. Nor is this Nomination at all injurious to the Divine Right of
Bishops, which is not derived from the Persons Electing or Nominating, but the
Pastors Consecrating.

But we have him again crying out (...). He finds the King and Parliament
authorizing Archbishops, Bishops etc. By Virtue of their Acts, to take
Informations concerning the not using of the Common Prayer etc. Therein
prescribed and to punish the same by Excommunication etc. The first and last of
these etcs, are very artificially placed for corrupting the Text. After Bishops
should have followed, Chancellors and Commissaries, after Excommunication,
Sequestration, and other Censures and Processes. So that the Authority given by
this Act does not necessarily respect the Bishops, and that Power of
Excommunicating, which they have jure divino, but may relate to the power given
to Chancellors, and Commissaries, and other Officers, who plead no such divine
right to their respective Functions; or if the Bishops are included, yet not so
as that they derive the power of Excommunicating from this Act, but of
inflicting the other punish-ments, which by this Act may be inflicted. Or let
us suppose the Bishops authorized by this Act to Excommunicate, and
Excommunication taken in the strictest sense for internal Censures, yet this
will be no injury to their Jus divinum; until it be proved that because God
has gave the Bishops a power to Excommunicate, therefore the King may not
command them to put it in Execution, where there is a just Cause.

finds 32 Persons commissioned to reform the Laws Ecclesiastical. But this he
found before in King Henry's Reign, where it has already been considered, and
whither I refer the Reader, as often as this Author shall be pleased to remind
us of this Discovery.

finds Six Prelates and Six others commissioned to make a new form of
Consecration of Bishop's and Priests. He might have found that this Act as well
as the former was made at the Sea the Petitions of the Clergy. Burn. Vol. 2. p.
47.
request of the Convocation. Nothing is by him excepted against the Form it
self; and for the Authority, the Synod petitioned such a Commission might be
granted; the Six Prelates, and six Divines Bur. V. 2. p. 141.
Persons commissioned were all Clergy Men; and King Edwards Articles. Art. 35.
Bur. V. 2. Coll. p. 218.
the Synod confirmed it when done. As for the Oath against the Pope inserted in
the new Ordinal, it was by birth a Roman-Catholic; Fox. p. 1092.
King Henry's Bishops took it without scruple; That Compare the Oath in Fox
with the Oath of Supremacy as it now stands.
part of it, which this Author thinks most offensive is since put out, and he
may be as severe as he pleases upon a Nonentity. The Heretical Catechism in
the 43d Paragraph shall be spoken to when it meets us again in the 166th.

The 44th would justify a Protestation of Bishop Bonner's, which that Bishop
himself Bur. V. 2. Coll. p. 112.
recanted. He is angry at Fox for calling that Protestation Popish. But the
Prelate himself in his recantation of it calls it unadvised, of ill exexample,
unreasonable, and undutifull. If Fox abuses the Bishop it is because Popish
signifies something worse then all these.

Gardiner's Subscription together with our Author's Notes upon them. One of the
most pertinent Notes would have been, that Bishop Fox. p. 1350. 1357.
Gardener subscribed most of these Articles; but this was not for his Interest
to observe. His remark is that though in some of these Articles the Authority of
Parliament is mentioned, yet in none of these is any thing said of the Consent
of the Clergy, as necessary to make such Parliamentary or Regal injunctions
valid. That the consent of the Clergy was urged to this Bishop, I hope he does
not deny; I am sure. 110. it is urged by r. that in the charge given in against
Gardener it is said, that the Injunctions were of all men for all sorts
obediently received. And that this charge was given in, is not denied in the
Reply to r.. 119.
elsewhere He confesses it. The meaning must be, that this consent was not
urged under the modality of making the Regal Injunctions valid, Nor do I see
any Necessity it should; for Gardener had not yet so far refined his gross
sense of the Supremacy, but that he still owned his Obligation to obey His
Majesty's Godly Injunctions and Ordinances concerning Religion. Neither could
the Imposers of these Injunctions, according to their Principles, lay so great
a stress on the consent of the Clergy; for if the matter of the Injunctions was
unlawful, no Church-Autority could make them lawful; but if it was agreeable to
the Law of God, then the Civil Authority without the Synodal (if that had been
wanting) was sufficient. From this idle remark the Author has raised as idle a
Consequence; From this non-mentioning the consent of the Clergy he collects,
that when the Synodal consent of the Clergy is any where else mentioned, as
sometimes it is, it is not to add any Authority to these Injunctions thereby.
Now to me it seems a wild Inference that because the Synodal consent was once
not urged as necessary, therefore, whenever it was urged, it was thought to
add no Authority. I may certainly obey my Prince in a thing lawful, though my
Pastor does not at the same time exact this Obedience from me; But when they
both require the same Duty, there arises a new tie of Obedience, and I am now
under a double Obligation. But least we should wonder why the King and
Parliament never pleaded any Necessity of the Synodal consent, the Author
conjectures the reasons to be, 1st. Because some of the Voters were displaced,
and so their suffrage less Authentical. But these places were supplied, and
then I would know why those, who succeeded into their Pastoral charge, did not
also succeed into their Synodal Authority? and if so, why the Reformers should
think the Act of a Synod less Authentical when Ridley sat there, than when
Bonner did? His second reason is, Because they saw that the Laws of this
National Clergy could stand in no force, but so would also the Laws of the
Church, and her Synods which were superior to the English Clergy; And if the
King urged his and his Subject's freedom from the Laws of the Church Universal,
so must He also from the Laws of his own Church National. Church, Superior
Synods, and the Church-Vniversal are words, which sound big; but when they come
to be construed, the Laws of the Church, signify Papal Decrees; Superior
Synods are put for any Council that is foreign; and the Church-Vniversal
dwindles into Roman-Catholic. In this case I hope we may obey our Lawful
Pastors, though we reject an Usurper; Nor are we quitted from our Obligation to
the just Authority of our own Bishops; because we do not submit to the Invasions
of Forreigner. But if by Church-Vniversal, and Superior Synods is meant what
other People understand by those words, it rests to be proved that the Reformed
plead an Exemption from their Authority.

God's just judgment on Bishop Gardener, for having so zealously abetted the
King's Supremacy. But the divine Judgments are differently interpreted,
according to the different Sentiments of the Interpreters. Other Writers tell
us of severer Judgments inflicted on this Prelate, than Deprivation, and that
for more flagrant crimes then asserting the Regal Supremacy.

He concludes this Chapter with the resentment of the Clergy for their lost
Synodal Authority. It is confessed that the Extreme of raising the Ecclesiastical
power too high, in the times of Popery, had now produced another of depressing
it too much. But this was the Infelicity of the Clergy, not their Crime. The
same Authority, which tells us the Clergy complained of this, tells us also that
those complainers were the Reformers. But this is a truth, which is
industriously concealed, and the Citation mangled lest it should confess too
much. Haec discrimina pati Clericis iniquum atque grave visum est, says he,
from the Antiquitates Britannicae. Clericis multo jam acrius atque vigilantius
in divina Veritate, quam unquam antea laborantibus, say the Antiquities. This
Omission I believe was not for brevity sake, for he does not use to be so
frugal in his Citations. But the Reader was to understand by Clerici the Popish
Clergy exclusively to all others, and the decay of Synodal Authority was to be
represented not as the grievance, but the fault of the Reformers. For this
reason it is that we find this Author indecently insulting oven that pious
Martyr Bishop Hooper. All, which I shall observe of it, is this, that what is
here said of this Bishop's Appeal from the Ecclesiastical to the Civil power,
is applicable to St. Paul's Acts 25.11.
Appeal to Caesar. The cause then was Ecclesiastical, for They Acts 25.19.
had certain questions against him of their own Superstition. And the Bishop
might have used St. Paul's Plea, Acts 24.14.
That after the way which they called Heresy, so worshipped he the God of his
Fathers, believeing all things which are written in the Law and in the Prophets.

This Chapter more nearly concerning the Reformation it may not be amiss to
give a brief Summary of what is performed in it. It is said, that all the
Supremacy was confirmed to Edward the 6th, which was conceded to Henry the 8th;
But no reason is given why it should have been diminished: that some Statutes
against Heretics were repealed; but this repeal not shown to be without good
reason, or good Authority: that all Jurisdiction Spiritual is said to be derived
from the Prince; but this Expression taken in a due Sense may be justified, and
if it could not, the Act being void, we are under no Obligation to defend it;
that the Bishops are authorized by Virtue of an Act of Parliament to
excommunicate; but this Interpretation is forced upon the Statute, and the
words taken even in this Sense will not bear the Stress which is laid upon
them; that 32 Commissioners were appointed to reform the Laws Ecclesiastical,
and 6 Prelates with 6 others to reform the Ordinal; but nothing said to show
that these did not want a Reformation, or that the Persons commissioned were
not qualified, for such a trust; and these two urged as the mere effects of
Parliamentary Supremacy, which were the Synodical request of the Clergy: that
an Oath of Supremacy was imposed on Persons entering into Holy Orders; but this
Oath invented by Papists, and in that part which gives Offense since altered:
that an Hypothetical Submission of Bonner was not accepted; but this such a
Submission as that Bishop recanted: That the consent of the Clergy was once not
urged as necessary to make the Regal Injunctions valid; But no reason assigned
why it should have been: That the Clergy complained of their lost Synodal
Authority; But these the Reformers, who yet are accused of being no Friends to
it: That Bishop Hooper appealed to the Civil power; But so also did St. Paul.
The title of this Chapter (least the Contents may have made the Reader forget
it) was, The Supremacy claimed by King Edward the 6th.

A Reply to Chapter the 5th.
WE are come now to Q. Mary's Reign, the fatal Revolutions of which We would
willingly forget, did not the unseasonable importunity of these Men refresh our
memories. Our Author had acted the part of a skilful Painter, had he cast a
veil over this piece of his History; for the Calamities of this Reign tend
little to the Honor of that Religion, and are never properly insisted on, but
by those who write Invectives against Popery; But those Reflections, which
create horror in other men's breasts, seem to have a different Effect on this
Writer: for in his entrance upon this Reign, it is easy to discover such a new
Warmth and Vigor in his Expressions, as betray him to be in a more then
ordinary rapture. All that had been done in the two former Reigns by Prince, by
State, or by Clergy, were now by an equal Authority of Prince, Clergy, and State
reversed, repealed, ejected. His Discourse here has put on a new air, and like
the Orator in his triumphs over exiled Cataline he prosecutes declining Heresy
with an abiit, excessit, evasit. But here to moderate his Acclamations, let me
tell him that this Prince, who thus reverses, repeals, and ejects, was the same
Burn. V. 2. p 237.
that gave the Suffolk men full assurance that she would never make any
Innovations or changes in Religion; The same, that made an open Declaration in
Council, Bur. V. 2. p. 245.
that though her own Conscience was staid in matters of Religion, yet she was
resolved not to compel or restrain others: So that this after repealing
reflects severely on those Guides, who had the Government of her Conscience,
and those Principles, by which She acted. Lay-Supremacy was indeed at last
ejected by her, but not till the other parts of the Reformation were reverst by
it is Influence. If sending out Injunctions in matters Ecclesiastical, using the
Title of Head of the Church, convoking Synods, ejecting Bishops by Commission,
prohibiting some Preachers, licensing others, inhibiting the Pope's Legate to
come into the Kingdom, if these, I say, are admitted to be signs of a
Lay-Supremacy, it must be confessed that Q. Mary was such a Supreme. It is not
therefore Regal Supremacy, as such, but as countenancing the Reformation, which
these men condemn. Those Powers, which in the former Chapter were Invasions of
the Church's right, do in this easily escape our Author's Censure. We are told
now of the power of the Prince when Protestantism is to be defaced, who in the
establishment of it was allowed to have no power in Causes Ecclesiastical. Nor
is the Clergy, which here reverses, repeals, and ejects, less liable to
Exceptions. For the first change was not of Religion, but of the Pastors; and
the Reforming Bishops were ejected before the Reformation. See them reckoned by
this Author.. 53.
Thirteen Prelates we find deprived to make room for a reversing Hierarchy; and
of Bur. V. 2. p. 276.
Sixteen-thousand Inferior Clergymen (as they were then computed) 12000 turned
out for committing the unpardonable Sin of Matrimony. As for the Authority of
the State, i. e. the Parliament, it was none, we were told, in the 2 former
Reigns, and sure it had no advantage in this if it be remembered, how Burn. V.
2. p. 252.
Elections were managed, and how predominant Spanish Gold was.

The 4 next Paragraphs give us an account of the Restitution of things made in
Q. Mary's days; 49 50.51.52.
which I allow, and only desire the Reader to carry a long with him what has
been hinted of the manner of it. Mary's days were a lawful Clergy?. 54. ad. 65.
And the succeeding pages endeavor their Vindication. The Bishops ejected by
Q. Mary he has numbered from Fox, but least we should have too much truth
together has took care to qualify it with his Paratheses. Fox mentioning
Hooper ejected from Worcester, it is added [ he might have said from Gloucester
too, for Hooper in the latter end of Edward the 6th 's time held both these
Sees together in Commendam.] Our Author might have spared this Observation from
Sanders, had he consulted the Burn. V. 2. App. p. 396.
Appendix to the History of the Reformation, where this lie of Sanders is
confuted. Hooper was first made Bishop of Gloucester, which before King Henry
the 8th 's time, had been part of the Bishopric of Worcester: In King Edward's
time these Sees were reunited, so that Hooper had not two Bishoprics, but one
that had for some Years been divided into two; He only enjoyed the revenue of
Gloucester. [ For Worcester, Latimer for Nonconformity to the Six Articles had
been ejected out of it, or for fear resigned it, yet (for what reason I know
not) could not in King Edward's time be restored to it.] This again is a
transcript from the inexhaustible Sand. p. 181.
Sanders. Latimer Bur. V. 2. App. p. 385. 392. and Hist. V. 2. p. 95.
was not ejected, but freely resigned his Bishopric upon passing the Six
Articles, with which he could not comply with a good Conscience. In King
Edward's time the House of Commons interposed to repossess him, but he refused
to accept of any Preferment. [Taylor was removed from Lincoln by death, not by
the Queen, as appears from Fox. p. 1282.] Q. Mary's Bur. V. 2. Coll p 257.
Commission for displacing the Bishops is extant, amongst which Tailor is one.
Fox positively says He was deprived; He says indeed in the place cited that
he died, but not that his Death was before his Deprivation. Having given us
this Catalogue of the ejected (thus adulterated with his false mixtures) he
desires us in Vindication of the just Authority of Q. Mary's Clergy to take
notice; That the Ejection of Bishops in Q. Mary's days was not the First, but
Second Ejection; the first being made in King Edward's time, when Gardener,
Bonner, Tonstal, Day, Heath, Vesy, were removed from their Sees. But here we
have a Supernumerary put in to enhance the Catalogue. Vesy Godw. Catal. of
Bishops.
was not deprived, but did resign. His Character in History is so scandalous
that he ought to have been deprived, and therefore it had been pardonable to
have guessed that he was; but it was unlucky to assert it. Probably, he says,
some others were removed from their Sees. To which it may be enough to answer,
probably not. I find not the Ecclesiastical History of those times accurately
written by any. An Accurate Writer in his Sense is one who favors his own
Cause, and is careful to insert a necessary Supplement of his own, where the
History wants it. His admired Sanders is in this Sense accurate enough, but not
so accurate, as our Author could have wished. Nor Mr. Fox to use the same
diligence in numbering the change of Clergy under King Edward, as he does that
under Q. Mary. As for the Bishops which are the Clergy here meant, Fox mentions
the Deprivation of all that were deprived; and it is because He had not this
Author's diligence, that he named no more. Something may be conjectured from
those general words of his, For the most part the Bishops were changed, and the
dumb Prelate compelled to give place to others that would preach. Mr. Fox was no
great Master of Style, nor rigorous in his Expressions, from which our Author
would make advantage. But it is a sign his cause is desperate, when he is
forced thus to build upon empty conjectures. The Deprivation of Bishops is not
a matter of so little importance, that our Historians should take no notice of
it; but amongst them all, We find no more Deprived, then have been mentioned.
Dr. Heylin, and Dr. Burnet have been very exact in this particular, but they
have not arrived to our Author's diligence and accuracy. He must therefore be
content with the ejection of only 5 Bishops in King Edward^s time; which he
promises us to prove not lawful, and consequently the ejected justly restored,
and the introduced justly ejected in Q. Mary's time. The ejection he proves not
lawful; Because 1st. Not done by Lawful Authority. 2ly. Nor for a Lawful Cause.

1st. Not done by lawful Authority: Because the Bishops being tried for Matters
Ecclesiastical, their Judges were the King's Commissioners. But neither is it
true (at least not proved) that they were tried for Matters Ecclesiastical; Nor
is it true that the King's Commissioners (amongst whom was the Metropolitan)
were not proper Judges in such Causes, as has been proved by the Animadverter;
Nor can the Authority of such Commissioners, though unlawful, be declined by this
Writer, who presently will prove the Bishops in Q. Mary's time ejected by
lawful Judges, Who yet were no other, then that Queen's Commissioners. So that
there is in this one Period such a complication of falsehood, as nothing can
match, but what follows concerning the Causes of their Deprivation.

The Causes he supposes to be all the Articles of Popery as distinct to the
Religion Reformed; Their not owning the King's Supremacy; Nonconformity to his
Injunctions; Not-relinquishing the Use of former Church-Liturgies; Not
conforming to the New-Service, and other Innovations. He supposes he has by
this time confirmed his Authority with the Reader so far that he will credit his
bare assertion without vouching any History. But it is impossible He could have
falsified so grossly, had not an implicit Faith in Sanders given him over to a
Spirit of delusion. Tonstal Bur. V. 2. App. p. 390. 391.
was deprived for Misprision of Treason; He was a firm Friend of the Protector,
and so well satisfied with the first changes which were made, that he is
complained of by Gardener (as well as Cranmer) in a Letter which he wrote to
the Protector. Ibid.
Bonner and Gardener were deprived for not Preaching up the King's Authority to
be the same under Age as after; which is a point purely Secular, and relating
to the Constitutions of this Government; Bur. Hist. V. 2. p. 70.
Gardener in the Sermon (for an Omission in which he was deprived) expressed
himself very fully concerning the Pope's Supremacy, as justly abolished, and
the Suppression of Monasteries and Chantries; approved of the King's
proceedings; thought Images might have been well used, but yet might be taken
away; approved of Communion in both kinds, of the abolition of Masses, and new
Order of Communion; asserted indeed the Corporal Presence, but that was not yet
declared against. Bur. V. 2. p. 121.
Bonner complied so easily with every Order of Council, that it was not easy
to find any complaint against him. Bur. V. 2. App. p. 390.
Heath and Day complied with all the changes that were made in the first 4
Years of this King's reign, and both preached, and wrote for them. They were
deprived by Lay-Delegates in the 5th Year of King Edward, and my Author hence
guesses it was for some Offense against the State. After this account I need
not be sollicitous to examine, Whether the Causes assigned by our Author were
just Causes of deprivation or not, having proved that they were not at all the
Causes.

As for the Ejection of the rest of King Edward's Bishops by Q. Mary, this, he
says, will be justifiable if done. 1st. For a lawful Cause. 2ly. By a lawful
Judge; which therefore he assigns. The Causes here he supposes to be all the
Articles of Reformation, as distinct to Popery, viz. Marriage of Clergy;
denying the Papal and asserting the Regal Supremacy; accusing the
Church Service of Idolatry, denying the corporal presence in the Eucharist, or
that it was a propitiatory Sacrifice, etc. This again he asserts upon his own
Authority; which had need to be great, since it contradicts all others. Of the
Bishops ejected by Q. Mary, (besides Bur. Hist. V. 2. p. 247.
those who made room for the re-entrance of the former Possessors, not unjustly
ejected, so far as has yet appe^^^d, and therefore unjustly reintroduc'd) Bur.
V. 2. Coll. p. 256.
Four of them, Holgate, Farrars, Bird, and Bush were ejected for Marriage.
Ibid. p. 257.
Three others Tailor, Hooper, and Harley were deprived by Delegates, who were
empowered to declare their Sees void, as they were already void. Bur. V. 2. p.
275.
Barlow was made to resign. Bur. V. 2. p. 257.
Cranmer, the only remaining Bishop in the Catalogue, was esteemed Archbishop
till he was degraded for Heresy; so that he indeed was deprived of his See,
and of his Life together, for the Causes alleged. Now as for those, which were
ejected for Marriage, it was warranted by the Law of God, the Authority of the
Primitive Church, the Statutes of the Realm, and the Synodical Act of the
English Clergy. Nor is it to any purpose, which our Author urges, that these
Acts of the Parliament and Synod were repealed; since a repeal could only
abrogate the Law for the future, not void it from the beginning; it might make
that Marriage should be, not that it should have been unlawful; it might
legitimate the proceedings against these Bishops if they retained their Wives,
not warrant the deprivation of them for what was past. Nor is it more material
which is here urged, that the Laws which legitimated such Marriage were void in
their making, as being contrary to the Canons of Superior Councils, until it
be proved that those Councils, which prohibited such Marriage, were our lawful
Superiors, and, if so, had power to lay such a Yoke upon their Subjects. For
these Councils he refers me to the Discourse of Celibacy, and for a Reply I
refer him to the Answer to it. As for the next 3 Bishops Tailor, Hooper, and
Harley their Judges were not to seek for a Cause, who had power to declare
their Sees void, as they were already void. But let us at last suppose the
Causes of their Deprivation the same as are by him alleged; as it is confessed
they were the Causes, for which Cranmer was deprived, and for which He and
others were burnt; Yet whether these were just Causes of Deprivation or not,
does not depend upon this Man's confident Assertion, but on the truth of the
thing. It seems something arrogant thus Magisterially in one breath to condemn
all those Doctrines of the Reformation, which have hitherto stood the shock
against all their Arguments, and their Faggots; their Bellarmines and their
Bonners. The Reformers for some Years have been writing and dying in
Justification of these Doctrines, and does this Author at last think that the
very naming of them is Evidence enough that those Bishops, who were ejected for
their adherence to them, were rightfully ejected as to the Cause? But it is
enough with these Men to condemn an Opinion, that it is not their own; For as
for the truth of particular Doctrines, whether there be a Trinity, whether
Christ and the Holy Ghost be God, or the like, these, we are told, Guide in
Controv. Preface.
are things that trouble none, who has once undergone the Mortification of
dethroning his own Judgment, and has captivated it to the Unity of the
Church's Faith.

But as they were regularly ejected as to the cause, so they were as to the
Judge, they being not ejected, he says, by the Queen's Commissioners, but by
the delegates of the Western Patriarch. This, not to speak too bluntly, is a
Book of Educ. p. 294. Edit Ox. 1677.
Gasconade with a Witness. Had not the World been presented with a Collection
of Records, such an Assertion, as this, would have been more tolerable; but to
tell us they were not deprived by the Queen's Commissioners, when we can have
recourse to the Bur. Vol. 2. Coll. p. 256. 257.
Original Commissions, by which they were deprived, became one, who writes as
if he had no reputation to lose. But the Judges were to be proved Canonical,
the Delegates of the Prince had before been affirmed to be Uncanonical, and
this being a knot impossible to be untied, the Knight Errant boldly cuts it.

cause, and as to the Judge, the next Question is, whether they were regularly
burnt too? As for the burning of Heretics, it is to be considered, He says,
that the Secular Laws, not Ecclesiastical appoint it, and the Secular
Magistrates, not Ecclesiastical, execute it. This amounts to no more than that
Kings are the Pope's Executioners; they are required to extirpate Heretics upon
pain of being themselves extirpated; and if they will not be active, must be
passive. It is farther observed that Protestant Princes, as well as Catholic,
have thought fit to execute this Law upon Heretics. He instances in Joan of
Kent, and George Paris burnt in Edward the Sixth's days. But these suffered for
Impieties directly against the Creed; B. V. 2. p. 111.
Joan of Kent for denying that Christ was incarnate of the Virgin Mary; Ibid p.
112.
George Paris for denying that he was God. We have King Edward's Ibid
tears recorded which he shed upon signing the warrant for Joan of Kent's
execution; but I have not read of any tears shed upon that Occasion by Q. Mary.
Some other Anabaptists condemned and recanting were enjoined to bear their
Faggots. But Ibid. p. 111.
the Opinions of these Anabaptists would have made an Anticreed to that of the
Apostles; and bearing the Faggot is ill opposed to the cruelty of that Reign,
when Cranmer's case.
recanting did not exempt from burning. In Henry the 8th 's time, Cromwell
pronounced Sentence on Lambert to be burnt. I never read before that King Henry
was a Protestant Prince. Archbishop Cranmer committed to the Counter Thomas
Dob a Master of Arts, who also died in prison. The Consequence is, that
Protestant Princes burn Heretics. In Q. Elizabeth's time Jews and Hammond were
burnt for Heretics. Hammond's Impieties against God and his Christ were such,
as Cambd. Hist. of Eliz. p. 235. Edit. Land. 1675.
Mr. Cambden will not mention, but desires they may be buried in Oblivion.
Lewis was an Heretic of the same Magnitude. Hacket was executed for Heresy and
Blasphemy. Full. Hist. Book 9^h. p. 205.
Such blasphemies as might have been uttered by a fallen Angel. Coppin and
Thocker were hanged for publishing Brown's book against the Common Prayer. But
Stow's Chron. Q. Eliz. p. 696.
that book full of Sedition against the State. In King James's time Bartholomew
Legate was burnt for an Heretic. But See his Opinions. Full. l. 10. p. 62.
he an Arrius Redivivus. As for the Statute of King James An. 3. Jac. 4. c. it
does not punish the reconciled as Heretics, but as Traitors. The Crime there
reputed Treason is withdrawing the Natural Obedience from the Prince; and none
can suffer by that Act, who takes the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. Had
the Writ de Haeretico comburendo lain as quiet as this Act, We should not have
reflected with so much horror on the Cruelty of the C. of Rome. This instancing
in a Statute made only in terrorem, and never put in Execution (though the
demerits of some Apostates have been sufficiently provoking) would tempt one to
look back into the last Century, and review the Treasons and Rebellions which
extorted the making of that Statute: but I forbear to pursue this Topic, least
too warm a zeal against the disloyalty of that party be it self interpreted
dis-loyal.

condemns only to Poverty and Prisons. This in Spain or Italy had been a great
Act of grace; but He might be sure few of our Laity or Clergy could plead the
benefit of it. The Fathers of the Church and Learned Sons of it are not
mentioned in this Indulgence, and there seems to be no reserve for them. Indeed
He had stretched his kindness too far in favor of the Haereticis credentes, and
as if he repented, confesses some of them to have been extremely arrogant and
ignorant. It provokes his Indignation that Mechanics should dispute with
Bishops. But the advantage these Mechanics had in the cause, made amends for
the imparity of the Advocates. And after all, Bonner, and the Miller were not
such unequal Disputants, as He would persuade Us. They relied he says, on the
uncertainty of their own Judgment. But this Protestant certainty such, as has
been proved to rise as high as the Popish Infallibility. He is not satisfied
that the Relations of these disputes are penned with Integrity. Indeed the
reasonings of the Roman Prelates and Doctors are such, as One would be apt to
think them misrelated; but when I read our Modern Controvertists, I begin to
have a great respect for their Forefathers.

The next Paragraphs tell us,. 67.68.
that if the Ejection of these Bishops were lawful, then the Introduction of
others will be so too, though. 1. Whilst they living, 2ly. Without the
Metropolitan's consent. But I am so well satisfied he has not proved the
lawfulness of the Ejection, that I shall not dispute with him concerning the
Consequences of it. Our Author him-self, who does not use to be scrupulous,
seems here unsatisfied with his own performances. For being conscious he has
not proved Q. Mary's Clergy lawful, Mary's re-establishment of the former
Religion, even without her own Clergy, from the Authority of Superior Synods.
This he knows is part of our Plea, but with this advantage on our side, that
Whereas, he will have the Prince obliged to execute the Church's Canons without
Inferior license, We think him much more concerned to provide for the Execution
of Christ's Laws without such consent of the Clergy.

What has been said in this Chapter cannot want a Recapitulation. The ejection
of Bishops in King Edward's time was to have been proved unlawful, because for
an unlawful Cause, and by an unlawful Judge; the ejection of Bishops in Q.
Mary's time lawful, because for a lawful Cause, and by a lawful Judge: the
Judges in both cases were the same, viz. the Commissioners of each Prince; the
Causes in neither are rightly assigned; and of those which are assigned,
Nothing is said to prove their respective lawfulness or unlawfulness. This is
the great Argument of the Chapter; to repeat all the fals-hoods in it, would be
to transcribe it.

A Reply to his 6th Chapter.
THat the former Supremacy was reassumed by Q. Elizabeth,. 70.71.
is confessed: Thus much is said in the Title of this Chapter, and no more in 3
pages of it. Some bounds of this Supremacy are owned to be assigned by
Protestant Writers: unlimited Supremacy. The Qualifications by us urged are
taken from the Queen's Title, her Admonition, the words of the 37th Article,
and the Proviso in the first Act of Q. Elizabeth. Rational Reply to the Title;
that Head and Governor in a due sense are Synonymous, I allow; but because the
Style of Head gave Offense, the changing of it into a word, which was less
obnoxious to cavil, Admonition, it has been observed by the p. 40.
Animadverter that no more power is there challenged to the Prince, than was
due of Ancient time to the Imperial Crown of this Realm; and so much our
Church-Governour, if he will be constant to his own Principles, cannot deny. As
to the Clause of the 37th Article, Proviso, that the adjudging of Heresy
should be confined to the Canonical Scriptures, four first General Councils,
and Assent of Convocation, and that this should be no confinement of the
Supremacy, Elizabeth's Reign, is true; but whether those in the former Chapter
have been proved a lawful Hierarchy, must be left to the Reader. This indeed
was asserted strongly; but proving is not this Author's talent.

A Reply to Chapter the 7th.
I Have hitherto, not without great patience, pursued this Author through all
his windings, and turnings, and every where discovered his constant fallacies
and prevarications. Being arrived to Q. Elizabeth's Reign, in which the
Reformation had it is last settlements, We might justly have hoped He would have
been drawing toward a Conclusion. But We have been wandering in a Labyrinth,
and after this tedious pursuit are brought to the same point again, whence We
first set out. Four long Chapters have been spent to show us what Supremacy
King Hen. Ed. and Q. Eliz. assumed; and the same things are to be repeated
again in above an hundred pages more,

King Henry by Virtue of his Supremacy committed the Laws Ecclesiastical to be
reformed by 32 Commissioners. But this was a Repetition when we met it last; it
was spoke to when it first offered it self; and I should follow a bad pattern,
if his Example should invite me to repeat.

By Virtue of such Supremacy he set forth certain Injunctions concerning
Matters of Faith. These Injunctions were the genuine Acts of the Convocation.
The setting them forth therefore was not by virtue of any such. i. e. any new
Supremacy. For it is confessed, that to enjoin the observance of Synodical
decrees by Temporal punishments was such a Supremacy, Hen. 8th, had and
exercised. These Articles set forth seem to him to have nothing in them
favoring the Reformed Opinions, and to discede in nothing from the Doctrine of
former Councils. Why then are they brought here as an Evidence that the
Reformation was carried on by mere Civil Supremacy? But however our Author and
Sanders agree in their History, they differ much in their judgment. Sand. p. 119
Sanders styles some of these Articles Heretical, the Doctrines of Luther, and
Zwinglius, and says they are diametrically oposite to the Catholic Religion.
The body of them he compares to the Alcoran, as made up of a Medley of
Religions, and, after his usual manner of treating Princes, calls King Henry
upon this Occasion another Mahomet. Bur. V. 1. p. 218.
The Reformers at that time thought a great Step made by these Articles toward
a Reformation: The Papists here were much mortified by them, and the Papal
party abroad made great Use of them to show the necessity of adhering to the
Pope, since King Henry, having broke off his Obedience to the Apostolic See,
did not, as he had pretended, maintain the Catholic Faith entire. If therefore
these Articles do in nothing discede from Popery, it is because the New Popery
of this Age has disceded much from the antiquated Popery of the former. It is
noted, that the King by Virtue of his Supremacy commands these Injunctions to
be accepted by his Subjects, not as appearing to him the Ordinances or
Definitions of the Church, but as judged by him agreeable to the Law of God.
Our Author had little matter for Censure, when He urged this as an Accusation.
It is imputed that he paid more deference to Christ's Law, then to the Act of a
Convocation; and chose rather to resolve his and his Subjects Obedience into
the Authority of God, then of Man. Thus are We taught that we must put out our
Eyes, e're We can follow Our Spiritual Guide, as We ought; and in our Faith
prescind from Christ's Authority, if We will approve our selves good Catholics.
For if what is enjoined by the Church seem agreeable to the Word of God, and
therefore is accepted, such acceptance is accused of not being sufficiently
resigning; So that no one, according to these Principles, is a true Son of the
Church, but he who pays a blind Obedience to her Dictates, either without any
regard to God's Laws, or in formal Opposition to them.

By Virtue of such Supremacy he published a Book entitled, A necessary Doctrine
for all sorts of People. The two Bur. V. 1. p. 274.
Archbishops, several Bishops, and Doctors of the Church compiled this book.
If the Doctrines in it were as Orthodox, as they were thought necessary, I see
no harm in the Publication. Whether they were or not, concerns not us, it being
not pretended that these (or the Six Articles, which are here also urged) were
Acts of the Reformation.

Heresy became a thing of the Parliament's cognizance, as well as the King's;
Of their cognizance, not only for the declaring and punishing, but also the
adjudging of it. What the nice difference is betwixt declaring, and adjudging
Heresy, I am not so subtle a Nominalist as to determine. Heresy was no
farther of the Parliament's cognizance, then to declare, how it should be
punished. It was, in this sense, of the Parliament's cognizance before King
Henry the 8th 's time, when the Laws were made against Lollards, and after King
Edward's time, when those Acts were by Q. Mary's Parliament revived.

He has dwelt the longer on these Instances that We may see, when a Prince
(together with his Particular Clergy,. 83, 84.85.
or rather whom out of them He shall choose) claims a power of composing Models
of Christian Faith, and declaring all those his Subjects Heretics, who do not
believe and obey such his Determinations; what danger, what mutability occurrs
in such a Nation, as often as this Independent Head is not every way Orthodox.
It concerns not us, what ill Consequences may attend the claim of such a power,
until it be proved that we ascribe such an Authority of New-Modelling the Faith
to our Princes. The Apostolic, Nicene, and Athanasian Creeds we receive and
embrace; but I know not of any Henrician Creed incorporated into our Faith. The
Romanists have a Creed Younger by some Years then King Henry; but nothing is a
part of our Faith, but what sprung up with Infant-Christianity. It is therefore
a wild Inference, that because we own the King to be Supreme Head of the
Church, therefore We make the Christian Religion mutable. Did we make Acts of
Parliament the Rule of our Faith, there would be ground for such an Objection;
For then an Article of Faith might be enacted and repealed at pleasure, and He,
who was Orthodox in one Session, might become an Heretic in the next. But
Scripture is the Rule of our Faith, a Rule like it is Author, unchangeable; the
same yesterday, to day, and for ever. The Christian indeed is obnoxious to the
power of the Prince, but Christianity is without the reach of his Sword. Nor
has the King this influence over the external profession of Religion, as he is
the Ecclesiastical Head, but as he is the Civil Supreme. God has entrusted him,
as such, with the power of the Sword, with a command indeed to use it for the
protection of the true Religion, but with a natural liberty still of using it
for the Protection of a false. This Author, I confess, has a remedy against
this, namely, some Temporal coactive power lodged in the Pope, in order to
dissolve upon Occasion the coactive power of the Prince; But we do not envy him
this Catholicon against Innovation. Passive Obedience is our Principle, and if
this renders the legal Establishment of our Religion more obnoxious to the
pleasure of the Civil Magistrate, Yet it better secures our common
Christianity. Q. Mary therefore may repeal King Edward's Laws, but unless she
could repeal Christ's Law too, Ridley's and Latimer's Religion will still be
the same; The only difference is, that the Faith, which before they defended
from the Pulpit, they now more effectually propagate at the Stake. To conclude
this point; whilst Princes have the power of the Sword, and Subjects are
obliged to Nonresistance, the Supreme Governor will have an influence over the
outward State of Religion; and He, that complains of this, repines against the
Methods of God's providence. It is no blemish therefore on the Reformed
Religion (which is here dwelt upon by this Author) that it went forward or
backward under King Henry, according as his different passions or Interests
inclined him. Whilst Q. Ann lived it had indifferent success, says Fox. Here
then, says our witty Observer, the Supreme Head of the Church was directed by
a Woman, and managed the Affairs of Religion accordingly. Now admitting this
were a truth, which had escaped him, Yet the curious Editor, I doubt not,
amongst his Collections has met with a Medal representing Donna Olympia with
the Pope's Mitre on her Head, and St. Peter's Keys in her Hands; and on the
Reverse, the Pope with his Head dressed like a Lady, and a Spindle in his hand.
Be it also true, that Cromwell, a Laic, had the total management of
Ecclesiastical affairs under King Henry, Yet any one, Who is conversant in
History, knows that the administration of the Popedom has been in the Hands of
more obnoxious Favorites.



By Virtue of such Supremacy, he took Possession of all the Monasteries and
Religious Houses. Our prolix Author, who never spares his own Labor, or his
Reader's Patience, has enlarged upon this point for 12 Paragraphs, and is very
copious against Sacrilege. But I do not see how our Cause is concerned in this
charge; Avarice and Sacrilege are as great Sins in our Homilies, as they are in
the Popish Canons; and Cranmer and Ridley were as severe against robbing the
Church, as this Declaimer. We are no more concerned to defend King Henry's
rapines, then the Lusts, some have charged him with. Were the Suppression of
Abbeys as great a crime, as it is here under false colors represented, I do
not see why we are more obliged to plead in it is favor, than this Writer would
think himself bound, because he asserts the power of the Roman Patriarch, to
justify the foul and unparalled enormities of those, who have sat in St.
Peter's chair. But were the dissolution of Monasteries represented impartially,
it would be easy, were it necessary, to give it a fair appearance; and it must
be at last confessed that the fault of King Henry was not so much in taking away
those foundations of Superstition, as in not applying all the Revenues, as he
did some (and had done more, if the Reformers had had more Influence over him)
to Uses truly Religious.

By Virtue of such a Supremacy he made orders and gave Dispensations in matters
of Marriage,. 99.100.
of Fasts, of Holydays, of Election and Consecration of Bishops, and Challenged
a power of abrogating several other Ceremonies. It ought to have been shown,
that any Constitutions concerning these did ever oblige us, but such as either
were made and ordained within this Realm, or such other as were induced into
the Realm by sufferance, consent, and custom; for until this Proposition laid
down in the Statute 25. of Hen. 8.27. c.
be disproved, the Assumption there, that the State has power to dispense with
it is own Laws, will be unshaken. Ecclesiastical Canons with this Author is
another expression for Papal Decrees; the Authority therefore, which supported
them, being justly taken away, it is no wonder if they fell with it. Amongst
the Rites, which King Henry commands to be observed, till he shall be pleased
to alter them, Fox reckons paying of Tithes; Where this Annotator observes,
that, Tithes are here conceived to be in the disposal of the Supreme Head of
the English Church. Now whether King Henry thought Tithes to be jure divino or
not, does not concern the Reformation; But what is here said of payment of
Tithes does not prove that he thought them alienable from the Clergy; For he
might by his Laws regulate the payment of them, though he did not think them
disposable in this Author's sense. Several Statutes were made in his Reign for
the better securing this Right of the Clergy; In them 27. Hen. 8. c. 20.
Tithes are said to be due to God and the Church; the detainers of them to have
no regard of their 32. Hen. 8. c. 7.
duties to Almighty God; And the Ref. Leg. Tit. de Decimis cap. 1.
Reformatio legum derives the Clergy's original right to them from the Laws of
Christ.

By Virtue of such Supremacy, he without any consent of the Clergy, by his
Vicegerent Cromwell ordered that English Bibles should be provided and put in
every Church. The translation of the Bible was petitioned by the 2 Bur. V. 1.
p. 195.
Houses of Convocation; and the publication of it was included in that request.
This Act therefore had the consent of the Clergy, though, had it wanted it, it
would have been justifiable from the Law of God. The prohibition of the
Scriptures to the Vulgar, which followed afterward, was no Act of the
Reformation, but of the Anti-reformers. It was pretended that some erroneous
Opinions were propagated by a free Use of the Scripture; and therefore that Use
was restrained. Now least it be objected by Us, that the Opinions, the King
called erroneous, were the Protestant doctrines discovered by the Vulgar from
the New light of Sciptures, this Author bids us see the very Opinions a the
Bishops collected them in Fox: unownable by any sober Christian. It is my fate
to deal with One, who glory's in his Shame; and Who is seldom content to be
mistaken, but he refers his Reader to the very Page, which confutes him. Fox,
in the very place by him cited, has showed how unfaithful the Bishops were in
that Collection; He has with great Industry compared the Bishop's Catalogue of
Errors with the Books, whence they are cited, and from the Comparison has
proved the Bishops guilty of a fault (which this Author inherits from them)
that they perverted the sayings of the Protestants otherwise then they meant,
fasly belied them, or untruly mistook them, either in mangling the places, or
adding to their words, as might serve for their most advantage to bring them
out of credit.

By Virtue of such a Supremacy these things that King did, some of them against
the Canons, not of Popes, but of the Catholic Church, and Superior Councils.
The truth of this depends upon the four first parts of Church Government: When
we know what he means by Church-Catholic, what by Superior Councils, and what
those Acts of the Reformation are, which are thus opposite to such Obligatory
Canons (for we do not desire to justify all King Henry's proceedings) it will
then be seasonable to give in our Plea to this (at present) indefinite charge.

That the King should derive his Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction on Cromwell a
secular person, and unlearned; concerns not Us, since the placing such
Jurisdiction on a Person so unqualifi'd is no part of the established
Discipline of this Church. But that this is not a thing unparalled, the
Animadverter has given an Instance in the King of Spain's exercising by
Lay-Delegates greater Authority in Spirituals, then can be pretended to have
been lodged in Cromwell.

If now we look back to the Bur. Hist. Pref.
preparations, which were made toward a Reformation in this King's Reign, and
consider that the Papal Usurpation was by him abolished, the Rites and
Constitutions, which depended merely on that Authority, fallen together with it;
the Superstition of Images, Relics, and redemption of Souls out of Purgatory
suppressed with the Monasteries; the extravagant Addresses to Saints reduced to a
mere ora pro Nobis, and that left at Liberty to be used or omitted; the
Scriptures translated, published, and made the Rule of Faith; and the power of
a National Church to reform her self vindicated; We shall not be scrupulous to
sdbscribe Mr. Fox's Epiphonema, which so much grieves this Author, That King
Henry did by his Authority more good for the redressing and advancing Christ's
Church here in England in three Years, then the Pope the great Vicar of Christ
with all his Bishops and Prelates had done in the Space of three hundred Years
before.

A Reply to Chapter the 8th.
the breach made by King Henry upon the Church's Doctrines; I confess my self
very curious to know how a breach here is reconciled with a Non-discession from
the Church's Doctrines above;

He challenges the Duke of Northumberland to be of the Roman Church.. 105. n. 1.
We confess it, nor do we envy him such a member. His striking in for ambitious
ends with the Reformers, who went upon honest princeples, casts a blot upon his
memory, but no blemish on the Reformation. Whether Cromwell died a Roman
Catholic, as this Author intimates, or not, the term Catholic faith used in his
last Speech made doubtful. This Writer bids us compare Fox with Lord Herbert.
Fox supposes him a Protestant, and in the Margin calls his Speech Fox. p. 1190.
, A true Christian profession of the Lord Cromwell at his death: Lord Herbert in
his History says no more then that Lord Herbert. Hist. p 524.
he made profession of the Catholic faith; the Index Under the Letter C.
indeed says, he died a Roman-Catholic. Th e Antiq. Brit. p. 334.
Author of the Antiquities gives him an High Character, and supposes him of the
Reformed Religion. I do not find that Heylin or Godwin mention any thing of
this. Full. Hist. 1. 5. p. 233.
Fuller after his way descants upon it, and inclines to think him a Protestant.
Dr. Burnet Bur. V. 1. p. 285.
makes it appear that the term Catholic faith was then used in it is true Sense,
in Opposition to the Novelties of the Sea of Rome. He argues from his praying
in English, and that to God only through Christ without those tricks, which the
Roman Church use when they die, that he was none of theirs. After all, this
Controversy is not perhaps worth the deciding; but this Author is over
peremptory in affirming that he died a Catholic in his Sense.

King Edward had but one Parliament all his days, 105. n. 2.
continued by Prorogation from Session to Session, till at last it ended in the
death of the King. It betrays gross Ignorance in one, who sets up for an
Historian, thus blindly to mistake in a matter so notorious. Bur. V. 2. p.
195.214.
The first Parliament was dissolved. Apr. 15. 1552. and a second called the
1st. of March after. As for the complexion of King Edward's Parliament, which
he has given us from Dr. Heylin, It arises to no more then that in so great a
Body, All did not act upon pure principles of Conscience, but some were swayed
by their Interest: An imputation, from which None can pretend to vindicate
their Infallible Councils, not this Author himself.

Cranmer is accused of unorthodox Opinions concerning the power of the Church.
105. n. 3.
Cranmer pretended not to be Infallible, and all that is here said, is, that he
was not. He Bur. V. 1. p. 172.
had some singular Opinions concerning Ecclesiastical Functions, which yet he
enjoyed by himself, and never studied to make them part of the doctrine of this
Church. These Bur. V. 1. inter Addenda. p. 357.
afterward he corrected, and we find him subscribing a Declaration, in which
it is affirmed, that the Power of the Keys is formally distinct from that of
the Sword. And least it be thought that in this subscription he was overruled
by a majority, in a Bur. V. 2. p. 71.
Work, which was wholly his own without the concurrence of any other, He sets
forth their Divine Institution. Posterity, says our Commentator, might have
done better to have covered this Nakedness of their forefather, then to have
published it after so great Silence. A caution this of great use to the
Followers of Ignatius and Francis, but till we come to draw Parallels betwixt
Cranmer and our Savior, we shall not be ashamed to own in him the frailties of
a Man.

King Edward sent out Injunctions in matters of Religion. True! And these
contrary to the Decrees of former Obliging Councils. Which, till the four
former parts of Church Government are published, I may safely deny. Without the
consent of a Synod, the Act of which only has force in such Matters. This has
been said often, but never yet attempted to be proved.

Fox, but, according to his usual method, very much interpolated. Men of
Learning were sent for from foreign Countries, says Fox; Which argues
scarcity at home of those Clergy, who would second the King's Reformation,
says the Comment. After his rate of arguing, very possibly it may; men of
great Learning, say Travelers, are at this time great rarities in some Popish
Countries; Yet my Logic gives me no encouragement to argue, that in those
places there is a scarcity of Popish Clergy. Among those sent for, says Fox,
were Peter Martyr, Martin Bucer, and Paulus Fagius; He might have added, says
the Parathesis, Bernardus Ochinus. Had he been as much delighted in adding, as
we find this Church-Governor, he no doubt would have added it. But Mr. Fox very
probably had not read that Ochinus was sent for, and therefore besides other
reasons made Conscience of saying it. " Martyr taught at Oxford, Bucer and
Fagius at Cambridge, says Fox. Sure, says our Author, not because the
Universities were not held so Learned, but because they were not counted so
Orthodox. Very sure it is, that a composition of both was required, and it is
no wonder if in the very dawnings of Reformation, Persons so qualified were
very rare. Fox adds And that with no small commendation of the whole
University. The Author puts in, not without opposition of many Learned Men
there, and recommends to our Reading, when at leisure, the rational arguings of
Mr. Glyn, Mr. Langdale, and others against the Reformers. How rational their
arguings are, he, that is at leisure, may consider; but this Writer has given
us such a Specimen of his own, that I doubt his Judgment will little recommend
them. But, since he has imposed this task upon us, I hope, by way of return, he
will be pleased to peruse the Dialogue between Custom and Verity, which
immediately follows that part of Fox, which he has assigned us. As for the
Oxford oppositions, Peter Martyr's relation is perhaps not the most impartial.
And some may say our Church-Governor is perhaps not the most Honest. For if by
this scrupulosity of Expression he would insinuate that Martyr was partial,
this is a Calumny borrowed from Sanders, and replied to by his Bur. V. 2. App.
p. 394.
Confuter. You may find in his Opponents, Tresham, Chadsey, and Morgan, much
Learning, Reverence to the Church, and zeal in their Cause. I have not the
Relation by me, and therefore can pass no judgment on this Learned Triumvirate.
But as for Tresham we have a Specimen in Fox Fox. p. 1475.
how great a Talent he was Master of in disputing. Being Pro-Sub-Dean of
Christ-Church he called all the Students together, and recommended Popery to
them upon these convincing grounds. 1st. He urged, that there were a goodly
company of Copes that were appointed to Windsor, but he had found the Queen so
gracious to him, that they should come to Christ-Church; Now if they, like
honest men, would come to Mass, they should wear them on Holy Days. A second
motive was, that he would get them the Lady-Bell of Bampton, and that should
make the sweetest ring in all England. The third was, that as for an
Holy-Water-Sprinkle, he had already the fairest within this Realm. He thought
therefore no man would be so mad, as to forego these commodities. It may be
needless to remark to the Gentlemen of that Foundation, that our Adversaries
are still the same dangerous Orators, and therefore, if any should have
irrecoverably engaged his Affections to a pretty pair of Beads, or set his
heart immoderately upon the great Bell, it concerns him to have a guard upon
himself. The Author having mustered up the Bishops ejected in King Edward's
days, adds; Pate Bishop of Rochester, Goldwel Bishop of St. Asaph, -- Bishop
elect of Bangor are said to have been Banished. If the Author was Jesuit
enough to say this to himself, before he wrote it, he may come off, If not, it
will prove a most unconscionable Gasconade. Pate Godw. Catal. of Bishops in
Worcester. Bur. V. 2. p. 324.
was never Bishop of Rochester, but of Worcester; he was not Banished, but
Fled; and this not in King Edward's time, but in King Henry's. So here was
multum in parvo. Goldwell Heylin's History. p. 224.
was not Bishop of St. Asaph, nor any other Bishop till A. 1555. which was in
Q. Mary's time, and therefore it was an unreasonable Prolepsis to make him one
of the exiled Bishops in King Edward's time. Anonymus Long-stroke Bishop Elect
of Bangor is one of our Author's own Creation. Some more, he says, might be
removed in like Manner; who happen not to be mentioned because deceased before
the Reign of Q. Mary; as Wakeman Bishop of Gloucester, Holbeck Bishop of
Lincoln, Skyp Bishop of Hereford, Rugg Bishop of Norwich. No doubt they might
have been, if this Church-Governor had pleased, for never Committee-man ejected
more arbitrarily, then he. But that they actually were not removed, we have
these good reasons to think. The ejection of Bishops is particularly insisted
on by our Historians; but these Bishops make none of the number. All these
Bishops do happen to be mentioned, not as deprived, but deceased; Though their
Deprivation had deserved mentioning, as well as their Death. Burn. V. 2. p.
152. Heylin's Hist. p 90.
Wakeman dyed in Dec. 1549. Burn. V. 2. p. 203. Heylin's Hist. p. 129.
Holbeck in August 1551. Burn. V. 2. p. 218.
Skyp in the Year 1552. Rugg dyed in the Year 1550, according to Godwin's
Catalogue in Norwich.
Godwin; Dr. Burnet Burn. V. 2. p. 150.
call's him Reps, and says heresign'd. So that what our Author has inserted
here de proprio is like to be looked upon as one continued Forgery.

The next two Paragraphs have more truth in them,. 108.109.
being transcribed from Fox, But the Proclamation inhibiting the whole Clergy
to preach, cited from Fuller, is questioned by Burn. V. 2. p. 81.
Burnet, who met with no footsteeps of it neither in Records, nor Letters, nor
in any Book written at that time.

The succeeding Paragraphs of this Chapter pretend to give Us the defense made
by the Protestant Divines concerning King Edward's proceedings, 110. to 136
together with our Author's Rational Replies. But besides, that from the fair
dealing of this Author already detected, we have no reason to expect him
ingenuous in representing the Arguments of our Divines with their just weight;
it may be farther offered by way of Precaution, that those excellent Divines,
which he refers to, wanted one advantage, which we of this Age have from a more
complete and Authentic History of the Reformation, and, among other things, not
knowing of the Bur. Hist. V. 1. Pref.
rasure of Records made in Q. Mary's Reign, pleaded to those Negative Arguments
which we have good reason to reject. This premised, I proceed to consider with
all possible brevity his Alphabet of Arguments.

a Urges that these Injunctions were not set forth but by the advice and
consent of the Metropolitan; and b of other Bishops. 111, 112,
The substance of his Reply to a and b is, that these Injunctions had not the
Authority of the Metropolitan, as such, i. e. as acting with the major part of
the Synod. Now a b may easily rejoyn that where the matter of the Injunctions
is lawful, much more where it is necessary, as being commanded in Scripture,
there the coactive Authority of the Prince is sufficiently Obligatory; and that
since the Office of Pastors (whether in or out of Synod) is directive, these
Injunctions proceeding from the direction of both the Metropolitans (for Bur.
V. 2. p. 25.
Holgate also Arch Bishop of York was a Reformer) and Ibid.
other Learned Bishops, were not destitute of Ecclesiastical Authority.

g Says these Injunctions were not set forth as a body of Doctrine (which was
the Act of the Synod in the 5th. of King Edward) but were provisional only for
the public exercise of Religion and Worship; and Gamma is in the right of it,
for any thing his Replyer faith to the contrary, who does not pretend that they
were. A new Objection indeed is started, and pretended instances given that
King Edward claimed a power for rectifying the Doctrines of his Clergy.

d Says, The public Exercise of Religion was necessary to be provided for at
present. that the Judgment of a National Synod was necessary for such
Provision. For the proof of that, we are referred to Chapter Gov. Part. 4th.
a Book, which no Bookseller has yet had the courage to undertake; and
therefore for a Reply, I remit him to the Answer to it; which he will find at
any Shop, where Church Government Part the 4th is to be sold.

z Says, The Injunctions extend only to some evident points, the abolishing of
Image Worship, the restoring of the Liturgy in a known tongue, and Communion in
both kinds, and the abolishing of Romish Masses, and that in the three former
the King restored only, what was established in the Ancient Church. nothing is
said in x of taking away the Mass; But if the Reader be pleased to consult z he
will be satisfied of our Author's modesty. If z did not charge the Mass with
Novelty, it was because the Respondent had the management of the Opposition. As
for the other three points, Err^urs in practice do always presuppose Errors in
Doctrine. Zeta does humbly subsume, that those Church Governors who would have
been facile to license a change of their practice, ought not to have been
difficile in allowing us a decession from their Doctrine.

Zeta took Epsilon's place.

e Urges that these Injunctions were generally received, and put in practice by
the Bishops; and th much-what the same, that they were consented to by the
major part of Bishops. The Answer to this consists of some Pages; but what is
material in it will ly in a less room. It is urged that some were averse to the
Reformation, that the Compliers were guilty of dissimulation, of an outward
compliance whilst contrarily affected, that they remained of the old Religion
in their heart, wore vizours, took up a disguise, and were swayed by the fear
of a new Law-giving Civil power. To this e and th will not be so rude as to
rejoyn, that it may perhaps be this Editor's personal Interest to prove that
these Bishops complied against their Consciences, and that Hypocrisy was the
general principle of that party; but that it is little for the honor of the
Communion, which he would seem to be of, to urge, that the whole body of it is
Pastors were guilty of the highest prevarication possible with God and Man. But
this does does not at all affect our Divines, who only urge that those Bishops
conformed, and might in charity have hoped that they did it Honestly, but are
not concerned, that this Compliance was from base and ungenerous Motives. What
is said here of the Liturgy shall be considered in l, where it ought to have
been said. I cannot dwell upon the History of these Paragraphs; but there are
in it some bold strokes worthy of our Author. He blushes not to cite Parson's
Conversions, Sanders disputable, had not Posterity seen a third Person, who may
seem to have put an end to the quarrel. In a citation from Fuller, Fuller
reckons; Aldrich Bishop of Carlisle, Goodrich Bishop of Ely, Chambers Bishop of
Peterborough, and King Bishop of Oxford. Now, though by the absolute Authority of
a Church-Governor he might have imposed these four Bishops on us, Yet it seems
very hard that Fuller should be commanded to satisfy us of this point, who not
only mentions no such Bishops, but in his Marginal notes tell's us, that he
thinks Oxford and Ely were at that time void. We are told that Cranmer in the
beginning of King Edward's days called a Synod, Antiq. Britann. p. 339. But he,
who would see any such thing there, must borrow our Author's Spectacles.

ch Urges, that it makes no real difference whether a Reformation begin from a
Vote of Bishops in Synod, and so proceeding to the Prince be by him
established, or take beginning from the Piety of the Prince moved by advice of
faithful Bishops, and, so proceeding to the whole Body of the Clergy, be by
them generally received, and put in practice according to the command of
Sovereign Authority. The Answer is,

In l it is urged that the first Form of Common Prayer, and Administration of
Sacraments in the 2d. Year and 2d. Parliament of King Edward's reign had the
approbation and consent of the whole body of the Clergy in Convocation. To this
it is offered by way of Answer, That no other Act of Reformation before the 5th
of King Edward had the consent of Convocation. had not. That it was confirmed
by Act of Parliament before it had this consent. But, granting this, had it
therefore not the consent of Convocation? But, how does he prove that the Act
of Parliament preceded the Decree of the Synod? Because the Act of Parliament
does not mention the consent of Convocation. Negative Arguments he knows do not
conclude, and it is positively said in the For. p. 1303.
Letter of the Council to Bishop Bonner that this Liturgy (not only had the
Assent) but was set forth with the Assent of the Clergy in Convocation. Our
Author himself, when he has forgot the debate here, the Liturgy was at the same
time authorized by Act of Parliament, and consented to by Convocation. But it
is said, the Second Liturgy was sent to the Clergy, autoritate Regis and
Parliamenti. Ergo, the first Liturgy had not the consent of Convocation. But, a
motive to this consent might be fear of punishment. Yet the Bur. V. 2. p. 101.
Convocation, which gave this consent, acknowledged to King Edward the
quietness they enjoyed under him, having no let nor impediment in the Service
of God. But the withdrawing of a few Clergy, especially if prime leaders, and
introducing new Votes of a contrary persuasion into their rooms (suppose taking
away six old Bishops, and putting in six new ones) may render that, which
before was a major part, now a lesser, and consequently the Act of this major
part invalid. This putting of cases is very impertinent here, for when the
consent of Convocation was given to the Liturgy, not one old Bishop was
deprived. For the Letter to Bonner before mentioned, which mentions this Assent
of Convocation to the Liturgy, is directed to him then Bishop of London, who
yet was the first of the Bishops deprived. This Liturgy, he says, rather
omitted, then gainsaid the former Church-tenents and practice. This is urged by
way of Apology for the Convocation's consenting; but whether the Liturgy
omitted or gainsaid the Church-practise, it was one main branch of the
Reformation, and it is not denied that it had the Vote of a Synod. The errors
reformed were such as corrupted, either the Worship or Doctrine; that the
Reformation of Worship had the Authority of a Synod, is after much shuffling
granted; Whether the Articles, which were the Reformation of Doctrine, were not
confirmed by the same Authority is to be examined?

the Clergy were now much changed, many old Bishops displaced, new ones
introduced; many absented from Synod, others dissembled. All this is said upon
our Author's bare credit, which by this time may not be altogether
unexceptionable. Only five Bishops have been proved to be ejected; two of
these, Heath and Day, in the same Year wherein these Articles were past; and
their Deprivation placed in History after the passing of the Articles; the
Bishopric of Durham was not yet dissolved; only two New Voters therefore (
Ridley and Poinet) introduced by the Ejection of the old ( Bonner and Gardener)
and those old, not proved to have been unlawfully ejected.



A Reply to Chapters the 9th. and 10th.
Edward's Reformation proceeds to particulars: His description of the general
has proved very Poetical; the particulars are most of them served up the second
time, and very little altered in the dressing.

By Virtue of such Supremacy he sent Articles to the Bishop of Winchester to
subscribe. But these Articles were sent once before in the 45th Paragraph, and
needed not have been sent again here, since the Bishop Fox. p. 1350.1357.
subscribed all (but that which contained an acknowledgment of his fault) at
the first sending.

By Virtue of such Supremacy the six Articles were repealed without a Synod.
The repealing of an Act of Parliament is not, I suppose the business of the
Convocation. King Henry's Parliament had affixed severe Penalties on the
Violators of the Six Articles; these King Edward's Parliament took off. Nothing
therefore was repealed by the Civil power, but it is own Act. But neither is it
true that none of these Articles were revoked by Synod. For the Bur. V. 2. p.
50.
Convocation, that sat with this Parliament, declared for Communion in both
kinds, and Marriage of Priests, contrary to two of those Articles. Had not the
Registers of this and other Synods been Ibid.
lost, I doubt not but we could have proved most Acts of the Reformation
Synodical.

By Virtue of such Supremacy he justified the power used by his Father over the
possessions of Monasteries and Religious Houses. That is, He did not throw up
his right to them. This power was justified by Gardener, and Bonner, and
others, whom our Author must own for Catholics. This Power was justified by Q.
Mary's Parliaments, who would not part with their Lands, as they did with their
Heresy. This power is still justifiable by the Romanists, or else a late Nath.
Johnson.
Author deceives Us, who has invited us to his House to a Volume of
satisfactions, that the Alienation of Church Lands consists with the principles
of that Church. But it is said, King Edward went farther, and declared Monastic
Vows to be unlawful, superstitious, and unobliging. The Reformers have always
declared the same, and must continue to do so, till some reasons are brought to
convince Us of the falsehood of such a Declaration. Those, which are offered in
the Discourse of Caelibacy, are not demonstrative. King Edward seized upon
Chauntries, Free-Chappels etc. his pretense being the Unlawfulness of offering
the sacrifice of the Eucharist, or giving alms for the defunct. The
unlawfulness of these is not pretended by the Reformation, but proved; The
Chauntries were dissolved, that the provisions for them might be converted to
more pious Uses; this was the design of the Act of Parliament (for which only
We can be thought obliged to answer) how ever it might be defeated: For the
statute expressly provides that they be converted to good and Godly Uses, as in
erecting Grammar-Schools for the Education of Youth in Virtue and Godliness,
the farther augmenting of the Universities, and better provision for the poor
and needy.

In this he went beyond his Father, that He began the taking of Bishop's Lands
also. This must be reckoned an Act of the Reformation, though he knows it is as
pathetically lamented by our Writers, as by his own. He cites the complaints of
three Protestant Bishops ( Cranmer, Ridley, and Godwin) and a Protestant Dr. (
Heylin) to prove this charge, and yet at the same time has the boldness to
charge it on the Reformed. Sure, says he, foul things were done in this kind,
because I find even King Edward's favorite Bishops highly to dislike them. If
Cranmer, and Ridley, and other King Edward's favourite-Bishops disliked the
spoil of the Church-goods, why is the Odium of this cast upon the Reformers? Or
why must very foul things be done, before these declare their dislike, when it
will be found upon History that Cranmer and Ridley were more inveterate Enemies
to robbing of the Church, then Gardener, and Bonner? He shuts up this Paragraph
with a remark, that Laymenders of Religion, ordinarily terminate in these two
things, the advancing of their carnal Liberty and temporal Estates. Sure this
Author thinks that We know nothing beyond the Alps; that we never heard of the
rich Nephews of Popes, which are flagrant evidences that Carnality and Avarice
are not only Lay-vices. But perhaps he may object, that Popes are no menders of
Religion.

By Virtue of such Supremacy he removed Images out of Churches, and this when
the Second Nicene Council had recommended the Use of them. This Second Nicene
Council is often appealed to by this Writer; there is a Second Divine
Commandment, (or at least there once was such a Commandment) which will deserve
his Consideration. What Reverence we pay to this Council, he may have learnt
from a late Reply to the 2 Disc. Oxon.
Reply, where the Reader will find a just Character of this celebrated Assembly.

By Virtue of such Supremacy, he imposed a Book of Homilies. i. e. He took care
that the people should be instructed in things concerning their Salvation, who
before had been kept in ignorance. He laid a command upon the Clergy to
administer the Communion in both kinds to the people. Which Command had been
laid upon them by our Savior. Contrary to the Injunction of the Council of
Constance. Which Injunction was made with a non-obstante to the Institution of
Christ. Without any preceding consultation of a National Synod. But Bur. V. 2.
p. 50.
others tell us it was agreed to by the Convocation, which sat with that
Parliament, and particularly that in the lower House it did not meet with a
Contradictory Vote.

of the Suppression of the former Church-Liturgies, Ordinals, and other
Rituals; the setting up of New Forms of Celebrating the Communion, Ordination,
and Common Prayer; the alterations of King Edward's first Common Prayer Book in
his Second, and the reduction of some things, in the Scotch Liturgy, to the
first Form of King Edward, and the complaints concerning this in Laudensium
Autocatacrisis; But the Reader will excuse me, if I think a defense of our
Liturgy at this time of day needless; the unlawfulness of the Mass, and
Invocation of Saints, and the non-Necessity of Sacerdotal Confession have been
defended in Volumes; besides that this, which is here said, is only a Second
Edition of the two Discourses concerning the Adoration etc. Where this change
of the Services is animadverted on. So that this has been already considered,
and any farther Reply is superseded by the two Learned Answers from London and
Oxford to those Discourses.

By Virtue of such Supremacy the King conceived he had a power to alter and
reform the Ecclesiastical Laws.

This is the 4th time that this Reformation of the Laws has been insisted on;
it is here confessed, that this Rerformation of them was never ratified by King,
Parliament, or Convocation, i. e. that it was no Act of the Reformation;
Nothing is urged against it but that these Laws were established by former
Superior Councils, and the Reader, e're he can be satisfied of that, must be at
the charge of four more Volumes of Church Government.

By such Supremacy he abrogated all former Church-Laws concerning days of
fasting or abstinence, and appointed those, he thought fit, by his own and the
Parliament's Authority. The Canon-Laws, which he call's the Church-Laws for
fasting, were full of mockery and superstition; Religion was placed in those
Observances, and yet Sensuality was consistent with them; It was advisable
therefore to take off those Laws, and yet to keep up such as might make Fasting
and Abstinence agreeable to their true End; Which is to be a means to Virtue,
and to subdue men's Bodies to their Soul and Spirit, the End expressly provided
for in the Statute. There is no Obligation, he says, for the Observation of
either Fasting or Abstinence by any express Canon of this Church Reformed, but
only by Act of Parliament. The days of Fasting are prescribed in the Liturgy,
which has the Authority of Convocation; Fasting is enjoined in the Homilies,
which have the same Authority; It is there recommended from precepts of
Scripture, from the Example of Christ, and from the Constitutions of the
Primitive Councils; It is defined to be a withholding from all meat and drink,
and all manner of Natural food, in contradiction to this Author, who says,
that not Fasting is enjoined us, but only Abstinence from Flesh; He might with
as good reason have urged, that Praying to God, and believing in Christ are not
enjoined by the Church, as that Fasting is not; For if by Canons he means
those, which are properly so called, neither is there any Canon, that I know
of, which enjoins such Prayer, or such Belief.

By Virtue of such Supremacy the King and Parliament ordained that such Laws
which prohibited Marriage to any Spiritual Persons, who by Gods Law might
Marry, should be of none effect. The Convocation had declared the Marriage of
Priests lawful by the Law of God; the State found the Prohibition tended to
the detriment of the Republic, and therefore (had they had no other reason)
might according to our Author's own principles take it off.

By Virtue of such Supremacy the King published 42 Articles of Religion, said
to be agreed on in a Synod of the Clergy held at London. If these Articles were
the legitimate Act of the Synod, then they were not the effects of mere Regal
Supremacy; and that they were so, will, I doubt not, appear, notwithstanding
all his cavils. If any one should question whether the Iliads and Aeneids were
the genuine works of Homer, and Virgil, the Title they carry, and the Universal
Tradition, which assigns them to these Authors, would be thought a sufficient
Vindication of them. This Author builds part of his Faith on the second Nicene
Council, and opposes it is Decree, in favor of Image Worship, to the second
Commandment forbidding it. If I should ask him how he knew such a Decree to be
genuine, he would not, I believe, produce the Records, but think it a good
Reply, that it is found amongst those Acts which bear the Name of that Council,
and which the Church has allways accepted as such. These Articles are published
with the Title of the Synod; this publication was Anno 1553, the next Year to
that, in which we say they were past in Convocation; the Church for the first 5
years of Queen Elizabeth retained these Articles as her Doctrine; the
Convocation in that Queen's time reestablish'd them with very little
Alteration; they have been appealed to, ever since, by our Writers as the Acts
of that Synod; they have been owned by our Adversaries as such; and if so
general a Tradition of a thing so notorious, and so lately done, may not be
admitted, the Church of Rome is built upon a weak Foundation. But all this
notwithstanding, this Author thinks he has good Reason to deny that these
Articles were established by that Synod. First, he transcribes what Mr. Fuller
says of this Convocation, which I shall not hear copy, because the Author has
here (once for all) dealt ingenuously. Mr. Fuller says the Records of this
Convocation, are but one degree above blanks; and to the same purpose Dr.
Heylin. But neither of these Historians had seen Q Mary's Commission for razing
the Records; else they could have given us an account, why these Registers are
so bare. Dr. Heylin Heylin's History. p. 121.
found left upon Record in that Convocation a Memorandum concerning the
Dissolution of the Bishopric of Westminster; and it is not improbable that
these Articles were expunged by some Persons, who yet were willing that the
Dissolution of a Bishopric, which they thought might cast an odium upon the
Reformation, might remain upon Record. As for Fuller's Assertion, that the
Convocation had no Commission from the King to meddle with Church-business, it
is only a conjecture which he makes from the silence of the Records. Fuller's
Discourse of the Catechism does not at all affect the Articles, unless it be
proved, that by Catechism must be understood Articles, which our Author
endeavors to persuade his unwary Reader. For this purpose, he next presents us
with a Relation from Fox, concerning the questioning of a Catechism in the 1st
Synod of Q. Mary; but here he is himself again, as will appear to the Reader,
if he compares this Relation with Fox's. He concludes this Story with this
Epiphonema. This concerning the questioning of the Catechism and Articles;
whereas in the Relation nothing is said of the Articles, but the Catechism
only. To clear this point a little farther, He finds in Fox Archbishop Cranmer
charged amongst other things, with being Author of the Catechism and Articles,
and with compelling men against their wills to subscribe them. Here again he
shuffles; Archbishop Cranmer is not there charged for compelling Men to
subscribe the Catechism, but the Articles; as appears from Fox's relation, as
it is transcribed even by himself; but he makes the Catechism subscribed, that
it may look like a Synonymous term to Articles. Archbishop Cranmer answered to
that charge, that he exhorted such as were willing to subscribe, but compelled
none against their wills; Now, where this Exhortation, and Subscription was,
unless in Synod, will not easily be answered. Having given us these three
relations, he next proceeds to make reflections on them. First he excepts
against the words in the Title of the Articles, de quibus inter Episcopos and
alios eruditos Viros, etc. that they seem not the ordinary expression of a
Synodal Act, which runs more generally; as thus [de quibus convenit inter
Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, and Clerum universum] or the like. This, which he
calls an ordinary expression, will scarce be found in the Title of any Synodal
Act before Q. Elizabeth. These Articles are by him confessed to have been
subscribed by part of the Synod; Cranmer who drew up the Articles, and procured
Subscriptions to them must himself be a Subscriber; probably also Holgate
Archbishop of York, who was a Reformer; Archiepiscopal Authority therefore
might have been mentioned, had they been the Act of only a part of the Synod,
and therefore that it is not explicitly mentioned (for it is implied in the
Episcopal) can be no argument, that they were the Act of a part only. But the
other words in the Title, ad tollendam opinionum dissensionem and consensum
verae Religionis firmandum show they must have been the Act of the whole Synod,
since the Opinion of a part could not be effectual to such an End. Next he
observes, that though the Prolocutor in the Synod 10 Mariae questions, and
Philpot answers concerning the Catechism, yet they speak not of the Catechism,
but only of the Articles, which were first printed at the end of the Catechism,
and bound up with it, which the Prolocutor therefore calls the Articles of the
Catechism, and proposes the matter of the 28th of these Articles for
disputation; and so also calls them the Catechism, because the first Title of
this Book is Catechismus brevis, etc. In this Period we have as much crude
unconcocted reasoning, as would have furnished an ordinary Writer for some
Pages. Weston ill deserved the Office of Prolocutor, if speaking of a Catechism
he meant not that, but the Articles, which are two as distinct things as can
well be imagined. The Articles They are so bound up together in the public
Library.
were indeed bound up with the Catechism; but have a new Title Page, and are as
distinct from it as the Discourse of Caelibacy is from the Considerations on
the Spirit of Martin Luther. Now had the Answerer to the Considerations on
Martin Luther entitled his Book, an Answer to the Discourse of Caelebacy, or
should the Replyer to the Discourse of Caelibacy call his Book a Reply to the
Considerations on the Spirit of Martin Luther, they would not take it ill to be
laughed at; and yet this is our Author's way of arguing. But the Prolocutor
speaks of the Articles of the Catechism, and therefore must mean the Articles
at the end of the Catechism. Now this is only a quibbling upon Mr. Fox's way of
expression, who by the Articles of the Catechism means no more then the matter
of the Catechism, as is evident both from the Context, and from Fox's Decretis
simul rebus de quibus acturi essent, nempe de Catechismi libro, deque iis quae
ad Sacramenti altaris praesentiam, and transubstantiationem attinebant,
postquam de his ita rebus atque id genus prolegomenis primo die transactum est,
secundo deinde die Prolocutor in Synodum ingressus duas secum Schedas affert,
quarum una Christi naturalis in Sacramento praesentia affirmabatur, altera vero
Catechismum neque Synodi autoritate editum, neque eidem etiamnum adhuc Synodum
assentiri -- Job Filpottus; Videmini Vos omnes turpissime falli quod vos ita
oftendat Catechismi inscriptio Rerum in Eccl. gest. Comm. a Joh. Fox. p. 215.
Edit Basil.
Latin History, where the Conference is related in such words, as, being void
of all Ambiguity, leave no room for Sophistry. Fox says, Philpot stood up and
spoke first concerning the Article of the Catechism, that He thought they were
deceived in the Title of the Catechism. Where I hope our Author will not
understand by the singular Article the 42 Articles. And it is observable that
what Fox in English calls in one place the Articles of the Catechism, and the
Article of the Catechism in an other, that the Latin Fox calls Catechismi liber
in one place, and Catechismus in the other. So that it is evident our Author
here only sports himself with a poor clinch upon the English word Article. But
it is said, that the Prolocutor proposed the matter of the 28th of these
Articles for disputation. I am apt to lose my patience, when I find one
cavilling at this rate, who seems not so much as to have seen King Edward's
Articles. The matter proposed for disputation was the Natural presence of
Christ in the Sacrament; but the 28th of King Edward's See them in Sparrow's
Collections, or Bur. V. 2. Coll.
Articles concerns Baptism. In the 39 Articles as they now stand, the 28th
concerns the Doctrine of the Lord's Supper; and therefore he unthinkingly
judged it must have been the same in King Edward's 42 Articles. But how does it
follow that because the Natural Presence is spoke of in the Articles, therefore
when another question was proposed, "whether the Catechism was agreed to by the
former Synod "by Catechism there must be meant the Articles? This is such a
Consequence as ill becomes a Disciple of Occham. What if the same matter be
also proposed in the Catechism? Then I hope proposing this for disputation is
no Argument, that by the Catechism is meant the Articles. I desire therefore
the Reader to consult the Inde non efficitur ut nobis sit corpore praesens, cum
alia divinitatis ejus sit ratio, humanitatis alia; Haec est creata, alia
increata; haec in aliquo coeli loco, illa autem sic ubique est, ut coelum and
terram impleat, Quod ad corpoream Christi hic in terris praesentiam attinet (si
magna parvis componere licet) sic Christi corpus praesens est nostrae fidei, ut
Sol, cum cernatur, praesens est oculo, cujus corpus tametsi corporaliter oculum
non contingat, atque hic in terris praesens praesenti adsit, tamen corpus Solis
praesens est visui, etiam reluctante intervalli distantia; Sic corpus Christi
quod in gloriosa ejus Ascensione nobis sublatum est, quodque reliquit mundum,
and ad Patrem abiit, ore nostro abest, etiam cum sacrosanctum corporis and
sanguinis ejus Sacramentum ore nostro excipimus; fides autem nostra versatur in
coelis, ac intuetur Solemn justitiae, ac praesens praesenti in coelis haud
aliter illi adest, ac visus adest corpori solis in coelis, aut Sol in terris
visui, etc. M. Video, mi fili, te neutiquam ignorare quomodo dicatur Christus
corpore absens, and Spiritu praesens. -- Quemadmodum pane and vino vita nostra
naturalis sustinetur ac nutritur, sic corpore. i. e. carne and sanguine Christi
anima per fidem nutritur ac vegetatur. -- Ista fiunt occulta quadam energia
Spiritus, quando credimus Christum corpus and sanguinem suum pro nobis
tradidisse, etc. See much more to the same purpose in the Catechism.
Margin, and he will be satisfied, that the Corporal Presence is there denied,
and that the Prolocutor had greater reason to call this Book Heretical, then
our Author has to affirm, without any regard to truth, that it does not State,
scarce touch any Controversy. But still, it is plain they must speak of the
Articles, because the Catechism, as taken by it self, is not at all entitled to
the Synod, but only the Articles at the end thereof. The Catechism, which we
now find bound up with the Articles, is not, I confess, entitled to the Synod;
but that either this, or some other Catechism, of which the dispute here is
raised, was so entitled, is put out of all doubt by a passage we meet with
elsewhere in p. 1440.
Fox, where Weston thus charges Cranmer, You have set forth a Catechism in the
Name of the Synod of London, and yet there be 50, which witnessing that they
were of the Number of the Convocation, never heard one word of that Catechism.
Cran. I was ignorant of the setting too of that Title, and as soon as I had
knowledge thereof I did not like it. Here the Discourse proceeds altogether
upon a Catechism; and there is no subterfuge for a pretense that Catechism; is
another word for Articles. Philpot's words are not applicable to the Catechism,
but to the Articles only. Philpot pleads that the Catechism might be entitled
to the Synod, because the House had committed their Synodal Authority to certain
Persons, to be appointed by the King, to make such Ecclesiastical Laws as they
thought convenient. Now I see no reason why a Catechism does not as properly
come under the Denomination of Laws Ecclesiastical, as Articles; or how the
Catechism's being drawn up by Cranmer, can be a reason that it could not be
meant, but the Articles; when the Articles also were drawn up by Cranmer, as
our Author himself proves from Fox. But, if the 42 Articles were framed by the
Synod, the Prolocutor had no reason to get hands to the Catechism, as falsely
ascribed to that Synod, when what was more opposite to what he accounted the
Orthodox Religion, namely the Articles, was known to be past by them. It was
not the Doctrine of the Catechism, or Articles, which was here questioned, but
the false ascription of the Catechism to the Synod; Now the Articles being
undeniably genuine, they content themselves only to condemn the Doctrine of
them; but the Catechism being supposed illegitimate, they subscribe both
against it is Doctrine, and Authority: Nor could Philpot have pleaded, as our
Author would have had him, that the Synod's composing the Articles justified
the Act of the Delegates composing the Catechism; since this might indeed
warrant the Doctrine of the Catechism, but not the entitling it to the Synod.
He says, all the Historians that he has seen are silent concerning these
Articles. In this dispute concerning the Articles Dr. Heylin is twice
mentioned, and two several Books of his referred to in those very pages where he
mentions these Articles. In his Heylin's Hist. p. 121.
History He thinks them debated and concluded on by a Grand Committee, on whom
the Convocation had devolved their power, and esteems it not improbable that
these Articles being debated and agreed upon by the said Committee, might also
pass the Vote of the whole Convocation; though we find nothing to that purpose
in the Acts thereof, which either have been lost, or never were registered. [I
add, or being once Registered were expunged.] In his Reformation justified, Ref
Justif. 4.
He positively affirms that the Clergy in Synod 1552. did compose and agree
upon a book of Articles. Neither therefore is Dr. Heylin silent herein, nor is
he one of the Historians, which this Author never saw. Dr. Burnet is another
Historian, whom either this Editor had seen, or ought not to have published
this Relation, till he had first consulted him. He peremptorily affirms, Bur. V
2. p. 195.
that in the Year 1552. the Convocation agreed to the Articles of Religion,
that were prepared the year before. But our Author has still another Objection
in reserve, that the Archbishop Cranmer, to whom it would have been an
excellent Defense to have showed these Articles to have been subscribed by a
full Synod, yet pleaded no such thing. That Reverend Martyr pleaded that the
Opinions, which he maintained, were the Doctrines of the Scripture, and
Primitive Church; that the rejection of the Pope's Supremacy (the fundamental
Heresy, of which he was accused) was the Unanimous Act of the whole English
Clergy and Nation, and, which his very Judges had solemnly sworn to. Now if
this Plea could avail nothing in his Defense, it must have been a weak Plea to
have insisted on Articles past in a Synod called by himself, and over which he,
by reason of his Archiepiscopal Authority, had great Influence. This dispute is
concluded with a shrewd Remark, which our Author raises from a passage of Dr.
Heylin. The Dr. observes that this Book of Articles was not confirmed by any
Act of Parliament; whence he concludes, that the Reformed Religion cannot be
called a Parliament Religion; Hence this Author gathers that, neither was it a
Synodal Religion, because we see the Parliaments in King Edward's time
corroborating the Synods in all other transactions of the Reformation. Now though
there is ground for the Drs. observation, because there is never an Act, which
formally gives Sanction to these Articles, yet there is in one of those very
Acts (cited from the Doctor in this Pamphlet) that, which quite overthrows our
Author's Conclusion. For in the Act for Legitimating Marriages of Priests, it
is said that, the untrue Slanderous report of Holy Matrimony did redound to the
High dishonor of the Learned Clergy of this Realm, who have determined the
same to be most Lawful by the Law of God in their Convocation, as well by
common Assent, as by the Subscription of their Hands. Which words plainly refer
to the 31st of these Articles, and are an Authoritative Testimony, that they
are the genuine Act of the Synod; and had, I doubt not, been expunged, had the
Commission of rasure extended to the Statute-Book.

I have insisted the longer on this particular, because it is a matter of some
moment, and because the Author has here used more then ordinary Artifice; I
have not had the benefit of any Registers, or Manuscripts, nor am I skilled in
these niceties of History: What has been said, sufficiently overthrows all his
Cavils; but the Curious and the Learned are able to give a more Authentic and
Solid account of this matter.

A Reply to Chapter the 11th.
THat the Reformation was restored by Q. Elizabeth, after the extirpation of it
by Q. Mary, might have been said in fewer lines than this Author is pleased to
use Paragraphs. That some things were at first reduced without Synodal
Authority, I confess; and that the Reformation had it is last settlement by a
Synod, he cannot deny. The Act of the first Popish Convocation I esteem
illegal, because the Q. had sent and required them under the pain of a
Praemunire not to make Canons. The Canonicalness of Q. Mary's Clergy, here
acting, depends upon his former Proofs, which were not altogether
Demonstrative. But let their Authority be supposed just, yet these Constitutions
were repealed by a later Synod, whose Authority must be conceded equal; and
therefore their Act, as being the last, Autoritative. The stress therefore of
the Controversy lies in this, whether Q. Elizabeth's new Bishops were lawfully
introduced; and this depends upon the legality of the ejection of the Old. The
Cause of their ejection is confessed to be their denial of the Oath of Supremacy,
and is just, or unjust, according as that Oath was lawful, or unlawful. Our
Author therefore sets himself to examine that Oath; where he first puts his own
Exposition upon it, and then attacqs it, as so expounded. Neither Q.
Elizabeth's explication of her own Sense, nor the Church's Exposition in her
Articles favor his Construction. Those, who take this Oath, are not persuaded
that they abjure the Authority of a General Council, or the Jurisdiction of
their own National Clergy. But if we accept it in that Sense, which he is
pleased to impose upon it, Yet still the Strength of his Arguments depends on
such Assertions, as are to be supported by his four first part of
Church Government. We must therefore wait the Edition of those, before We can
be satisfied of the Strength of these. But if we may make an estimate of future
performances from past, there is no reason to expect any thing formidable from
that Quarter. For the only business of our Modern Controvertists is to rally up
those scattered forces, which have long since quitted the field to our
Forefathers. This Oath of Supremacy has exercised the Pens of the greatest
Champions of both Churches; and there is not a shadow of an Argument here
brought against it, but what has been baffled, when managed with better skill,
and more Learning, than this Author is Master of. The Regal Supremacy in
Opposition to the Papal has been asserted by our Kings, ( James the first, and
Charles the first in their Writings) Prelates, (Bishop Andrews, Bilson,
Carlton, Morton, Bramhal, etc.) and Doctors, ( Hammond, Barrow, etc,) who have
exhausted this Subject, and made it impossible, as to oppose it, so to add any
thing farther in Defense of it. I shall choose therefore rather to refer the
Reader to these great Men for the lawfulness of this Oath, then to imitate this
Author in transcribing.

Oath in Opposition to repeated Acts of Parliament, which guard it against such
attempts with the severest Penalties, he may more securely fall upon Dr. Fern,
who pleads, that had none of these Bishops been removed by Q. Elizabeth, Yet
the 6 Bishops remaining of King Edward's being restored, and the vacant
Bishoprics supplied, the Popish Bishops would have been outvoted. To prevent
this Inference, our Author tells us. 1st. That King Edward's Bishops being
justly ejected by Q. Mary could not now lawfully act. That their ejection was
just, he supposes, we were convinced above; The Reader therefore, according to
the Degrees of Conviction, which he found there, is to pass his judgment here.
2dly. That Q. Elizabeth could not justly supply the vacant Bishoprics with any
Persons, but such as the Major part of her present Bishops did first approve
of. But this, if it prove any thing, proves too much; For if want of the
approbation of a major part of Bishops, makes the Election and Consecration of
a Bishop void, then neither was Q. Mary's Hierarchy lawful, nor the Acts of her
Synods valid: if none can be a true Bishop, who has not the approbation of a
major part of the Bishops of the Province, no true Bishop has sat in St.
Peter's chair for some Centuries. If this rule be admitted, it will cut of the
Episcopal power of the Bishops of Amasia, and Adramyttium.

A Reply to Chapter the 12th.
THis Chapter concerns our Ordinations, in which I miss the story of the
Nags-head; a Fable hist out of the world with so much scorn, as it is well and
wisely omitted even by this Author. But to make some amends for this Omission,
what is here offered is picked up from the Confutations of our Writers. There is
not an Objection, which has not been replied to by Mr. Mason, Archbishop
Bramhal, and, more lately, by Dr. Burnet. As will more clearly appear, if I
leave this dispute to be managed betwixt the Pamphlet, and them.

Pamphlet. The new Ordination grew so far suspected, as deficient, to Q. Mary,
that in her Articles sent to the Bishops this is one. That touching such
Persons at were heretofore promoted to any Orders, considering they were not
ordered in very deed, the Bishop of the Diocese finding otherwise sufficiency
and ability in those men, may supply that thing which wanted in them before,
and then according to his discretion admit them to minister.

A. Bp. Bramhal. To this Objection, that the Form of ordaining in King Edward's
days was declared invalid in Q. Mary's days, I answer, that we have no reason
to regard their Judgment. They, who made no scruple to take away their lives,
would make no scruple to take away their Holy Orders. I answer also (and this
Answer alone is sufficient to determine this Controversy) that King Edward's
Form of Ordination was judged valid in Q. Mary's days by all Catholics, and
particularly, by Cardinal Pool then Apostolical Legate in England, and by the
then Pope Paul the 4th, and by all the Clergy, and Parliament of England. This
appears clearly from the words of the Cardinal's Dispensation, wherein he
confirms all Persons which had been Ordained, or beneficed in the time of King
Henry or Edward, in their respective Orders, and Benefices. From which I argue,
that if King Edward's Clergy wanted some essential part of their respective
Ordinations, which was required by the Institution of Christ, then it was not
in the power of all the Popes and Legates, that ever were in the world, to
confirm their respective Orders, or dispense with them to execute their
Functions in the Church Consecr. of Protest. Bps. Vindicated c. 4. p. 445. A.
Bp. Br. W. T. 1. Edit Dub. 1676.
.

Pamphl. But if you look narrowly into the words of the Instrument, you may
observe, that the Cardinal very cautiously here says not dispensamus, or
recipimus, in the present, as he does in every one of his other dispensings,
but dispensabimus in the future.

A. Bp. Br. It may perhaps be objected that the Dispensative word is
recipiemus, we will receive, not we do receive. I answer, the case is all one;
If it were unlawful to receive them in the present, it was as unlawful to
receive them in the future Ibid.
.

Pamphl. He says not recipiemus simply, but with a prout multae personae
receptae fuerunt, referring to the manner of reception, which had been used
formerly in Q. Mary's days, which we find set down in the Queen's 13th Article.
viz. That such new Ordained repairing to the Bishop, and he finding them
otherwise sufficient should supply that, which was wanting to them in respect
of their Orders, as they being before not ordered in very deed.

A. Bp. Br. All that was done after, was to take a particular Absolution, or
Confirmation from the Pope or his Legate, which many of the principal Clergy
did, but not all. No not all the Bishops, not the Bishop of Landaf, as Sanders
witnesses; yet he enjoyed his Bishopric; so did all the rest of the Clergy,
who never had any particular confirmation. It is not material at all, whether
they were confirmed by a general, or by a special dispensation, so they were
confirmed or dispensed with at all, to hold all their Benefices, and to
exercise their respective Functions in the Church, which no man can deny Ibid.
.

Pamphl. That the Roman Bishops held not the orders received by the new Form
sufficiently valid, is clear from the Bishop of Gloucester his degrading Ridley
only from his Presbytership, not his Episcopacy; for says he, We do not
acknowledge You for a Bishop.

Mr. Mason. Ridley was consecrated by the old form, and therefore this
Objection is impertinent Mas. Vindic. Eccl. Angl. l 2. c. 15.. 10. p 209. Edit.
Land. 1625.
.

Pamp. The same You may see in Fox concerning Hooper made Priest by the old
form, Bishop by the new, and therefore degraded in Q. Mary's days only as a
Priest.

Dr. Burnet. They went upon this Maxim, that Orders given in Schism were not
valid; so they did not esteem Ridley nor Hooper Bishops, and therefore only
degraded them from Priesthood; though they had been ordained by their own forms,
saving only the Oath of Obedience to the Pope Burn. Hist. V. 2 p. 290.
.

Pamph. Again, Mr. Bradford made Priest by the new form, and therefore in his
condemnation not degraded at all, but treated as a mere Laick.

A. Bp. Br. Popish Bishops are no competent witnesses to give evidence
concerning the Orders of Protestants. If one of us should urge a Determination
in either of our Universities against them in a point of Controversy, agitated
between us, for an authentic proof, how would He make himself merry with Us?
Yet we might do the one, as well as he does the other Protest. Ordin. def.
against S.N. Tom. 4. Disc. 7. p. 1006.
.

Pamphl. Bishop Bonner wrote a book, wherein he contended that the new devised
Ordination of Ministers was insufficient and void, because no Authority at all
was given them to offer in the Mass, the body and blood of our Savior Christ;
but both the Ordainer, and Ordained despised and impugn'd, not only the
Oblation or Sacrifice of the Mass, but also the Real Presence of the body and
blood of Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar.

A. Bp. Br. He says, We are not ordered to offer true Substantial Sacrifice.
Not expressly indeed. No more were they themselves for 800 Years after Christ,
and God knows, how much longer. No more are the Greek Church, or any other
Christian Church, except the Roman, at this day. Yet they acknowledge them to be
rightly Ordained, and admit them to exercise all the Offices of Priestly
Function in Rome it self. We acknowledge an Eucharistical Sacrifice of praise
and thanksgiving; a Commemorative Sacrifice, or a memorial of the Sacrifice of
the Cross; a Representative Sacrifice, or a representation of the Passion of
Christ before the Eyes of his Heavenly Father; an Imperative Sacrifice, or an
impetration of the fruit and benefit of his Passion by way of Real prayer; and
lastly, an Applicative Sacrifice, or an application of his merits unto our
Souls. Let him that dare, go one step farther then We do; and say, that it is a
Suppletory Sacrifice, to supply the defects of the Sacrifice of the Cross. Or
else, let them hold their peace, and speak no more against us in this point of
Sacrifice for ever Bp. Bramhal's Works. Tom. 1. Disc. 3. c. 9. p. 255.
.

Pamp. Those, who are truly ordained, yet, if in an Heretical or Schismatical
Church, their true Orders as to the Exercise of them are unlawful; and so,
unless a Church be first cleared from Heresy and Schism, these Orders are not
rightly employed in it.

A. Bp. Br. First I deny that the Protestant Bishops did revolt from the
Catholic Church; Nay they are more Catholic than the Roman-Catholics
themselves. Secondly, I deny that the Protestant Bishops are Heretics. Thirdly,
I deny that they are guilty of Schism. Fourthly, I deny that the Authority of
our Protestant Bishops was ever restrained by the Catholic Church. Fifthly, No
sentence whatsoever, of whomsoever, or of what crime soever can obliterate the
Episcopal Character, which is indeleble, nor disable a Bishop from Ordaining,
so far as to make the Act invalid Ibid. Disc. 7. p. 990.
.

Pam. Though I do not here state the Question, Whether they had such due
Ordination and Ordainers as to be truly and essentially Bishops, yet their
Ordination, and Introduction, if valid, seems several ways uncanonical and
unlawful.

A. Bp. Br. For the Canons, we maintain that our form of Episcopal Ordination
has the same Essentials with the Roman, but in other things of inferior allay
it differs from it. The Papal Canons were never admitted for binding Laws in
England, farther then they were received by our selves, and incorporated into
our Laws; but our Ordination is conformable to the Canons of the Catholic
Church. And for our Statutes, the Parliament has answered that Objection
sufficiently, showing clearly that the Ordination of our first Protestant
Bishops was legal; and for the validity of it, we crave no man's favor Ibid.
Tom. 1. Disc. 5. cap. 8. p. 471.
.

Pamph. They came many of them into the places of others unjustly expelled.

A. Bp. Br. "This is saying, but we expect proving Ibid.
.

Pamph. Neither the major part nor any, save one, of the former incumbent
Bishops consented to their Election or Ordination.

Dr. Bur. If Ordinations or Consecrations upon the King's Mandate be invalid,
which the Paper drives at, then all the Ordinations of the Christian-Church are
also annul'd, since for many Ages they were all made upon the Mandates of
Emperors and Kings. By which You may see the great weakness of this Argument
Dr. Burnet's Vindic. of our Ordinations p. 09.
.

Pamph. No Metropolitan can be made without the consent of the Patriarch, but
Archbishop Parker was ordained without and against the consent of the
Patriarch.

A. Bp. Br. The British Islands neither were, nor ought to be subject to the
Jurisdiction of the Roman Patriarch, as I have sufficiently demonstrated
Bramhal's Works. Tom. 1. Disc. 2. cap. 9. p. 128.
.

Pamph. Neither did be receive any Spiritual Jurisdiction at all from any
Ecclesiastical Superior, but merely that, which the Queen (a Lay-Person) by her
Delegates in this Employment did undertake to conferr upon him.

Dr. Bur. All Consecrations in this land are made by Bishops, by the power that
is inherent in them; only the King gives orders for the Execution of that their
power. Therefore all, that the Queen did in the case of Matthew Parker, and the
Kings do since, was to command so many Bishops to exercise a power they had
from Christ in such or such Instances Vindic. of Ord. p. 89.
.

Pamph. Which Delegates of hers were none of them at that time possessed of any
Diocese, Barlow and Scory being then only Bishops Elect of Chichester, and
Hereford; and Coverdale, never after admitted or elected to any; and Hoskins a
Suffragan.

A. Bp. Br. The Office and Benefice of a Bishop are two distinct things;
Ordination is an act of the Key of Order, and a Bishop uninthron'd may ordain,
as well as a Bishop enthroned. The Ordination of Suffragan Bishops, who had no
peculiar Bishoprics, was always reputed as good in the Catholic Church (if the
Suffragan had Episcopal Ordination) as the Ordination of the greatest Bishops
in the world Bramhal's Works. Tom. 1. Disc. 5. c. 5. p. 452.
.

Pamph. Nor had they had Dioceses, could have had any larger Jurisdiction save
within these; at least, being single Bishops, could have no Metropolitical
Jurisdiction, which yet they conferred on Parker, not on their own sure, but on
the Queen's Score.

Dr. Bur. Does he believe himself, who says that none can Install a Bishop in a
Jurisdiction above himself? Pray then, who invests the Popes with their
Jurisdiction? Do not the Cardinals do it, and are not they as much the Pope's
Suffragans, as Hodgskins was Canterburie's? so that if inferiors cannot invest
one in a Superior Jurisdiction, then the Popes can have none legally, since
they have their's from the Cardinals, that are inferior in Jurisdiction. There
are two things to be considered in the Consecration of a Primate, the one is
giving him the Order of a Bishop, the other is inverting him with the
Jurisdiction of a Metropolitan. For the former all Bishop are equal in Order;
none has more or less then another; so that the Consecrators of Matthew Parker
being Bishops by their Order, they had sufficient Authority to Consecrate him.
As for the Jurisdiction of Metropolitans, Primates, and Patriarchs, it has no
Divine Institution; it rose upon the division of Provinces, and the Kings of
Western Churches did first give those Preheminences to some Towns and Sees
Vindic. of Ord. p. 77. etc.
.

Pamph. But then might not She at pleasure take away, and strip Parker again of
all that Jurisdiction, which he held only on her gift?

A. Bp. Br. We hold our Benefices by humane right, our Offices of Priests and
Bishops both by divine right, and humane right. But put the case we did hold
our Bishoprics only by humane right, is it one of Your Cases of Conscience,
that a Sovereign Prince may justly take away from his Subjects any thing, which
they hold by humane right? If one Man take from another that, which he holds
justly by the Law of Man, he is a thief and a robber by the Law of God
Bramhal's Works. Tom. 1. Disc. 5. c. 11. p. 489.
.

Pamph. But the Authority of these Ordainers standing good, one or two Bishops
is not a competent Number for Ordination.

A. Bp. Br. The Commission for their Consecration limited the Consecrators to
four, when the Canons of the Catholic Church require but three. Three had been
enough to make a valid Ordination, yea, to make a Canonical Ordination Ibid.
Tom. 1. Disc. 5. c 5. p. 451.
.

Pamph. The Form of the Ordination of these new Bishops, as it was made in
Edward the 6th 's time, so it was revoked by Synod in Queen Mary's days, and by
no Synod afterward restored before their Ordination.

Dr. Burn. It is a common place, and has been handled by many Writers, how far
the Civil Magistrate may make Laws, and give commands about Sacred things. The
Prelates and the Divines by the Authority, they had from Christ, and the warrant
they had from Scripture, and the Primitive Church made the Alterations and
Changes in the Ordinal; and the King and Parliament who are vested with the
Supreme Legislative power added their Authority to them to make them Obligatory
on the Subject. Let these Men declare upon their Consciences, if there be any
thing they desire more earnestly, than such an Act for Authorizing their own
Forms; and would they make any Scruple to accept of it, if they might have it
Bur. Vindic. of Ordin. p. 51. etc.
?

Pamph. But this Form was revoked also by an Act of Parliament in Queen Mary's
days, and not by any Act restored till long after the Ordination of Queen
Elizabeth's first Bishops. viz, in 8. Eliz. 1. upon Bonner's urging hereupon,
that the Queen's were no Legal Bishops.

Pamphlet, it self in the next Page. The new Ordinal (when Archbishop Parker
was to be Consecrated by it) did not want sufficient Lay-license, having the
Queen's, nor had the Parliament been defective in relicensing it, for which see
Bishop Bramhal.

Pamph. For such Considerations as these it seems it was, that the Queen in her
Mandate for the Ordination of her new Archbishop Parker, was glad out of her
Spiritual Supremacy and Universal Jurisdiction, of which Jurisdiction one Act
is that of Ordaining to dispense, and give them leave to dispense, to
themselves, with all former Church-Laws, which should be transgrest in the
electing, and consecrating, and investing of this Bishop.

A. Bp. Br. There is a double power Ecclesiastical, of Order, and of
Jurisdiction. Which two are so different the one from the other, as themselves
both teach and practice, that there may be true Orders without Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and an actual Jurisdiction without Holy Orders. He leaves the
Orders in the plain field, to busy himself about the power of Jurisdiction,
which is nothing to the Question. That which the Statute calls the Authority of
Jurisdiction, is the coercive and compulsory power of summoning the King's
Subjects by Processes, which is indeed from the Crown. The Kings of England
neither have any power of the Keys, nor can derive them to others; He need not
fear our deriving our Orders from them Tom. 4. Disc. 7. p. 1000.
. As for the Dispensative clause, it does not extend at all to the Institution
of Christ, or any Essential of Ordination, nor to the Canons of the Universal
Church, but only to the Statutes, and Ecclesiastical Laws of England. The
Commissioners authorized by these Letters Patent to Confirm and Consecrate
Archbishop Parker, did make use of the Supplentes or Dispensative power, in
the Confirmation of the Election, which is a Political Act (as appears by the
words of the Confirmation) but not in the Consecration, which is a purely
Spiritual Act, and belongs merely to the Key of Order Tom. 1. Disc. 5. c. 5.
p. 453.
.

Pamph. Notwithstanding this Regal Dispensation a Statute was afterward made
[8. Eliz. 1. c.] to take away all Scruple, Ambiguity, or doubt concerning these
Consecrations.

A. Bp. Br. It was only a Declaration of the Parliament, that all the
Objections, which these Men made against our Ordinations were slanders and
calumnies; and that all the Bishops which had been ordained in the Queen's time
had been rightly ordained according to the Form prescribed by the Church of
England, and the Laws of the Land. These Men want no confidence, who are not
ashamed to cite this Statute in this case Ibid. p. 439.
.

I have transcribed the very words of the Authors, to show the importunity of
these Men, who are not ashamed to transcribe not only the matter, but the very
form of those Arguments, which have been so often confuted. But there is, I
confess, one thing new in this Chapter, which seems as if reserved for this
Writer. He would prove that the Queens dispensation relates not to her own
Laws, but to the Laws of the Catholic Church. The words in the Commission are
Supplentes etc. Siquid desit, aut deerit eorum quae per Statuta hujus regni aut
per leges Ecclesiasticas requiruntur. So that the Clause extends only to the
Statutes and Ecclesiastical Laws of this Kingdom; as the Learned A. Bp. Br. W.
T. 1. Disc. 5. c. 5. p. 453.
Primate understands it. But this Author with his wonted ingenuity omits the
words, per Statuta hujus Regni, and then construes the Leges Ecclesiasticas, to
be the Laws not of the English, but the Universal Church.

A Reply to Chapter the 13th.
A Reply to his former Chapters has made any Consideration of this needless. He
supposes he has proved that the Reformation was not effected by the major part
of the Clergy; and I may be allowed to suppose that he has not proved it. He
has indeed affirmed that it had not Synodical Authority under King Edward, and
Queen Elizabeth; and he had not ventured much farther, had he affirmed, that
there never were such Princes. In this Chapter he has found Six Protestant
Divines who are of Opinion, that Princes may in cases extraordinary Lawfully
Reform without or against a major part of their Clergy. He is very large in
proving, that they have delivered this Doctrine, but very sparing, when He
comes to confute it. We think it sufficiently justified from the single
Instance of the good Kings of Judah; This is copiously, he says, spoken unto
in the Succession of the Clergy, and so that Instance is confuted. This
reference to his (...) is a new way of arguing, but perhaps not altogether
irrational, since his Arguments are as likely to operate with Us whilst
confined to his Desk, as if they were urged from the Press. As long as the
Sacred History of Hezechiah's and Josiah's Reformation shall be preserved, this
Prerogative of Godly Princes will need no other defense. The particulars of the
Parallel have been so exactly drawn in a Dr. Steward's Sermon Preached at
Paris. Reprinted Land. 1687.
Discourse lately reprinted, that any farther attempt would be a Presumption.
It may be enough to say that He who denies that the major part of the Guides of
the Jewish Church erred, must also deny Christ, since by such Church-Autority
he was rejected. He, who will determine the Prince to judge allways with the
majority of Church-Guides, obliges him in Elijah's time to establish Baalism;
and at other times Calve-Worship. He who can excuse the Kings of Judah for not
consulting with those Priests, who were guilty of Idolatry, because they were
extra Ecclesiam, and he had nothing to do with them, puts a new Plea into the
mouth of the Reformers.

The latter part of the CONCLUSION has been particularly spoke to by the
Animadverter; the former part depends altogether on the unpublish'd Tracts of
Church Government. He takes his farewell of the Reformed Religion with this
Observation, That, though at the first (perhaps out of novelty) it made a
wonderful progress and growth, yet of late it has rather lost ground, and is
grown decrepit and much abated of it is former bulk and Stature. I leave the
Author to consider, Whether this Argument be not borrowed from the Jew. It is a
surprising instance, how intent our Adversaries are upon the Interest of a
Faction, when they urge such Objections against the Reformation, as equally
affect our common Christianity.

The Close.
THIS Church-Governor has now been examined through-out: Of the strength of his
Arguments, and the Authority of his History, the Reader has by this time
determined. Great things were discourst of this piece, whilst it threatened us
from the Press; but it has seen the world, and our Church is not yet
overturned. It is to be hoped that those well-meaning Gentlemen, who hence
expected such an increase of their Numbers, do not owe to this their own
Conversion. I cannot tell with what degree of Esteem others may entertain this
Relation; I who have read it through (a piece of diligence which few can boast
of) must confess to have discovered nothing so eminent in the Writer, as an
undaunted Courage, and presence of Mind. For there is not the least distrust
signified, where the Fictions are most bold and open; the grossest falsehoods
being delivered with all the security and confidence of Truth. Indeed the main
Artifice of these forgeries consists in the extravagant boldness of them; for
it is not easy for an unexperienced Reader to think so foul practices
consistent with so much unconcernedness; and nothing but a Conversation with
some Authors could excuse such a Suspicion from being uncharitable. One, who
finds Autorities vouched for that, of which they prove the direct contrary;
passages distinctly cited, which never were extant; matters of fact barely
denied, which all History assures Us of; is rather apt to mistrust his own
Understanding, then to pass so severe a Judgment, as such dealings deserve; But
how incredible soever these practices appear in the Theory, yet the Reader may,
if he please, satisfy himself that they are not wrongfully charged: Nor indeed
would I hope that He should believe them from me, without consulting my
Authority. I was my self willing at first to think Him little conversant in our
Ecclesiastical Historians; but a narrower perusal informed me, that his
peculiar excellence lay in an intimate acquaintance with those Writers. He
seems to have studied them on purpose to prepare matter of cavil, and to have
examined every passage with the prejudices of an Adversary, and the insidious
diligence of a Spy. I would slill persuade my self, that these Papers are of so
Ancient a date, that the Composer never had Opportunity to consult the latest
Account of our Reformation. The exactness of that History would have obliged
him to a stricter care in his Relation; that large Collection of Authentic
Records would have required from him a better proof of his Assertions; and the
Appendix must have satisfied him of the Character of that infamous Writer, on
whose Authority he so much depends. The possibility of his not having seen these
would incline me to a more favorable Opinion of some particulars: but I
consider that the more one is willing to Apologize for the Author, the less he
is able to excuse the Publisher.

FINIS.

