814 WOOD (Anthony a): D. (E.) A VINDICATION OF THE HISTORIOGRAPHER OF THE
UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD, and his Works, from the Reproaches of the Lord Bishop of
Salisbury in his Letter to the Lord Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield,
concerning a Book lately Published, called, A Specimen of some Errors and
Defects in the History of the Reformation of the Church of England, by Anthony
Hurmer. To which is added the Historiographers Answer to certain Animadvertions
made in the beforementioned History of the Reformation to that part of Historia
et Antiquitates Universitatis Oxon, which treats of the Divorce of Queen
Catherine from King Henry the Eighth. Sm. 4to, 30 pp., cobb boards, FINE COPY,
RARE. L4 10 0 Randal Tailor: London 1693

*This rare tract is an answer to one of the many attacks on Anthony a Wood*
the famous author of the Athenae Oxoniensis. His works are fully described and
many of his statements justified by reference to the original authorities. It
was probably written by Thomas Wood, his nephew, the lawyer, who appeared for
him in his suit against Lord Clarendon.

A VINDICATION OF THE Historiographer OF THE UNIVERSITY of OXFORD, AND HIS
WORKS, FROM The Reproaches of the Lord Bishop of Salisbury, in his LETTER to
the Lord Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, concerning a Book lately Published,
called, A Specimen of some Errors and Defects in the History of the Reformation
of the Church of England, by Anthony Hurmer.

Written by E. D.

To which is added the Historiographer's Answer to certain Animadversions made
in the beforementioned History of the Reformation, to that part of Historia
and Antiquitates Vniversitatis Oxon, which Treats of the Divorce of Queen
Catherine from King Henry the Eighth.

London, Printed, and Sold by Randal Tailor, MDCXCIII.

A VINDICATION OF THE Historiographer OF The University of OXFORD, And his
Works, etc.
THE Prefacer to the First Volume of Athenae Oxonienses, (now an Eminent
Proficient in the Common Law,) says, First, It is well known, that the Author
of that Work has through the whole course of his Life declined the pursuit of
any private interest, or advantage, and has only, according to his Abilities,
endeavored to promote the Honor and Glory of that Nation wherein he had been
Born, and more especially of that University wherein he was Educated. His Early
Application, or as some call it, his Natural Propensity to Histories and
Antiquities, made him more fit to serve his Country in that, than in any other
Study; and that part of Antiquity which was most useful in it self, and which
yet lay most neglected, became the immediate object of his Care, as that which
not only deserved, but required and wanted the greatest Industry.

The First product of his Labors and generous Studies was, The History and
Antiquities of the University of Oxford, which being by him wrote in English in
his Juvenile Years, it pleased the Chief Heads of the said University to have
it put into Latin, that the Learned World might know and be acquainted with the
Antiquity, Honor and Glory thereof: Which, had it been done by a Scribler, or
poor Writer, as his Lordship of Salisbury is pleased to Characterize the Author
in his Letter, p. 9. they would not in the least have taken notice of it; nor
would a certain Nich. Lloydius in Dictionario Historico, Geograph. Poet. etc.
Edit. Oxon. in fol. 1670. p. 593. col. 2. in Voce Oxon.
Writer of Note have styled it Four Years before it was Published, Liber
aureolus plurimo labor nec minori judicio confignatus, etc. It was a Book of
Eight Years Labor, and all, or most part of it, was Extracted from the very
Bowels of Antiquity, as the many Quotations from Records and Manuscripts in
every Page thereof do show. It has afforded matter for many Eminent Writers,
whether Domestic, or Foreign, who have made Honorable mention of it, and its
Author, as those who are Bookish Men (who have frequently styled it, A Choice
Treasure of Antiquities,) do know very well.

After it was finished, the Curators of the Sheldonian Press, namely, Sir
Leoline Jenkins, Sir Joseph Williamson, Dr. John Fell, (afterward Bishop of
Oxon,) and Dr. Tomas Yate, did Dedicate it to His Majesty King Charles the
Second, to whom being presented at Windsor in July, 1674, by Dr. Richard
Allestry Provost of Eaton College, His Majesty was graciously pleased to accept
of it, turn over several parts thereof, and hold some Conference about it with
that Learned Doctor, as the Author of it was by his Letters informed. Soon
after the Heads of the University of Oxon, agreed, that as many Copies that
Cost Eighty Pounds should be presented to the great Persons of the Royal Court,
of the Clergy, and of the Law. And afterward it was presented, in the Name of
the said University, (1.) To the most illustrious Prince John William Prince of
Neoburg, when he was Entertained by the Members thereof in the beginning of
June, 1675. See in the Fasti of the Second Volume of Athenae Oxon. p. 871. (2.)
To the most illustrious Prince Cosmo de Medicis, the great Duke of Tuscany; to
whom the said Hist. and Antiq. was sent by the Decree of the Venerable
Convocation of the Doctors and Masters, held on the Seventh of October, 1675,
and with it a Latin Letter Penned by the Public Orator, wherein a Just and
Laudable Character was given of the said Book, as it appears in the Register of
the Acts of that Convocation. The said Duke had been entertained by the
University of Oxon, when he came to see it, and its Glories, in the beginning
of May, 1669. (3.) To Charles Maurice le Tellier Archbishop and Duke of
Rheimes, when he and other French Nobility visited the University. It was
presented by the Hands of Doctor Fell Bishop of Oxon, the 8th of May, 1677.
(4.) To his Royal Highness James Duke of York, when he was Entertained by the
University in the Month of May, 1683. See in the said Fasti, p. 893, etc. To
omit others, must not be forgotten the most Illustrious and Excellent Ld. Peter
Sparr Fzee, Baron of Croneberg, etc. General of the Army of Foot belonging to
the King of Sweedland, and Extraordinary Ambassador to the King of Great
Britain, from the said King of Sweedland, who had a Copy presented to him by
the Heads, though not quite finished at the Press, when he was Entertained in
Oxon, in the Month of June, 1674.

These Memoirs are purposely set down, that the Reader might understand what
value the chief Members of the most Famous University of Oxon had for that
Book, which they deemed a fit Present for a Prince, and other great Persons,
and that he might see that the Author thereof was not a poor Writer, or
Scribler, or one who had no Reputation of lose, as his Lordship of Salisbury in
his Letter before mentioned tells you, p. 9, 10.

The said Book, wherein is maintained, by several valid Arguments, the
Antiquity of the University of Oxon, against that of Cambridg, remains as yet
unanswered: Nor is any part of it Animadverted upon, but a Minute part, by
Doctor Gilbert Burnet in the first part of The History of the Reformation of
the Church of England, Printed at London, 1679, wherein, p. 85, 86. the Author
speaking of the Divorce of Queen Catherine from King Henry the Eighth, makes
these Animadversions following on the said part in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon.
lib 1. p. 256. a.

The Collector of the Antiquities of Oxford, informs us of the uneasiness of
this matter, (the Divorce,) and of the several Messages the King sent before
that Instrument, (meaning the Act, or Decree of the University, in order to the
Divorce,) could be procured. So that from the 12th of February, to the 8th of
April, the matter was in Agitation, the Masters of Arts generally opposing it,
though the Doctors and Heads were (for the greatest part) for it. But after he
has set down the Instrument, he gives some Reasons (upon what design I cannot
easily imagine) to show that this was extorted by force; and being done without
the consent of the Masters of Arts, was of its self void and of no force. And,
as if it had been an ill thing, he takes pains to purge the University of it,
and lay it upon the Fears and Corruptions of some Aspiring Men of the
University: And without any proof gives Credit to a Lying Story set down by
Sanders, of an Assembly called by Night, in which the Seal of the University
was set to the Determination; but it appears that he had never seen, or
considered the other Instrument to which the University set their Seal, that
was agreed on in Convocation of all the Doctors and Masters, as well Regents as
Non-Regents; giving power to these Doctors and Bachelors of Divinity to
determine the matter, and to set the Seal of the University to their
conclusion. The Original whereof the Lord Herbert saw, upon which the Persons
so deputed had full Authority to set the University's Seal to that conclusion;
perhaps that Instrument was not so carefully preserved among their Records, or
was in Queen Mary's Days taken away, which might occasion these Mistakes in
their Historian.

There seems also another Mistake in the Relation he gives, for he says, those
of Paris had determined in this matter before it was agreed to at Oxon. The
Printed Decision of the Sorbone contradicts this, for it bears Date the Second
of July, whereas this was done the Ninth of April, 1530, etc.

Thus the Church Historian, soon after the Author, or Collector of the
Antiquities of Oxford, Examining the said Animadversions on that little part of
his Book before mentioned, he divided them into several pieces, and made Answer
to each, but were not then Printed. The Contents of which, and the Answers
follow.

-- But after he has set down the Instrument, he gives some Reasons, etc. The
Two first Reasons (if they may be so called) were put in by another hand, and
the other were taken by the Author from these Three Books following, viz. (1.)
From A Treatise of Marriage, etc. written by Doctor Nicholas Harpesfield, which
is a Folio Manuscript, written either in the time of Queen MARY, or in the
beginning of Queen ELIZABETH, and it is by him quoted in the place excepted
against. (2.) From The Life of Queen Catherine, written by William Forest in
the Reign of Queen Mary, and Dedicated to Her. It Is also a Manuscript, and
written in a fair Character on Parchment. (3.) From An Apology for the
Government of the University of Oxon against King Henry the Eighth, etc.
written by a Master of Arts in the time of Queen Elizabeth. It Is a Manuscript
also, and has all the Kings Letters therein, written to the University about
the Question of Marriage and Divorce, with several passages relating to
Convocations and Congregations, concerning the said Question.

So now you may see, that he did not frame, or give those Reasons from his own
Invention, but from Authors of Credit in the time they Lived.

-- (Upon what design I cannot easily imagine.) There was no design at all in
the matter, but only for Truth's sake, which very few in these Days will
deliver.

-- And, as if it were an ill thing, he takes pains to purge the University of
it, etc. It was a very ill thing (as he thought) for a King by his Letters to
frighten Persons out of their Consciences and Opinions, and to endeavor to
force them (as 'twere) to say and do what must please him: But forasmuch as the
Masters would not be frightened, and therefore they were laid aside* and the
matter discussed and determined by a few Old Doctors, and Bachelors of
Divinity, who would act and say any thing to please the King, lest danger
should follow, they ought to be commended for keeping their Consciences sound,
and standing up for that which they thought was Equity.

-- And without any Proof gives Credit to a Lying Story set down by Sanders, of
an Assembly called by Night, etc. Sanders is not his Author, for he says no
such thing in his Book De Schismate, of an Assembly called by Night. His
Author, for it is the Apology beforementioned, which adds, That when a Regent
of Balliol-College (whom the Scholars called King Henry) heard that the
Commissary (or Vice Chancellor) and his Company were going to dispatch this
Night-work, denied the Seal with his Breeches about his Shoulders for want of a
Hood. See in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 256. a. The Truth is, the
Meeting was unseasonable, and all their Actions Clancular, as having been
protested against by, and done without the consent of the Regents. And as for
Sanders, though he cannot defend him, yet many things in his Book De Schismate,
especially those relating to the University of Oxon, he finds, from other
places, to be true.

-- But it appears, that he had never seen and considered the other Instrument,
to which the University set their Seal, etc. The grand Collection, or Farrago,
which Mr. Thomas Master, of New-College, drew up by the Lord Herbert's
appointment, in order to write the Life of King Henry the Eighth, he had seen
and perused, but could not with all his diligence find that Instrument, Act, or
Decree of Convocation, neither in the Three great Folio's written by another
Hand, containing Materials at large for the writing the said Life, neither in
any of the Registers, Records, or Papers, belonging to the University: So that
for those Reasons, and because that the Lord Herbert says, that it was blurred,
and not intended for the King, and that also it was not under Seal (you say
'twas) neither passed in the Majority of Votes, therefore did he omit it, as
not Authentic. Truly he had good ground to think, that it was only drawn up,
and not proposed; for if it had been proposed, it would have been Registered,
there being nothing proposed either in Convocation, or Congregation, but is
Registered, whether denied or not: And the Register of that time is most exactly
kept, and nothing, as he could perceive, has been tore out.

-- There seems to be another Mistake in the Relation he gives, for he says,
those of Paris had determined in this matter, etc. He says it not, for it was
said by M. Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, then Chancellor of the University,
in his Letters thereunto, To make what Expedition they could to give in their
Answer to the King's Question, forasmuch as Paris and Cambridge had done it
already. For this matter he Quotes the Book of Epistles sent from, and to the
University of Oxon, which is a Manuscript in the Archieves of Bodley's Library,
Epist. 197. Yet he believes the Archbishop said those things to hasten the
Members of the Convocation of the University of Oxon the more, though probably it
was not so. However he was not bound to take notice of that, but to follow
Record as he had found it: And that he does follow Record throughout his Book,
there is not one (as he presumes) of the Venerable Senate of Antiquaries, or
Historiographers, can deny it, etc.

Thus far the Answer to the Animadversions of the Church Historian, made on a
little part of Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. Now forasmuc has the said
Church-Historian does often quote and make use of several Manuscripts and
Records in the Cottonian Library, it would be well worth the Curiosity of some
Persons, to Enquire why he did not make use of a certain Volume in that
Library, under Faustina, c. 7. containing Letters sent from, and Copies of
Charters, Privileges, etc. of the University of Oxon: In which Letters are
several Matters relating to the Reformation of the said University by certain
Commissioners appointed by King Henry the Eighth, Anno 1535. To which may be
Answered, that there being many Vile things in the said Letters, which tend
rather to the Deformation of the said University, (a Nursery to supply the
Church) they would have spoiled the smooth Current of his History of
Reformation: And if so, as several Curious Persons have supposed, it does,
under favor, Argue much Partiality; and he that is Partial, is not fit to be
an Historian. One passage, among the rest, I shall here set down, written by
Nicholas Layton, or Leighton, one of the Commissioners; his Letter Dated the
Twelfth of September, 1535, and directed to Thomas Cromwell Secretary of State,
(wherein is mention made of some of the mad work they had done relating to the
Works of the Famous Joh. Duns Scotus,) tells you thus, We have set Dunce in
Boccardo, (meaning a Prison in Oxon so called,) and have utterly Banished him
Oxford for ever, with all his blind Glosses, and is now made a common Servant
to every Man, fast Nailed up upon Posts in all Common Houses of Easement, Id
quod oculis meis vidi. And the Second time we came to New-College, after we had
declared their Injunctions, we found all the great Quadrant-Court full of the
Leaves of Dunce, the Winds blowing them into every Corner, and there we found
one Mr. Greenfeld, of Buckingham-shire, gathering part of the said Book-Leaves
(as he said) therewith to make him Scuels, or Blaunsheers, to keep the Deer
within the Wood, thereby to have the better Cry with his Hounds, etc. Thus,
Thomas Layton: Which things were mostly done by Dr. John London, another
Commissioner, at that time Warden of New-College, who spared not to Abuse his
Founder, College, University, and his Conscience, to gain Favor from great
Persons, and Wealth into his Purse.

If so be the said Commissioners had such disrespect for that most famous
Author J. Duns, who was so much admired by our Predecessors, and so difficult
to be understood, that the Doctors of those times, namely Dr. William Roper,
Dr. John Kynton, Dr. William Mowse, etc. professed, that in Twenty Eight Years
Study, they could not understand him rightly, (as John Bale, an inveterate
Enemy to that Author, and Romanists, In his Mystery of Iniquity, etc. Printed
at Geneva, in Octavo, Anno 1545, Fol. vel Page 26.
reports,) what then had they for others of inferior Note? Truly, I have very
good reason to think, that the said Commissioners made sad Havoc in the
University at that time, and were not wanting, upon all occasions, to give an
ill Report of Learning, and Learned Men. So it was, that what the Wisdom of
former times did Advance, and Cry up, the Peevish and Base Humor of these
(1535) did decry and run down, such is the World's Career.

But now let us proceed, It has been a Wonder, that among all the Members of the
most Famous University of Oxon, who have signalized their Learning and Industry
in all Professions, and almost upon all Subjects, never have undertaken the
History of the Writers thereof, and of Learning, till our Historiographer wrote
the Athenae and Fasti Oxon, the First Volume of which coming out in 1691, does
make the Second Volume which he has written. It was partly collected from
Records, and Registers, and some of it from the Works of Authors who are
therein mentioned. Another part from Books written pro and con, and what
concerns the Death and Burial of Authors, is taken from Epitaphs, Parochial and
other Registers, or from the Will, or Heralds-Office at London. And lastly,
what is said of such Roman Catholick-Writers, either in that, or the Second
Volume, who to enjoy their Religion in Peace and Safety, have fled their
Native-Country, is partly taken from the Registers of those Colleges and Houses
of Religion beyond the Seas, wherein they have settled, and spent their time,
or from the Epitaphs, or Inscriptions on their Graves. All which has been
communicated to the Author by Letters from Persons mostly unknown to him. Now
whereas the Bishop of Salisbury says in his Letter, p. 9. That he has been
visibly made a Tool by some of the Church of Rome, to Reproach all the greatest
Men of our Church; is, under favor, not true, as he himself has several times
protested, and with Zealous Imprecations declared his Innocence of such a
matter, so much, that he is ready to make Oath in any Court of Judicature, that
he has not in the least, either by Letter from, or Discourse with, any Roman
Catholic, whether Religious, or Laick, been desired, persuaded, or provoked to
speak any one thing of, or against, a Writer, or Bishop, or any Person else, of
the Protestant Persuasion.

His Lordship, in that Character of the Historiographer's being made a Tool,
has seemed much to incline to the vain Reports of some Men, and has received
things too much upon trust: For had he enquired of several Persons in Oxon of
known Worth and Truth, he would have found him not to be so. But it seems those
just Truths which he has given of Trimmers and Temporizers relishes not with
many Men of this Age.

Furthermore also, whereas his Lordship does alledg, That he has laid together
all that the Malice of Missionaries could furnish him with, to Blemish the Work
of one of the greatest Men of our Church, Bishop Jewel; is, under favor, a
mistake, for he laid them not, but R Parsons the Jesuit, whom he Quotes for
what he says: And if any thing be ill said of that Bishop, those of Parsons his
Party are to Answer for it, while in the mean time the Author of the Athenae
Oxon is so far from speaking ill of that Worthy and Learned Bishop, that he
tells you in that Book, That he was one of the greatest Lights that the
Reformed Church of England has produced; that for his great Learning and
Sufferings he was made Bishop of Salisbury by Queen Elizabeth; and adds, with
Cambden, (who was no Missionary) That he was a wonderful, great, and deep
Divine, a most stout and earnest Maintainer of our Reformed Religion, against
the Adversaries of his Learned Books: That he was a Man of singular Ingeny, of
exquifit Erudition in Theologicals, and of great Piety, etc. what more can be
said? If this is not enough, after an excellent Book written of his Life by the
Learned Dr. Lawrence Humphrey, I know not what is.

The Truth is, which may be easily observed by any ordinary Reader (not
prejudiced) that the Author of Athenae Oxon. has written So in The Works of
the Learned, etc. London, 1691. qu. p. 5.
very impartially, and has related whatsoever he knows, whether good or bad, of
those whose Lives he writes. The Roman Catholics are not better used by him,
than those of the Church of England, as may be seen in the Lives of many of
them in the First Volume, among which are those of John Bekinson, William
Chiadsey, Edm. Bonner, Thomas Harding, Henry Cole, Edm. Campian, John Nicholls,
Robert Parsons, and others, whose great Mutability in Religion, (which the
Author of The works of the Learned calls Hyprocrisie) he sets down.

The Second Volume of the Athenae Oxon, which makes the Third Volume that the
Author has Published, was collected as the First, viz. From Records,
Registers, etc. In it you will find a great deal of the Mystery of Iniquity Acted
in that dismal Rebellion which was commenced by the Puritans, and other
Factious People, Anno 1642, opened and displayed. It shows how those Brethren
were common Preachers up of Treason and Rebellion, and how their Pulpits were
Esteemed by Observing Men, the Chairs of Juglers: That Blasphemies,
Profanations, Absurdities, etc. were by them vented every Day in their
Extemporary Prayers and Sermons, to the great blinding and misleading of the
People. It shows how the Men of those times did turn themselves, and overturn
all things, merely for private Interest and Gain. It shows also the Instability
of others, who then Swore and Forswore for their own Ends, made Religion a
Stalking-Horse, and of Sacred Oaths, no more than common Knights of the Post.

Therein you will find many passages relating to the Life and Actions of that
Blessed Martyr King Charles the First, especially for the Two last Years of his
Reign, which were never before Published, and the Intriegues of many of the
Leading Men on the Rebels side, that were carried on, in bringing that Pious
Prince to the Block. Therein you will find great and generous Sense of Loyalty in
the Author, and from his Pen Just and Impartial Characters of the True and
Suffering Sons of the Church of England; as also the Impartial Relations of
such as were not so, mostly taken from their own Books and Sermons, or
Pamphlets written by the Brethren, or Royal Party. You Will also find therein the
Just Characters of many of the Nobility and Gentry that adhered to the said
King when he was at Oxon, and what not of History that relates to that most
Wicked and Barbarous Rebellion beforementioned? You Will also find therein many
bold and undeniable Truths, which treading too close on the heels of Time,
several Persons (whose Relations had been Actors in, or submitters to the Men
in the said unparalled Rebellion,) have endeavored to make them Abuses and
Libels, thereby to bring the Author into trouble.

Both the Volumes of the Athenae and Fasti Oxon, (which his Lordship of
Salisbury calls a despicable Book) are most exactly written according to time;
and the Author has been so punctual, that the very Day, and sometimes the Hour
of a thing done, or of the Death of a Writer, or Bishop, is set down; and all
compacted in so good and exact a Method, that nothing of that Nature can
possibly be done better: And therefore why his Lordship of Salisbury should
say, That he has thrown together a Tumultuary mixture of Stuff and Tattle, none
in Oxon can imagine it, or in the least judge where that Stuff and Tattle should
be lodged. Both the said Volumes will, without doubt, be of great use to all
Persons of Literature, but particularly to such as apply themselves to History,
or Politics, whom it concerns every Moment to know what kind of Men were the
Authors of those Books they Read. Neither is that knowledge unnecessary to all
that Study; for as the Writing of Authors may be said to be the Picture of the
Mind, so to know their Life, Religion, and most remarkable Actions, must needs
be a great help toward judging rightly of their Sentiments. This being an
infallible Truth, it has been a wonder to many, why his Lordship of Salisbury,
who has written many Lives (and many more) of Eminent Men, and seems to have a
peculiar Genius that way, should now endeavor to run down the Athenae and
Fasti Oxon, which consists all, or most, of Lives and Characters, and make it a
despicable Book, and the Author a Scribler, etc.

As for that passage in Mr. W. Fulman, in the Second Volume of Athenae, p. 625,
that his Corrections of, and Observations on, the First part of The History of
the Reformation of the Church of England, were some omitted, and others
curtailed, etc. The Author had from Mr. Fulman himself, who related it several
times with reluctance before him, and some of his Collegiats of
Christ-Church-College, and seemed to Condole his Misfortune, that his Labors
and Lucubrations could not stand according to his Mind, desiring withal, that
as the said Author had done See Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Oxon, lib. 2. p. 243.
See also in Athenae Oxon, Vol. 2. p. 625.
him right, as to the Collecting of the Works of King Charles the First, and
obtaining Materials for the Writing of that King's Life (the Glory of which,
Dr. Richard Perinchief carried away,) so he would be pleased to do him right in
the Work (Athenae Oxon) that he was then Meditating, to let the World know of
the omitting and curtailing of many of the said Observations. All which, he
according to a promise then made, has performed, and thereby done right to the
Memory of his deceased Friend: Which being Just and Equitable, and not
unbecoming an Historian, his Lordship of Salisbury needed not to expect to see
a Writer of his (Anthony Harmer' s) Rank descend so low to Cite such a
Scribler, especially upon such an occasion, etc. Had it not been for Mr.
Harmer's reference to a passage in the Second Volume of the Athenae Oxon. the
Character of a Scribler, and other most terrible things of the Historiographer,
would not have been mentioned; but something must be said, let it be never so
unjust, lest an Answer should be deficient, Et hinc Lachrymae.

I cannot but reflect on that sort of Creature, who when for their Snarling and
Barking, a Stone or a Stick is thrown at them, they turn Tail to him that threw
it, and fall with Teeth, and Grins upon the poor Instrument of Correction. With
Reverence be it spoken, there is a great likeness in the present Case. Mr.
Harmer being a little offended with the Noise made by the Writer of The History
of Reformation, thought fit to cast at him a passage out of Athenae Oxon. Vol.
2. p. 625. Upon this the Author of that History turns away from the Objecter,
and falls upon the Book so Objected to him, with so much Fury, that if the Book
had been burned, it had been better used. But pray where is the Ingenuity of
this Method of Defense? Would any Court of Equity allow, that when a Person
stands Convicted of a Crime by this or that Evidence, he shall not insist upon
disproof of the Testimony, but fall upon the Witness, and call him Fool and
Knave, because he dared to prove him guilty? If the Writer of this Vindication
had treated Mr. Harmer with some Scorn and Contempt, it had not affrighted him,
nor deterred him from enquiring further into the truth Preface to the Specimen
of Errors, etc. p. 7.
of things. And therefore it seems when he foresaw his Scorn and Contempt would
be thrown away upon the said Mr. Harmer, he was resolved to cast it all upon
the By-stander, the Author of Athenae Oxen. And it was wisely done, not to
provoke the Man that wore the Sword, but to turn the Affront upon the Naked
Passenger. And he has effectually done it upon one, who can digest a Rude
thing, and equally neglect Greatness and Passion.

The next matter that his Lordship of Salisbury takes notice of, is, His
Barbarous attacking the Memory of his Predecessor Bishop Ward, who was in so
many respects one of the greatest Men of his Age, etc. What his Lordship means
by Barbarous attacking, is, no doubt, in his sense Abusing, or Reporting False
things of him. If so, then let the Reader know that what is said, being taken
from Register and Observation, is as clear as the Sun at Noon: But I see Truth
must not be spoke at all times. Had his Lordship known Dr. Ward before His
Majesty's Restoration, he would have been of another Mind; but his knowledge of
him, was not, I presume, till after he was a Bishop, when then, and to the time
of his Death, he was esteemed a Good and Excellent Man. The Truth is, he was a
Man of Parts, and a great Royalist for a time; but when he saw that King
Charles the First was beheaded, and Monarchy never in a possibility of
returning again, then did he change his Orthodox Principles, submit to the Men
then in power, and Eat the Bread of Two Royalists, (that had been Ejected,)
successively. And though his Friends say, that he never took the Oath cal^ed the
Engagement, yet it appears that he did so in the Register belonging to the
Committee for the Reformation of the University of Oxon, as I was many Years
since informed by the Clerk belonging to that Committee.

What his Life and Conversation was, while he Lived in Oxon, the poor Remnant
of the Royalists that then remained there, would have told you, who usually
said, That had not Dr. Ward degenerated from their Principles of Loyalty, he
would not have lashed out into several Immoralities, etc. for the doing of
which, he also lost the Opinion that the then Saints in the University had of
him.

And now to conclude, I shall leave with you the Character of the Author of the
Athenae Oxon. which is at the end of the Epistle to the Reader, (of which but
few were Printed,) set before the First Volume of the said Athenae running
thus, The Reader is desired to know, that this Herculean Labor had been more
proper for a Head, or Fellow of a College, or for a Public Professor, or
Officer of the most Noble University of Oxon, to have undertaken, than the
Author, who never enjoyed any Place or Office therein, or can justly say, that
he has Eaten the Bread of any Founder. Also, that it had been a great deal
more fit for one who pretends to be a Virtuoso, and to know all Men, and all
things that are Transacted: Or for one who frequents much Society, where the
Characters of Men and their Works are frequently discussed; but the Author,
alas, is so far from frequenting such Company, that he is as 'twere Dead to the
World, and utterly unknown in Person to the generality of Scholars in Oxon. He
is likewise so great an Admirer of a Solitary and Retired Life, that he
frequents no Assemblies of the said University, has no Companion in Bed, or at
Board, in his Studies, Walks, or Journeys, nor holds Communication with any,
unless with some, and those very few, of Generous and Noble Spirits, that have
in some measure been promoters and encouragers of this Work: And indeed all
things considered, he is but a degree different from an Ascetick, as spending
all or most of his time, whether by Day or Night, in Reading, Writing, or
Divine Contemplation. However, he presumes, that the less his Company and
Acquaintance is, the more Impartial his Endeavors will appear to the Ingenious
and Learned, to whose Judgments only he submits them, and himself.

To which I shall add what I know besides of the same Author, viz. That he did
never in heat and forwardness meddle with a Subject, to which he was not
prepared by Education, and a due Method of Studies: That he never Wrote to
oblige a Rising Party, or to insinuate into the disposers of Preferment; but
has been content with his Station, and aimed at no end but Truth: That he never
took up with the Transcript of Records, where the Originals might be consulted:
Nor made use of others Eyes, when his own could serve: That he never Wrote in
Post with his Body and his Thoughts in a hurry, but in a fixed Abode, and with
a deliberate Pen: That he never concealed an Ungrateful Truth, nor flourished
over a Weak Place, but in sincerity of Meaning and Expression has thought an
Historian should be a Man of Conscience: That he has never had a Patron to
oblige, or forget, but has been a free and independent Writer: And in a Word,
that he confesses there may be some Mistakes in Modern Things and Persons, when
he could have no Evidence but from the information of living Friends, or
perhaps Enemies: But he is confident, that where Records are cited, and where
Authentic Evidence could possibly be had, there he has been Punctual and
Exact. And therefore he defies Anth. Harmer to Write any one Specimen of
Errors and Defects in his History; or if he can find out Eighty Nine, or One
Hundred, gross Mistakes, yet he should not value his Threats of further
Exposing him, and his Writings.

FINIS.

