Edwards Mayor.

Curia Special. tent. in Festo Sanctorum Simonis and Judae, 28. die Octobris,
1679. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli Secundi, Angliae, etc. xxxi.

THis COURT does desire Dr. Woodroffe to Print his Sermon Preached at the
Guild Hall Chapel, on Sunday last, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this
City.

Wagstaffe.

A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Mayor, AND ALDERMEN of
the City of London, AT THE GVILD-HALL Chapel, October 26. 1679.

BY BENJAMIN WOODROFFE, D. D. Canon of Christ-Church in Oxford, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON: Printed by M. Clark, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1679.

To the Right Honorable Sir JAMES EDWARDS Lord Mayor of LONDON, And to the
Court of ALDERMEN.
Right Honorable,
IF you suffer not in your Judgment by commanding the following Discourse to be
made public, I am very well satisfied, I cannot in my Obedience, it being the
best Application of any Sermon, next to that of the Hearers practice, to be
enforced by so good Authority; Especially where the chief design of what is
delivered in it, is but to discover some of those present Epidemick Distempers
of the Nation, for which in your wise Counsels, you have already prescribed
such wholesome Remedies; so that in what the Preacher is most earnest to be
heard, it is only where you have been so before him; I mean, as in your timely
discountenancing those men of evil designs, who matter not what name they make
use of, no not, though it be that of the best Religion, the Reformed Protestant
Faith it self, to bring us into disorder and confusion; so in your Care to
restrain that exorbitant License of the Press, so much of late abused to the
purposes of Sedition and Rebellion, as if what was the Invention of a Soldier
at first (for so Printing was) must have so much of its Author, as to be still
sounding the Alarm to the Public: But (God be thanked) you have not been
wanting to do your Parts to prevent all its mischiefs, you have not been
wanting in your Wisdoms to divert the Ruin, on the Brink whereof we have so
long stood; you have hitherto been the Shield to defend us (let me use the
words of my Context) against the Bow the Wicked had bent, against the Arrow
they had made ready on the string: Nor need we fear the destroying the
Foundations, as long as it shall please God in his good Providence to keep this
great and Royal City upon a firm bottom; that is, as long as you shall go on to
Execute the good Laws, under which to the dread of our Enemies, and the Envy of
all round about us, we may so safely dwell: As long as you shall continue to
uphold the Established Religion, which in so critical a time you have so
worthily avowed: Let but this Jerusalem, be as a City that is thus Compact
together, and at Unity within itself: Do but you go on to lead the Example of
Loyalty to the most Gracious and best of Princes, and of Obedience to his and
Gods righteous Commands, the Reverence you pay the Laws, will be returned in
the Obedience due to your own Government, the Care you have for the true
Religion, repaid in the Care God will have of you: Nor is it, I trust, a mean
instance of this his Care, that, (as it is so frequently applied to the Judges
he raised up to deliver his own people) those whom you call out to it, seem to
be such on whom His Spirit is to carry them through their weighty charge: It Is
your Honor, It Is your Happiness that your own Body still furnishes you with
Members worthy so great employments, That as in this nick of time, wherein I am
commanded this Duty, If the same Person whose name is prefixed to the Order
continues not in the Office to see it Executed, however the Office and
Government still survive the same; and one Excellent Magistrate lays not down
the Sword, but to deliver it up to Another, who will not fail to wield it in
Defense of the same Laws and the same Religion: That God Almighty would
strengthen your hands, and hearts in both, shall be the dutiful Prayer of,

Right Honorable, Your most humble and Obedient Servant, Benjamin Woodroffe.

A SERMON ON
Psalm xi. 3. If the Foundations be destroyed, what can the Righteous do?
THE Psalm whereof these words are a part is a short, but full description of
the Treatment good men are to expect from the wicked in this world; and that
is, to be the mark of all their malice; and cruelty: as a Bird pursued by the
Fowler, to be chased into the mountains, verse 1. and as the Metaphor is
carried on verse 2. to have the bow still bent against them, the arrow made
ready upon the string; and that if possible, to wound them in the very soul,
verse 1. so to shoot privily at the upright in heart, as to aim the blow at
that Uprightness, that Integrity, and Innocence, which should support them
against other injuries.

According to which design of theirs, the Holy Ghost elsewhere describes them
traveling with iniquity, and conceiving mischief, in the seventh Psalm at the
14. verse, it is the Birth which their Brain and Imagination is in pain to bring
forth: They devise it on their beds, Psalm xxxvi. 4. and as it is Proverbs iv.
16. Sleep not there, except they bring it to pass: it is in their hands, Psalm.
xxvi. 10. Under their Tongues, Psalm x. 7. and in their hearts, Psalm. xxviii.
3. it is what they sport to do, Proverbs x. 23. and boast that they are mighty
in it, Psalm lii. 1. Little mattering what desolations they make in the Earth;
How they put the whole course of Nature out of Order; what Foundations they
destroy, so they may but involve the Righteous in the same ruin with themselves.

And where this is the sad state of Affairs (as, God knows, it is not the fault
of the Devil, and his wicked Instruments, if it be not every where so) as it
follows in the Text, What can the Righteous do? What defense and protection can
he hope for, whom the Innocence, which should be his safeguard, thus exposes to
the greatest dangers? Yes, the very mischief intended against him, ought to be
his support; For, as it is against his soul, that impregnable part of the good
man, which no malice, no violence can reach; As, it is against that Heart, and
the uprightness of it, at they which privily shoot, whose Security as well as
Religion it is, to put its Trust in the Lord, verse 1. So, it is not without the
good Providence of Him, in whom he Trusts; not without his tenderest Care, and
Affection, who is too Holy, too Powerful, too Wise, too Just to permit his
ruin; which is the sum of the latter part of the Psalm: From all which put
together, the Propositions we shall raise to be insisted on shall be these two.

1. That in the mischiefs the wicked design against the Righteous, their great
aim and business is to destroy all Foundations.

2. That in these designs of the Wicked against the Righteous, all that the
Righteous can do, is to trust in God.

1. That in the mischiefs the wicked design against the Righteous, their great
aim and business is to destroy all Foundations.

And here we shall have to consider,

1. What the Foundations are the wicked are so solicitous to destroy.

2. What the Interest, and true grounds are, which move them to such attempts.

3. With some reflections on their great folly in such their designs.

1. As to what the Foundations are the Wicked are so solicitous to destroy;
what can these be, but the Foundations, as I may say, which would otherwise
destroy them; and those are, whatever it is, on which is built the Stability
either of Church, or State:

Such are, with respect to the One, all Civil Government, and the Laws by it
Enacted; with respect to the Other, the Principles of Faith and true Religion.

And very well may these be called Foundations, because, what Foundations are
to any Fabric, by upholding, and securing it from becoming a Ruinous, and
Disordered Heap, that are these with reference to Human Society, as serving to
support the several Members, and parts of it, in a Settled, Regular, and
Established dependence on each other.

It Is by Government, Good Laws, and Religion that this Rational Building is
held. up: That the Whole world is preserved from falling back into a worse
disorder, and confusion, than that Natural Chaos, that void formless State was,
out of which 'twas Genes. i. 2.
at first taken.

Hence the Royal Psalmist reflecting on the Corruptions, which in his time had
prevailed in Church, and State, When He was put by the exercise of his just
Authority, speaks of them, as of what tended to the utter dissolution of the
Earth, and the Inhabitants thereof, Psalm lxxv. 3. and of Himself, to whom the
Care of their Laws, and Religion was committed, as bearing up the Pillars
thereof.

And in the lxxxix. Psalm 14. he tells us, speaking of God himself, that
Judgment and Justice are the habitation of his Throne (...) says the Hebrew,
It Is Foundation or Establishment.

So that we see, what it is, we are to understand by Foundations, namely those
Hieronymus Leges interpretatur, quas ait dissipatas tum fuisse Tyrannide Saulis.
Righteous Laws, which are necessary to support the Government of God and Man,
and serve to hold the several parts of the Rational Creation from starting
aside from the Square and Rule, by which they subsist, the next thing we have
to consider, is

2. What the Interest and true Grounds are which move the wicked to their
attempts against the Righteous; and that is, nothing else but their being
wicked, i. e. Those dissolute, ungoverned wretches, who can themselves set no
limits to the Extravagancies of their ill Life, and are so heinously offended,
that the Laws do it for them; That These are the Hook put into the Nose of the
Violent and Oppressor: the Bridle to check the Lust and Vices of the
Intemperate and Unchaste: of the Backbiter and Reviler. How does it grieve them
that Authority has set those Bounds, and Landmarks to the Property of their
Neighbor, which the unjust cannot remove without invading his own quiet? That
there is that Yoke on the Neck of the Sons of Belial, which will gall the
Disobedient and Rebellious in all their strugglings against it? That to resist
the Scepter their Lawful Sovereign holds over them, is but to turn it into a
Rod of Iron.

And as in Civil Matters, so in Matters of Religion, How are these the
unacceptable Remembrances of God, and the service due to him, and in the
neglect thereof, of a day of Reckoning; of that fearful expectation of
Judgment, which is always shaking the Rod over them? This is that, which makes
them so much concerned to destroy these Foundations, at once to quit themselves
of those Fetters which not only tie their hands from outward wrongs, but what
is much severer, bind up their minds too, So perplex and entangle their
Consciences, that they can have no comfort, no freedom in their most prosperous
Mischiefs.

Alas could they but once cast off these cords from them, and break these Bonds
asunder, Psalm ii. 3. Were there no heir of restraint as the Magistrate is
styled Judge. xviii. 7. No King in Israel to hinder every man from doing that
which was right in his own Eyes, Judges xvii. 6. None to curb the humor, or
fury of the multitude: Might they but have the pleasure to ruin themselves and
others without control, what a happy Liberty of Conscience were this to these
men?

This, it is true, is what wicked men would fain be at, and without which they
cannot hope to compass their mischievous designs against the Righteous:
Forasmuch as it is for the safety of such that all Laws are made, in their
defense, that Religion inforces them. And how have they in all Ages labored to
root out the Principles of both? How Zealous have they been to quarrel at the
most Prudent, and Sober Decrees of their Superiors, and what is much more, at
his Decrees who is higher than the highest?

What Leviathans have there been still to rise up against God, and his
Providence? What endeavors either wholly to efface, or at least corrupt the
Notions, which are implanted in the minds of Men, of the Deity, and his
Government?

How has Religion too been brought in to serve a purpose, and the very Liberty
of the Gospel corruptly applied to maintain Schism and Rebellion?

Nay the very Spiritual part of Christianity, the worshipping God in Truth, i.
e. in the heart and inward man, made use of by the Enthusiast, and Fanatic to
discharge them from all Conscience of their Duty? And can there be any grosser
Scandal cast upon the Gospel, than to make it thus contrary to the Law!

Is there any greater indignity can be offered to our good Master, who was
himself so observant of all the Laws of his Nation, so tender of his Obedience
to the Magistrate, as by a Miracle to pay Tribute to Caesar? Matthew. xvii. 27.
Romans xiii. 1. 1 Pet. ii. 17. 2 Pet. ii. 10. Jude 8. Prover. viii. 15.
and has by himself, and his Apostles so strictly injoined subjection to the
higher Powers, than, that either he by whom Kings Reign, and Princes decree
Justice, or his Religion, should be traduced as destructive of both?

And it is a reproach I confess, which sticks on some who call themselves by his
name, I would to God, those, many of them, who in show, and outward appearance
run out so much in their Zeal against them, were not their greatest Factors:
God forbid, I should judge any man, but let every one lay his hand on his heart,
and seriously consider in his own Conscience, whether the Heats, and Divisions,
the Jealousies, and Heart-burnings, which are at present so much among us, do
not most effectually carry on their work: If the wicked, our Enemies, have bent
the bow, and made ready the arrow upon the string, as it is in the context, are
not they who promote these, the men who have discharged it for them, have shot
out the others arrows, in their bitter words? Psalm. lxiv. 3.


'Twas the complaint of the Prophet Jeremiah, Chapter xx. verse 5. I have heard
the defaming of many: Fear on every side, report say they, and we will report:
I wish our Times did not furnish us with too many instances of this nature, and
that in those men, who do not only as it there follows watch for, but are ready
to make the Halting of the Righteous; Those, whatever they say, who strike at
the very Foundations, whose greatest Joy 'twould be to see the Nation bereft of
the Security of her Laws, and the Comforts of her Religion: Only I cannot but
rejoice too, as all good men must, that in such Times as these, wherein to be
open, and plaindealing, to dare to love, and vindicate Truth, is to expose ones
self to the Calumny of every Scurrilous Libeller, I, and all good men cannot
but rejoice in our hearts, I speak it to the Honor of this great and Royal
City, and the good and wise Government thereof, that like what is given in the
Character of the heavenly Jerusalem, (and may Jerusalem, the City where they
shall see Peace, be always its name) that, I say, like what is given in the
Character of the heavenly Jerusalem, you have made it your singular Care, that
whosoever loves and makes a lie, barking, snarling wretches as they are,
should be shut out with Dogs. And may you Order against Hawkers, September. 7.
1679. See the Right Honorable Sir Robert Clayton's Speech, Lord Mayor Elect,
and the Right Honorable Sir James Edwards Speech, Septem. 29. 1679.
go on still to justify your Authority, the Authority of that Law, which
cannot but protect them, who make it their Rule: Never may those, who have ill
will at Zion, be so prosperous as to see the day, when you either want Power,
or Will to execute it. Never may the Religion we profess, and its Foundations
be so far destroyed as to let Anarchy, and Confusion be the badg of the
Protestant. No: Let it be the Reproach, and the single reproach of our Enemies,
that it is only in throwing down Foundations, that their Cause can prosper: in
Subverting all the Laws of God, and Man, all the Principles of true Christian
Religion, that they must ever hope to advance their Catholic Faith.

For what else is their unbounded Primacy of the Pope, but the overthrowing all
Clerici legibus civilibus, ut sunt Leges Principum, non tenentur obligatione
aliqua correctiva, sed solum directiva. Non possunt tamen a Magistratu politico
puniri, nec ullo modo trahi ad Magistratus Secularis Tribunal. Bellarm. de
Cleric. l. 1.

A Clericis, qui jure subjectionis exempti sunt, proprie quidem Majestatem non
laedi. Eudaemon Jesuita Apolog. c. 34. p. 110. Clerici Rebellionem non esse
crimen laesae Majestatis, quia non est subditus Regi. Zimanch. Aphoris. de Cons.

Juramentum Fidelitatis ne suscipi quidem posse a Papistis nostris sine Fidei
Catholicae abnegatione. Bellarm. Resp. ad Apolog. pro juram. Fidel.

De Fide eertum esse, quemcunque Principem Christianum, si a Religione
Catholica manifesto deflexerit, and alios avocare voluerit, excidere statim
omni potestate, and dignitate, idque ante prolatam Papae sententiam: posseque
and debere subditos si vires habeant, istiusmodi Haereticum ex hominum
Christianorum Dominatu ejicere. Philopat. Sect. 2. p. 109. and Suarez in Libro
de Censuris, Disp. 15. Sect. 6. p. 262. has many things to the same sense.

Non licere Christianis tolerare Regem Haereticum, si ille conetur subditos ad
suam haeresin protrahere, Bellarm, de Romans Pontif. 5. 7.

Sed and Christiani Principes, qui diu in Ecclesiasticam potestatem tyrannico
furore surrexerunt, cui flectere genua, and caput submittere debuerant, Nonne
sacris Conciliis sunt depositi, percussi Anathemate, pulsi regno, atque
imperio? Vt Ladistaus, Leo III. Henricus III. Fredericus II. Constantinus VI.
Conc. t. 14. p. 992. In Orat. Cornelii Episcopi Bitontini.

1. Oportere Jesuitas in suo Generali, ac multo magis in quovis Pontifice
Romano non hominem erroribus obnoxium considerare, sed ipsum Christum, qui est
sapientia Patris intueri, atque horum vocem excipere, non secus ac Christi
ipsius, qui nec decipi potest; nec decipere.

2. Debere eos apud animum suum statuere, se moveri, ac dirigi a divina
voluntate and providentia, quoquoversus moventur, ac di^iguntur a suo
Superiore. Maffeius in vita Loyolae. l. 3. c. 7.

Prudentiam esse solius Imperantis non autem Obedientis virtutem. Sum.
Constitut. Jesuit. Regul. 36.

In Colloquio Ratisbon. Sess. 9. p. 282. and ^88. confidenter asserunt
Jesuitae, Populum ita subjectum esse Regimini Praepositorum suorum, ut si illi
in aliquo dubio definiendo errarint, populus vi Regiminis errare simul posset,
imo deberet.

These as a few of those multitudes of Testimonies and Authorities which might
be cited under this head, he who desires more of the particulars shall need
only to consult the Bull of Pius IV. Conc. Trident. p. 944, 945 946. Con. t.
14. Anno 1564. where the Errors alluded to in this part of our continued
discourse, are with many others reckoned up to our hand, and confirmed by the
Pope as Articles of Faith, and as such to be professed by every one therein
concerned.


Government in the World? The wresting the Scepter out of the Princes hand,
which God Himself put there? And giving such Laws and Rules of Obedience as are
utterly inconsistent with all Civil Power! And, as if this were not enough,
wresting the Scepter out of Gods own hand too? That greatest Royalty of his
Crown, to forgive sins; by giving that absurd License, and impunity to all
manner of Transgressions, which he were not God, must forfeit the Holiness, and
Justice of the Divine Nature, should he permit? Again, Is there any Prerogative
of Heaven equal to the Infallibility they usurp? Or can any thing reconcile the
Infallibility they pretend to, with the many Contradictions their Religion
defends!

'Twould be no difficulty to demonstrate, that they who so far depose Christ in
his Kingly Office, as to set up another in his stead, to dispense with his
Laws, and give new Rules and measures of Obedience to his Subjects.

That they who so far evacuate his Prophetic Office, as in fact at least to
deny, that he led his Apostles into all Truth, as appears by their Doctrines
concerning Civil Powers and submissions due to them; according to which, what
was to be taught and allowed in their Times, when the Christians had no Force
to oppose them, is not true Gospel now.

That they who so far depress him in his Priestly Office too, as to join new
Mediators, and Intercessors with him: to find out new Saviors, and new merit,
whereby men may be justified: Or to take it, in their own language, they, who
in Consecrating the Host put it in the Power of the Priest to make his God, and
most blasphemously give him the same attributes, we ascribe to the great
Creator of all things: I say, 'twould certainly be no difficulty to
demonstrate, that, they, who do this, can have no design, but to destroy all
Foundations: to banish God and Religion out of the World, and according to the
professed practice of some among them, who have been the most Zealous in making
Proselytes, first to make men Atheists, that they may thereby be the better
disposed to be fit Converts to their Faith.

It cannot be expected I should upon this Occasion run through all the
Artifices of such men to give success too their mischiefs: No, the Mystery of
Iniquity is too hidden to be so easily discovered; only for the Rise of all
'twill be sufficient to observe, that it is the same Malice and Envy, which
inspiaes the Devil and his wicked Instruments: That it is the common Interest
both have against Christ and his Members, the Enmity which was begun in Heaven
itself by the Apostasy of Lucifer and his Adherents, who rebelled against God
and his Government there; and it is not at all to be admired If they have been
still propagating the same in all the successive Treasons and Rebellions
against his Vicegerents to this day.

No wonder that the best of Governments have been always most exposed to their
Malice, when the Tongues that are so keen against them have been as sharply
whetted against the Justice of Divine Providence; an effectual instance
whereof, we have Ezekiel xviii. verse 2. and 25. Where the blasphemous Jews in
their affliction stick not to charge their Grievances on God himself: not
considering that 'twas not the Fathers eating the sour Grapes (as they most
impiously apply the Proverb there) but the Childrens chewing them, (as I may
say) after them, I mean their following their ill example, which set their
Teeth on edge: Not the Inequality of Gods ways, (as they had Atheistically
suggested) but that Iniquity of their own, which pressed so heavy upon them.

3. And this one would think, (which was the last thing we proposed to speak to
under this Head) should be sufficient to convince the wicked of the Folly of
all their ill Practices, that as it is from themselves, that all theirs, and the
Publick's Mischief arise, so that they cannot but expect they should return on
their own head.

For, besides that all Wickedness in its own Res est profecto stulta nequitiae
modus. Jer. vi. 7. Job xv. 16.
nature is unbounded and infinite; such the overflowing of these waters (as the
Scripture often compares them) that he who once pulls up the Sluices cannot
assure himself that he shall not be swept away in the common Inundation; he
that removes the Hedge, as the Jews style the Law, cannot be secure, that he
shall never suffer by the Trespass: Besides, I say, that this is the Natural
result of all wickedness, as such, that the sinner himself can set no bounds to
it; how can they, who are so forward to drudge in the service of the Devil, but
think that that Apollyon, or destroyer, as he is called Revel. ix. 11. will be
as ready to stir up others to practice the same, or greater Mischiefs on
themselves?

Can they consider that the Change they drive at, is in that variable Subject
(for such are the people, such are all human Affairs) which is still capable of
new alterations! And can they hope that the same inconstancy they make use of
in them, may not be turned to their own Ruin? Or can they reasonably expect
that the various Temper and Complexion of the multitude, (who seldom know what
they would have) should just jump with their present designs? Or to take the
measure by themselves, have their own designs, their own counsels, been, or
will they always be, what they now are?

Or are they sure to overreach the Cunning of others, who know, as well as
themselves, how to make a show of one thing, whilst they design quite another?
Whose Craft, and Subtilty it is to carry on men by degrees to what they never
intended? And in a quite different way of Policy, under the very Guise of
Religion, and Holiness, to outdoe them in all they contrive against the
Public; like what we read of the Adversaries of Judah and Benjamin, Ezra, 4.
2. who know how to ruin the Temple, by building with them, by seeming to be in
the very work, which it is their chief purpose to hinder, and under the glorious
pretense of Reformation there, of cutting off only what is luxuriant, or
peccant, in Church and State, so to prune the Tree till at last they cut it up
Root and Branch.

Or were they sure that none of these things would attend their wicked
purposes; That, when they bend the bow, and make ready the Arrow upon the
string, there were none could outshoot them at their own Mark: none, who could
outgoe them in the base and unmanly pleasures of delighting in Mischief: None,
who would contend with them for the Resemblance and likeness they bear to the
Devil? I say, were they sure of all this, yet can they set bounds too to the
Justice of Divine Providence? Are they well advised that He neither can nor
will infatuate their Counsels? That He who made Exodus 1.
Pharaoh, notwithstanding all his proud Boasts, know who the Lord was, that he
should obey him: He, who put his 2 King. 19. 28.
hook in the Nose of Sennacherib, and his mighty Host; He, who in despite of
all their Enemies, made the Jews so often to wax stronger under the Oppression,
whatever the Tumult of the People, whatever, as the wicked Multitude is in the
Ps. 65. 7.
Psalms compared to them, the Noise of the Seas, and the Noise of their Waves,
that He, who Job. 38. 10, 11.
sets bounds to the Sea, cannot say to these proud Billows, hitherto shall ye
come, and no farther.

I have done with the first Head, which was to consider, 1. the Foundations the
wicked are sosolicitous to destroy, in the mischiefs they design against the
Righteous, with, 2. what the Interest and true grounds are, which move them to
such attempts, and, 3. Their great Folly in such their designs: I proceed to
the second, viz.

2. That in these designs of the Wicked against the Righteous, all that the
Righteous can do, is to trust in God.

And that implies these two things.

1. A relying upon him for safety and deliverance.

2. A behaving themselves so toward Him in whom they trust, as to do nothing
whereby to put themselves out of his Protection.

1. In all the Designs of the Wicked against the Righteous, it is the Duty of
the Righteous to rely upon God only for safety and deliverance, and that they
will find they have great reason to do, as they consider how many ways their
gracious God is, as I may say, obliged to deliver them: How His Holiness, His
Power, His Omniscience, His Justice,
are all concerned in the Protection of the Righteous.

1. God is in his Holiness concerned for the safety of the Righteous; and that
whether by his Holiness we understand the Purity of his Essence, or of his
Religion: The Immaculate Perfections of his own Nature, or the Imitation of
these he requires from all who engage in his service; agreeable to what is so
particularly urged in the words immediately after the Text, of his being in his
holy Temple.

For how can we imagine, that He who is himself of the greatest Purity, should
not favor those who endeavor to make good the Image and similitude of God in
which they were made, by cleansing themselves, as the Apostle expresses it, 2
Cor. 7. 1. from all filthiness of flesh and spirit.

Can there be any thing more acceptable to the Divine Being, than to see such a
Resemblance of his own perfections in his Creature?

Or with reference to his Religion, to be exercised in his holy Temple, can
there be any thing more reasonable, than for them to expect the Blessings of
the Temple, who are so faithful to attend its Worship?

Was not this the place toward which, under the Law, his eyes were opened
night and day? as we read, 1 Kings 8. 29. the place where he put his Name?
where Ps. 26. 8.
his honor was said to dwell? the place King. 1. 8. 30.
toward which whoever, and in what condition soever, did but pray, was sure to
be heard in Heaven? So that whatever were the Trespass between man and man,
ibid. v. 31.
here was the place to decide it: whatever the affliction under which they
were, whether led Captive into a strange Land, or punish by Famine, Sword, or
any other of God's just Judgments for their sin, in their own; if they had but
thoughts of returning to his Religion and Service, He who had set apart the
godly to himself, as it is Psalm 4. 3. could not but in the defense of his own
Name and Honor, which he had made to dwell there, likewise distinguish them in
his care, and uphold them in the work to which he called them.

Such was the Protection, the Holiness to which they were separated, then gave:
such the security of flying to the Altar, that the very Oblation of their
Wills, their true and earnest desire of appearing there before God, was a
Sacrifice he would not refuse.

2. A second Reason why the Righteous should look upon it as the only Remedy
against the Treatment they meet with from the Wicked, to put their trust in
God, is, because of the honor of his Power concerned in their deliverance.

It Is with respect to his Sovereign Dominion and Rule over all, that his Throne
is in the next words said to be in Heaven: and certainly that is not a Throne,
that can be established by iniquity. Heaven, as it is a place where no injustice
can enter, so much less can it prevail against it; nothing can resist the Power
and Supremacy of him who sits there.

Changes, Alterations, and Vicissitudes may be in things below; but to the
Heaven, in which his Throne is, it belongs only to overruled, not feel these.
He who dwells above, may for the purposes of his own glory permit the Cruelty
and Oppression of the Violent, but so, that his permitting and converting these
to his own glory, is none of the meanest instances of his Power; that in all
the Motions which are made about it, all the Commotions which are made against
it, yet still his Throne is in Heaven, the place of Bliss and Holiness; and
they who hope to interrupt the Righteous in either, do but thereby prepare
themselves for a severer Sentence at this Tribunal: Which of how great moment
must it be to the good man, thus to consider the overruling Power of him in
whom he trusts! that if, as it is v. 1. the wicked say unto his Soul, flee as a
Bird unto your Mountain, Heaven is that Mountain whither he can flee, there the
Hills from whence comes his help, Psalm. 121. 1.

3. A third Attribute which ought to encourage the Righteous to trust in God,
is that of his Omniscience; for so the Psalmist adds in the same verse, His
eyes behold, and his eyelids try the Children of men.

Did not God know, as the Psalmist brings in the Wicked making his boast
against the Righteous, Psalm 73. 11. and were there no knowledge in the most
High, there were then some reason why his people should spare some of their
over-forward confidence, and abate of that so full and absolute trust they put
in him; because whatever his Holiness is to detest, whatever his Power to
avenge injustice, yet what would all this signify, if he had no privity of the
Fact?

But then on the contrary, for the Wicked as well as the Righteous to be always
under his eye, to be seen and detected in their closest Devices, to have their
very Imaginations lie open before him, their secretest Councels, and most
hidden works of darkness still in the light of his Countenance, to have (pardon
the lowness of the comparison) as you may have sometime seen in excellent
Pictures, where the Archer is so painted, as in every posture of the Beholder
to direct his Arrow at him, to have I say, this (...), the Eye of Vengeance
always aiming at the Offender; Him, who must be his Judge, to be still present,
not only at the committing, but the first designing of the Crime, to see, to
watch, and overawe him in every motion; How must this be cause of joy and
transport to the Righteous in his greatest Sufferings, as being hereby assured
that nothing can befall him, as without the Cognizance, so, which is one
signification of the Eye, without the Pity and Compassion of his good God: That
it is He, who knows and sees all things, who permits the Enemy to design against
him; He too, of whose Omniscience this must be one Effect; that he knows what is
best for him; that as his Eyelids try the Children of men in general, so in
particular they try the Righteous, as the Refiner does his best and most valued
Metals, to bring them more clean and purged, freer from dross and dregs out of
the Fire; that it is only to make them fitter Objects for his own Love and
Favor; that whom, with the rest of Mankind, his Eye cannot but see, as it is
Verse the last of the Psalm, his Countenance may behold, i. e. encourage and
approve.

4. The last Argument I shall take notice of in the Psalm, why in the Designs
of the Wicked against the Righteous, all that they can do is to trust in God,
is, because of the honor of his Justice likewise concerned for them; As, He
whose Throne is in Heaven, sits there, as the just recompense of their doings,
( a) to rain Snares, Fire and Brimstone, V. 6.
and an horrible Tempest on the Wicked.

And certainly, if any thing can satisfy the Oppressed, That they shall not
always be so, that there will be a time when Right shall be done them; nothing
is more likely to do it, than when they shall consider that God, the just, the
holy, the powerful, the Omniscient Lord of all, has reserved to himself the
Correction of their Enemies: That however they may at present go on smoothly in
their Wickedness, yet, that their Prosperity it self, their most Fortunate
Mischiefs, are but their Snares; that, as Solomon describes the madman, Prove.
26. 18. casting about Firebrands, and saying, am I not in sport, yet 'twill not
be so, when retumed in this Fire and Brimstone; when the Storms they delight to
raise here shall end in a more horrible Tempest to themselves, and the Cup,
however they now mix all with jollity, which is to be their Portion, shall be
only that of everlasting trembling and amazement.

This as to the first part of that Trust the Righteous are to put in the Lord;
as it signifies their relying upon him for safety and deliverance, as he is
their Holy, their Powerful, their Wise, their Just Protector; the second thing
to be considered in this Trust, is,

2. Their behaving themselves so toward the Lord, in whom they are upon all
these forementioned Reasons to trust, as to do nothing whereby they may put
themselves out of his Protection.

For that may be the case of God's own People: How often did this befall the
Jews, that God cast them off, and deserted them? Was it not their sad Fate, as
in all their Captivities abroad, so in all their Superstitions and Idolatries
at home? What was it gave them up at any time into the hand of their Enemies,
but that they first delivered up themselves to their sins?

And if the Christian shall write after this Copy, if they, who have all these
Reasons for their Trust and Faith in God, shall be such Infidels in their Duty,
as to forget that they are the Righteous only, who have any title in them; if,
as it is Hosea 10. 2. they will thus be found faulty, be such an empty Vine, as
the Allusion there is, v. 1. as to bring forth Fruit only to themselves, none
to that God from whom they expect this safety; what then, as it follows, v. 3.
should a King do unto them? Nay, what can God himself do unto, or for them, if
they put it out of the Power of either to be their Savior?

In vain do men talk either of the Excellency of the Government or Laws they
live under, and the Protection they look for thence, if they despise both.

In vain to boast the Religion we profess, if we are not resolved to live up to
the Rules of it.

In vain to hope for security from the Altar, if we give not that that same
Privilege we pretend to by it.

To speak plain: We live in Times of great difficulties and danger, wherein
every one would be glad to provide for his own Peace; but what are the Methods
we take to procure it?

We can talk with great noise and zeal of and for the Protestant Religion, but
do our Actions and Tongues speak the same Language? What is it we inveigh
against in that Church whose Errors we seem so much to detest? Is it not that
Primacy of the Pope, which sets up above all that is called God? Is it not that
Infallibility whereby we think he too arrogantly assumes the determining
matters of Faith and Religion? and what are we advantaged by the Invective, if
every private person (such is the Ungoverned License of the Age we live in)
usurps these to himself?

I am not so rigid to deny every man the use of his own judgment; the exercise
of those discerning Faculties he is endowed with, as a reasonable Creature; but
sure it is a great difference between being wise to Sobriety, and imposing every
Conceit and Romans 12. 3. (...).
whimsey of our own upon the Public: A very vast difference between submitting
to God's Providence in the Government he has set over us, and being every day
preparing for, I know not what Alterations in Church and State.

Men may, if they please, call this trusting in the Lord, and committing their
Religion to his Providence, but would it not do very well to take some of the
Rules of that Religion along with them? to bethink themselves of that
Peaceable, Meek, Humble, Charitable Temper,
which ought to be the Badg of every good Christian, and if they do so, they
would then find, That to trust in the Lord, were to wait upon him in his own
way, to expect safety and deliverance only in doing their Duty.

If in Power, then to consider that the Foundations they are to maintain, are
the LAWS and RELIGION.

If in the Capacity of Subjects, what they are then to contribute to this, is
to be Obedient to both.

Not to think themselves all Princes, any otherwise a Genesis 32. 24.
than Israel was by ( a) wrestling with God in Prayer, by appplying to him in
their daily Devotions for his Blessing on the Public, and endeavoring to make
their Devotions effectual, by so living that themselves be not the Curse of it:
That for their Sins; their Discontents, Murmurings, and Repining; for their
Disobedience, and Injustice; their Intemperance, and Wantonness; their
Profaneness and Irreligion, they do not provoke God to give us up to those
Judgments they are so forward to charge upon the miscarriages of others.

That if it should be the Irrepairable Fate of this Nation (which the good Lord
of his Mercy avert, I hope those warnings he has given and is still giving,
will have that effect upon us, that we may timely apply to him to do it) that,
I say, if it should be the Irrepairable Fate of the Nation, to have its
Foundations destroyed, as the Old Translation reads it, we might be able to put
the Question, What has the Righteous done? and to answer it in the Innocent
and Inoffensive Carriage of good men; those, for whom God will find Mercy in
the midst of his Judgments, that there is nothing they have done to bring on
the Ruin: No, they are the good men who are the Safeguard of them, amongst
whom they live; God could not destroy Genesis 19.
Sodom till Righteous Lot was departed thence: It may be the case of a Land, as
it is threatened Ezekiel 14. 14. that though Noah, Daniel and Job were in it (and
I trust in God there are many such in this Nation, in this City) they should
deliver but their own Souls by their righteousness.

However, let that be our study, that we may think at least of delivering our
own Souls; it is worth our care, were there no benefit to redound to the Public
by it; worth our care, if 1 Pet. 4. 17.
Judgment must begin at the house of God, that the sin which brings it on begin
not there: That when it shall be asked, What have the Righteous done? only our
Prayers and Intercessions for the good of the Nation: Our Litanies for Mankind,
for our Enemies, for them who would destroy all Foundations.
Our meek and charitable Behavior to all, Our Blessing them that Curse us,
doing good to them that hate us, praying for them that despitefully use Mat. 5.
44.
and persecute us.
Our Constancy to the Reformed Faith, Our Renouncing the Principles and Errors
of our Adversaries. Our Duty and Loyalty to our Superiors, Our equal
Detestation of Sacrilege and Idolatry:
That these, with all those other Christian Virtues and Graces, which we
profess and teach, may be the Answer we have to return to such a Question.

And then I am sure, whatever become of the Foundations, si fractus illabatur
Orbis, should the World it self dash in pieces about us, impavidos ferient
ruinae, the Ruins that strike upon us, could not touch our Courage and
Resolution, any more than our Innocence: No, there is a firmer Bottom on which
all stands, even the Isa. 26. 4. For so, what in the common reading is
everlasting strength, is to be rendered according to the Hebrew
Rock of Ages, That God, whose Holiness, whose Power, whose Omniscience, whose
Justice
will, in his due time, do us Right: If not here, at least in that Heaven,
where his Throne is,

In that holy Temple, from whence he now looks down to encourage the Conflict,
and applaud the Triumph of our Patience; and having by what ways he thinks best
proved and prepared us for himself, will take us up into that of his and our
Glory.

To which happy state he in his mercy bring us all, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, to whom with the Father and holy Spirit, be praise, honor, and
Adoration, now and always. Amen.
FINIS.

