A SERMON Being an Encouragement for PROTESTANTS, or a Happy Prospect of
Glorious Success: With Exhortations to be Valiant against our Enemies, in
opposing the Bloody Principles of PAPISTS, and Errors of POPERY, etc.
Occasionally on the Protestants Victory over the FRENCH and IRISH Papists
BEFORE Londonderry, In Raising that Desperate SIEGE, a Glorious Prospect of
the Protestants Happiness, etc.
By Mr. WALKER Minister, and Governor of the City.
Judges VII. XX. The Sword of the Lord, and of Gideon.
WE may through all the Course of Holy Scripture, plainly behold that when the
Almighty designed to work (...) a Deliverance to his People, he made them
sensible that it was not so much the Arms of Flesh, as his immediate Power that
sav^^ them. The Israelites at the time that God raised up Gideon the Son of
Joash, to be an Instrument in his Hand of saving them, were oppressed by the
Midianites and Amalekites, a cruel and wastful People that spared no Means that
Force or Fraud could invent to vex them, and lay their Country Desolate, to
draw them away to Idolatry, and the Worship o^ strange Gods, which their
Fathers had not known; and least they should seem to attribute the Victory to
multitudes, and not give the sole Glory to the God of Battles; This great
Captain had an express Command, to try first their Courage and Resolution, and
after that proving too many, they were selected at the Water-Brook, where three
hundred only were chosen, and with that small number, the mighty Army was
overthown, destroyed, broken, and con^ounded at first onset by the breaking of
Pitchers, and sounding of Trumpets, and crying, The Sword of the Lord, and of
Gideon, Judges 7. 20. Let but the Lord arise, (says Holy David) and his
enemies shall be scattered: (And again) God is our refuge and strength, a very
present help in trouble: Therefore will we not fear though the earth be moved,
and though the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea; Though the
Waters thereof roar, and be troubled, Psas. 46. 1, 2, 3. We find that when
Samaria was Besieged, and even Famine raged in the City to a Degree, that a
Woman was forced to eat the fru^ts o^ her Womb, when all visible Means failed,
and an Insulting Enemy every day expected to enter the City, and bring it to a
final Desolation; that only a no^se being heard in the Hills and Mountains,
raised the Siege, and gave abundance of plenty to the Besieged, according as
the Prophet had foretold. And Senacheribs Host trusting in the Arm of Flesh,
and the multitude of Horses and Chariots, found themselves insensibly Defeated
by the Revenging Sword of the Destroying Angel, falling dead, by the mighty
stroke of an Invisible Power, whose Force they felt, but knew no way to resist,
or fly from, till 80000 of them were scattered in the Cha^ns of Death. And upon
consideration of these, and the like Deliverances, Holy David says, to comfort
himself, and his People, viz. The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is
our Refuge; come, behold the Work of the Lord, what desolation he has made in
the earth, he makes Wars to cease unto the end of the earth, he breaks the
bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder, and burns the Chariot with fire: Be
still, and know that I am God, I will be exalted amongst the heathen, I will be
exalted in the earth. The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our
refuge, Psalm. 46. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. For although God makes Man for the most part
the Instrument in his hand, the more v^sibly to bring about his purposes; yet
without the Operation of Almighty Power and Wisdom, Men's Devices are brought to
naught, for here we find, that when Gideon came to behold the Camp of the
enemy, The Midianites, and Amalekites, and all the Children of the H^st lay
along in the Valley like Grasshoppers for multitude, and their Camels were
without number, as the Sand of the Sea, Judges 7. 12. Yet this great Army that
had so long been the wast^ul Terror of the Country, was put into such a fear
at the cry of the Sword of the Lord, and Gideon, that they were utterly
confounded, and knew not what they did; for as we find it in verse. 21, 22. of
the ^oregoing Chapter, viz. And they stood every man in his place round about
the Camp, and all the Host ran, and cried, and fled, and the three hundred blew
the Trumpets, and the Lord set every man's Sword against his fellow, even
throughout all the Host, and the Host fled, etc. By this we may see, it was
more through Fear and Distraction they were broken, than through any slaughter
the three hundred Israelites were capable of making amongst so great a Company
of men, David encouraged by God, pursued the Amalekites that burnt Ziklag, and
with four hundred Men fell upon those that had taken the spoil, and with four
hundred Men Defeated their great Army, recovering what ever had been taken
away. Barach and Deborah Defeated Jabin's great Host, Destroying it together
with Sisera its Captain, who fell in Jael's Tent. Sampson with his single Arm,
routed at sundry times, the Powers of the Philistines; so that we see that God
confounds strength with weakness, for when men presume too much on the Arm of
Flesh, they ^^^quently deceive themselves* and in the m^^st of their security
are overthrown: Therefore let a good Christian consider that his strength is in
the Lord, and (...) God be on his side, he need not be afraid, th^ugh danger
beset him round about; but be comforted, an^ ma^e v^liant by the words of the
Kingly Prophet, viz. The Lord is my light, and my salvation, whom s^all I fear*
the Lord is the ^^trength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid* When the
wicked, even mine enemies, and my foes came upon me to eat up my flesh, they
s^umbled and fell: Thou^h an Hos^ should en^amp against me, m^ heart shall not
fear, though War shall arise against me, in this will I be confident, Psalm. 27.
1, 2, 3. This ought to be the confidence, and courageous resolution of every
Christan, especi^l^y Soldiers* who carry their Lives in their hands, and are
said to live on the brink o^ the Grave. Above all ^n a good Cause, and the
Defense of the Sacred Truth, when their Religion is in danger, and the Enemy
seeks not to gain a Dominion over their Bodies, but over their Souls, to
obscure the Light of the Gospel, and Cloud a K^ngdom in Darkness and
Ignorance: Let them take Example by the Valiant Maccabees, who when they beheld
their Holy Things Profaned and Trampled under Foot by an idolatrous People,
their Alter po^luted, and their Sanctuaries in danger to be defiled; they took
up the Sword of Gi^eon, and stood more for their Religion than for their Lives,
no^ was the Sword of the Lo^d wanting to give them success over the^r Enemies,
and to Redeem their Blee^^ng Count^ey from the Distraction and Desolation it
groaned under; no^ may we spare to come nea^er home, and find innumerable
insta^ces of God's ra^sing up Gideons to save these K(...) ^^t only from
B^^b^^o^^ N^t^o^^ who (...) ^arly (...) invaded them* but from a Papal Tyranny,
from Plots and Conspiracies, that have labored to make their glory set in
blood and Ruin. Henry the Eight was raised up to scatter the Midianites, and
Amalekites of Rome, whose Idol^tries and Superstitions had inf^cted our Israel,
and whose Pride and Luxury had laid waste their pleasant places, and destroyed
the good things of the Land: This, I say, is the Sword of the Lord, and of
Gideon, for God made this Prince an Instrument in his hand: This was the Lord's
doings, and it is marvelous in our Eyes; and in the next place, he raised up a
good Josia in the person of Edward the Sixth, and under him, gave us the Purity
and Light of the Gospel, in its primitive Luster, brighter than the Morning
Star, and though after the death of this good Prince, he witheld his Sword, and
suffered us to be crushed under the merciless hands of our enemies; yet the
Bloody Reign of of Q. Mary once over, wherein our Adversaries displayed
themselves in their true Colors, feasting Flames with Martyrs precious Blood,
at such a Riotous profuseness, as no Barbarous Nation had equalled, he heard
the Groans of his suffering people, and sent us a deliverance, The Sword of the
Lord, and ^f Gideon, was again on our side, as appeard in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, who was valiant for the Truth, and in spite of all the Conspiracies,
to raise a Rebellion, or bring her to an untimely end, by Poison, Daggers, and
many pernicious Devices; she stood the Gideon, or Deborah of our Land, and
though Spain filled the Seas with floating Castles to destroy this flourishing
Kingdom, yet the Almighty by a small number manifestly bared his Arm to save
us, and ruin those that were too confident in the Arm of Flesh, not only
destroying that huge Arm^d^, but routing such Forces, as the Spaniards sent
into Ireland, to assist the Bloody Irish Papists, in Rebellion against their
lawful Sovereign, comitting such Cruelties as are too tedious here to mention;
and although in the frustration of their Plo^s and Devices, they might well
have perceived the Immediate hand of Heaven, protecting this great and
prosperous Queen; yet so far were they infatuated, or transported with
inseparable Malice and Revenge, that though their Attempts cost many of them
their lives, yet no sooner was the wise Protestant Prince King James the first
advanced to the Throne, but they went to exalt him in a blast to the Skies, had
not their Powder Plot been discovered by the Divine Hand of Providence, who
blasted it; all which well considered, may make us confess with the Royal
Prophet, viz. We have thought of thy loving kindness, O God, in the midst of
thy Temple, according to thy Name, O God, so ^s thy praise unto the ends of the
earth; thy right hand is full of righteousness: Let Mount Sion rejoice, let the
Daughter of Juda be glad, because of thy Judgment, Psalm. 49. verse 9. 10. 11.

And now not without Tears of Compassion, we cannot but reflect on the Popish
Cruelty in the poor Kingdom of Ireland; in the Reign of King Charles the first,
Anno 1641. when without any provocation, Armed with Hellish ^age, and the
natural Cruelty of a Papist, they by inhumane Torments, Massacred no less than
200000 English Protestants, of all Ages and Sex; insomuch that the Dead Bodies
not being suffered by the Priests to be buried; Created a Contagion, and in
some measure took revenge on the Murderers; and what can we think? but at this
day a Papist is a Papist still, where even the Principle of Religion instills a
kind of Fiercenes^ and B^rbarity into their Nature: Nay, if we reflect, what in
a few Months they have done, what better can be expected, if we consider the
Spoil, Plunder, Ravagements, and Desolations the French and Irish in Arms have
made, regarding neither Oaths Promises, nor nearness of Relation; with a desire
utterly to Root the English out of the Kingdom, with a further desig^ of
carrying on their Mischievous Enterprises against the Pr^testant Religion; In
general, it is time for Protestants to become(...) Valiant for the Truth, and
bold as Lions, not only for the(...) Religion, but temporal Interest; the
preservation of they(...) Wives and Children, from Murders, Rapes, and
Deflowrings, and all manner of Violence and Wickedness: to stand as Bulwarks
against the Rapid Innundation of Antichristian Tyranny. Let us consider that
the Fowls of the Air, and the Beasts of the Forest, stand in the defense of
their own lives, and the lives of their young Ones, with such Weapons as Nature
has afforded them: And shall not men in such a case pluck up their Spirits, and
redouble their Courage, since the Almighty has of late been so favorable in
giving us, even by Miracle, a Protestant King and Queen to sit upon the Throne,
and so great a Prospect of a through deliverance; we are here Members of the
Church Militant: Let us not be ashamed, or afraid of our profession, when
maintaining our Christian Warefare in a good Conscience, and a just Cause, we
make our way to the Church which is Triumphant, where God shall wipe away all
Tears from our Eyes, And there shall be no more Death, neither sorrow nor
crying, neither shall there be any more pain, for the former things pass away,
Revel. 21, 4. Though never so many Storms and Tempests threaten; yet a good
Christian ought not to be dismayed, though in a time, even when danger does
beset them: yet it is required, they should humble themselves before their
Maker, and Rely on him, who is able to save to the utmost, all that trust in
him: For indeed, Sin is that which provokes him to withold his mercy, and
bring calamities on Nations, and Kingdoms, it was always well with the seed of
Jacob, when they clave fast to the Rock of their Salvation; but when they grew
Regardless, he gave them up to the oppressing Nations, who grieved his chosen
Heritage; for as it is said Psalm. 18. ver. 25, 26, 27. viz. With the Merciful,
thou will show thy self Merciful; and with an upright man thou will show thy
self upright; with the pure, thou will show thy self pure; with the froward,
thou will show thy self froward: For thou will save the afflicted people, but
wilt bring down high looks. Niniveh humbling her selt in Sackcloath and Ashes
before the Lord, was saved from impendent Wrath, when stubborn Sodom, and
Impenitent Gom^rah sunk in Sulpherous fire; let us turn then to the Lord with
our whole hearts, and sing praise unto our deliverer, that our Enemies, and all
those that seek to hurt us, may fall before us: It Is a good Conscience, and an
assurance in Gods mercy's that makes men valiant; Abraham on this score pursued
the Kings, and rescued his Brother Lot, etc. out of their hands: David in this
assurance undauntedly marched against the mighty Champion of the Philistines;
and with inconsiderable Weapons, as knowing God saves neither by Spear nor
Shield, no more than by weak means, when he resolves to manifest his power, or
intends to save, he overcame the man that had so long defied the Armies of
Israel: For when the great Jehovah was d^signed to show his last Judgment upon
Pharach, and his pursuing Host in the Red Sea, and Israel cried cut for fear,
they were only commanded to stand still, and see the Salvation of the Lord, and
they even without contributing any help of their own, found themselves not only
secured from the danger they feared, and a little before had threatened them,
but saw their desire upon their Enemies; the Element heard the voice of its
Creator, and returned with violence to let the stubborn Monarch know, that the
highest Rules in the Kingdoms of men, in whose hands are all the Kingdoms of
the Earth, and all the breath of life. There is a Sword of the Lord, and a
Sword of Man; against the first there is no prevailing, but the latter is weak,
i^ the first be wanting: God if he pleases can arm all the Elements to fight
for his Servants, as he did the Hail in the time of Joshua by which there fell
more than by the Swords of the Israelites; or enclose his people with Fiery
Camps of Armed Angels, as he did Elisha, when his life was sought for by the
Assyrians. Trust in the Lord, and he will be to his Servants a Wa^l of Defense,
and a strong Tower, a Buckler, a Shield, and a mighty Deliverer; who has power
to do what he please^, in Heaven and Earth, whose Will is Fate, and whose
Decrees are irresistible and irreversable: Let us but call upon him sincerely,
with a true heart, and unseigned lips, and he will hear us, and deliver us out
of all our trouble: Let us not then be afraid of their terror that seek to
harm us, but assuredly rest secure in his protection, whose mercies are over
all the works of his Creation, and he will keep us from the Arrows that fly by
Night, and the Shafts, though go abroad by day, the Adversary shall have no
advantage over us: Therefore let us acquit our selves like men, and not faint,
or grow weary: Let fear fly our Breasts, and let us Arm our selves with Courage
in a good Cause; and consider that the God of Battles, the Lord of Hosts is the
disposer of all things, and if the Lord be with us, who shall be against us,
and prosper? for there is a Sword of the Lord and a Sword of Gideon.

Thus by extraordinary means does the Almighty save, when he bares his Arm to
make his power known to the Sons of Men; then happy are all they that trust in
him, for they shall never be confounded, their Enemies shall come out one way,
and flee seven; the Lord shall draw a Sword after them, and they shall be
scattered, even from Heaven shall they be discomfited, and scattered over the
face of the earth, as in Judges 3. 2. They fought from Heaven, the Stars in
their courses fought against Sisera. If Heaven be on our side, in vain is the
Combination of man, for who is able to stand before that mighty God, whose very
looks dries up the deep, and whose wrath makes the Mountains to melt, before
whose Majesty Job confesses himself to fail and tremble, like one in a stormy
Tempest, and that his fear was so great, that he was not able to bear it; nor
(can his hand be shortened, that he will not save those that stand for his
truth; suce as are valiant for the promotion of God's honor, are said to fight
the Lords Battle; that is, he owns them to be his Soldiers, and he puts power
and strength into their hands, as he did into his Servant Joshua's, when he
made the Heavenly Bodies, contrary to the course of nature, obey a Mortal
Voice, the Sun and Moon stood still till his people had accomplished their
desire upon their Enemies, as we find it in Joshua 10. 13. And when Moses held
but up his hand, the Israelites prevailed, for there is nothing too hard for
the Lord, when he designs to bring about his purposes: I called on the Lord in
my distress (says holy David) the Lord answered me, and set me in a large
place; the Lord is on my side, I will not fear what man can do unto me: The
Lord takes my part with them that help me, therefore shall I see my desire
upon them that hate me; it is better to trust in the Lord, than to put
confidence in Princes; all Nations compassed me about, but in the Name of the
Lord will I destroy them, Psalm. 118* v. 5, 6, 7 8* 9, 10. Thus we may behold,
how a good Cause puts life into the Soul, and makes the Spirit rise to the
extremest height of valor, banishing the image of fear, by a confident
assurance of success, makes Men bold as Lions, and unwary in their
undertakings. This made Nehemiah courageous for the House of God, and for his
Sanctuary, when he caused the very Workmen to arm at their labor, having
their Swords in their hands, even whilst they were building, and repairing the
City of Jerusalem, to prevent and repel their treacherous Enemies, who sought
always to surprise and bring them to destruction; Let us take Courage then, and
faint not, but acquit your selves like men.

A Protestant Prayer for our Deliverance from Popish Enemies, and for future
Success.
O Lord God, Holy and Glorious, in whose hands are all the ends of the Earth,
thou God of Battles, on whom all Success and Victory depends; look down upon us
thy poor afflicted Servants, pardon our Sins, and pass by the multitude of our
Transgressions; save us, save us, O Lord, from the Malice and Hatred of our
Implacable Enemies, Defeat their Plots, and Confound their Devices, and let
them know, neither Policy, nor the Arm of Flesh can do any thing against those
thou art pleased to take into thy especial Care and Protection; Give us Courage
to be Valiant for thy Revealed Truth in the Gospel of thy dear Son, our ever
blessed Lord and Savior, and ever Defend us from the Clouds and Mists of
Popery and Error; give us hearts to Fear, and Reverence thy Holy Name, that all
our Actions and Undertakings may redound to thy Honor and Glory, through Jesus
Christ: To whom with Thee, and Thy Holy Spirit, be all Power, Praise, and
Dominion, World without end. Amen.

Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, 1689.


