A DECLARATION OF THE BRETHREN, who are for the established GOVERNMENT and
JUDICATORIES OF THIS CHURCH, Expressing their earnest desires of UNION and
PEACE with their DISSENTING BRETHREN.

EDINBURGH, Printed Anno Dom. 1658.

A DECLARATION of the BRETHREN, who are for the established Government and
Judicatories of this Church, expressing their earnest desires of Union and
Peace with their Dissenting Brethren.
IT may justly seem strange to all impartial Observers, and cannot but be
looked on, by all the lovers of Zion, as a sad and humbling dispensation, That
after so many years tossing about a debate now so far removed out of our way,
and after so many endeavors for an accommodation; We should yet be
necessitated to express our sad resentment of the continuance of our
distempers, and of the afflicted condition of this National Church. For our
part, we have been from the beginning, and yet are, so sensible of the evil
and prejudice of these Divisions, that as we have made Conscience of lamenting
them before the Lord, and afflicting our souls because of them, and for the
sins procuring the same; So we have not forborne, from time to time, to seek
peace and pursue it upon any terms that might be consistent with the simple
freedom of our own judgments in the matters controverted, and with the being
of Presbyteriall-government, which we believe to be of God, and which the Lord
in mercy has established among us in answer to the prayers of many, of whom
some now sleep in the Lord, and by the no small sufferings and troubles of the
present generation. We are nor so insensible, as men, how we have lien under
many disadvantages in our opposing our Brethrens irregular courses destructive
to that Government; nor, as Christians and Ministers of the Gospel, how God
might justly plague any private interest or design of ours which should add
fuel to that fire; and how our main work has been retarded and obstructed by
these contentions, That we should take any pleasure in them, if so be we could
obtain peace upon safe and just terms. In pursuance whereof, both in our
conferences with our Brethren at home, and of late in England, and in our
Representation published to the world, we have expressed our earnest desires
for peace, and our ready condescendence to gain them to an Union in the Lord
for carrying on the work of God amongst us; though as yet without any desired
success: but while we have been seeking peace, some of them have been sailing
all winds to compass their own ends and set up a domination of their Party in
this Church.

We are sorry we have so much cause to complain of our Brethren, that they
should not only have begun a needless rent in this Church upon a Question so
extrinsick to our Doctrine, Worship, and Government; But that since they have
so notably injured us in our Persons and Ministry, by casting so many and so
foul reproaches upon us, both by word and write at home and abroad, that so
they might make us hateful, and purchase credit and power to their own Party;
whereby also they have endeavored to render this National Church odious in
the view of the world, and exposed her to be a laughing stock to all her
enemies on all hands, and furnished them with weapons (if their foul slanders
deserved to have credit) whereby to fight against her, and justify their
opposition to her, when her own Children bear such witness against her. Though
we heartily wish our Brethren may seriously consider and lay to heart those
their actings; Yet, for our part, we profess it is not our purpose to impose
upon their Judgments in these matters of our differences; nor do we keep at a
distance from them upon the account of any such personal injuries, having
learned from our Master to forgive, and patiently to bear; hoping that as these
aspersions are not believed by these who know us, so in due time He will wipe
them off, to the conviction of all who do not wilfully blind their own eyes.
But our stumbling at our Brethren, is merely upon the account of the wrongs
they have done, and daily do to the settled Government of this Church; from
which, if they would once cease, and provide against them for the future, our
debates with them were at a close.

As our hopes of peace after our first rupture were soon blasted, when we
perceived our Brethren not sisting at the first cause of their rent, but
starting new quarrels to increase alienations; So we did easily foresee that
their way did manifestly tend to the overturning of the established
Church Government; and that, if they did not hearken unto peace, there was no
remedy but they behoved to run some course destructive thereunto. We could in
prudence judge no otherwise, when in the very entry we found them decline the
Authority of the Supreme Church-Judicatory in this Nation once and again, and
ready to do so from time to time at their pleasure; and drawing Factions and
Parties with them in that opposition, and branding Church Officers and
inferior Judicatories, as generally corrupt, that so all of them might be cast
loose, or, at least, molded to their mind. But they did not long leave us to
our own conjectures and fears in this matter; having soon after, and constantly
to this day, by their irregular practices contrary to all order (upon the
account of their Declinatour, and the pretended corruption of this Church, both
Officers and Members which they could never make out, though often put to it)
bewrayed their small respect to the established Government; planting
Congregations in a tumultuous and disorderly way, without respect either to the
Church Judicatories, or to the just interest of the People of the Congregation;
and counter-acting to the Resolutions and Determinations of Judicatories, when
any of them pleased to be dissatisfied therewith; with many the like practices
which we take no pleasure to repeat. And we found yet more cause to judge that
these were not the deeds only of some few amongst them, more forward and
violent than the rest, but agreeable to the principles of all, at least, of
their prime Leaders, when our conference for Union with them, in November,
1655. was broken-up chiefly upon this account (beside some other things
mentioned in our Representation) That we could not denude the
Church-Judicatories of their just Power, and devolve matters into the hands of
an extra-judiciall Committee of equal numbers, and that they expressly refused
subordination and submission to the Church Judicatories to which they and we
were solemnly engaged at our Admission to the Ministry, and which we were
willing to renew for our parts, and without which our established Judicatories
shall be nothing else but so many consultative meetings: A principle
inconsistent with Presbyteriall-government in a constituted Church, as all who
are acquainted with debates of that nature will easily perceive.

The prejudices to the Church Government flowing from their way, did not sist
here; we were but too much further confirmed in our just grounds of fear, while
some of them did endeavor to enervate the power of Church-judicatories by
procuring an Order putting the power of giving Testimony to Intrants (which is
due to Presbyteries only, who are authorized to judge of their Call, and to try
and ordain them) in the hands of some select persons of their own choosing. And
when it pleased the Lord to break that snare, their leading men have again of
late attempted the utter ruin of this Church and of these who differ from
them: Under the pretext of seeking a commission for plantation of Churches,
they projected to have the power of disposing the legal maintenance of
Ministers put in the hands of that Commission; though they know such a power
was never given nor assumed by such a Judicatory, but that it is contrary to
the order established by the Law of the Land; the great design thereof being
not only to call the Authority of the late Assemblies in question as they
express in their desire, but to have the maintenance put in the hands of men
to their mind who were the proposers of the Overture, that so they might
discourage all who are opposite to them from the Ministry: But not contenting
themselves with this, they have further proposed and projected to have it
imposed upon us, That there should be a particular Visitation appointed in
every Synod, consisting of equal numbers of both Judgments, the one half to be
chosen by the one party, and the other by the other party respective, with
power given them from the Synods for purging and planting Ministers and Elders,
and composing present and future Divisions in Presbyteries and Congregations
within the bounds of the Synod; And, that there should be also a general
Committee of Delegats from the several Synods, of equal numbers, chosen as
aforesaid, and anthorized by Synods, without whose previous advice and consent
the respective Synods may not reverse any thing done by the aforesaid
Visitators, and such Visitation and Committee to continue only till the present
differences be healed, or till the Lord in providence minister some better way
for settling peace among use.

These projects we look upon as setting up in effect a new Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, and a plant which is not of Gods planting, and not only
suspending the established Church Government sine die, but totally subverting
it to make way for the projecters their domination in the Church and over their
Brethren. For, this course projected by them, does clearly take away the power
of Synods and Presbyteries, not only in the matter of our present differences,
and in the matter of purging and planting Ministers and Elders (wherein the
chief exercise of their power consists) but in all suture divisions: And what
may not men affecting pre-eminence make a matter of difference that they may
continue themselves in power? It lays also for a foundation, an universal
imputation upon the Synods and other Church-judicatories as not worthy to be
trusted with the Work committed to them by Christ; and that they will not be so
faithful in the Work of Reformation, nor in composing any difference which may
arise hereafter of what importance so ever, as these Delegates chosen after a
new mould. So that a preparative is led to lay aside Synods and Presbyteries
when any party pleases to quarrel them, and they must lend their power to give
some shadow of Authority to any Party who pleases to tread upon them. It is a
tyrannical imposition upon Synods, that they must give their power to persons
whom they have not liberty to choose, nor power to call them to an account; and
must set up a jurisdiction above themselves with, at least, a Negative voice to
frustrate all their actings, if these Delegates please: Yea, not only is a
Negative voice required to be given them in or over all the Judicatories of
this Church; (which by parity of reason cannot be denied to any Party that
pleases to make a rent, if so be it be given to our Brethren, who are so few
in number in comparison of the body of the Ministry of this Church, and very
few or none at all of them being in some Synods) But hereby also a way is laid
for perpetuating differences and contentions, by yoking Parties of equal
numbers together in debate, who probably will not cede to other, and so in
stead of composing, the breach shall be widened. Nor do we see here any desire
or purpose to put an end to this arbitrary jurisdiction, but for any thing we
know, it might be perpetual, and the Synods never return to their due liberty
if those proposals once took place: for not only were it in their power to
continue present differences so long as they please, and consequently to
continue that extra-judicial power to compose them, much more if they must be
continued for composing any future divisions they shall be pleased to start;
But if in process of time this way shall not please them, they (in stead of
recurring to Christ's own institutions) do give us an hint of some better way,
which they expect may be ministered for settling peace.

As we are confident that (upon these and many other weighty considerations)
all who cordially own the Church Government as of divine right, will be ashamed
of such encroachments; So we heartily wish those who have had hand in them, may
lay to heart their carriage toward their Mother Church, whose interests they
are bound by the oath of God to maintain. And though we doubt nothing of their
unwearied endeavors (if they persist in their former temper) yet again to set
on foot and prosecute those their purposes, and that they may pretend to
prosecute them as the only expedient to draw us to Union; which is in effect to
cast all Christ's interests among us under their feet, and to force us to what
terms of Union they please, when they shall have us in their power: Yet, for
our part, we resolve, in the power of the Lords Grace, never to accord
thereunto, nor recede from the established Government, be the hazard what it
will. But what ever may be the Lords purpose to permit men to do to that
Government, we will never buy peace at so dear a rate as the ruin thereof, nor
be accessory thereunto by any deed of ours.

We have expressed our thoughts more fully in these things, without any purpose
to defame or irritate our Brethren, or to charge these destructive courses upon
all of them, but merely for our own vindication and justification in our
adhering to our principles, in opposing these encroachments, and for our own
exoneration before the world, and to our Brethren, if so be they will seriously
ponder and weigh the tendency of these courses, and, being wearied of those
unpleasing unprofitable and scandalous contentions, they will give proof of
their love to peace and to the welfare of their Mother Church and Christ's
precious interests in her, by thinking upon an aggreement with us in the Lord.
And albeit our Brethren may before this time fully know our mind in order
thereunto, by our conference with them; and we have also given an account
thereof to the world in our Representation. Yet we do once again hold our
selves bound to declare our readiness to contribute to our outmost for
advancing so good a work; and that, what ever wrongs we have sustained, yet we
are heartily content to bury in oblivion all former injuries, and to be far
from any animosities which might have flowed from the same; that so we and they
may jointly concur to uphold the established Church Government in the
constitution thereof, and due suborditiation and submission thereunto,
according to the lawful known principles wherein we have walked formerly,
which both of us have professed to be of Divine right, and the preservation
whereof we conceive they ought to prefer to any private interest whatsoever.
And we believe it will afford them more peace in end so to do, than if they had
obtained all their irregular desires which they have so industriously
prosecuted. And albeit they differ from us in Judgment upon the matter of our
first difference, yet we judge that needs be no impediment to Union; seeing we
have already offered and declared, that though we hold fast our own Judgment,
yet we shall not impose upon their Judgments in that matter, it being now
buried and taken out of our way: But we aggree that the matter be remitted to
the determination of a General Assembly, when the Lord shall grant the liberty
thereof according to the established order, to whose determination we submit
our selves. And we see not how our Brethren shall be able to justify
themselves before the world, or in their own Consciences, if they continue a
rent so prejudicial, merely because we cannot renounce our Judgments in such
a debate, and say as they say.

Whereas it has been often alleged against us, as a mean of heightening
Divisions, and an obstruction to Union, that by some Acts of the late
Assemblies, a bar is laid in the way to keep men who are not of our Judgment
from the Ministry, and to hold out men of their Judgment (though never so
Godly) from being Members of Church-Judicatories. We shall not now insist to
clear the justice and necessity of the conclusions of these Assemblies at that
time, and to show that nothing was then done, but what had been done formerly
in like cases: We might also instruct that (though some very few Presbyteries
have required of Intrants to the Ministry, of whatsoever Judgment, that they
should promise not to trouble the peace of the Church with these needless
debates, yet) to our best knowledge none of these Acts have been de facto a
bar to hold out any Godly man, who was lawfully and orderly called and tried,
though we may but too justly complain how industrious and active they have been
to thrust-in men of their Judgment, and to crush Godly and able men who did
not aggree with them. But to free our Brethren from all jealousies and grounds
of suspicion, and to justify our selves before the world, as to our sincere
and earnest desire of Union, we shall willingly aggree that all these Acts be
made void and null by the next General Assembly, to whom it belongs to repeal
Acts; and that in the mean time they shall not be put in practice. And whereas
they make so great a noise of the Censures inflicted on some of their number by
the Assembly, 1651. Though we might say much on behalf of the Assembly their
proceeding at that time, and of their lenity who did Censure only four of
their number, who yet have never submitted unto these Censures, and
consequently have the less cause to complain: Yet to assure them that we are
real for peace, and do not mind nor desire the personal prejudice of any of
them, but only the preservation of the order of this afflicted Church; we are
content that the Synods (since a General Assembly does not meet) do take off
the Censures that are upon their respective Members; they giving assurance of
their submission and subordination to the Judicatories, without which there can
be no order nor Government, and which we have to this day constantly observed
in our practice, and they also with us until the times of our late differences.

And whereas our Brethren affirm, that their chief aim and scope in all their
late actings, has been to find out some effectual way for purging out of
scandalous and insufficient Ministers, and other Officers; We might too justly
complain that this is but a Question started on the by, and since the time they
had begun a rupture amongst us, And that they have so liberally aspersed the
Ministry of this Church who differ from them, both at home and abroad, when yet
upon exactest trialls, both by them and us, nothing can be found answerable to
the great cry raised against this Church and our Ministry. Yet in this
bussinesse, we seriously declare we do not contravert with them, having
professed our willingness to go about that work in the most strict way,
according to justice and the common rules of Church-Judicatories in such cases:
And we have not only often entreated them to unite upon this very account, that
the work of purging might be carried on more effectually; but have upon all
occasions of any report of scandal or insufficiency, laid forth our selves to
the utmost to try and examine the truth thereof, and have not been wanting in
inflicting due Censure for any thing that at any time was found. Yea, so far
are we from fore-slowing or obstructing, that to declare our readiness and
sincerity in that matter, we are content, if our Brethren be not satisfied with
the rules of procedure hitherto aggreed upon, that they condescend upon the
strictest rules can be desired in justice for trial and censure; and we shall
be willing to observe them, providing they be rules binding for all, and to
which all will submit, both they and we.

Having thus again expressed our selves in this matter, we do seriously in the
bowels of Jesus Christ, Exhort and Obtest all our Brethren, that as they do
tender the Government of this Church, and the welfare of Christ's Interests
therein, they would lay aside prejudices and animosities, and cease from all
irregular practices, and all things tending to hold up divisions and widen the
breach: And that now at last, after so many experiences of the bitter fruits of
contention, they will join cordially to uphold the Lords Interests, and go on
in His Work; that so the Gospel, and work of Reformation may prosper amongst
us, the Lord may take delight to continue His habitation in the midst of us,
and stumblingblocks may be removed out of the way of the People, which have
been multiplied by these differences. We have made choice of this way of making
known our inclinations to peace, not upon any sinister design, but merely that
our heart in this matter may be made known to all our Brethren and the Lords
People in the Land, and that our condescensions may not be huddled up in a
conference with some few, who may keep them up, or represent them to others as
they please; but that all knowing our mind, there may be a foundation laid for
begetting a good understanding, and making up an Union with all these whom the
Lord shall convince of the necessity of peace in this poor Church, which we
desire may be speedily gone about, considering the sad prejudices following
upon this rupture, and the so long continuance thereof. And we cannot in reason
but expect that our Brethren will hearken to our serious request, if so be they
be real in their professions for Presbyterial-government, and do mind only the
advancement of the work of God amongst us, and be not driving some other design
all this while. But if after all these essays and desires of Union, we be
still, to our great grief, frustrated of our intentions, and men will continue
an unnecessary Schism in the Church, Though we shall desire to reverence and
stoup to the Lords holy dispensation in it, and (as hitherto we have done)
shall look upon that sad and humbling lot (more grievous to us than any thing
could be fall us in our particular concernments) as a call from Him exciting us
to our work, that we may lay forth our selves in season and out of season, to
make our Master Christ more known to His people, and bring-in Disciples to Him,
and may make full proof of our Ministry In all the parts and opportunities
thereof, that our Lord when He comes may find us so doing; Yet, as to those
who persist in such courses, we must say that we have exonered our selves, in
discharge of our duty toward them, and we hope it will appear to all unbyassed
Discerners, that, notwithstanding all their violent attempts against the
Churchgovernment and us, since our conference with them, yet we are not at all
irritated thereby to recede from the condescensions and offers then made. And
as we do commit Christ's Interests into His own hand, that He may see to the
preservation thereof, against those usurpations and encroachments of men, and
shall desire to lament after Him, till He be pleased to dispell those clouds
and shine upon this distracted Church; So we invite all the Lords People in the
Land that they will not give place to Satan's craft in these times who would
take them off the main work of Godliness and Religion, and engage them in
fruitless contentions and debates, whereof they will have neither profit nor
pleasure in end; But that with us they will lay to heart and lament all the
evils that have come and do daily grow upon us by these sad Divisions, and that
in their Stations they will adhere to the Interests of Christ, and the settled
Government of His Church, not suffering themselves to be misled by the specious
pretexts of men while they run courses so destructive thereunto; As considering
that it will be no grief of heart to them in the latter end, when the Lord will
judge, not according to appearances or pretext, but righteous judgment, that
they have had no accession to the ruin of their Mother Church, but have been a
comfort to her in the day of her distress.

FINIS.

