An Historical Narration OF THE LIFE and DEATH OF OUR Lord Jesus Christ.

IN TWO PARTS.

engraving

Printed at the Theater in Oxford 1685.

A brief account of what is contained IN THE FIRST PART of The History of our
SAVIORS LIFE.
1 OUR Savior came about the year of the world 4000, 2 when the Scepter of
Judah was in the hand of Herod, a stranger. 3 (S. John Baptist being sent
before 4 an extraordinary person both as to his birth, and manner of living, 5
but especially as to his preaching, 6 Virtues, actions, 7 and sufferings.) 8
Our Saviors conception in Galilee, 9 Of a most pure and holy Virgin, 12 of
mean condition, 13 espoused to an husband, 14 and informed by an Angel of this
great favor intended her by God; 15 whereupon she went to visit her cousin
Elizabeth, mother of the Baptist, 16 conversing with her 17 three months. 18
Whence she with some apprehensions returned to her husband; 19 but he, being a
very discreet, righteous and holy person, (whilst he was thinking of dismissing
her privately) 20 was admonished by an Angel not to do it; because that her
conception was by the Holy Ghost. 21 to whom Joseph most readily obeyed, and
continued to cohabit with her 22 at Nazareth, till the time of her delivery
drew near; which was 23 to be at Bethlehem, 24 whither an Edict of Augustus
forced them to go; 25 and there they were necessitated to lodge very meanly, 27
in a Stable; 28 where our Savior was born; 29 (A great exaninition and
humiliation of the Son of God!) 31 his parents only being present, and adoring
him. 33 Meanwhile an Angel published this birth to certain Shepherds there in
the field watching their flocks; 35 and was seconded by many more, 36 who
glorified God for this birth in a song* 36 (as all the host of Heaven rejoiced
for, and in, it) 38 The Shepherds immediately came to Bethlehem to see and
worship this newborn child. 39 (Gods great wisdom in thus ordering these
affairs!) 41 The shepherds relation was a great consolation to both the
Parents; 42 But his Mother, especially, kept this, and such other favors of
God, to her self, and pondered them in her heart. 43 our Lord was Circumcised*
46, to 55 A Digression concerning circumcision, the nature, and effects, of it.
55, to 61. Of the giving him the name Jesus, and his saving his people from
their sins. 61 to 71. The history of the coming of the Wise men. 71 to 77 Of
the presentation of him in the Temple, 77 to 80 whom Simeon took up in his
arms, and openly confessed, 80 as did also Anna a Prophetess. 81 Which public
testimonies alarmed Herod; 82 wherefore the Parents being returned to Bethlehem
with him, 83 the Angel of the Lord warned Joseph to flee with them into Egypt,
84 to 89 which they did immediately, and 89 to 94 (whilst Herod out of great
fury slew all the children in Bethlehem, hoping thereby to have slain our Lord
himself) 94 they arrived safe in Egypt: 95 where they stayed not long, till 96,
to 100 Herod miserably died, and 100 Joseph was commanded to return into his
own country. 101 Who, hearing that Archelaus reigned in Judea, durst not go
thither, but retired into Galilee, to his own city Nazareth. 102 Which seems
foretold by the Prophets, 103 and prefigured by Samson. 104 Little written of
his life or actions there till 30 years old, 105 Tho he was then also filled
with all wisdom and knowledge; 108 only at 12 years old he went up to
Jerusalem; where he 109 stayed after his Parents were gone away: 112 For,
supposing him in the company, they went homeward without him, but returning 113
to Jerusalem, found him among the Doctors. 114 (Whereat his mother, wondering,
demanded; why he had so used his Parents? to whom he answered, that he must be
about his Fathers business: 115 which answer they seemed not fully to
comprehend, but his mother 116 laid this up in her heart;) where the Doctors
and learned men seemed to take notice of his great wisdom. After this he went.
117 to Nazareth, with his Parents, was obedient to them, and increased in
wisdom; but the entire history of his life and actions, from this his return to
Nazareth till his baptism, is not written by the Evangelists; 118 yet by some
passages in scriptures diverse particulars may be collected. 126 In that time
seems to have happened the death of S. Joseph. 127 Our Lord being shortly to
manifest himself, and enter upon the exercise of his calling, John Baptist was
sent, whose mission and preaching in described: 137 our Lord, being to enter
upon his ministry, went to John to be baptized of him. 139 thence immediately
retiring to prayer, the Father gave testimony to him, by a visible descent of
the Holy Ghost in the resemblance of a Dove; and by an audible voice from
heaven: 141 Which voice was afterward several times reiterated, and 142
himself often urges it in his preaching. 143 But our Lord, in the vehemence of
the same spirit newly received, departed immediately into the wilderness; where
he remained in fasting, prayer, and other spiritual exercises; till 150 The
Devil came to tempt him, which he failed not to do diverse ways, till being
foiled in all he departed; and 163 (John continuing his preaching and openly
testifying of our Savior) 165 our Lord returned out of the wilderness, 166
showed himself unto John; and 167 the next day entertained two of John's
Disciples; one of them, S. Andrew. 168 who brought in his brother Simon, and
170 shortly after our Lord himself called S. Philip, and he Nathanael, 172 to
whom our Lord forerepresented his future glory. 173 Our Savor, going thence to
Galilee, arrived at Cana, 174 (where he wrought the first miracle of changing
water into wine) 176 thence to (...) 177 with his Mother, brethren, and
Disciples, 178 some whereof also were women. 179 Thence he went up to
Jerusalem. 180 Where he first cleansed the Temple, and afterward preached to
the people. 181 Some of whom desired of him a sign for the confirmation of his
authority; 182 But he only told them, that if they destroyed the temple of his
body, he would raise it again in three days; 183 Yet some did believe in him,
184 particularly Nicodemus, a Ruler; with whom our Lord held a long discourse.
186. After the Paschal feast, our Lord, not trusting to the Hierosolymites,
went and preached in the country of Judea, 187 and ordered his converts to be
baptized; 188 Whereupon John withdrew further toward Herod's Jurisdiction. 189
Meanwhile there growing a little emulation of some of John's Disciples, seeing
our Lord more followed then their Master, they consulted St. John; 190 before
whom John discourse giving testimony to our Lord, 191 which fully satisfied
them. 192 But John himself, boldly reproving Herod, was by him cast into
Prison. 195 Meanwhile our Lord departed out of Judea into Galilee 196 through
Samaria; coming to Sychar, 197 where fitting by the Well, he discoursed with,
and converted, a woman, and many of the Inhabitants. 204 Thence after 2 days
stay, he continued his journey toward Galilee; 205 where he healed the Rulers
son. 206 Then he went to Capernaum, where preaching with great applause 207 he
gathered Disciples. Particularly 208 Simon Peter, Andrew, and the sons of
Zebedee. 209 With whom the next Sabbath he entered into the Synagogue, and
taught, (...) Spirit 213 And departing from the Synagogue he entered into Simons
house, and cured his wives mother. 214 Betimes in the morning he retired
privately to Prayer. 215 And leaving Capernaum he went about other cities and
towns of Galilee* 217 Going over the Lake he discoursed with several of the
Scribes concerning following him. 220 Passing over in the nightime he calmed
a great storm. 221 And the next morning landed in the country of the Gadarens;
where he met with two possessed violently with Devils. Which casting out he
permitted to enter into Swine, and to drown them in the Lake. 225 Upon which
the Gadarens being displeased desired him to depart. And 226 he immediately
returned into the ship, 227 and came to Capernaum. 228 Where he cured a
paralytick on the Sabbath Day. 231 Thence going to the Seaside, he called
Matthew, and dined with him: 233 justifying that action; 234 as also the not so
frequent fasting of his own, as of John's, Disciples. 237 Then Jairus the Rules
of the Synagogue entreated him to come and cure his daughter; 238 (going along
with him, he cured the woman touching his garment) 240 and went forward to
Jairus's house, and restored his daughter to life. 241 Returning thence to
Capernaum, by the way he cured 2 blind men. 242 And at Easter went up to
Jerusalem. 243 Where he cured a known Paralytick lying at the Pool on the
Sabbath Day, 245 To the great offense of the Jews. 246 But our Lord justified
himself, 247 and his Disciples also, for plucking, rubbing, and eating the ears
of corn on the Sabbath Day; 248 himself also for curing a man with a withered
^and on the Sabbath when (as it should seem) he returned to Capernaum. 249 But
the Pharisees, joining themselves with the Herodians, sought how they might put
him to death. Which caused his sudden departure thence by Sea 250 into a
Mountain, where he chused his 12 Apostles, 255 and constituted Peter the first
or chief, 257 and preached unto them that divine Sermon concerning the
Beatitudes, 262 Recapitulated; and 263 the contrary woes. 264 The rest of that
Sermon also is explained: 269 Yet not all pressed as equally necessary. 272
Thence he proceeds to instruct them how to pray. 275 and how to behave
themselves in their Apostolical office; particularly concerning false teachers.
A brief account of what is contained IN THE SECOND PART of the Life of our
SAVIOR.
1 OUR Savior informing his Disciples of the dangerous temtation shortly to
come upon them and providing them against it, 2 Judas departed to the High
Priests to bargain for betraying him: 3 who agreed with him, 4 and gave him
Officers and Guards to apprehend him. 5 They came and found him in the Garden
of Gethsemane: 6 Whither our Lord retired, 7 and his Disciples with him; 8 all,
especially Peter, resolving and promising never to forsake him; 9 our Lord,
being arrived in the Garden, comforted his Disciples, and took some of them to
be witnesses of his great agony there; 10 In the garden he 11 enters upon a
spiritual combat, 12 by Gods permission, 13 very sharp upon several grounds, 15
as he discovers to the three Apostles, (which he had also hinted before in the
Temple) 17 so that he sweated blood, 18 and an Angel was sent to strengthen him
in, 18 but not deliver him from, sufferings. 20 Then he rises from the ground,
and with great cheerfulness and serenity prepares for his suffering, 21 meets
those sent to apprehend him. 22 Whom his Disciples, especially Peter, prepare
to resist, 23 (blamed therefore by our Lord) 24 who after a short expostulation
with the Officers, 25 yields himself into their power: 26 who laid hold upon a
young man accidentally there present, 27 and carried our Lord late in the night
to Ann^s, 28 then to Caiphas the High Priest; 29 where he was strictly
examined; 30 diverse witnesses appearing against him. 33 To whose frivolous
accusations our Lord answered not. 34 Wherefore the High Priest adjured him to
confess the truth: 35 which he did with great courage and plainess, 36 warning
them of his future power and glory. 38 Mean while 2 of his Disciples (John and
Peter) follow him to the High Priests Palace, 39 where Peter denied him 3
times: 40 For which he was very much greived. Meanwhile 43 our Lord was very
ill used by the servants and Officers, 46 as was prophesied of him. 49 In the
morning he was carried before the Governor, 53 before whom he was vehemently
accused: 54 Which Judas seeing made away himself, 57 as was fore-prophesied. 59
-- Our Lords behavior as he was led to the Governor, 60 Before whom the Jews
laid many things to his charge. 62 But examined by Pilate and found innocent,
he 64 was sent to Herod. 68 Who despising him returned him to Pilate; 69 and
Pilate endeavored to save him, 1 by proposing his releasment, 70 2 by
chastising him, 71 and suffering him to be mocked by the Soldiers. 73 The Jews
urged, that he called himself the Son of God, and laid other accusations
against him; 76 till they forced Pilate, yet with great reluctance, 80 to
condemn him to be Crucified; 81 (a death foreshewed by the Prophets, and chosen
by himself) 90 and to commit him to the Soldiers. 91 Who led him to execution,
much pitied by diverse persons, 95 unto Golgotha. Where they offer him
mingled-wine, 96 stripped-off his garments, 97 set a title over his head, 98
and Crucified him; 99 And divided his garments. 100 Meanwhile many of the
people, and one of the theives, mocked, but diverse pitied, him. Our Lord,
having disposed of his Blessed Mother, 101 was silent, whilst many prodigies
appeared. 103 At last he said I thirst, and gave up the Ghost. 104 The meaning
of those prodigies, 105 acknowledged by the Centurion, 106 but not by the Jews.
108 A soldier pierced his side. 111 Joseph of Arimathea begged his 112 (...),
And buried id. 113 and the Rulers sealed the stone and set a guard. 114 But
notwithstanding he rose from the dead, as it was witnessed by the guards. 117
Diverse women ignorant of his Resurrection come to the Sepulcher, 118 as did
Peter and John: 119 our Lord appeard to Mary Magdalen first, 121 then to the
other women, 122 who hasted to tell the Apostles; 123 He appeared also to S.
Peter, 124 and to 2 more Disciples going to Emaus; 127 and to the body of the
Apostles; 131 and to them again when Thomas was present; 135 again in Galilee
when they were a fishing; 139 again to James; 141 and Lastly to them all at
Jerusalem; from whence he led them forth to Mount Olivet, and in their presence
ascended into heaven. 150 They returned to Jerusalem.
An Historical Narration OF THE LIFE OF OUR LORD JESUS.
PART. 1.
before the Law; and near another two thousand under it; That the world from
its beginning might successively move still to more and more perfection, the
remainder of its duration was to be spent under the Gospel. Which time also, as
for the progress of the Gospel in conversion of Nations, probably shall not
surpass two thousand years more; and then, after these six great days of the
World, the seventh Millenary day shall be a Sabbath, a day of great rest,
peace, and prosperity unto the Church of God (see Rev. 20.2. comp. 19.29. and
-- Rev. 20.7, 10, 11. -- Romans 11.25, 26, 29, 31.) and lastly, on the 8th day, a
resurrection from the dead; and so time swallowed up of Eternity. For that this
world shall not arrive to eight thousand years appears from the many texts
intimating that in our Saviors and the Apostles days it had already passed its
middle age. [See Heb. 1.2. -- 9.26. -- Romans 13.12. -- 1 Cor. 7.29. -- 1 Pet.
4.7. -- 2 Pet. 3.3. -- Phil. 4.5. Ephesians. 1.10. -- Gal. 4.4. -- 1 Jo. 4.3. -- 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. comp. 1 Jo. 2.18.] After the World therefore now was about 4000
years old; and the Laws, of Nature, and of Moses, had fulfilled their periods;
the appointed time approached for the coming of the Promised Messiah, and
promulgation by Him of the Gospel.

Genesis 49.10.) that upon the coming of Shilo, the Civil Government and
commonwealth of the Jews was shortly to expire, and to be changed into the
Spiritual and eternal Kingdom of the Messiah) We find, not only a subjection of
the Jewish supreme Governors to the Roman Emperors; and a new enrolment and tax
just now imposed on that people by Augustus (being such a submission as that
Nation had never stooped to before: therefore one Judas of Galilee and much
people with him made an insurrection upon it ( Act. 5, 17.- Jos. Antiq. 18. l.
1. c.) we find I say not only such a subjection of the Governors, but also the
Government, and the Scepter it self of the Jews to be now first put into the
hands of a stranger, Herod, by race an Idumean.

A man, who raged amongst Gods people like a Bear and a Lion, devouring and
wasting on every side. One, who slew their King [Antigonus]; slew their High
Priest [Hircanus] his great Friend, and all the chief Council of the Jews that
sat with him, save only one man (see Joseph. 14. c. 18.) extirpated the race
of the Macchabees, and with them several of his intimate friends (see Joseph.
15. c. 9.) One, who changed the High Priest, now of no authority, seven times
over in his reign; deposing some, killing others, substituting in their rooms
whom he pleased, persons of little merit, low condition, that he might be less
jealous of their power. (And what He did toward the High Priest, the same also
did his successors in this government: Amongst whom Valerius Gratus, Pilates
Predecessor, changed the High Priest in five years five times Joseph. Antiq.
18. l. 4. c. which might sufficiently intimate to the Jews the approaching
cessation of that office by the Aduent of the Eternal High Priest.) Again, One,
whose rage entered even into his own family; killed his wife most passionatly
loved by him, and his wives mother; killed his three eldest Sons, (two of them
men of great worth) as is imagined, causlesly. One, who, when just vengeance
would suffer him to live no longer, imprisoned all the Jewish Nobility that he
could assemble together, and ordered, that instantly upon his expiring, they
should also be slain, to change the Jews foreseen rejoicing at his death into
a mourning for theirs. Not here to name that superbarbarous slaughter of so
many (certainly-Innocent because) Infants in the coasts of Bethlehem.

At this time therefore, after the most cruel of Princes, (to make him the more
acceptable) was to come to his people the most merciful, and mild, and
peaceful: eternally to deliver them from their enemies, and from the hands of
all that hated them ( Luke 1.71.) When also this Ambitious man, much given to
magnificent structures, being ore-ruled by the Divine Providence, and thinking
no other work so fit to eternize his own memory (see Joseph. Antiq. 15. l. 14.
c.) or to oblige to him for ever the Jewish nation, had built and prepared a
new Temple, much more sumptuous then the former, as it were for the more solemn
entertainment of the sudden coming of this Lord into his Temple. ( Malac. 3.1.)

Luke 7.26.) one prophesied of by the Prophets; and called by them Angelus
Domini; of whom the highest of the prophets, Elias, was only a Type.

And so we find, Mat. 3.7, the whole Nation, as it were, upon his appearing and
telling them, that One followed, who brought his Faun in his hand to purge his
Floor, and who would burn the chaff with fire unquenchable ( Mat. 3.11, 12.),
flocking unto him; confessing sins (especially the meaner people, Publicanes,
Soldiers, and such as had no high opinion of their own righteousness); and
receiving baptism; and inquiring of him concerning their several duty, and
amendment of life. See Luke 3.10. etc. -7.29. And among others we find also
repairing to this forerunner, out of the remoter parts of Galilee several of
those, whom our Lord afterward entertained for his Disciples; learning as it
were their first rudiments from this Baptist; As, Andrew, John, Peter, Philip,
Nathanaiel Jo. 1. c. -and not unlikely Matthew also amongst other Publicans
Luke 7.29. Only the Pharisees and Lawyers, much conceited of their own
Holiness, frustrated the Counsel of God against themselves, and would not come
to confession to, or receive baptism from, Him Luke 7.30. and as they, first,
refused John's principles and discipline, so afterward, they profitted as
little under that of the Messiah.

Jo. 1.26. Only, because he came so near the time of our Lord, no miracles were
to be wrought by him, lest he should turn men's eyes upon himself from him that
followed Him, to whom these were reserved as a Royal prerogative; and therefore
our Savior enumerated these to John's Disciples questioning who he was Mat.
11.5, 6. to show them that he was the Messiah and a greater Person, then their
Master. See Mat. 11.5.

Luke 1.6, 36.) He was conceived miraculously (as Isaac had bin formerly), when
concupiscence and lust was now ceased in his Parents being very old, and past
procreation of children, as if he was not to be a child of the flesh, but of
the Spirit. Gal. 4.29. He was sanctified and filled with the Holy Ghost even in
the womb, leaping there, for joy (says S. Luke 1. c. 44. v.) three Months
before his Nativity, at the approach of our Saviors presence, as it were
indicating thus early the Messiah to his Mother. His conception was first
foretold to his parents by an Angel, and that the same Angel Gabriel, who six
Months after annunciated our Lords conception to the blessed Virgin; and who,
being singularly admitted into the secrets of God, and one of the Angels of
special presence, ( Luke 1.19.) had long before those times revealed to the
greatly beloved Daniel the punctual time of our Lords coming ( ^an. 9.24, 24.)

The Baptist, thus miraculously entered into the world, lived also such a life
here as never any man lived before him; after his infancy (as one who was not
like other Prophets taken for Gods service from leading a common life, but,
from the womb, filled with the Spirit,) He left his Fathers house (who lived in
a City in the Mountains of Judah) and retired into the Wilderness; was never
corrupted with any acquaintance with men; nor interessed in any affairs of
human life; nor learned at all the sinfully-compliant acts of ordinary society;
that so he might afterward, as an equal stranger to all, and independent on any
for the necessaries of his life, more freely reprehend the faults of every one,
whilst none could tax any in himself. He lived in a remote Desert, where
doubtless he had much converse with God and holy Angels; (for, what can we less
imagine of him who was from the womb so singularly sanctified?) He used not at
all the ordinary food of men at least after his sojourning in the Wilderness;
neither eating any Bread, nor drinking any Wine, so that the Jews seeing such
abstinence affirmed he was possessed. See Luke 7.33. His raiment rough and
suitable to his diet; and such as he might receive from any dead beast, for it
was but Leather and woven Hair. Of both which, his diet and his Apparel, our
Savior pleased to take particular notice to the people, as betokening an
extraordinary person; ( Mat. 11.8. - Luke 7.33.) from, whose unerring mouth he
received such a testimony, as never any had the like See Mat. 11.9, 11, 14.
[where tho the 11th verse there seems to intimate, that the least of our
Saviors disciples or followers should be made greater than he; (1.) in some
sort more happy in hearing and seeing our Saviors words and works, in enjoying
clearer manifestations of the Gospel, lastly in doing greater things than he,
namely all sorts of Miracles by the power of our Lord; yet might they be,
notwithstanding, and were most of them, much inferior to him, in the eminency
of a continued Sanctity from his birth, and the dignity of his office. Who was
chosen to be the first Minister of the Gospel, and whose hallowed Tongue first
showed to the world the person of the Messiah, and whose Sacred hands baptized
Him.]

Elias the most eminent of all the Prophets, as I said, was his Type; who
prefigured him in his rough apparel, and solitary abode, and silvestrian fare;
living for the most part in the Forest of Mount-Carmel, (as may be gathered
from 1 King. 18.19, 42. comp. 2 King. 4.25. the habitation of his successor
Elisha;) fed by Ravens in solitude; and drinking of the Brook; fasting beyond
all others save Moses and Jesus; typifying in his passing through the divided
waters of Jordan the baptism there of this his successor; Bold in rebuking vice
in Ahab, as John in Herod; and persecuted by Jezebel, as he by Herodias.

Mat. 3.2. with 4.17.) declaring unto them, a Kingdom in Heaven, which the
Lord, that followed him, would confer on the worthy; and the everlasting
torments of Hellfire, which he would inflict on the rebellious; telling them
of a kingdom of God to be erected, not abroad, but within them; and of the Holy
Spirit which this King would baptize them with upon their repentance preached
by Him, freeing them from the thraldom not of the Romans, but of sin; nor from
their servitude under Herod or Tiberius, but under the great Prince of all this
lower world, Satan their spiritual, and only dangerous enemy; whose captives
and children, and not Abraham's, they (unknowingly) were, till by this Prince
delivered. This was the great deliverance to come by Jesus which both Holy
Zachary spoke of in his Benedictus; Luke ^.77.
[To give knowledge of Salvation unto his people by the remission of their sins]
and the Angel in his message to Joseph telling him why he should be called
Jesus or Savior, Matt. 1.21.
[because he should save his people from their sins.] Such punishments and
rewards, liberty and royalty, as the Baptist preached, being the only that were
here worth the speaking of, or looking after. Thus was the Baptist appointed to
be the beginner of the Gospel, and the first open promulgator of this new
Spiritual Kingdom. The Prophets, says our Savior Mat. 11.12, 13. prophesied,
until John, [(1.) of such a thing to come]; but, from the days of John, the
kingdom of heaven began to suffer violence; people by troops now pressing into
it, and every one striving to gain for himself a share thereof, whilst they
crowded in such multitudes to John's (Mat. 3.5.) and our Saviors baptisms, (
Joh. 3, 26.) Only John began the publishing of this Gospel afar off as it were;
not coming into the Temple, or the chief Cities, to preach it, but staying a
loof off in the Wilderness, and near Jordan, leaving these honors to the Lord
who followed Him; by whom the Gospel was brought still nearer, till it visited
at last every small Town and Village.

Luke 3.19, 20,) as our Savior afterward did ( Luke 13.32.) reproving him for
all the evil he had done, says the Evangelist, Luke 3.19.
and particularly concerning his Wife; not fearing the implacable wrath of a
woman and a Queen, tho this cost him his life. Again treating the Scribes, the
Pharisees, and Sadduces (whose manners he knew by the Spirit and Revelation,
not having learnt them by experience) at the first sight, roughly and severely,
as their incorrigible Hypocrisy and malice deserved; reproving them in the very
same terms as our Savior; comp. Mat. 3.7. -with 23.33. and calling them
Generation of Vipers or Serpents, (they being the brood of the old Serpent the
Devil in the resemblance of their manners see Jo. 8.44.) in opposition to their
boasting of their being Abraham's seed, to whom they were nothing like in their
lives: 2 Meanwhile, toward the soldiers, the publicans, and others notorious,
but relenting sinners, using the same mansuetude as Christ, teaching them their
duty for the future, without upbraiding their former faults. This great Saint,
(not bred in the Court or in ceremonial Society, but in retiredness and
solitude) neither reverencing the secular port and state of the Pharisee, nor
despising the meanness and low esteem of the Publican. Only in general, the
Baptist seems to personate a greater austerity then our Lord both in his
conversation and his preaching pressing mainly the discipline of repentance,
and threatening much the wrath to come, hellfire, and damnation, to the
disobedient; having something more herein of the Spirit of his type Elias;
whereas our Saviors language was more benign and indulgent publishing remission
of sin, and promising a Kingdom to the obedient; and also telling his
Disciples, that the Spirit of Elias did not so well befit them. Yet were both
our Saviors and John's dispensations suitable to their seasons; the one
answering to the beginning of an holy life, the other to the end and
consummation thereof; the one laying the foundation with threats and terrors;
the other building it up with consolations and mercies; the Lord doing the
rough part by his servant, the gentle and mild by himself.

3 Again, much resembling our Savior also in his great humility accompanied
with such eminency of Sanctity. He, that was so far above the Prophets, yet
when the Jews sent to him and asked him, whether he was Elias, or whether he
was a Prophet, (which is to be understood here as in Mat. 16.14. the Jews,
then, holding a (...)) He answered, No: without telling them, that he was that
typified Elias, which was for to come; or that he was more then a Prophet; and
expressed himself meanwhile by the most diminutive term that could be thought
on; that he was only Vox clamantis, etc. before a greater Person, that was then
coming after him. He stood exceedingly upon his guard of lowliness, and
disparaged himself upon all occasions, as the Jews and his Disciples magnifyed
him. Being conjectured by them for the Messiah he nourished not the mistake for
his own honor; but (says the Evangelist Jo. 1.20.) he confessed, and denied
not, [i. e. to speak this truth against his own reputation] but confessed, that
he was not He. And Jo. 3.28. he takes solemn witness of such his confession. In
comparing himself with him, he uses an expression, to debase himself beneath
the lowest of his servants; that he was not worthy, stooping, to untie the
latchet of his shoe ( Mar. 1.7.) and ( Jo. 3.31.) he says that he being
earthly did but loqui de terra speak of the Earth, i. e. low and mean rudiments
(for which S. John uses this phrase see Jo. 3. v. 12.) in comparison of Jesus,
who coming from Heaven above spoke of the greater mysteries which he had there
heard and seen. He every where gave place to our Savior; left Bethabara in
Judea, the more public place of concourse, for our Saviors disciples (some of
whom had formerly bin his) to baptize in; and retired himself Northward toward
Galilee to Enon near to Salim. ( Jo. 3.23.) He transmitted his Disciples to him
( Jo. 1.35.) and resigned his former Auditors, and the multitudes to his
conduct: and when the people, so soon as they saw his great Miracles and heard
his divine words, now admired and flockt after Jesus much more then they did
after John; He rejoiced to hear it with an humble acknowledgment; Oportet illum
crescere me minui: and when his ambitious disciples made a complaint to him of
it, he answered them, that he was but a waiter on this Bridegroom of the
Church, and his joy was fulfilled to stand silent by, and hear his sweet
colloquies with his Bride ( Jo. 3.29.)

Luke 7.30, 34): persecuted by Herod and ungratefully imprisoned by him, at the
solicitation of his Wife, whom before he had heard gladly and in many things
obeyed his Holy Counsel Mark. 6.20. -and afterward killed by him, only for
bearing witness unto the truth, a year before our Savior; (a well-dancing Girl
being preferred before this great Prophet); Kill d whilst Herod's conscience
pleaded for him, as Pilat's did for Jesus; and both were by both out of a base
fear destroyed. Killed at a solemn Feast in Galilee that was kept on Herod's
birth day, as our Savior was at the Pascal feast, none of the many great Guests
there opening their mouth for him; beheaded in prison, privately, and unheard;
condemned without witnesses as Jesus by false ones. Put to death by Herod
partly out of religion too, to keep his oath forsooth, as Jesus was by the Jews
to preserve their Law. And then his Reverend Head and countenance, which living
none beheld without a religious awe and respect, not committed to a decent
Grave but carried away in triumph, and served up in a dish at Herod's bloody
Table (who now feared no more his righteous Tongue,); there rejoiced over and
made merry with: (the fate of great Saints ( Rev. 11.10.) and exposed to the
derision and abuse of his malicious enemies; as also our Saviors sacred Head
and countenance was treated (but this when alive) both by his blind folders
-and his Crowners -hands, (knocked, spit on, peirced, by them at pleasure); and
lastly as it was exposed to derision also (for many hours) upon the Cross. With
such sufferings God here rewards his worthiest Servants. And thus much being
said in honor of this great (I know not whether I may say) in some manner the
greatest (excepting the Blessed Virgin) of Saints, the Baptist. Now let us turn
our eyes toward our Blessed Lord that followed him.

Jo. 1.46.) of Galilee; by the Jews a much despised Country (see Jo. 7.41, 52.)
a place the farthest remote from the Royal City and the Temple, and from the
noble Tribe of Judah, and the Lineage of David from which was expected the
Messiah; and a place of extraordinary darkness and ignorance, (as we may gather
from Mat. 4.15, 16. a people that sat in darkness, and in the region and shadow
of death); bordering upon, and being it self half, Gentile. And this remote
ignoble Region Gods wisdom chose for the habitation and education of his own
Son, and the Lord of all the Earth. For which country of his our Savior
suffered much mortification and scorn all his life from the great ones of the
Jews, saying, that the Messiah could not come from such a place; and was also
afterward, by the enemies of Christianity Julian and others, reproachfully
called the Galilean. And this we may imagine done by the Divine Wisdom for many
reasons. First that his own Son might here, in all things, represent to us the
greatest humility; and man might hereafter be ashamed to be proud and boast
himself of the Nobleness of his City or Country. And secondly, that he might
here the better be concealed and live in obscurity, who was to suffer death
from sinners before his public exaltation and glory. 3ly. Again; that where
more darkness was, there they might enjoy the more light, and the efficacy of
the Divine Grace more manifest it self in Man's weakness: much of our Saviors
teaching being spent amongst this dull and ignorant people: and that, the more
to exalt Gods power, from this dark region, those persons should chiefly be
taken by our Savior, being his own Countrymen, who should enlighten the whole
world. 4ly. And lastly that, by this Countries confinment upon, and mixture
with the Gentiles, God might show his Son a common Savior coming to all, not
only the Jew, but us Gentiles.

the expression of the Prophets. Ezech. 16. - Hos. 2.19.) that holy Virgin Mary
a Daughter of David, found out in this obscure corner so far removed from the
Tribe and house of her progenitors and kindred; a person singled and chosen out
of all the daughters of Adam of all generations, curiously viewed by his
all-searching eyes, whom he thought the most worthy to make the Holy Mother of
his only Son and the second Eve to bring salvation to mankind as the first had
caused their ruin. Which person, since she was thus singularly gracious in Gods
eyes above all mortals that ever were, and destined to that high honor, as
never any other creature was, to have a God to be her Son, and cloth himself
with part of her substance, to be nourished with her milk, to hang on her
Breasts, and to be carried about in her arms. And since God makes all things
proportionable and fit for the ends he designs them to; we may justly imagine
her purity and cleanness from sin, her graces and perfections in all virtues,
to have surpassed those of the greatest Saints whatever. And, all those
enamoured praises which God gives in the Canticles to his Spouse the Church;
[Behold thou art fair my Love, behold thou art fair; thou have Doves eyes --
Thou art all fair my Love, there is no spot in thee. -- A garden enclosed is my
Spouse; A spring shut up; a Fountain sealed; -- How fair and how pleasant art
thou, O Love, for delights, looking-forth as the morning, fair as the Moon and
clear as the Sun, etc. Cant. 4.1, 7, 12. -7.6.] We may conceive in a singular
manner to be verified, above all other faithful, in this Blessed Virgin, the
most high and the most elevated amongst all the members of this his Spouse, the
Church. If therefore the Baptist, who was to be but our Saviors Messenger, was,
for this office, filled with the Holy Ghost from the womb ( Luke 1.15): Surely
so was she who was to be his Mother; and probably this is the reason, that when
as the Evangelist says, of Elizabeth and of Zachary before their Doxologies
and Hymns, and of Peter and others before their Sermons, that they were filled
with the Holy Ghost; yet no where is such expression used of this Blessed
Virgin, either before her Magnificat, or on any other occasion, because she
from her very beginning was so.

S. Greg. Nyssen. In Natalem Domini. may we not believe of the passing of her
childhood and younger years; of her retirements and prayers; of her most pure
chastity, and horror of all carnal lust and Concupiscence; of her dedicating
her unspotted Virginity to God and devoting her self to his only and perpetual
service; of her constant holy conversation with him, and ardent love toward
him; like that which a Spouse has to her Husband, which love he saw who saw
her heart; or also who made it there; and so he, who is never indebted,
returned his love again to Her; who since he was pleased to show the affection
and enamoredness of a husband to the house of Israel, tho a very sinful people;
in adopting its children to be his own (see Ezech. 16. chap. and Hos. 2. chap.)
how much more may we say that he did so, to this pure Virgin, of whom by the
Holy Ghost he produced his natural Son? Which honor (so far surpassing that of
the Baptist or of any other Saint) many Holy men and Doctors of the Church well
considering, assign also to her a sanctification yet higher, then his; some
saying, that she (through the merits of her Son, through whom only must any good
descend on any of Adams children) was exempted from all actual sin; others that
she was also cleansed, or (as others yet further) preserved, from that
pollution and stain of Original sin, the carnal concupiscence, which inheres in
the rest of Adams posterity; and that thus, as, through Christ, others are
delivered from the sins they have any way contracted, so was she preserved from
those sins which else she, as a daughter of Adam, should have contracted; that
so this Spouse, who was to entertain such intimate visitations of the Holy
Spirit, might have nothing of the flesh displeasing in his eyes. And indeed S.
Austin, when speaking against the Pelagians of the Universal guilt of sinning,
yet reverently puts in this exception concerning this excellent Creature (yet
not preserved such without the help of Grace.) Excepta Sancta Virgin Maria; de
qua, propter honorem Domini, nullam prorsus, cum de peccatis agitur, habere
volo quaestionem. Inde enim scimus, quod ei plus gratiae collatum fuerit ad
vincendum omni ex part peccatum, quae concipere ac parere meruit eum, quern
constat nullum habuisse peccatum.

Cor. 6.16, 17, 18, 19. -1 Thessalonians. 4.4, 7. - Ephesians. 5.3. - Exodus 19.15. -1 Samuel
21.4. -1 Cor. 7.5, 34.) so that we may imagine all things of her (both for her
reverence, guard, and vows, concerning this virtue) far transcending those
which have appeared in other Holy persons. As for her Espousals to Joseph
(which seems almost necessary to take away the reproach of any daughter of
Israel, her remaining issuless and unfruitful and not being given in marriage;
and yet more, to take away that of a Virgin that was also whilst a Virgin, to
be a Mother), it is piously supposed to have bin done with her request, first
made to Him, and as willingly granted by him, of the perpetual conservation of
her Virginity. Of the Divine pleasure in which, (amongst so great Graces she
was from her infancy adorned with by the Almighty so passionatly loved by her)
she might likewise have some extraordinary Light and Revelation. For otherwise
her Question to the Angel, How shall this be done since I know not a Man? as S.
Austin observes De S. Virginitate cap. 4. would have had no wonder at all in
it, if tho she had not yet, she might soon after have, known a man, the
Espousals also to one being already passed. -- Quod profecto (says he) non
diceret, nisi Deo virginem se ante vovisset. Sed quia hoc Israelitarum mores
adhuc recusabant, desponsata est viro justo, non violenter ablaturo [after
acquainted first with such vow] sed potius contra violentos custodituro quod
illa jam voverat. And -- Virginitatem Deo dicavit, cum adhuc quid esset
conceptura nesciret, ut in terreno mortalique corpore caelestis vitae imitatio
voto fieret non praecepto etc. -- And -- Ipsa quoque Virginitas ejus ideo
gratior and acceptior, quia non eam conceptus Christus viro violaturo quam
conservaret ipse praeripuit; sed priusquam conciperetur, jam Deo dicatam, de
qua nasceretur, elegit. Thus He. Which also from hence is rendered more
credible, that upon the Angels message we find her with great faith and
humility very readily consenting without casting in any scruples from her late
Espousals to Joseph; as if one preacquainted with her chaste purposes. Tho the
Angels transactions with her, and her supernatural Conception of a Son her
modesty and humility thought fit as yet to conceal from him: she being noted by
the Evangelist to have bin a person of great prudence and secrecy Luke 1.29.
-2.19, 51. This we may imagine of the Blessed Virgins Sanctification and
Devotement to God from her Infancy. But then, when there acceded also to this
sanctification by the Holy Spirit dwelling in her heart, the supervening of the
Holy Spirit as a Spouse, whereby was caused in her the Conception of the holy
child Jesus, if her chastity were capable of degrees, how may we conceive it
then in the highest Zenith thereof, and her then to have even an Angelical
purity from any sense of carnal Love, or pleasure!

Luke 1.48, 51, 52, 53. And, when the Angel, in his first salutation, told her,
that she was replenished with Grace, and singularly favored of the Almighty,
and she the Blessed among all women, her great modesty and mean esteem of her
self, and reflection on her secular poverty, was much startled at such speech;
and instead of being exalted to some vanity from this fair language, as some,
especially of that weaker Sex, are apt to be, she cast in her mind says the
Evangelist, (as being a wise and considerative soul, see Luke 2.19.) what such
a salutation meant; titles so high to a person so mean; and thus still more
endeared and enamoured the Lord with her Virtues.

made sure to a righteous and holy man indeed, but one also of a low fortune
and a poor Trade; whereby her condition, as it was for the present but mean, so
neither was it now for the future advancible by a rich or noble marriage; so to
make more credible to her the Angels news of her high advancement Luke 1.28.
And by Gods forecasting providence was it thus ordered; That, before she was
with child, before the Son of Gods publication to Israel. As may be collected
from Jo. 2.2, 3, 12, where no mention of him.

of much less marveil; (and therefore the Virgins undisputing and ready faith
is much taken notice of by the Holy Ghost in the mouth of Elizabeth with a
beata annexed to it; beata quae crediderit Luk 1.45); and tho many scruples she
might have made also concerning what the just Joseph would think, and what the
world would say, Yet here her great prudence stopped all further curiosity and
the suggestions of such low fears; and she meekly acquiesced in Gods good
pleasure; answering the Angels High, Ecce Matter Domini, with her Low, ecce
Ancilla Domini, and, Fiat mihi secundum Verbum tuum: This her ready faith, and
modest consent, and submissive resignation of her self into the hands of God,
making and completing this divine espousal; instantly upon which followed the
Conception of Jesus; and this Mother became one, whom all Generations should
call Blessed; Blessed and honored above all the Creatures of God; as they have
done unto this day.

Luke 1.5. a daughter of Aaron, and is supposed to have an Aaronite for her
Father; Yet her Mother is said to have bin one of the race of David, and Sister
to the Mother of the Blessed Virgin. As it had bin of a long time usual for the
Tribes to intermarry, especially that of Levi dispersed in Israel; and for such
women as had no inheritance. So Jehoiada the High Priest married King Ahaziah's
sister 2 Chronicles. 22. And David Saul's daughter a Benjamite.] I say the Blessed
Virgin having heard this strange and joyful news of her Cousin Elizabeth, and
having this as it were, given her for a sign of the truth of these things which
should happen to her self, being now acted by the Holy Ghost to do
extraordinary matters, and filled with a courage unusual to a Maid, undertook,
all on the sudden, and before any cohabitation with her espoused husband
Joseph, as appears in Matt. 1.18. a very long journey to a place far remote from
her own habitation, and Friends, some 70 or 80 miles, through some part of it an
hilly and difficult way, quite Cross Palestine ( Luke 1.39.) to give her Cousin
Elizabeth a visit, To confer with her about spiritual affairs, to congratulate
with her for the great favors God had done unto her and to join with her in
his praises. But chiefly such a remote journey at this time presently upon her
Conception of our Lord seems to be undertaken, and so long a stay also there,
by the special Divine Providence; that there might be no cohabitation nor
matrimonial correspondence or commerce with Joseph her Husband (therefore the
Angels visit seems also to have bin presently after the Espousals) till she was
first apparently with child: which commerce Her great wisdom purposely
declined, that nothing might be seen that might resemble any carnal or conjugal
satisfaction. She departing, says the Text (not without some Mortification to
herself) cum festinatione. Luke 1.39.
And therefore after so long a stay abroad till she began now to be apparently
with child to a curious observer; at her return she gave a great jealousy to
Him, not yet acquainted with this secret of her seeming dishonesty abroad,
after (as may piously be conceived) she had so religiously covenanted with him
at her Espousals a perpetual conservation of her Virginity. Where we may note
the great humility of this person, after so highly favored of God, in going
meekly so long a journey to visit a person now so much inferior to her self; but
more the humility of our Savior, God before all worlds; who, in this his
estate of exinanition, devised a way to show his humility, even already, when
he was scarce formed in the womb; in putting his Mother upon so long a
peregrination for his making a visit to his servant John; who, we may imagine,
had he had words as well as motion, would with his leaping for joy have saluted
Jesus, as his Mother did the Virgin, with an; Vnde hoc mihi, ut veniat Dominus
meus, etc. -In her way, or very near it, was Jerusalem and the Temple; whither
it is most probable that she, so holy a Creature, and now bearing him, who
sanctifies all things, in her womb, went first to say her Magnificat there
unto God; and to exalt him for this exaltation of her; and early to offer this
springing fruit of her womb unto his father. Especially when we find this her
visit of Elizabeth to have bin about the solemn feast of the Passover, for it
was about three Months before the Baptists birth that she took this journey.
And there will also be less strangeness in, and more Invitation to, it; if we
imagine Joseph, her Spouse, a pious man doubtless, ascending about that time to
Jerusalem to the great Paschal feast, to have bin acquainted with her purpose;
and to have accompanied her so far, which was the greatest part of her way: and
so she, after having staid there the Paschal Holydaies, to have finished the
rest of her journey in the Company of Zacharias her Cousin, or some of his
Relations. But the former design: and privacy, in this journey seems to me much
more probable; and a chief motive of it to have bin her absence and forbearing
any converse with Joseph till her Gravidation.

Vnde hoc mihi, ut Veniat Matter Domini mei ad me? reverence I say; tho she the
wife of a Sacred Priest, and an ancient Matron, and Mary a young maid, and
meanly betrothed to a manual Artificer; and then, by the spirit, she repeats a
second time the Angels words -- Benedicta inter mulieres (being the first of
all Generations that called her Blessed); she magnifies her ready faith; Beata
quae eredidit etc. and, by a prophetic inspirement, prevents her in relating
what had happened to her, before herself had revealed any thing thereof;
calling her a Mother, tho still remaining as much a Virgin as formerly; and
(going one note beyond the Angel) singing a Benedictus also to the new fruit of
her womb; [ Benedictus partus ventris tui]; whilst this chosen vessel meanwhile
overflowed with joy, in receiving a second Annunciation from the holy
Elizabeth. And now what does the Virgin do, but, having received these
Eulogies, immediately, without suffering them to rest in her bosom, or to swell
her to any elevation of spirit, offer them unto the Lord? changes their
Magnificant eam, to her Magnificat Dominum, (see Luke 1.46.) turns other's
praising her to her praising another, the fountain and end of all praise. Using
somewhat like words as the desolate and humble Hannah, the Mother of Samuel,
and (both she, and her Song, and her Son being a type of this present story)
and interweaving with Gods praise her own (never forgotten) lowness; and so
extolling more the favor by the unworthiness of the receiver. Then turns the
rest of her Song to a prophetic narration of the everlasting Kingdom and
conquests of her Son, and of the General redemption of Israel (as appears by
the last verse [who has helped his servant Israel]) from the slavery of the
mighty ones; namely of the Prince of this world, Satan and his Ministers.

Luke 1.6.) (sequestered far from Joseph her espoused husband, that so there
might seem to pass no carnal compliances between them, nor attempt to be made
upon her sealed Virginity) till that three Months were ended, near to
Elizabeth's down-lying, and that the Virgins being with child might now begin to
appear; which once discovered, we may suppose, would keep Joseph afterward,
being a just man, at a sufficient distance from her.

she had covenanted with him a perpetual Virginity;) and so intended to rid his
hands of her, and to put her away. She could not but observe his changed and
troubled countenance, and could not, but guess aright the cause thereof. For
which suspected crime if he, being a just man, should have proceeded against
her according to Law, what means had she at all to manifest or prove her
innocence? which also her straying so far from home gave them still more cause
to question. And not absolved, her punishment was no less then death; to be
carried before the door of her fathers house, and there to be stoned to death
(see Deuteronomy. 22.21. and 24.) Or, if this could some way be avoided; yet so could
not the loss of her reputation in the highest degree, in being reported
dishonest and an harlot.

Mat. 1.20. -2.13, 22); to be the nursing Father of Gods only Son, and the
Guardian of his Infant exile into a foreign land; to be his Governor and
Master of his House; to whom the Son of God should be subject and serve, with
the strict duty of a Son to his Parent in those necessary offices, and affairs
wherein he should employ him: without any meddling with other matters we may
presume, for the major part of his life here on Earth (except only for some
three days space (when twelve years old) that his zeal was permitted to follow
his own fathers business). Again, who should have the nearest relation of any
upon Earth to the Mother of God, committed to his care, to undergo for her and
her Son all labors and provide all necessaries, and defend them from all
injuries, that a Mother and an Infant in a poor and mean condition are subject
to. Surely great must be the perfections of his person, who was thought worthy
to guide such a family, and exteriourly to govern him that governs the world.
And the dearer he was to the Blessed Virgin for these, the greater torment to
her must be his displeasure; which displeasure, tho on her par groundless, yet
had she no likely means to remove. Should she go to him, and tell him the story
of what had happened to her? But then in so much intimacy of acquaintance, why
had she not done this before, when she as yet had no concernment to tell him an
untruth? And, since it was such a wonder, as was hard to be assented to or
believed by her when an Angel from Heaven told it to her, as joyful news; how
much more incredible would it seem to him, when a woman with child by another
then her husband, brings it for her excuse? and pretends an heavenly visit and
intercourse to Veil a supposed Crime? Besides: her great humility and modesty,
her religious silence of, Gods secret and intimate transactions with her,
hindered her, that she knew not as yet how to reveal to any a thing which tended
so much to her own praise and honor; (For so also the Holy Ghost, not she, had
formerly disclosed it to Elizabeth;. Wherein she remains to all Christians an
everlasting pattern, in any such extraordinary visits and favors of God, of
what is safest for them and more perfect, if not their duty, to do. Safest I
say to conceal such favors, for many reasons. 1 Because, ordinarily, such
favors cannot be related without some vanity and self-conceit. 2 Because the
publishing such things begets estimation amongst men, and this begets pride in
the esteemed, and this pride ruins that for which we are esteemed. 3 Because by
it at least we seem to others to magnify our selves; and so indeed lose our
former reputation with them by seeking to increase it. 4 Or at least seem to
disparage others who receive not the like favors. 5 Or to disparage Gods
wisdom in representing him more favorable to the more unworthy. She therefore,
in all this storm, held her peace; and patiently endured her beloved Joseph's
strangeness to her; armed (as we may piously believe) both with an holy
resolution and resignation of her self to suffer cheerfully and willingly
whatever human crosses such celestial Graces and favors should draw aster
them; and also with an extraordinary confidence in God, that he would in due
time make known her innocence at least, if not her honor; and own his Son,
without casting the justification thereof upon the modesty of a woman. For why
should he not defend her whom her obedience to him only had exposed to
reproach? and why not in this time of need reveal as much to Joseph, as he had
done, when no such exigency, before to Elizabeth?

Haec eo cogitante says the text, before the least rumor of any such
suspicion was divulged, (that we may see, as Saints are patient in their
sufferings, so Gad is as perfect and exact in his deliverance), the Angel now
steps in, (with the mission of whom God could have prepared Joseph as well,
(had he pleased), before he had first seen the Virgins swelling womb:) and in
the due time frees them both from their sorrows and fears. He therefore, now
the first time appearing to Joseph in a Vision by night, and courteously
saluting this mean Artificer with the title of the Son of David, to mind him of
his more particular relation to the Messiah descending from David's race,
reveals to him; that Mary's conception was of the Holy Ghost, and that she
should bring forth a Son that should save his people from their sins; Mat. 1.21.
and therefore when born, he should call his name JESUS. The Angel here, as
Zachary in his Hymn, signifying, that his Kingdom was not to be a temporal,
but (which only much concerned us) a spiritual Kingdom; and therefore that he
was to come in a suitable dress, not in pomp and state, but in all self-denial
and humility.

his Spouse, and which many married persons, tho much inferior to these Saints,
have bin endowed with since, by the power of the same Holy Spirit, long
cohabiting without touching one another. Thus therefore we may imagine these
two lived together afterward in our Saviors family; enjoying now a Spiritual
union much more delicious, then any carnal, and doing all conjugal duties for
the breeding up of their little Infant, without tasting any of the fleshly
pleasures thereof. Meanwhile, how many joys at once ravished this poor man's
heart at his awaking (who went to bed laden with so much grief)? joys, for
the coming of the Messiah whom all men had so long expected, for the Virgins
innocence and honor, one so nearly linked to him and loved by him; for his
being chosen, so mean a man, amongst all the progeny of David, to be Guardian
to Her and her Holy child. How well he was now rewarded for his discreet
proceeding and patience, in not seeking presently public revenge or
satisfaction for his supposed violated Bed, and again, how great consolation
the Virgin now received for her past affrights, secured for ever under the
protection of an husband from the obloquies of the wicked, I leave you to
meditate by your-self, whilst I proceed.

Joh. 7.41.) strictly required, that this Son of David should be born in no
other place, then Bethleem, the Town of David, where he also was born. And the
very name of this Town [Viz. the house of Bread as also Ephrata fruitfulness or
plenty] was also of old ordained with relation to this child's birth there;
because the world should thence at the appointed time receive this bread of
life; and God out of it would bring forth him, who should feed his people
Israel; as the Evangelist seems to allude, Mat. 2.^. And at this very place
also, or close by it (see Genesis 35.19.) the fair and beloved Rachel's painful
birth, and that in a journey; (of a Son, who was called her: Benoni, but Jacobs
Benjamin; who was Jacobs only Son that was born in the blessed land of Canaan;
and whom his Father, tho so dearly beloved, was afterward forced to part with,
for the redeeming of his Brethren out of their prison in Egypt), was promised
two thousand years before, for a type of the much-suffering travel of the
Blessed Virgin, which should be in the same place; and for a type of this Son
which she should there bring forth; who was Her Benoni also (see Luke 2.35.)
but his Fathers Ben-jamin. Whom, tho he was much dearlier beloved then Jacobs
Benjamin, yet God his Father not importuned unwillingly gave up, but unasked
freely offered, to suffer far greater hardships then the other Benjamin was
exposed to, for the redemption of his brethren; and for the bringing home of
many more sons unto this his Father. Whom also, after these his sufferings as a
Benoni, he took and set at his right hand for ever; and so made him a
Ben-jamin. This therefore, and no other place, was preappointed for the
Nativity of this Benjamin, the Antitype of the other. And likewise because the
eternal wisdom of God would have his Son, from (and I may say also in) the
womb, to undergo the hardest condition which mortals are subject to, and to
descend in his exinanition so far below other men, as in his honor and
Majesty he was above them; that in all things, even in sufferings, as well as
in glory, he might have the preeminence; Therefore he would not indulge the
Mother so much rest, nor her Son so convenient a birthplace, as their poor
house at Nazareth; But he, who had suffered before a long journey, (forward, and
backward above one. hundred and forty miles) into the Mountainous country of
Judah, must now be carried another near as far, to Bethleem before his Birth.
And this also (that we may not think he was removed to get honor by his
birthplace), was but a small and poor Town, and (saving its relation to David
and Christ) of no greater account in Judea, then Nazareth in Galilee; as
appears by the Prophet ( Micah. 5.2.) And thou Bethleem, tho little among the
thousands of Judah, etc.

for travel, or for providing for themselves there early a convenient lodging:
But, according to his boundless foresight and providence, he derives the cause
of this removal as far off as Rome. That his Son thus early might begin to
practice obedience and subjection, not only to his good pleasure, but to the
beck and command of earthly Princes, he lays his design in the Vainglorious
Head of an heathen Emperor; that he should devise an Edict, such as formerly
had not bin, that all the world, the subjects of his now all-peaceful Empire,
should be enrolled; and amongst the rest, that the Jews should be enrolled,
according to their Tribes, in the Mother-cities thereof. Amongst which
Bethleem, tho a poor place, was the mother City of the Tribe of Judah and of
David, as Jerusalem was of Benjamin. And then, that this enrolling at Bethleem
should be just at such a time, as the Blessed Virgin was ready to ly down: at
which time there should be such a concourse of people in this City, as that
there was no receipt at all for Jesus his Mother in any lodging; which not at
any other time, save such an extraordinary concourse, could have happened. And
all these accidents and casualties must concur together by the certain and
unerring guidance of divine dispensation, to effect his predeterminate pleasure
in every circumstance of our Saviors birth. And by such casualties it is, that
God mostly uses to effect his purposes; that he may work his works with the
more secrecy and art (If I may so say), the more to try and exercise man's faith
and patience; whilst he sees not the motion of that divine hand, which directs
all his affairs: and again, that he may show the more his omnipotency, in
making man's free will to effect his predestinations, and contingency to be the
mother of necessity; delighting to bring, as good out of evil, so certainty out
of uncertainty, and beauty and order out of confusion. Where also we may note,
that this Prince Augustus Caesar was, by the divine providence, inthroned at
this time in such an Universal and peaceful Empire; as a type of this greater
Prince, that was to be born in his days. His type, both in this submission of
all the world unto his Scepter in this new enrolment; and also in the Universal
peace which the world in his days enjoyed, (never any other Prince or Empire
having bin so great, nor times so calm), betokening the Universal and peace ul
Monarchy of Christ.

(when now ready to ly down (for had they known of or undertook sooner their
Bethleem-journy, they could, not but have made better provision there;) and,
when after her peace made with her Husband, little dreaming of such a new
disaster) are summoned suddenly to appear at Bethleem. Upon which injunction
their humility presumed not any extraordinary protection from the Father of
this greater Prince, that was with them, to stay at home (tho this seemed al
most necessary in behalf of the Virgin) but readily obeyed the command of
Caesar. Our Savior, in describing the sad destruction of the Jews, pitties
those who were then to make their flight great with child, or in the Winter*
Mat, 24.29, 20.) yet this did his own holy Mother suffer; and through so many
difficulties, in the midst of Winter, so laden as she was, traveled about 70
Miles journey over many Mountains, to the Town of Bethleem; these pious persons
having first, as we may suppose, visited the Temple in their way.

Esai. 53.3.) whom she carried within her, and (who hid from the beginning
exposed himself to his Fathers wrath, as it were a voluntary Anathema and a
curse for the sins of men, wherewith he had charged himself) gives no release
to her troubles. For here the great conflux of people, which was at this time,
had already filled every place, fit for reception, with Guests, and tho they
went from place to places, from house, yet every where they found a repulse:
perhaps the Virgins great belly, which represented her as a troublesome Guest,
occasioning, instead of pity, a more ready denial. Thus early, even before he
was born, may we say of this King the words of the Evangelist, that he came
unto his own [his own not only people but tribe and Kindred] and his own
received him not Jo^ 1: thus early may we apply to him, what the Prophets
foretold of him, that he was despised of men and an outcast of the people, and
that they hid, as it were, their face from him; he looking for some to take
pity but there was none. -Esai. 53.3. - Psalm. 69.20: and what afterward he
said of Himself; That the Foxes had holes [and the beasts of the Field had
caves and stalls.] but the Son of man had not where to lay his head; [Unless
happily, by borrowing, to rest it, one of their cribs.]



In the Night I say; for when Angel said to the Shepherds the same night;
[this day is born, etc.] he meant; [this night]: for the Jews beginning their
day at even, the day before, that night would have bin called by Him yesterday,
and besides it is likely, that the joy of Angels hasted to sing their
Genethliack, so soon as the Savior was born, which they did that night. And it
was thought meet, that this Light, this dayspring ( Luke 1.78.) which from on
high visited us, should arise in the darkness of the Night, as a type of that
spiritual darkness, which the world lay in at his appearance.

Esai. 53.) and full of tears (see Heb. 5.7. - Luke 19.41. - Jo. 11.35.) fell a
weeping as other Infants do; but this not for the pains which that, tender age
then feels from the strains and crushings of the parturition, or sudden
chilness of an open Air, not yet for his cold harbor and Straw-bed; which
miseries he foreknew and voluntarily chose, and with a smiling patience
underwent; but, for man's sin, the cause of all our, and his, misery; now
beginning his Intercessions for man's offenses, and offering these first tears
for the expiation thereof. Thus come amongst us poor and naked, his pious
Mother, (whom we may imagine, (free from Eves curse,) to have brought forth
without pain him that she conceived without sin; and so who was enabled
presently to perform the office of a Nurse, after that of a Mother) took him up
( Luke 2.7.) and cast such poor cloths about him, as her fortune, and so long a
journey afforded; and instead of a Cradle, laid her Babe down to rest in the
Manger of the Stable; being but a cold and hard pillow for him, if cut out of
the Rock, and this Cradle at his birth not much unlike his grave at his Death.

Exinanition) to teach haughty man humility, Digress.
and to confound his pride, was the Son of God pleased to enter into the world.
Thus was he born, because thus born he would be: who alone amongst all Infants
foreknew and preelected both the place and manner of his birth. Thus was he
pleased to be brought into it amongst beasts, as afterward to be carried out of
it amongst thieves. Thus was the second Adam, who might, had he thought fit,
have bin created with the same preeminences as the first, in a perfect and
flourishing age, pleased to oblige himself for his birth unto a woman, and for
his life unto the subjection and infirmities of youth and infancy; and this
place was the Paradise, wherein he was put. He; not an Adam from the Earth, hut
the Lord from Heaven. 1 Cor. 15.47. For the entertainment of whom, when Solomon
with all his wisdom and wealth had built his golden Temple, yet was he ashamed
that it was so mean and so unworthy to receive him. Thus to expiate the former
Adams, Ero similis Altissimo Genesis 3.5. this Altissimus became similis Homini.
Like to man in every thing; so far as to be conceived and born of a Woman,
because his brethren were so: That he might fulfill the Spouse's wish in the
Canticles ( c. 8. v. 1.) O that thou were as my brother, that sucked the breasts
of my Mother; to please this his Spouse, as her brother he was in every thing;
not leaving out, nor skipping over that sleeping and unactive age in the womb,
and that loathsome and impotent condition of a newborn Infant, of which see
Ezec. 16.4. Tho he was not intended by his Father to be employed in our affairs
till 30 years of age; yet Pudorem exordii nostri non recusavit (says S.
Hilary) sed naturae nostrae contumelias transcurrit. He submitted himself to be
imprisoned for so long a time in so dark and strait a cell as a woman's womb.
Wherein some observe that he began his sufferings much earlier then the rest of
the sons of men; because, supposed to have from his very first Conception, from
the Union of the human nature to his Divine person, a perfect use of his
intellectual faculties and sense of these his sufferings, when as God, in these
first beginnings of our miserable life, has suspended in others the use of
reason to hinder the sense of pain. Now after that we once understand what a
close imprisonment that of the womb is, what evil would not we choose, rather,
then once more undergo it? and what horror had Nicodemus thereof, when he
thought our Savior had prescribed it ( Jo. 3)? Yet so fervent was our Saviors
love unto mankind, that he thought himself not sufficiently intimate and united
unto him, unless he took up his first lodging, tho known to be so inconvenient,
even within his very bowels. And as this he did at his coming into the world;
so again, at his going out of it, in the mysterious Eucharist he contrived a
way, how his Sacred body might enter again into us, and he dwell again within
us. As soon also as freed from this first restraint, he submitted himself to
have his Hands and Feet, whose omnipotent hands had formerly made the World,
taken and bound anew with swathbands, which were at last, when sufficiently
grown for it, to be bound with cords, and fastened with nails. Not to mention
yet-another binding, namely that of his Tongue, to so long a time of silence;
no small misery to that feeble age, which wants most help, yet can ask none:
but a greater humiliation to the Son of the Almighty, that this essential Word
of God, and Wisdom of his Father, should empty it self into so long dumbness
and silence, being already an agnus ligatus, and se obmutescens and non
aperiens os suum. Who also, after he had the use of speech, yet underwent so
great a self-denial in this Kind, that tho all his words flowed with wisdom
(Grace being poured into his lips Psalm. 47.2.) and were all carefully laid up
by his observing Mother, yet it seemed good unto him, that his Historians (four
of them) should not mention one Word that came from this Word, till he was 12
years old, and that first word mentioned by them was a profession of his
zealous obedience to the will of his Father. Luke 2.49. Again, like to man he
became so far as to be made under the same Laws with them, ( Gal. 4.4.); not
only under the Moral, but Ceremonial too; which cost his infancy a bloody
Circumcision: not under God's, but Cesar's, Laws too, the punctual obedience to
which (wherein, it were strange if a woman so great with child might not have
bin dispensed with, had not God in his secret wisdom more exacted this
submission of the child, than the Mother; cost him so many afflictions
attending his Nativity. Wherein he descended far below his servant the rigid
Baptist, who was born at home with great resort of congratulating neighbors.
And thus early began himself to give a pattern to his followers, in leaving his
house, and his country, and his Father in some sense, out of whose bosom he
came, and the society of Angels, into this place of Beasts: Here look upon Him
now at his very lowest and weakest. And how well does S. Paul's expression of
his exinanition suit with it? That he, who was in the form of God, and thought
it no robbery to be equal with God, yet made himself of no reputation, in
taking upon him the condition of such a forlorn Infant: And that he, that was
so rich, yet became to such a degree poor to make us rich. And how well now do
his own words Mat. 11.29. in this posture, and in this age (the emblem of
humility) especially become Him? Learn of me for I am meek and lowly; and (
Matt. 20.28.) The Son of man came not to be ministered unto.

Phil. 2.9. - Heb. 2.9. -12.2.) in his intending to build the exaltation of
this man Jesus higher then all, to lay his humiliation lower then all; and this
King, being to have not one, but two comings into this lower world, the latter
whereof was to be with exceeding, pomp, and glory, and attendance, with
shouting and sound of Trumpet (1 These. 4.16.), with the whole Court of Heaven
in all their glory, ( Luke 2.26.) and all the Chariots of God ( Mat. 24.30.
Psalm. 104.3.) waiting on Him, with his bright beams streaming from the East
unto the West, ( Mat. 24.27.) Thus it seemed meet to his Father to dispose the
first coming in exceeding lowness and contempt, desertion and poverty, that he
might appear in one as novissimus Hominum, ( Esai. 53.3.) who in the other was
to appear, as primo-genitus Dei. And we find Moses, that great type of our
Lord, in being also a glorious deliverer of Gods people out of their house of
bondage, and their Lawgiver, treated in his infancy much what after the same
manner; when he lay amongst Crocodiles a weeping and sorlorne Infant, in a
bulrush cradle, floating in the flags of Nile, and his poor life sought-for by
Pharaoh, as this Infant's by Herod. Lastly; thus it seemed fit unto Him, who
bestows not heaven on man for nothing, to disguise his only Son (through the
belief in whom we can only attain eternal life) in so many Veiles, and
unlikelyhoods, now laying him in a Cratch, then hanging him on a Cross, to
advance in us so much the more the worth and dignity of our Faith; to which
what praise and thanks would it have bin, to have believed on him appearing, in
Majesty and glory, like a Son of God, and such as we shall see him in his next
Advent, where no offense of the Manger, nor of the Cross ( Gal. 5.11.)?
Therefore it pleased God, by eclypsing his own Sons honor, to dignify man's
faith, and so increase his reward; as likewise to discover to this faith his
infinite power in raising such greatness out of such littleness, in making all
Kings submit their Scepters to such a poor born-child, and all nations to do
him service Psalm. 72.11; nay, above all things, to glory in his shame and in
his Cross, and to build a Temple even over this Manger.]

Emanuel (turning this privacy and solitude, and freedom from the tumult of the
Town, desertion of attendance, and silence of the night, to an elevation of
their devotion and Christmas Vigils) well pleased to see themselves surrounded,
tho with poor yet none but innocent, Creatures, and such as had never offended
their Maker; whilst sinful man was deemed unworthy of such a celestial society.
Overjoyed in their first sight of this divine person, the desire of all ages;
dedicating the whole service of their lives to his constant attendance, and
again, receiving from him those sweet smiles, and those indearing looks, which
the love and gratitude of one, who tho an Infant in age, yet was then mature in
all wisdom, and who had nothing of a child in him save the weakness and
humility, did think fit to return to so great pains, and so devout adoration.
Thus they remained solicitous for nothing in so great extremity; but saying to
themselves some such thing as S. Paul, in contemplation of the riches of the
same Lord ( Romans 8.32.) God, that has given us his only Son, how shall he not
with him also freely give us all things?



Luke 2.10. that this Prince at his first entrance into the world might receive
due adoration and homage from the representatives of them both. He therefore,
for the body of the Jews, in his infinite wisdom, made election of these poor
Shepherds; (as he did at the same time, of the Magi for the body of the
Gentiles.)

Luke 2.9.) for doing this newborn Prince the honor, in such his low
condition) to tell them the joyful news of the birth of a Savior, which was
Christ the Lord. Luke 2.11. a Savior, not of our bodies, or estates, from our
temporal enemies, for a while, (unconsiderable salvations; fear not them, that
can kill the body, etc. Mat. 10.28.) but of our Souls, from our sins, from our
Ghostly enemies, from spiritual wickednesses in heavenly places, from Abaddon
the Prince of the bottomless pit, from prisons, and chains, and darkness, and
tortures, and deaths, eternal. And the Angel gave them this sign to know him
by, that they should find him lying in the Manger of a Stable: a strange sign
of so great a Prince; but yet not so improper for such a Savior, who was to
restore the world by humility and sufferings, as it fell by pride; and a very
distinctive sign, such as was common to no other Infant; and a sign which could
not but encourage these poor men to go, and see, and pay their duties to him;
where they should find no repulse at the Gates; nor needed some great Patron to
convey them into his Court, or bedchamber; the place, the entertainers, and all
other accoutrements about the Babe, being very suitable to such visitants.

Luke 15.7, 10.) did now much more, when salvation came to the whole world,)
with great joy, celebrating the new birth of their Masters son, the Savior of
men, and the Lord of Angels; and singing his Nativity-song in the sight, and
hearing of these ravished Shepherds, that others also might hear it from them.

Ephesians. 2.3.) by this Mediator-Babe God and man. Cessation or war between Earth
and Heaven, (the only war which men had cause to dread) Man's former offenses
against God being now cancelled. And the Angel removed that formerly guarded
Paradise against us with a drawn sword ( Genesis 3.24.) through this onlysinless
Infant taking our part, and being Emanuel, God with us. -- Good will toward
men; yea (...); Good Will and well-pleasing; such good will to man as God had
to this Babe his own Son; which he expresses elsewhere in just the same term,
(...) Mat. 3.17. such well-pleasing in man, as to make his only Son not an
Angel, but a man. -- Such peace and Goodwill from God toward men below; and
Glory, for it, from men and Angels, the welwishers of men, to God on High. [But
yet perhaps another Glory sung by the Angels to God on High, with reference
even to themselves. For this Babe is said not only to be a Head of men ( Col.
1.18.) but of Angels Col. 2.10. (from which it follows, that Angels are not
only his subjects, but also in some sense his members) and God the Father is
said, to gather together in one, in Him, all things; not only which are on
Earth, but also which are in Heaven: ( Ephesians. 1.10.) and further yet; to
reconcile unto himself by this babe (making peace through the blood of his cross)
all things whether they be things on earth, or things in heaven ( Col. 1.20.).
Even those things in heaven receiving some benefit, it seems, (tho we do not
well know in particular what) some further sanctification, or illumination, or
recommendation to the Deity through Him; by whom as these Angels were created, so
it is said that they were created also for Him ( Col. 1.16.) and they, as all
the rest of the Creation, are acceptable, and well-pleasing to God only through
Him, being of themselves of no value without Him. Besides, the whole Creation
being said ( Romans 8.22.) to groan under sin, the whole Creation may be supposed
to be some way or other releiv'd, by this Expiatour of sin. And ( Heb. 9.23.)
there is mention of a purifying, even of the heavenly Sanctuary, the habitation
of these Blessed Angels, by this Babe; as if that had bin some way polluted by
the fallen Angels sin, as the Earth by man's. And (2 Pet. 3.13.) It Is said, that
as a new earth, so new heavens, shal-be made, wherein dwells righteousness,
as if the present, at least the lower regions of them, retained some contagion
of unrighteousness. See Job. 15.15. -- 25.5. And ( Ephesians. 6.12.) there is mention
of wickedness, dwelling now in heavenly places; and ( Job. 1.7.) of that filthy
Fiend Satan, by Gods permission, appearing there, after his perambulation through
the earth, in his presence, amongst the sons of God. And ( Rev. 12.10.) we read
of a war in heaven, between the good and bad Angels, and of the ejection, from
thence, of the Evil Angels, by the power of Christ. Pardon this excursion: for
we can set no certain bounds to the benefit, which the whole Creation has
received through this Infant of God. For whom therefore all the Angels of God, as
well as men, are obliged to sing; Gloria in excelsis Deo.]

Psalm. 97.7. mentioned Heb. 1.6. -- Who when he brought in his Firstborn into
the world, said: And let all the Angels of God worship Him. And the Apostle, in
description of the mystery of the Incarnation 1 Timothy 3.16. after [God
manifested in the flesh] adds, [seen of Angels] perhaps with special relation
to this solemn visit, and doxology of theirs, at his Nativity. And S. Peter
further says 1 Pet. 1.12. That they even longed to look into this matter, as
if they could not be satisfied with seeing it, it pleased them so well. Of this
honor done to the only begotten of God, at his Nativity, by the Angels, how
much was made visible to Joseph and Mary in the house, besides this that
appeared to the Shepherds in the field, we know not; but meanwhile are bound
gratefully to admire, how free from envy, (the cause of some of their fall) and
how full of love, and benevolence toward man, these more noble Creatures were;
exulting, and praising God for this honor done their Inferiors, whereby these
miserable creatures when sitting in darkness, and in the shadow of death,
eternal objects, together with the fallen Angels, of Gods wrath, were now by this
Babe, advanced into their society, and made sons of God, and Heirs of Heaven:
nay in some sense advanced above themselves; God passing by the substance of
Angels, Heb. 2.16. and making this babe, his Son, eternally to wear the form
and fashion of man rather, becoming flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone.

Jo. 1.29. -- 10.11. -- Ezec. 34.23.) where they found the Babe as described,
and fell down and did their homage to Him (in a representation of the whole
nation of the Jews; and, we may presume, offered some small present; (as is
usual to great Princes by their Subjects) and as afterward we read the Magi
did, for the Gentiles). Whom this Spiritual Prince rewarded richly for their
pains, in spiritual things; in illuminating their minds, and enflaming their
hearts with a love and zeal of his glory; for, their faith not stumbling at the
lowness of his outward appearance, his poor lodging, his hard bed, his course
swath, his mean attendance, they departed praising and glorifying God that a
new Savior was born to Israel, and divulging abroad the Vision of the Angels
and the wonderful things they had heard and seen concerning this child ( Luke
2.17.) These poor Shepherds, being chosen for the first preachers of the
coming of the Kindom of God; (as afterward were the poor Fishermen,) and
begetting a great wonder says the Evangelist Luke 2.18. in the Bethleemites
with their story. Yet probable it is, according to the poor and unknown
condition of life, that the son of God had chosen, that their wonder by his
secret influence upon them, was so restrained as not to proceed to any farther
inquiry after these Holy persons, and that the child and his Mother received no
visits upon it, nor better entertainment and accommodation there. And this
noise that was made, upon the jealousy raised afterward in King Herod, served
only to involve this Infant-Prince and his small family in much greater perils,
and the peoples present admiration was more unsafe to him, then their former
neglect. Nor did the Bethleemites enjoy the Honor of having this Savior of
Israel born amongst them, without their bearing also his Cross, and that a
heavy one, not long after it. After this early Predication of the new Messiah
the poor Shepherds returned to their flocks, rejoicing, as for the mercy
showed to Israel in general, so for the great favor done them in particular,
that they should be the first (besides his parents) that should behold the
Messiah, and hear the Music of Angels; and divulge this good news to the
great, and to the wise ones of this world.

Digress.
of the tribe of Judah, at this time, in this City, who probably would have
entertained with joy such a revelation, concerning the birth of the Messiah;
who might also with their riches have maintained, or with their power
protected, him: Yet God did not think fit, to send an Angel with this joyful
news to any of them, but only to the poor Shepherds, from whom the great and
learned ones were to receive it. As likewise, from the very conception of this
Prince, God had hitherto dealt with low people; and the honors done to our
Saviors person and to his relatives, in the frequent descent and visits of
Angels were invisible to the world, and communicable to it only upon their
relations, whom their mean condition made less authentic. And we see, in this
infancy of the Gospel, the truth of those scriptures fulfilled. -- Not many
mighty, not many worldly-wise, not many noble are called. -- God has chosen
the weak and base things of this world to confound the mighty. -- Blessed are
the poor for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. -- And our Saviors message to
the Baptist: Pauperes evangelizantur, to the poor the Gospel is preached; as
if, as he came poor, so he came only to the poor. For which good pleasure of
his Father S. Luke chap. 10.21. expresses, upon a certain time, a great
exultation in our Saviors spirit, breaking out into this expression; -- I
thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth [and so a free and absolute
disposer of all his favours] that thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and revealed them unto Babes: Even so Father, for so it seemed good in
thy sight. (By which we may gather, how welcome to his infancy was this visit
of these poor, sent to him by his Father).

hates the proud and gives Grace and favor to the humble. Now riches and
honor are seldom severed from pride, and humility more often accompanies
meanness and poverty. An hungry Shepherd trembling with cold in an open field,
and overwatched is in a more humble and mortified posture for receiving visits
and revelations from heaven, then one that is full of all good things, well
attended, delicatly lodged and taking his ease; tho elation or demission of the
mind commonly rising and falling with the indulgences or sufferings of the
body, and the flow or ebb of our fortunes. But, out of these babes mouths he
perfects his praise, and by the feible things of the world confounds the
mighty: or is clearly demonstrated to it, must needs be of very little esteem
and reward with God. But great faith is where little sight or conviction: and
where love and the Will have the greatest hand in the Composition of it. To
such believers God counts himself exceedingly indebted; and wherever our
Savior met with any such faith in the Gospel, he fell a-magnifying it very
highly, and granted presently whatever it desired. -- Great is thy Faith, be it
unto thee, even as thou will. For the growth therefore of these great faiths it
is, that God discovers only to a few, and those of less authority, what he
would have to be believed by all, that so he might rest more engaged to their
submission, who have the weaker perswasives or impulses to it. poor, one way,
or other; either in estate or at least in spirit: so that in this Kingdom,
wherein those of low degree are exalted Jam. 1.9. the rich and Honorable are
to be made low, that they may be exalted. ( Let the rich rejoice in that he is
made low. Jam. 1.10.) And in their affections at least to become another thing,
then they are in their fortunes, (They that rejoice to be as tho they rejoiced
not; they that purchase, as tho they possessed not; they that use the world, as
tho they did not use it); and tho they be as big as Camels, yet they must
become as small as a thread to get into this Kingdom Mat. 19.16, 21, 23, 24, 26.
which only admits the small things of this world. Which thing, since it is so
hard to do, tho possible, therefore has voluntary secular poverty, ever since
the times of the coming of this Prince, bin had in such esteem; because the
poor only in spirit, that remain still rich in Fortunes, are forced to bear one
heavy Cross more than any other poor, (which many of them sink and miscarry
under, and are not able to go through with it): namely, the trouble and anxiety
of a prudent dispensing those goods and revenues, of which God has made them
only his Stewards, not Masters: and by possessing, living in a continual
Temptation from, them. Now since this Kingdom has such an Antipathy to this
present world;

Luke 2.19. as an occasion of their coming, their vision, the message and song
of Angels, revives their spirits, and recreats their affliction. Their
heaviness endured not all the night, but joy overtook it before the morning;
and the scandal of the Stable was removed by the glorious appearance in the
field; whilst the child despised by earth was magnified by heaven. [And we may
observe that this great humiliation of the Son of God was every where mingled
with some state; state beyond all other sons of men. When conceived, a great
Angel of presence is sent before with the news of it; -- the Virgin going to
Elizabeth, She inspired from heaven falls a-magnifying him and his Mother; --
returned to Joseph, an Angel declares to Him the Holy Conception and greatness
of this Prince; -- Born in so mean a room at Bethleem, Angels appearing in the
Air discover it to the Jews and sing a Gloria in excelsis to Him, to
counterpoise that ignominy in infimis. And a new Star appearing in the heavens
at the same time manifests it to the Gentiles. And so hereafter; when presented
in the Temple, Holy Simeon and Anna proclaim him. The Infants life conspired --
against by Herod, an Angel discovers the plot; and (afterward) in Egypt reveals
to them the death of his enemy. Baptized by John, the Holy Ghost in the shape
of a Dove comes down and fits on his head. Upon his fasting and humiliation in
the Wilderness, Angels come, and Minister unto him. Before his going up to
Jerusalem to suffer, Moses and Elias in great glory visit him. In his greatest
agony and faintings in the Garden, an Angel is sent to restore strength to him.
And, to show the common intercourse he had with Angels, and how he had these
subjects of heaven continually at his beck and service, see what he says to
Nathaniel Jo. 1.51. -- and to Peter Mat, 26.53. -- Lastly, when murdered by
the Jews, the Sun loses its light, and the earth so trembles, that the Rocks
of it rent in pieces; when his body buried, Angels sit at the Head and feet of
his Grave. After so shameful a death followed so glorious a resurrection, and
ascension into Heaven in a bright cloud of Angels. Thus, to great humiliations
God not only gives afterward (after a resurrection, or so,) but presently
intermingleth great honors, and like exaltations; and has given an example
thereof in this Head, that the same might be securely expected by the members.]

she kept and pondered them in her heart; Luke 2.18, 19. took great notice,
without much talk, (tho her glorying in Him had bin a right glorying, being
glorying in the Lord. 1 Cor. 1.31), covering all these things that had happened
for the present with great taciturnity and humility, and perhaps not without
some presage of the hatred and envy which her Son was afterward to suffer;
which things in due time after our Saviors humiliation, and resurrection was
passed, she revealed to the Apostles and other disciples; from whom this
Evangelist received them. ( Luke 1.1.) Meanwhile we may imagine how these
strange accidents still increased (if capable of increase) the silent and
reverent deportment both of Joseph and Mary toward the child, Jesus; whilst the
little Babe in the cratch, by the secret influence of his divine power, guided
all these occurrences, and made these persons so near him to do only such
things, as done might be acceptable to Him.

Lev. 12.3. so to enroll them into the family of Gods Church, and render them
heirs of the Covenant (made with faithful Abraham) of redemption, benediction,
and an eternal inheritance through his seed that was to come, our Lord Christ. Of
which Covenant Circumcision was, from Abraham's time, appointed in Gods Church,
as a Sacrament, and seal ( Genesis 17.). The Blessed Virgin therefore, and her
most ^^us husband, diligently performed to this Holy Babe the solemnities
thereof. Of which solemnity, if we may make (where the Law is silent) any
conjecture of the Ancient, from the modern, rites, the manner of later times
is; that it may be done by any person even the Father of the Child, (and we see
Moses his Sons were circumcised by their Mother Exodus 4.24.) but yet is usually
procured to be done by some person well experienced in the practice thereof;
may be done also in any place, either more solemnly in their School, or
Synagogue; or more privately in their own house. Two of the kindred or near
relation, are as it were a Godfather, and God-Mother to the Child, the woman
bringing the Infant to the place of Circumcision. -- The man sitting down and
holding it in the Circumcision; after which, done with a stone-knife, some
drying medicines are applied to the wound, and so it is bound up, and usually
within two or three days perfectly healed. During the action the 128 and some
other Psalms are sung (by which also the Infants crying is not heard) and a
name given to the Child by his Parents appointment. (See Luke 1.59.) Lastly
some festival entertainments, and Congratulations are made to the Parents by
their kindred, and friends, as in a time of joy. See Leo Modena a Jewish Rabby
in his Ritus Hebraici. Part. 4. cap. 8.

Egredere de terra tua, and de cognitione tua, Genesis 12.1.
and de domo Patrum tuorum) removed from all Consolations, or assistance of
Kindred, or acquaintance, and their Condition also very poor, it is probable,
that our Lords Circumcision was suitable to his birth; done after the rudest,
and plainest manner, and with small, or no attendance; some mean lodging
perhaps hired by Joseph in the Town wherein this Ceremony was performed, or
also (as some rather think) dispatched in the Stable, or Grott by Joseph himsel.
In which Grott also, or in some private hired room, this Holy Family may be
imagined, according to the highest rule of perfection, to have sojourned till
their departing into Egypt, without any secular acquaintance, in great
Solitude, silence, and Devotion, and exceeding reverence to the Holy Child
Jesus, as the divine Offspring. Joseph by the gain of his Trade providing
necessaries for the Virgin, and the Babe; and tr^^ting the Mother also, as a
consecrated Temple of the Holy Ghost, with a most pure, and chaste honor, and
respect. Jesus meanwhile by his omnipotent influence working in both their
hearts what was acceptable to his Fathers will to be done unto him: Restraining
also, by the same divine economy, the wonder, and devotion both of the
Shepherds, and other Inhabitants, to whom these had told their discoveries in
such a manner; as that all expected rather what would follow afterward, than
curiously searched into what was transacted for the present; and so, as that
their great awe presumed not so far as to visit this newborn hope of Israel,
or to perform any respect, or service to him, which did not suit with that low
Condition he had chosen of living poor, unknown, solitary, and exposed to all
hardships; in which his Parents also may be thought to have served him in great
privacy, and silence, and without talking, or conversing much abroad. As also
the Evangelist observes, that whilst the Shepherds divulged the wonders of his
birth, yet his holy Mother kept all private, and pondered them in her heart, as
a much-considering, silent, woman. Luke 2.18, 19. And so we may conjecture that
the visits both of the Shepherds, and the Magi, were both performed by them
and received by Mary, and Joseph, with such a profound reverence, modesty, and
silence, as became a Temple, rather than a Stable: and as was suiting to the
presence of so great a Majesty; though mean and weak in his outward appearance
(for this appertained to his present state of Humiliation) yet most commanding,
and powerful in his divine influence, and energy, on all those who approached
him, and whose Conversation he admitted. For already his humanity also, by the
union to it of his divine person, is to be esteemed replenished from his first
Conception with the Holy Ghost, and with all wisdom, and not to have, as the
bodily, so also the mental, impotencies, or weaknesses of Infancy.

Romans 8.3. and to be numbered amongst the Transgressors, Esaias. 53. and to bear
the penalties of sin, as if he had bin a sinner. As in that last act to be
condemned for the greatest Malefactor, and Blasphemor, and destroyer of the
law; so in this first to suffer, as a sinful Son of Adam, an expiation of that
Original Guilt, with which he was never stained; and that not a washing only
with water, as it is now in baptism; but a shedding of his blood. For though
Circumcision (then) was a Sacrament of the same Evangelical Covenant, as now
Baptism is, yet was not this expiation (then) to be without shedding of blood,
as a type, and figure of what was to come, till the true blood of our
Redemption should be shed upon the Cross, after which now the Ceremony of a
mundation only with water suffices.

Genesis 3.15. and by whom should be had redemption, pardon of former sin,
restorement of Grace and of the Holy Spirit to keep Gods commands so far, as
this Covenant of Grace required; and a new benediction, and introduction into
the heavenly inheritance, to all the faithful, and children of the Gospel. And
so by this promised seed, and in this faith, and Covenant Evangelical, were all
the holy men preceding Abraham, even from Adam, Abel, Enoch, Noah, etc.
redeemed, and saved. And Fathers of the faithful (also before Abraham) all
these were in respect of their spiritual posterity; and probably had some
different ceremony from the rest of mankind, by which they were initiated into
this Evangelical Covenant, and constituted members of Gods Church; tho Abraham
first, (...), bare this name for his faith in God singularly eminent among the
rest; He believing (as the Apostle says Romans 4.18.) with his wife and family
in hope even against hope, first in relinquishing at once his country, and
kindred, at Gods bare command, not knowing (says the Apostle Heb. 11.8.) when
he went out whither he went; 2ly. and then in believing Gods power to give him
issue in such an old age; and lastly after he had issue, in that most
transcendent effect of his faith, the oblation, and slaughter of his only Son,
in whom were made the promises. To him therefore more expressly, than formerly,
God renewed his promise (as he did afterward again to David) that this promised
seed should descend from him; in which seed all, both he, and the rest of his
seed, i. e. so many as were sons of his faith, even amongst all nations, as
well as the Hebrews, should be blessed; i. e. should obtain redemption,
remission of former sin, a new sanctification by Gods spirit, and ability to
observe his laws; and lastly, the inheritance of the heavenly Canaan. (See Genesis
22.28. compared with Galat. 3d Chapter: which latter may serve for a comment
upon the former.)

Genesis 17.12, 23. Instituted, I say, the Circumcision, and cutting-off of the
prepuce of that member, in which, after man's fall, first appeared the effect of
sin, and the rebellion of the flesh against the Spirit. Of which rebellion our
first Parents, in the beholding it, were so much ashamed; which shame also has
adhered to all their posterity. By which Circumcision of Abraham's flesh were
signified to Him the very same things through this seed then promised, as are
now to us, by baptism, through the seed now exhibited; namely, his renouncing
cutting off, and mortifying the former lusts of the flesh, and of sin in his
members; and becoming a reformed and new Creature to walk thereafter (by grace
conferred through this seed) in all purity and righteousness: at which time God
therefore also as to new Creatures gave to him, and his wife, new names Genesis
17. changing them from Abram and Sarai, to Abraham and Sarah.

Genesis 17.1, 12.
and his Sons on their part engaged the sincere observance of all Gods
Commandments, so far as in this Covenant was required of them. Where also it
came to pass, (but by their own fault), that so many of Abraham's natural
Children as received Circumcision, by which they engaged themselves to the
observance of Gods law) and yet were not also children of the faith of Abraham
(according to the revelation of redemption through this seed) by which faith
they might become partakers of remission of their former sin, and of the return
of Grace through the same seed: so many I say were put in a much worse
condition by their Circumcision, than they were in formerly; contracting by
this a new obligation to Gods law, without ability (by reason of their want of
faith) to perform it, and without a partaking of the merit of this seed,
whereby to be pardoned their transgressions against it. Of which Circumcision
therefore may be said the same, which the Apostle says of the Promulgation of
the law, in the 7th Chapt. to the Romans. And the same thing, still, happens in
baptism to so many as receive it without a due faith, and without any donation
of Grace; they making therein a new engagement to the observance of Gods
Commandments without ability to perform them.

and seed promised, from whom Circumcision received its efficacy. And what
greater indignity could happen to his sanctity, and purity, than to be
circumcised in his flesh, who never knew any rising or rebellion of the flesh;
nor contracted from our first Parents any stain thereof? For though our Lord
was, by the flesh taken of his mother, a Son of Abraham, and Gods law was very
strict, that every Male of his posterity should be circumcised, or else cut off
Genesis 17. Lev. 12; yet, seeing such a law was prescribed to Abraham's posterity
with reference to sin (as also most of the laws Ceremonial were) such law
extended not to any of Abraham's seed that should be without all sin, as our
Holy Lord was.

Mat. 10.6. and a Minister of Circumcision Romans 15.8. the defect of which
surely would have bin a greater accusation, than his Original out of Galilee;
Again, that he might practice an obedience, and conformity for peace-sake,
though in a matter not obliging, as he did afterward in paying tribute Mat.
17.27. ut non scandalizemus eos. I say besides these reasons sufficient for his
non-omission of that sacred Ceremony, there seem to be others yet more
considerable.

but also as a door of entrance into the Church, family, and household of God,
and into a new Covenant with God for the time to come; by which, from Abraham's
days till the accomplishment of our redemption, this family was distinguished
from all the rest of the world; and a strict pact, and Covenant passed between
God, and all such persons, for the future; whereby they engaged themselves on
their parts to walk sincerely in his laws, in newness of life, as his obedient
Children, receiving then as it were a new nature, as well as a name: and God
engaged on his part, to be their Father, and protector, and exceeding great
reward in bestowing upon them the inheritance, and possession of an heavenly
Canaan. Now, as to such significations of Circumcision, and the other Church
Sacraments, though not as to the real effect of them upon him, (as the effect
of the Sacrament is also, by others, many times had, before the receipt thereof)
these were more completely fulfilled in our Lord, than in any other. For he
entered into the Church, and household of God, not as a simple member, but as the
Father, and Head thereof; not as a Son of God by Adoption, but as that true
natural Son, and seed, through whose merits all others entered into this
Covenant of Grace. As for the performance of the Condition of this Covenant,
never any undertook, and walked therein, in such perfect obedience, and new
life, and circumcision of all carnal and rebellious lusts, as himself: Nor ever
any received so high an eternal inheritance from God by virtue of this Covenant
observed, as his Humanity did.

also, as well as the Moral, were a handwriting against them Coloss. 2.14. --
Ephesians. 2.16. There therefore he also undertook, that by the merit of his exact
observing these laws, and satisfying his Fathers justice therein, he might
remove also this second hard, and unsupportable yoke from off their necks Act.
15.10. and purchase for them the perfect spiritual effects thereof. So, by
Christ's Circumcision (says the Apostle Col. 2.14. -- Ephesians. 2.15. -- Gal. 3.24,
25. -- Gal. 4.3, 4.9.) we are circumcised with the Circumcision made without
hands, in out putting off the body of the sins of the flesh [which cleansing
from carnal lusts, is the Spiritual Grace of the carnal Circumcision.]

righteousness, or duty of sinners, as if he had bin a sinner too (to the
wonder of the Baptist, to whom God then revealed him and his all-sanctity):
and, after it, he betook himself to a long penance, of solitude in a desert, of
fasting, and prayer, accompanied also with strong temptations from Satan, for
six weeks: and afterward all his life long he endured reproaches as a sinner
Romans 15.3. and though the Holy one of God, he sequestered not himself from the
more public offenders, but conversed freely with them, not out of love to sin,
but to the sinners; though it turned much to his disesteem, and prejudice, with
those who pretended more sanctity among the people.

Hocfac, and vives, and fully performed the natural, or moral law, in all the
points thereof; but also as a Son of Adam fallen, and taking upon him the curse
of his sin, though not deriving from him the guilt of it, he entered upon the
Covenants of Grace, and expiations of sin, made with Abraham and the Patriarks;
and, in the stead of sinners, performed exactly all the Ceremonial Law, as it
related to sin; and thus by his perfect obedience became heir of the Promises
of the eternal inheritance, made first, to Adam for his works; and then to
Abraham for his faith; and by these his merits, whilst he owed nothing of what
he did, and suffered, for himself, became also the purchaser of mercy, and of
remission of sin, and of the Spirit, for all other sinners believing in him; by
which Spirit they are also enabled to keep the Covenant of Grace, and to
inherit the promises made to it. Romans 8.3, 4. -- Gal. 3.14. ^4.6.]

Genesis 4.1.25. -- 16.11. -- 29.32. -- 1 Samuel 4.21. -- Esai. 7.14. a name, which
ordinarily signified something that related to piety, and Religion, in reviving
the memory of some former holy Person, or thing; in acknowledging some special
favor, or Grace received from the divine Majesty; in devoting the circumcised
to some virtues or qualities acceptable to God; or also, when the name was
imposed by God, or persons directed by his Spirit, foretelling the nature,
actions and successes of the person circumcised; God also many times by his
secret providence guiding the Parents, though knowing nothing, to give such
names as do correspond to future events. Hence also (as was said) in the first
institution of Circumcision were two new names given by God to Abraham and to
his wife.

n. 1.
When therefore this Son of God came to be circumcised, God his Father
appointed his name to be Jesus, (or Jeshua as he was called in the Syriack, the
language which the Jews then ordinarily spoke: [(...)] or [us] being the Greek
and Latin terminations thereof) i. e. Savior; God signifying this beforehand
by an Angel, first to his Mother, at his Conception, and afterward to Joseph
her husband upon his first discerning her to be with Child; specifying then
also to him the particular salvation he should bring to the world, namely
Salvation from their sins; Mat. 1.21. repeated again by Zachary, and Simeon in
their Hymns. Salvation, says Zachary, by remission of sin through the bowels
of the divin Mercy, to give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the
Shadow of death, and to direct our feet into the way of peace; and light (says
Simeon) to the Gentiles, as well as the Jews. And thus by this Savior now
sent, God completed the Covenant of Circumcision made with Abraham, and so for
afterward removed this Ceremony; at the first Circumcision giving Abram the
name of Abraham, father of the faithful, faith being the Condition required of
us in this Covenant: and in this Circumcision of our Lord sending the promised
seed, and giving him the name of Jesus, or Savior: Salvation being the
condition engaged for on Gods part in this Covenant.

A name this was completing all Gods former works and mercies;. 56. n. 2.
and which he seems to have reserved, as an hidden treasure, for the latter end
of the world; having not revealed it in express term (tho he did this in many
other names some way implying it) to former ages. So that, as God made himself
first known to his Church, and to the primitive Patriarks only by his name of
(...) God omnipotent, but revealed not himself by his name Jehovah (importing
his sole, simple, eternal, being, and Godship; the one God living for ever, and
none besides him) till the time of Moses, when he began to manifest himself to
his Church, by greater works, and wonders; in vengeance upon his Enemies, and
deliverances of his people; and by fulfilling his promises to their fathers, as
who lives for ever to make good all his words. (See Exodus 6.3. comp. Exodus
3.14.) So he was not known by the name of Jesus, in the second person of the
Trinity incarnated, till now: that this person came in the flesh to accomplish
and finish the Salvation of the world by his own sufferings and satisfactions;
which were promised and believed-in indeed before from the beginning, but which
were not exhibited till this time.

Psalm. 2.2. and frequently elsewhere he was called the Messiah, or the
Anointed, translated in the Greek (...). Therefore Herod when he enquired of
the Scribes concerning him Mat. 2.4. enquired of him by this name where Christ.
i. e. the Messiah, or anointed, should be born; and, upon the Baptist pointing
to him, and calling him, the Son, and the Lamb, of God, his disciple Andrew
tells Peter, that he had found the Messiah, which is, being interpreted, the
Christ; says the Text Jo. 1.41. -- 4.25. and our Lord speaks of himself to the
Pharisees by the known name of Christ, asking them, whose Son Christ was to be;
when he would have instructed them, that he was Gods Son, as well as David's;
and therefore by David himself called his Lord Mat. 22.42. Again, Genesis 49.10.
(comp. Ezech. 21.32.) he is called by Jacob, Silo, or, qui mittendus est; the
seed that was promised to his Grandfather Abraham to be sent. Haggai 2.7. He is
called Desideratus, or the desire of all nations, veniet desideratus cunctis
Gentibus. Again: Esaias. 9.6. It is said his name should be called, Admirabilis,
Consiliarius, Deus fortis, Pater futuri saculi, Princeps Pacis. Again; Zechar.
6.12. It is said; (...), Oriens (as it is in the Septuagint, and Vulgar) erit
nomen ejus see Zachar. 3.8: a name repeated again by Zachary the Father of the
Baptist in his Hymn Luke 1.78. In quibus nos visitavit Oriens ex alto. -- Often
also is he called Germen Domini, Germen justitia. See Esai. 4.2. -- 11.1; and
Jerem. 23.5. -- and 33.15. It is said: Hoc est nomen quod vocabunt eum; Dominus
justus noster, or Dominus Justitia nostra; and there also is this new
deliverance, wherein he assumes this name, advanced above that out of Egypt,
where he took the name of Jehovah. Exodus 6.3. Esai. 7.14. It is said yet more
particularly, that the Virgin his Mother should call his name Immanuell, that
is, a Synonyma with Jesus involving Salvation to mankind by the Incarnation of
God. All these are the names, foretold, of the Lord that should come to redeem
us, representing to us several excellencies of this Lord. But no where is he
forecalled by the ordinary name he bare here on earth, and given him at his
Circumcision, his name Jesus; as Josiah, Cyrus, and some others have bin; God,
if I may so say, having provided this best of names for us, that they before us
should not have all perfection; and having reserved the most full expression,
and manifestation, of his mercies in the office of this person until his coming.

Jesus should not be foretold; as it was also necessary, that his birth at
Bethleem David's City foretold, and in its time fulfilled, should be in the
performance thereof unknown, and disguised by his Mothers usual abode in
another Town and Country; and by his being driven away from thence shortly
after born (for fear of a slaughter) to the place of her former residence for
his education; and so he was known only as a Prophet of Nazareth, and called by
a name unmentioned in the Prophets. Notwithstanding, tho in no places of the
Old Testament it is foretold that the name of the Messiah should be Jeshua or
Jesus, yet in many places speaking of him is this name or some derivative
thereof as a proper Epithete applied to him. So it is said Habbac. 3.18. Exultabo
in Deo Jesu meo. And, in those sentences spoken of the Messiah [ Genesis 48.18. --
Salutare tuum expectabo Domine. -- Psalm. 98. 2. (repeated Esai. 52.10.) --
Viderunt omnes fines terrae salutare Dei nostri. -- Esai. 56.1. Prope est salus
mea, ut veniat. -- Esai. 12.3. Ha^rietis aquas in gaudio de fontibus
Salvatoris,] some derivative of this word Jeshua as Jeshuahah, Jeshuahta, etc.
is used. Two persons also, that were most eminent types of him, were in former
times called by the very same name. The first of these was the Captain, that,
after a long Captivity in Egypt, conducted his people into Canaan the promised
Land, and fought all their battles with their Enemies; to whom Moses by a
Prophetical Spirit gave this name Joshua Numb. 13.16. (or as it is rendered in
the Greek Jesus; as he is also called Act. 7.45. -- and Heb. 4.8.) adding the
first letter of Jehovah to his former name Osh^a; the type of our Lord Jesus,
the Captain of our Salvation, Heb. 2.10. Fighting our battles, and subduing all
our most Ghostly Enemies, and conducting us into the true land of promise. The
second was Joshua, or Jesus the High Priest; that, after their second Captivity
at Babylon, conducted the People again into the land of promise, and rebuilt
the Temple of the Lord formerly demolished. Against whom (in the visions of the
Prophet Zachary) clothed in poor, and filthy Garments, Satan before the Lord
bringing great Accusation, God rebukes him, Satan, for it; and commands
Joshuahs filthy Garments to be taken away from him, and him to be clothed with
change of Raiment, and a Miter, and Crown to be set upon his head. See Zach.
3.3. etc. and 6.11. etc. In both which places is joined a promise concerning
this our Jesus (called there by the name of (...), or Oriens. Or, as the
Hebrew, Germen) who was typified by the other, and who is our everlasting. High
Priest: -- That he should build the Temple of our Lord, and should bear the
Glory, and should sit, and rule upon his Throne, and be a Priest upon his
Throne, etc.

darkness and in the shadow of death; trembling under Gods wrath, and appointed
to eternal torments.

These. 1.10.) that he might save us from the wrath to come. 1 For our salvation
from Satan. By him (says the Apostle Col. 1.15.) we are delivered from the
powers of Darkness. -- And (1 Jo. 3.8.) for this was he made manifest, that he
might destroy the works of the Devil. -- And ( Col. 2.15.) He spoiled
Principalities and Powers, and made an open show, and spectacle, and triumph
over them [both in his life, and in a Resurrection from the death that they had
most cruelly contrived against him.] 2 And so, for our saving from sin. Sermo
omni acceptione dignus (says the Apostle 1 Timothy 1.15.) a comfortable saying
beyond all other sayings this; that Jesus came into the world to save sinners.
Especially when our conscience adds, Quorum ego primus. 3 Lastly, for the
salvation from death. O Death (says the Apostle 1 Cor. 15.55.) where is now
thy sting? O Grave, where thy victory? Thanks be to God who gives us the
victory over these through our Lord Jesus.

And for the manner also of our Salvation by this Jesus; much more, misterious,
miraculous, and indearing it was, as to the delivered, than that of any other
Savior, whatever has, or can be. For this Jesus came, (if I may so say) not
so much with his power to save us, as with his patience; and conquered, not by
his enemies sufferings, but his own. 1 To conquer those powerful spirits he
took upon him weak flesh; by this flesh they conquered us, and in this flesh he
redeemed us. 2 To conquer Death, Himself under-went and suffered Death (but it
could not hold him. Act. 2.24.) and by this his death destroyed Him, that had
the power of death. Heb. 2.14. To save our lives he laid down his own; Jo.
10.15. and healed our wounds with his own stripes. Esaias. 53.5. 3 So for sin; He
came in the likeness of sinful flesh to condemn sin in the flesh Romans 8.3. And,
to free us from a Curse, became himself a Curse for us Gal. 3.13. Such was this
Salvation of this Jesus, and such the way of it; worthy a God. O Blessed Jesu!
O ever blessed Name! A name and the mystery thereof hid from ages, and from
generations, and now made manifest and revealed. What comfort could any other
name, expressing perhaps the Majesty, or power, or holiness, or justice, or
eternity of this Prince, have afforded to a poor guilty sinner, trembling, and
despairing for the judgment to come, but only this? Or what comfort would this
have aforded, if it had bin only a Jesus from some temporal Tyranny? from a
Pharaoh, or a Nabuchadnezzar, or a Caesar; and not a Jesus from the Devil, or
Hell, or the Grave? to which, these other deliverances, though for a time never
so glorious, would have left us still in bondage, and in fear all our lives,
after a few days to be devoured, and swallowed up by them for ever. Blessed
name! at which all the Spiritual Apolluons, and destroyers of mankind, all
spiritual Pangs, and anguishes of souls, all the corporal messengers, and
arrows of death, are afraid, and tremble, -- and from which only pronounced
they do so often fly away. Blessed name! a poor sinners only consolation on his
deathbed, when the Grave opens her mouth for him, and these spiritual Foes on
every side invade him, and Hellfire eternal burns before him. Blessed
therefore be this name Jesus, and exalted above all names; at which Name let
every knee bow of things in heaven, in earth, and under the earth; and every
tongue confess this Jesus, Lord, to the Glory of God the Father. Amen.]



Mat. 2.12; they were assured of the Birth of this Messiah, or great King, to
whom all the world should become tributary and subject. Of which Prince also it
is likely, in so general an expectation of the Jews as then was, that they had
heard, or also read something formerly. Therefore these first believers of the
Gentiles, crediting all things of this Prince worthy so supereminent a dignity,
and being persons of high condition (as the Magi in those Countries ordinarily
were, if not Princes) made have to be amongst the first, that should profess
their subjection and fealty to Him. And, as the Orientals usually do not
approach great Personages without some present, prepared some small quantity,
portable in a journey, of the richest Gifts their Country was famed for,
wherewith to present Him. And so setting forth upon this divine Indication,
either from some nearer parts of Chaldea or of Arabia Felix, which lies some
six days journey Eastward from Jerusalem: (whence also the Queen of Sheba,
(Arabia also being called Ethiopia. Numb. 12.1.) A type of them came with the
like gifts to visit King Solomon 1 King. 10.2.) Within not many days after our
Lords Nativity they arrived in Judea; probably the Star, that encouraged their
journey, now disappearing, that so they might repair to the Royal City in Quest
after the place thereof; and so, by our Lords special providence be the first
Promulgators of the Birth of the Messiah, and awaken the sloth of Gods own
people to make a stricter inquiry after it. And well might the Jews at least,
when our Lord afterward at thirty years of age publicly appeared to them, have
reflected on this Star, and the search of these Oriental Sages, and Herod's
slaughter, punctually agreeing with his Nativity. Come hither, and supposing
that what was manifested to them, strangers, about the time, was not concealed
to Gods own people, they made inquiry in the Metropolis of the Nation
concerning the place, where they might have access to, and adore, Him. For they
imagined, that either this Prince, the Messiah, might be of the present Royal
Stock; or, if otherwise, was of such a transcendent Sovereignty and descent, so
favored from heaven, such a King Paramount, and extending his scepter over the
whole world, (according to the frequent prophecies made of Him) as other
inferior Kings should have no envy to, but joy, therein: which conceit was also
nourished in them by Herod's professing his ready concurrence in the same
Adoration, so soon as the place of his Residence should be discovered.



Mic. 5.2. that Bethleem David's City was to be the Place thereof; And thou
Bethleem Ephrata (says he) that art a little one in the thousands of Juda. Out
of thee shall come forth unto me he that shall be the Dominator in Israel: And
his coming forth is from the beginning, from the days of Eternity. [Having an
eternal procession from the Father, and an Eternal decree of his Messias-ship.]
This for the place. But further, whatever certainty they might have also from
Daniels weeks, or Genesis 49.10, or other places concerning the Time, it was not
safe for them to pronounce any thing. Herod therefore, for his better
information in this, returns to the Sages; and very secretly requires of them a
punctual account of the first appearance of the Star, conjecturing from hence
the Age of the Child. Which having learnt, he desires, that, after they had
found this great Prince, they would in their return, give him Intelligence of
it, that He also might pay his Duty to this expected Messiah, and Heir of all
Nations. And so dismissed them, as the Divine wisdom ordered it, without
joining to them any further attendance of his own Court; perhaps, out of a
Countenance to slight the matter, and pass things with less noise; as also
least any such discovery, made by persons more interessed than these Strangers,
might, some way or other disappoint his Bloody purpose, or have given some
jealousy to the parents to have conveyed him away. (Tho indeed this his secrecy
defeated his Design). Who was also glad to see the Jews so supinely careless in
this affair; who began even at his Birth, tho thus alarmed and provoked by the
believing Gentiles, to neglect and deny this their Lord; Except only this
stranger Idumean, that was vigilant, how to dispatch Him.

Mat. 2.10. after its former so long disappearance, (because unbelieving
Jerusalem was unworthy of such a light); and with as much admiration, that the
daylight obscured not its splendour. For, Bethleem being not above six or seven
miles distant from Jerusalem, it is no way imaginable, that these, Strangers in
the Country, traveled thither by night. And now the Star became their Guide,
and went before them; till, they coming near our Lords secret Hermitage, the
Stable where He lay, (which poorer lodging now had its conveniences, the
Enrolment perhaps being not yet finished, in the better securing of his life)
it descended lower, and stood just over it. Which thing, as it was necessary
for the transaction of this visit with the more privacy, and happily prevented
their asking again the same question at Bethleem, as they did at Jerusalem,
which might have discovered this Infant to some, who might have told Herod: so
the Glory and splendour it cast upon this Grot served well to remove any scandal
they might receive from the poverty of the persons they found within it. And,
probably, all this passed without the unworthy Bethleemite's either seeing the
Star (like the cloudy pillar in die wilderness that was darkness to the
Egyptians, whilst light to the Israelites); or taking any notice of the new and
strange habited Guests: Which Bethleemites also before this, had bin as stupid
to the Relations of the good Shepherds, as the Hierosolymites were but now to
these Sages.

Mat. 2.11. before the Babe held in his Mother's Arms; and after worshipping
for some time, opened their Treasures, and made their Presents to Him; full of
silence and respect; and testifying their duty more in their actions, and
humble postures, than in their words: Behaving themselves rather as in a Temple
than in a lodging.

Genesis 37.25. -- and 43.11. But, as is observed, more especially proper
offerings to this Person, Aurum regi, Thus Deo, Myrrha morituro: It being, as
of a fragrant smell, so very exficcative, and preservative from Putrefaction,
and hence much used in the embalming of the Dead. Of which, mingled with Aloes,
another Gumm very odoriferous, an hundred pound weight was bestowed by
Nicodemus on our Lord at his burial, with which the linen cloths, wherein his
Body was wrapped, were besmeared. And one of the principal Ingredients this was
of the Holy ointment appointed for anointing the Priests and Sanctuary Exodus
30.23. Thy Garments smell of Mirrhe, Aloes, and Cassia, says the Psalmist of
our Lord. And -- A bundle of Mirrhe is my well-beloved unto me says the Spouse
in the Canticles chap. 1. v. 13. of the same person. Such Presents these great
Persons (for such both their Gifts and their Title of Magi intimate them to be;
This being a science studied only by the Nobility in those Countries, and the
skill thereof rewarded with the highest Honors) brought to this Infant-Prince,
as the first Tribute of the Gentiles. And so begun to be fulfilled those
Prophecies, which have not as yet received their complete accomplishment in
Psalm. 71. -- Coram Illo procedent Aethiopes: and inimici ejus terram lingent.
Reges Tharsis and Insulae munera offerent, Reges Arabum and Saba dona adducent.
Et adorabunt eum omnes Reges; omnes Gentes servient ei. -- And in Esai. 60. --
Surge, Illuminare, Jerusalem, quia venit lumen tuum. -- Et ambulabunt Gentes in
lumine tuo, and Reges in splendore ortus tui. -- Inundatio Camelorum operiet
Te: Dromedarri Madian and Epha: Omnes de Saba venient, Aurum and Thus
deferentes, and laudem Deo annunciantes. Madian and Sheba being in Arabia
Felix, East from Jerusalem: from which Sheba came the Queen with such presents
to King Solomon, and the Sabeans that took away Jobs Cattle. Job. 1.15. And so
was the title of Ethiopia common also to Arabia, Numb. 12.1.
as well as to the Ethiopia lying West of it and further off.



should by no means return to Herod, as was purposed (whose Counsels were
treacherous) but secretly and speedily depart to their own Country another way:
which also they successfully performed.

Lumen ad Revelationem gentium, as if he had known of this meeting and the
Star. So God is wont still to mix hardships with Favors, and recompense any
sufferings of his Saints with double Consolations. But in this present
satisfaction and repose, little did they know, that their poor Babe so meanly
lodged was the talk of all Jerusalem, and envy of Herod, or foresee the
terrible storm that would shortly arise from thence.

Genesis 4.4.) of offering to God, as the Creator and Proprietor of all that men
possess, the firstborn of every Creature; both of Men, to be consecrated to
his more special service and Ministry in divine things; and of clean beasts, to
be sacrificed; the fat burnt, and the flesh of them to be the Priests Numb.
18.18. and of unclean, to be redeemed for a certain price, and this given to
the Priests Numb. 18.15, 16. and, of the first fruits of the Earth and Trees,
to be presented to the Lord, heaved or waved on the Altar, and so to be the
Priests. Again, upon the Lords delivering all the firstborn of Man and Beast
among the Israelites from the hand of his destroying Angel, in the night when
he slew all those of the Egyptians round about them, the Lord also on this
account lai^ a second claim of these things to his own service and disposal.

primogeniture, as is thought to have bin of Abel, and was of Isaac and of
Jacob) continued till the times of Moses, and the law-written; when God chose
the Tribe of Levi See Exodus 19.22. -- 24.5. (of which was Moses) in their
stead, as a reward for their abstaining, (at least the most of them,) from
Idolatry to the Molten calf; and for their adhering to Moses, and valiantly at
his command taking revenge of this sin, in passing through the Camp, and
slaying all they met-with brother, friend or foe, that continued then in their
profane mirth and feasting.

Numb. 8.11.) yet God still retained a presentation and redemption of them. The
firstborn of Man then being a Male was to be brought after a month old, (that
this ceremony might be accompanied also with the purification of the Mother,)
to the Sanctuary, or Temple, and there presented and offered by the Priest unto
the Lord in such a manner as the heaved or waved offerings are, by being passed
from one hand to the other, see Exodus 29.24. and being thus the Lords, was to
be redeemed with five shekels of silver, the value of ten shillings or somewhat
more. The Mother also, after childbearing, was to be held unclean (as she was
also when in her flowers See Lev. 12.2. -- 15.19.) If it were a Male child, for
seven days; or if a Female, 'twice this time. But, the flux of her blood not
stopping so soon, was to remain thirty three days more (in all forty days)
for her purification, before she might come into the Sanctuary, or the public
assembly there; and if it were a Female the time of her purification was
doubled, because her flux in such a birth continued longer. In presenting her
self here, she was to bring a Lamb, or, if poor, a Turtle Dove, or Pigeons for
an Holocaust; and Turtle-doves or Pigeons for a sin-offering; such offering
chiefly relating to the legal immundicities, or also to many other sins
committed in the procreation of children, or otherwise, as these are truly
expiated by the all-meritorious sacrifice of our Lord; the antitype of all
these Legal offerings: as also the offering of the firstborn to God had
relation to the only self-acceptable oblation made to his Father of this first
and only begotten Son, Christ our Lord.



Arrived there, the Holy Virgin, at the time of the morning-sacrifice, carrying
her newborn Son to his Fathers house, humbly waited in the first Court (common
for all sort of people, clean or unclean, Jew or Gentile) till the two Turtles
or Pigeons she had brought, according to their mean condition (for the Lamb,
which only renders all other oblations acceptable to God, was that she carried
in her arms, her Son) were offered by the Priest attending there; the one for
her cleansing, the other for an Holocaust of Adoration, and thanksgiving to God
for her safe delivery, and newborn Son. Which done, she was admitted into the
inner Court of the Holy Congregation, which compassed the Temple and Court of
the Priests: and where the people beheld the service of the Altar, of
burnt-offerings, standing in this Court, and together with the Priest at such
time offered up their Prayers and Praises to God. Here the Priest received the
Holy Child from their hands, and presented him to the Lord, at or over the
Altar, with the usual Ceremony.

abroad a thousand miseries; and to be educated in obscurity, in a part of the
Country half Gentile, and the most remote from this house, for thirty years;
until the time should come of his manifestation. And thus was he, who came to
redeem us, first to be redeemed, and bought of his Father, the proper owner of
all things, for our use, and need of him, in all those labors, and sufferings,
and merits of his life and death for us.

Hag. 2.7, 9. -- Malac. 3.1. fulfilled and made good; wherein God promised,
that the desired of all Nations and the Messiah of the [new] Covenant, in whom
they delighted, and by whom they should have peace, should come to his Temple;
and thereby the glory of the latter house [that seemed so contemptible] should
be greater than the former. Which Temple also was a little before much more
sumptuously rebuilt by Herod, as it were, for the more solemn reception, and
honor of this Lord thereof; though intended by Herod for his own. Begun to be
rebuilt by him in the 21 year of his Reign, and in some Eight years finished,
and Dedicated, as to the chief Body of the house: but all the outworks, and
buildings not finished till 46 years afterward; and about the time when our
Lord, receiving Baptism from John, began his predication. See John. 2.20.

Luke 2.38.) of this new King, [for this Nation by the Divine Providence had
bin detained ever after the Babylonian Captivity, less or more, under the
servitude of foreign Nations, and of the great Empires of the world; to cause
in them a more ardent desire and dependence upon the promised Messiah, for
freeing Israel, as they imagined, from the Roman heavy-yoke; but Simeon with
more spiritual eyes expelling it for freeing the world from the servitude of
sin and Satan,] who I say had, for many, years, longed-after, and prayed-for,
the coming of this Messiah, and the Redemption of all Mankind. For to this
devout person, we may imagine, his seeing the world so overrun with sin, and
held captive by Satan, caused much grief, for the offending of God, and loss of
so many souls and that he often brake out into the like passion with the.
Prophet Esaiah chap. 62. 1. -- For Sion's sake I will not hold my peace, and
for Jerusalems sake I will not rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth
as brightness, and the salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns. And verse. 6,
11. -- I will not hold my peace day nor night, I will give him no rest, till he
establish, till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth, till the salvation of
Sion comes, and his reward is with him and his recompense before him. And upon
such fervent supplications of his, the Holy Ghost for his consolation revealed
unto him; that, notwithstanding his old age and small distance from the Grave,
yet he should not die before he had seen the Lords Christ. And at this time the
same Holy Spirit again gave him notice of our Load's being then in the Temple,
a small infant in the arms of a poor Virgin.

Luke 1.41; and lifting up his eyes to Heaven joyfully sung before the company
there assembled his Nunc dimittis servum tuum in pace secundum verbum tuum:
blessing God for the salvation he had prepared, not only for the Jewish Nation,
but all the world; and for this child's being, as the glory of Israel, so the
light of the Gentiles. This sudden action and prophecy of this reverend old
Man putting our Blessed Lady and S. Joseph into a new joyful wonder after all
those other testimonies concerning the child heard before; and adding still
more matter to the Holy Virgins treasure; out of which all these things came to
the knowledge of Posterity.

And, in giving, as an old Man if not also a Priest, his Benediction to the
thrice happy-parents; and, by the revelation of the same Holy Ghost, foreseeing
also the great sufferings of our Lord that were to follow, and the oppositions
that would be made to his new Kingdom, (of which sufferings one heavy one was
then immediately to break forth) he made his more particular addresses to the
Mother of our Lord (for S. Joseph, before those saddest times, was to be at
rest) and told her; That as the child was born for the advancement (as he had
already said) of many in Gods people Israel, such as should yield to his
Scepter; so also for the fall and utter ruin of many others, such as should
not believe and acknowledge him, and those secularly Great; and that this age
should thoroughly discover the goodness or wickedness of men's hearts. And that
he should be set up as a sign to all the world, that should be much
contradicted and spoken against by the great ones thereof, (as more especially
he was at his death, being lifted up on high on the pole of the Cross, and all
the people about him blaspheming; See Psalm. 105.18. After, and for, which
followed also the destruction of Jerusalem, and the dispersion and Captivity of
that Nation until this day). When also, as it were, a sharp sword should pierce
her Soul out of Maternal compassion toward him, whilst she should stand by and
behold such things done to the innocence of the Holy One of God. After which
words, spoken by him much what in the expressions of the ancient Prophets, See
Esaias. 8.14,15. -- 42.6. -- 49.6. -- 52.10. -- 11.10. -- 65.2. (as we usually
find those later in the new Testament to deliver their predictions in the
language of the Old, both coming from the same Dictator) and he receiving again
from the Infant the Benediction he bestowed on the parents, he now joyfully
retired waiting and preparing himself for his near approaching death and
dissolution from the many infirmities of his old age.

and Savior of the world. To which the Holiness of her person, and severity,
and sequestration of her life from common converse, somewhat like that of the
Baptist, added very much. Whom the Evangelist thus sets forth; That she had
lived in perpetual widowhood from her youth, after only having seven years
enjoyed an husband; and now, aged 84 years, departed not from the Temple; where
(many chambers belonging to it) we may imagine she might have some little Cell
for her self, and her necessary provision brought to her thither; and, beside
her Devotions, might do some little services more proper for women in
assistance of the Priests. And some such thing, of women serving and attending
on the Tabernacle, we read in Exodus 38.8. and again in 1 Samuel 2.22. And, after
the settlement of the Gospel, in 1 Timothy 5. is mentioned such a sequestration
and retirement of widows (living together and taken care-of for their
maintenance by the Church) for the peculiar service of God and his Saints.
Where verse. 5. it is said of these also, that -- Desolate and trusting in God
[to whom they dedicated their continency and service, for their subsistence]
they continued in supplications and prayers night and day. So, -- From the
Temple this Holy widow (says the Evangelist) departed not; but served God
there with fastings and prayers night and day. With fastings, as this being the
best preservative of chastity, and preparative for Devotion, by allaying and
calming the Spirits and Passions and mortifying and taming the flesh. The chief
subject of whose Devotions, as of Simeons, probably were the Redemption of
God's people by his sending quickly the promised Messiah, then much spoken of.
She then at this blessed sight and the fulfilling of it, first fell on praising
and giving thanks to God, and witnessed the same things with Simeon (her coming
also casually after him removing the suspicion of any combination) concerning
this Heavenly child to all there present; nor only to them, but to all those
pious people in Jerusalem that resorted to her, and expected also this
Redemption, Luke 2.38. which, by her eminent sanctity, and her being noted also
for the gift of Prophecy, must make no small noise in the City; after the Magi
had spread this news there before by their solicitous inquisition after this
newborn King.

that disappointed of their expectation out of shame they had secretly
withdrawn themselves from a public derision) soon gave him a new alarm; and
so quickened his bloody intention of destroying the Holy Infant. Meanwhile these
holy rites devoutly performed, and such praises and acclamations received at
Jerusalem as were before at Bethleem, the Holy Mother treasuring up all these
things in her heart, and Holy Simeons last words (bodeing great afflictions) as
well as the first, returned with her husband S. Joseph the same day to
Bethleem. [For an immediate return of them from Jerusalem to Nazareth, which
some imagine, seems not so well to suit with the following story, of their
being sent away into Egypt. For at Nazareth, they being so far removed from
Bethleem, their stay seems to have been secure enough; or their flight from
thence would rather have bin directed North-wards to some part of Syria near
hand, than Southwards into Egypt; as beating again the way they came, through all
their Country first, and flying from Herod just the way toward him.]

Mother (for so it is observed the Angel in reverence styles her v. 13. and
again v. 20. and not his wife) and to secure him by a speedy flight from that
place, for that Herod sought immediately to slay him; and this a flight not to
some neighboring Village, or to his own Country Galilee; but, quite contrary,
still removed further from home, and friends, into Egypt; a country of above
200 miles distance, through a vast Desert in a cold season, with a Child only
six weeks old (after a wearisome travel of it and them the day before) unto a
people of another language; left also uncertain how long their stay, which was
to be so long as Herod lived. Where what tolerable entertainment could they
expect, when they had received such mean accommodation among their friends and
kindred? Such was Gods command to Abraham, and his obedience Genesis 12.1. but he
much better provided and attended.

Exodus 4.22. and of whom he says ( Hose. 11.1, when Israel was a child then I
loved him, and called my Son out of Egypt) in its first childhood being by the
Divine appointment carried into Egypt for its Education; and brought thence
with a strong hand after that Pharaoh was destroyed, as our Lord was after
Herod; which Pharaoh also, as Herod, had appointed that all the Male-children
of Israel so soon as born should be slain, thinking thus to have destroyed Gods
firstborn Israel.

Psalm. 2.8. inheritance of the Gentiles, to whom he brought salvation as well
as to the Jews. And as in Bethleem he had already received the Homage of the
East, so now he went himself in person to this Southern Region, to establish
his new Kingdom there, where was at that time the very throne and seat of
Satan; and, which was the chief Mother of Idolatry and Superstition in the
whole Gentile world, and the Source where the rest of the Western and Northern
parts learnt, and whence they derived, it. But again, which, after this
gracious visit of his, and by his Redemption its being subdued to the Gospel,
became no less exemplaplary to the rest of the Christian world in an
extraordinary Sanctity and Devotion: all the Deserts also thereof being filled
with multitudes of persons, who having cast-off all secular cares, and having
all things common, were wholly employed in the Divine service and
Contemplation. From which the rest of Christianity derived the first pattern
(after that exercised in the Acts Act. 2.44.) and Rules thereof. And thus the
Divine Majesty, the more fully to show himself now by his Son reconciled to the
whole world, sent him so soon as born to that Country especially, toward which
of all others he had formerly showed his greatest wrath and displeasure; and on
which formerly he had powered out so many plagues.

Idolatrous Egypt by our Lord much is foretold by the Prophet Esaias chap. 19.
where it is said, verse. 1. -- That the Lord shall come thither on a Cloud, [in
corpore quasi in nube vectus], and the Idols of Egypt shall be moved at his
presence: and the heart of Egypt shall be melted tn the midst of it. And verse.
18. -- That the Cities thereof shall speak the Language of Canaan. [Of which
Cities one mentioned is Heliopolis, in or near which our Lord is supposed to
have sojourned there]. And, in that day that there shall be an Altar unto the
Lord in the midst of the Land of Egypt, and Sacrifices offered and vows made
to him. In that day, that Israel shall be the third with Egypt and Assyria: and
a blessing in the midst between them; whom [all which three] the Lord of hosts
shall bless, saying, Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my
hands, and Israel my inheritance. This Blessing, and pity, and reconciliation,
purchased by himself, this Infant now rejoiced to carry to them, and to make
them capable also of Altars and Sacrifices, before the Gospel restrained to
Jerusalem.

Out of Egypt have I called my Son. For these joys set before him, this Royal
Infant despised this cross so early laid upon his tender shoulders; and took so
long a journey, with as much jubilation in obedience to his Father, as his
Parents, with compassion of him.

which was very ready at hand as lodging in the same Room, this long journey
was somewhat eased: the Holy Virgin riding thereon and carrying our Lord in
her lap, and S. Joseph leading him, perhaps laden also with some tools proper
to his trade, wherewith he was to get his and their living: and very
opportunely had the Magi presented them with a little gold to defray the
charges of the way, till somewhere settled in Egypt he might subsist by his
labors.

in Bethleem; and produced the clear words of the Prophet concerning it.

the Bethleemites when expecting or fearing no such thing; and who, had they
fore-known of such a body of armed, men coming against them, yet could not have
imagined this to be intended only against such persons as were not yet capable
of being accused of any fault, and therefore had none provided for their
safety; and die slaughter was yet more cruel being done, by a multitude of
Soldiers every where dispersed, as it were all at once. [A cruelty surpassing
all belief, had not Herod bin the Actor; famous also for the killing of his own
children; and of whom Josephus relates, not long after this, a like inhumanity,
Viz. his designing the murder and Destruction of all the Jewish Nobility, of
which more hereafter]. To make also the surer work, which was but necessary
against a downright prophecy, he caused not only those born a little before the
Sages arrival at Jerusalem, but all whatever born within two years before, to
be slain; and that not only of those born in the Town, but in the territories
or Coasts, of Bethleem, having asked and learnt from the wisemen, punctually
at what time the Star first appeared to them. From which we may collect the
Star to have bin observed and admired by them for some two years before: as
Comets use to precede for some time the events they signify; but the certain
indication and design thereof to have bin only then revealed to them, when the
child was already born.

chap. 31.15. Thus says the Lord [which shows also nothing done in this
business without his certain providence in it] A voice was heard in Ramah [a
chief Town or the Tribe of Benjamin Rachels progeny] lamentation and bitter
weeping: Rachel [who dyed and was buried near Bethleem] weeping for her
children, refused to be comforted for her children, because they were not; Viz.
being carried away from her into captivity; which was the first fulfilling of
this prophecy of Jeremy, and which was a type of this other the more principal
accomplishment of it here. But, there, the Lord presently comforts her, saying
verse. 16, 17. -- Refrain thy voice from weeping and thine eyes from tears; for
there is hope in thine end, says the Lord, that thy children shall come again
to their own border and from the land of the Enemy; and verse. 9. -- I am a
Father to Israel and Ephraim is my firstborn. And afterward, in the same
chapter verse. 22. is a promise made to them of the Messiah.



Luke 2.17.
to lodge amongst the beasts, (if our Blessed Lady sojourned in the Stable till
her purification) when the Text also says, that the Shepherds had given them
some notice of the Dignity of the Child, and his Mother.

Qui cum audisset (says Macrobius Saturnal. lib. 1.) inter pueros, quos in
Syria Herodes Rex Judaeorum intra bimatum jussit interfici, filium quoque ejus
occisum; [some saying that he had then also caused to be slain a Son of his
own, lately born of a wife of his that was of the Tribe of Judah] ait, Melius
est Herodis Porcum esse, quam filium. Herod being a Proselite of the Jewish
Religion, and this prohibiting the killing of Swine, or eating their flesh, as
held a most unclean beast. But Augustus herein might perhaps also reflect, both
on the former slaughter of two sons of his, Aristobulus and Alexander, on
suspicion of a conspiracy against him; and on the leave he had lately procured
from the same Emperor for the killing another of his sons Antipater, whom
afterward he caused to be put to death on the same account.

Acts 2.8.) being placed also by the Divine Providence as it were in the midst
of Nations, and at the end of the Mediterranean Sea* from whence all the
Western Countries received their first Colonies, and inhabitants, by reason of
the first peopling of the world made in the East. Every where also, where the
Jews planted themselves, they had Synagogues: and in these publicly read to
them the Books of Moses and the Prophets; by which also were begotten amongst
other Nations many Proselites to the Jews Religion; and such was the Queen of
Ethiopia's Eunuch. And this also prepared the way for the easier spreading
afterward of the Gospel: for where ever almost the Apostles came, they found
Jews; and so began first their preaching in their Synagogues, and with the
expounding to them of the prophets read to them on the Sabbaths. And these
foreign Jews were also the better preserved in the true knowledge and worship
of God, by the repair of those, at least of better quality among them, at the
great festivals to Jerusalem, and to the Temple there, see Act. 2.5, 9. etc.
But in Egypt, in the parts thereof nearest Palestine (wherein, called the land
of Goshen, the Israelites also inhabited after Jacob descended thither) the
Jews at this time more abounded by reason of a Temple built there by ^nias, a
son of the High Priest: who with many other Jews fled thither from the tyranny
of Antiochus Epiphanes: to which Temple the King of Egypt gave all furtherance,
the more to strengthen himself, by the attraction of many Jews, against the
same Tyrant. Where also Onias erected an Altar, mis-applying the prophecy Esaias,
19.19. etc. to his own times. And this Temple was then standing when our Lord
came thither; being not destroyed till Vespasian's time, and by his command; a
year after the demolishing of that at Jerusalem, and after it had stood above
two hundred years.



Certum est (says Tirinus Chron. Sacr. c. 49.) Dominum ibi non haesisse toto
Biennio. And -- Hanc communem esse sententiam and antiquitus pro vulgari
habitam etc. And thus Eusebius Hist. l. 1. c. 8. -- Statim post necatos
infantes, nulla, ne minima quidem, dilatione interposita divina ultio illum,
dum adhuc in vivis manebat, exagitavit etc; referring to the History of
Josephus. And Josephus, tho he makes no mention of the slaughtered Infants, (no
more than he does of many other eminent occurrances of the Evangelical story,
as he being no friend to Christianity, and mistaking Vespasian for the true
Messiah), yet could not but observe the divine hand in Herod's sickness and
fall: -- Supplicia (says he Antiq. Judai. l. 17, c. 9.) Deo commissi sceleris
expetente, (tho he mistaking the scelus): And again -- Dicebatur (says he) ab
his, quibus inerat divinandi peritia, divinitus has paenas, ob impietatem ejus
and multa crudeliter gesta, deposci. And he thus describes his horrid disease.
Ibid. -- Ignis quippe lentus inerat, non tantum conflagrationem in superficiem
corporis agentem prodens, quantum intrinsecus crescens operabatur incendium.
Aviditas quoque inexplebilis semper inerat cibi: nec tamen satietas unquam
rabidis incitatam faucibus valebat implere ingluviem. Intestina internis
ulceribus tabida putrescebant, doloribus quoque coli saevissimis cruciabatur,
humor liquidus, ac luridus erga pedes tumidos oberrabat. Similis illi quoque
and circa pubem erat afflictio. Sed and verenda ipsa putredine corrupta
scatebant vermibus: spiritus quoque incredibilis erecta tentigo, quae fuerat
satis obscaena diritate foetoris, and anhelitus respiratione creberrima:
contractus quoque per cuncta membra subsistens vim noxiam operabatur, quae
omnem tolerantiae abstulerat firmitatem. -- He relates also his attempt to have
killed himself with a knife, had not one, observing it, suddenly stopped his
hand.

The sword also departed not from his own house. See Joseph. Antiq. l. 15. c.
9.16. c. 3.17. from c. 1. to 11.
For after a former slaughter of his two sons Alexander and Aristobulus; and of
several of his wives, (some of them at least innocent), upon jealousies and
continual accusations, of one another, for preparing of poison and for other
conspiracies against him, He, five days before his death, commanded the
slaughter of his Son Antipater; And, Antipater Joseph. Antiq. l. 17. c. 8. also
having formerly accused two other sons of Herod, Archelaus and Philip, of like
treason against their Father, in making his will he also passed-by them, and
nominated a younger Son, Herod Antipas, heir of his Crown. But, after Antipater
put to death, changing his mind again, he resumed Archelaus; and so these two
brethren Archelaus and Antipas, after his death, upon his varying wills,
contended for the Kingdom. [He had great misfortunes also in his kindred and
Relations. Herod's brother Pheroras was poisoned; and his wife, being accused
of it, made away herself. His Father in law, Simon the High Priest, was deposed
from his Office. And lastly Josephus observes concerning Herod's posterity,
Antiq. l. 18.
That though it was very numerous, yet within an hundred years there was none,
or very few, remaining. -- Vt innotescat (says he) nihil prodesse vel
exercitus, aut vim Corporis, vel alia, quae videntur mortalibus appetenda, sine
pietate, qua colitur Deus, intra centum annorum spacium praeter paucos (nam
admodum plures erant) cuncta Herodis origo consumpta est. Super haec etiam, ad
humilitatem and modestiam humanum genus adducitur, cum illius familiae
calamitates audierit. Thus He.] Besides such cruelties to his wives and
children, the same also overflowed toward all the Jewish Nobility. For when
some Jews, upon a rumor of his Death had defaced some of his (as they esteemed
them, profane) Ornaments of the Temple, he so much gloried in, He summoning
all the Jewish Nobility, (upon pain of Death to the absent) under show of
taking their advice for punishing such an insolency, and then imprisoning all
those who came, Ordered, that, at the time of his own expiring, they also
should be by his Soldiers put to death, the better he said to secure his
Kingdom to his posterity: and that he might make those mourn, who otherwise
would have rejoiced, at his death. But this was not executed, nor did such an
unheard of cruelty survive in any after him.

place of his Birth, so had taken notice also of the time! Of which God his
Father had given them such an eminent Signal and Testimony by the foreign
message sent to them of the Magi, and the Star. But though their Relation
wrought so far with them (says the Text) as to trouble Herod and all Jerusalem
with him; yet not so, as to make them sensible of this infinite Honor newly
done them in their long expected Messias's coming. It troubled them, but
reformed them not, to pay him at least the same homage as did those strangers,
or to provide him so much as a lodging, or a bed. Therefore we read of the
effect of Gods displeasure at this time not only falling upon Herod, but on the
Jews too. For not only, about the time of Herod's decease, died many other great
persons (and therefore it is said Mat. 2.20. They are dead, who sought the
child's life; Viz. such as whom their having relation to Herod (he marrying the
daughter of an High Priest) made zealous of his greatness). And several also of
the Sanedrim and Pharisees were slain by him for refusing to swear Allegiance
to him: and forty persons burnt alive for defacing the golden Eagle set up by
Herod before the gate of the Temple. But immediately after Herod's death happened
many rebellions of the Jews seeking to regain their liberty, before the
settlement of Archelaus by Augustus, and during our Lords quiet recess in
Egypt, which rebellions were suppressed with great slaughter of them.

Augustus (says Josephus Antiq. l. 17. c. 17.) Archelaum quidem Regem non
pronunciavit; Dimidiae vero Judeae regionis, quae Herodi tributa reddebat,
Toparcham constituit: Spondens et Regiam quoque dignitatem, si laboribus and
favoribus circa semetipsum meritus appareret: But the issue concerning him was;
that, after about nine years continuance in this Dignity, upon a new complaint
of the Jews for his crimes, he was deposed, and banished, and his Estate
confiscated by Augustus; and the like was the fate of his Brother Herod the
Tetrarch of Galilee. And the Jews still became more immediately subject to the
Roman Yoke.

chap, 7.14, 15, 16. (which is expressly applied to the Blessed Virgin Mary and
our Lord, Mat. 1.23.) That as there, before Esaiah's child (the type of our
Lord, Esai. 8.18. and born of a Prophetess and Holy-woman Esai. 8.4, 5,
representing our Blessed Lady) was two years old, so as to discern food
grateful from ungrateful, or so as plainly to speak my Father and my Mother,
the two Kings of Samaria and Damascus, that were enemies to Gods Church, were
to be taken away by the Executioner of the Divine Justice the King of Assyria:
so, before our Lord came to the same age, Herod, who was King of Samaria as
well as Judea, and Oboda the King of Damascus some few months before Herod (see
Josephus Antiq. l. 16. c. 10.) were removed by death, and their Kingdoms also
by Augustus, (the King then also of Assyria) taken away so as that their
posterity did not succeed in the same Title or extent of Power. The Mystical
signification of all which is, that the former Kingdom of Satan should now be
destroyed, and he cast out upon the coming and Birth of our Lord.

At this very time also One Judas in Galilee, under pretense of recovering
liberty, gathered forces and pillaged the Country; against whom, Varus the
Roman Prefect of Syria sent part of his Army thither, besieged and took
Sephoris and subdued the Rebels. See Antiq. l, 17. c. 15.
Josephus also mentions many others every where raising tumults in the absence
of Archelaus; during all which frights, and the sword traveling through the
coasts of Judea to revenge their contempt of the newborn Messiah, the Blessed
Virgin with our Lord and S. Joseph enjoyed in Egypt a peaceful security.

Exodus 4.19, a Deliverer also of Gods people and a Type of our Lord; who, when
Pharaoh (as here Herod), a little before this deliverance, had taken order for
all the Male-children of the the Israelites to be put to death, miraculously
escaped; and who afterward for his safety had fled to Midian: from whence God
commanded him to return unto his people, for that they were now dead that
sought his life. Where also we may observe the way by which God usually
delivers and provides for his Servants when in any strait: Viz. not on a
sudden and in have and by main strength and force (when as indeed all things
are always universally subject to his power); but tacitly and without any
disturbance of the course of other human affairs, and as it were attending an
opportunity by a secret, but effectual, flection and winding of these (not so
easily discernable by men) in all things to serve his designs.

Matt. 2.22. not to return again to Bethleem, (tho perhaps he might have had
some thoughts thereof, as imagining it Gods pleasure that this child should be
educated in that honorable City of David, where he was born, and which was so
near to the Royal City of Jerusalem) but rather to his own City Nazareth: where
also the strange occurrences in our Lord's birth were utterly unknown. And
indeed this obscure and rude place in the outskirts of the Nation was
preordained by the Divine wisdom for the place of our Lords Education, as
necessary for the accomplishing of his sufferings, and the redemption of the
world by his Death; that the grosly-unbelieving Jews and obstinate Pharisees,
notwithstanding all the wisdom and mighty works that appeared in him, might be
the more blinded, and our Lord less suspected for what he was. For so still,
sometimes by good men, it was argued against him. -- Number ex Nazareth potest
aliquid boni esse? Jo. 1.46. and Jo. 7.52. -- Scrutare and vide (said the High
Priest and Pharisees to Nicodemus) quia a Galilea Propheta non surget.

Mat. 2.23. observes, First that the Prophets also have given some prenotice of
this his Habitation and Title chap. 2.23. -- that he should be called a
Nazareen: Esai. 11.1. calling him Nazar. -- Flos, surculus, or Germen de radice
Isai exurgens: with which agrees Zech. 3.8. -- 6.12. -- Behold the Lord, whose
name is the Branch. Whence also Nazareth is supposed to take its Name, the
territory there being observed to abound exceedingly with variety of
odoriferous Plants and Flowers, to this day. Of which thus Eugen. Rogerus in
his Description of the Holy Land, who lived at Nazareth for some time in an
house of his Order there. -- This City is well called a Flower: for I might
aver (says he) that, having run through many Realms and viewed many Provinces
as well of Asia as Africa and Europe. I never saw any comparable to this of
Nazareth, for the great number of fair and pleasant Odoriferous Flowers and
Plants; which grow there through all the seasons of the year. For from the
Month of December even to April all the little Hills, Fields and way-sides are
enameld with (to give you them in his own language) Anemones, Calcedoines,
Ranuncules, Narcissus, Cyclamens, d Iris de toutes especes de couleurs, de
Moly, de Lavende, Stecas, Ambroise, Serpolet, Mariolene, Origan, Nepeta,
Scordium, and many other little Flowers intermingled with Trees and Shrubs,
that are always green: so that the sight of the one and fragrancy of the
other, makes it seem an Earthly Paradise; with an air also so well tempered
that little sickness happens there. Thus he. This of Nazar, flos or Surculus, a
Name in the Prophets applied to our Lord and this City perhaps having its name
from these so plentiful about it.

Nazarites (tho this word not written with a Tsade ^ as our Lords name Nazar
is, but a Zain ^) being persons in a singular manner separated and devoted to
God. And the famous Nazarite, Judge. 13.5, Sampson is observed by the Fathers,
-- in ortu, in pueritia, nuptiis suis, Leone, and apibus, asini maxilla, and
font ex ea prognato, Gazae portis, coma detonsa, exoculatione, pistrina,
Templi Dagon eversione, and maxim ultranea stupendaque morte Christum
praefigurasse; being a great Deliverer of Gods people; and Conquering their
Enemies, all alone without Armies, or Arms; Obtaining the greatest Victory
over them by and at his death; after their Bonds and fetters triumphantly
rising up and carrying away the Gates from their City; by his locks cut
becoming weak, his eyes put out, buffetted and made a common mocking-stock, but
after this avenging himself of all his enemies; Out of the dry Jaw Bone issuing
a fountain, and out of the dead Lion meat and sweetness: Fons Baptismatis and
regenerationis, Mel redemptionis, and Cibus Eucharistiae; Such a Nazarite, then
also was our Lord. 2. Besides this said of our Lords Name, chap. 4.14, the
Prophet Esay's plainly foretelling our Lord's residence in Galilee of the
Gentiles, and in the land of Zabulon, where Nazareth was; Esaias. 9.1.
and a great light springing up there to those that sat in darkness. This his
Habitation then in Galilee at Nazareth was also sufficiently foretold, but they
not worthy to understand it.



How our Lord here spent his childhood and youth, and indeed much the greatest
part of his life, (as also before of the Employment of the Baptist in the
Desert, till the thirtieth year of his age) very little is expressly mentioned
in the scripture. [And herein methinks appears the greatness of our Lord's
humility and design, to give our ambition and vainglory an example of imitating
him, that he should so little value, or also ordain, it; that all those
admirable virtues of his, and effects of the Divine wisdom and Grace, that
appeared in all his words and actions, and which (says the Evangelist Luke
2.^^.) were so grateful to those with whom he conversed, should during so long
a time be (save one passage in the twelfth year of his age) utterly lost, if I
may so say, and concealed and unknown to the world; and only manifest to his
Father above, and the inhabitants of Heaven. When as, had it bin his pleasure,
there were so many, that might have delivered this story from the mouth of his
Holy Mother, who let nothing pass unobserved, but was a faithful measures from
his first infancy, says S. Luke 2.19, 51, of all she saw and heard in or
concerning him]. Little, I say, is expressly delivered: But notwithstanding from
the consequences of several texts much may be learned.

In whom wore hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, says the Apostle
Col. 2.3 -- And, all the fullness of the Divinity dwelling bodily, verse. 9. --
And the word was made flesh, full of grace and truth, says S. John c. 1. Nor
did God give the Spirit by measure unto him Jo. 3.34. All which texts must be
verifyed at the Union of his manhood to the Divinity, suitable to the supreme
Dignity thereof; which Union was at his Conception. Nor is there any reason for
a temporary suspension of these, as of some perfections of the Body, in order
to our Redemption, but rather of the contrary.] And that the increase in them,
which S. Luke speaks of, chap, 2, was only of the more manifestation of the
effects thereof, in the progress of his Age; as also sufficiently appears in
that, without any the least former application of him to learning or studies,
or solitude of life, like the Baptists, when the sacred number of twelve years
of his childhood were completed, in going, as usually, with his parents to the
solemn feast, he secretly quitted his parents; and, entering into the Temple,
Luke 2.46, 47.
sat him down in the midst of the Doctors, disputing, and as king them
questions, and astonishing them, says the Text, with his understanding and
answers.



Mark. 1.35. -- Luke 5.16. -- 6.12.

Till then that our Lords growth was capable of corporal Labors, we may justly
account his time at Nazareth spent much-what like that of S. John Baptist, or
also his own 40 days sojourning in the Desert: and that all this while he
became a fervent Mediator for us, now by his taking our flesh become his
Brethren; and negociated our business so much more with God when hindered by his
age for doing it yet with men. And his Father, who was always well pleased in
him, accepted his service, in this time of nonage and sequestration from human
affairs, as more immediately devoted to himself. And if mankind is supposed to
receive much benefit from the Prayers and Devotions of those Holy Hermits, who,
without any conversation with men, apply themselves wholly to these; like Moses
in the Mount, praying whilst their brethren are fighting here with Satan and a
thousand temptations; how much more strength and succor may we be thought to
receive from those infinitely-meritorious intercessions of our Lord in that his
silent infancy? Whose outward deportment also in this time, corresponding with
his mind, must needs beget great reverence toward him: and the like Devotion
and silence in the Blessed Virgin and S. Joseph, that daily beheld it; and the
economy of this little family much exceed that of the strictest Monasticks.
Both these persons being, before our Lords Nativity, highly enriched with the
Graces of the Holy Spirit; and also, by so near access to his person, receiving
daily new influences and recruits thereof from him, who was full of Grace and
Truth, (as the beloved Evangelist describes him Jo. 1.14, 16); and of whose
fullness we all receive, Grace after Grace; and all for, and from, this fountain
of Grace.

Exodus 23.15, 17. -- 34.20. -- Deuteronomy. 16.17. -- Prove. 3.9. But women and
children were dispenced-with; and the males are said to be obliged thereto only
from twenty years old, to sixty, or fifty. But at the great Pascal feast it was
usual, from ancient times, for the women and their children, as well as men, to
go thither, as appears by 1 Samuel 1.3, 4. And so S. Luke says of the Holy
Virgin and her husband S. Joseph, that they went to Jerusalem every year at the
Paschal feast; and we may presume, took with them the Holy child Jesus after
able to travel so far: whom, considering who He was, and on such account how
dear to them, it would have bin a great affliction to have left behind them;
and to have relinquisht the Lord himself, as it were, to go to his house. And,
there missing our Lord, when twelve years old, and hoping to find him gone
before with some of their kindred, argues, that not to have bin his first
journey. In which also they would have bin more solicitous of his not straying
froth them: and their seeking him also in the Temple seems to have proceeded
from some observation made by them of his former inclinations, and practices
there, at these Feasts.

two years, and Herod's reign according to Josephus De Bell. Judaic. lib. 2.
cap. 6. only nine) ejected out of his Government by Augustus, and banished to
Vienna in France; and a Roman President substituted in his place.

After therefore the Feast was now ended and the multitudes returning homeward;
Our Lord in obedience to the will of his Father in Heaven, on a sudden
withdrew himself from his Parents here on earth, without giving them any
notice of his purpose; which, made known to them, might to their human reason
have seemed somewhat extravagant, and perilous, and so have received some
obstruction from their great solicitude for his safety. Wherein He has also
showed to us how little any Relations of Kindred, many times great lets of
Piety, are to be regarded, when any way hindering our service of God; Of which
disengagement from Kindred he also gave us examples afterward upon several
occasions. He therefore immediately returned to the Temple, (carried hither with
the same zeal and fervor of the Holy Spirit as when afterward he repaired into
the Desert), and these abode for the three days next ensuing.

Jer. 35.2. -- 4.36.12, 26; and in these the Doctors of the Law, assembling at
certain times or Hours of the day, expounded the Mosaic law to the people, and
instructed the youth, such as applied themselves to learning; disputed also
among themselves, and stated the hard questions and difficulties therein. Who
also, beside the Temple, used Synagogues; and had likewise, beside these, many
Schools instituted for the fame purpose. Of which Schools, and Synagogues,
there are said to have bin in Jerusalem 480. Sigon. ius lib. 2 cap. 8. So Act.
19.9, is mentioned S. Paul's reasoning or teaching at Ephesus in the School of
one Tyrannus; Act. 24.12, He pleads his not having disputed with any in the
Temple: Act. 6.9, are mentioned those of the Synagogue of the Libertines,
Cyrenians, etc. disputing with Stephen; Jerem. chap. 36.10, Baruch is said to
have read the words of Jeremiah (himself being in restraint) in the house of
the Lord in Gazophilacio Gamariae Scribae in vestibalo superiori, in introitu
portae novae domus Domini, audiente omni populo, which perhaps was done out of
some eminenter place in the room to the people standing in the Court; See also
Jer. 26.10, 11. So our Lord, John 8, 20, is said to have preached to the people
in the Temple in Gazophylacio; and another time in Porticu Salomonis. Jo.
10.23. In these places also, where the Doctors taught their Scholars or the
people, were some Chaires placed for themselves, and some lower seats or Mats
spread on the floor for their Scholars, or Auditors. So S. Paul says, Act.
22, that he was taught at the feet of Gamaliel according to the perfect manner
of the law of the Fathers.

Mat. 21 25.
whether John's Baptism was from Heaven or of Men? and How David called Christ
his Lord, the Lord being his Son?) He, to give them some light, so much as his
Father permitted, what person He was, and to show them manifestly in those
immature years that his wisdom was from above, and that he asked such things
not for his own but their learning, He (being that Eternal wisdom that composed
those laws, and inspired those prophecies which they expounded) gave them also
the solutions to those questions wherein they were deficient. He sat (says
the Text) in the midst of them, not only hearing but asking them Questions; And
not this only (which Scholars usually do), but giving answers also; answers
probably not only to their Questions, but to his own, when they could not
resolve them; and such answers, as that all that heard him were astonished
(says the Text) at his understanding. All which shows something very
extraordinary and divine in this his appearance. Where also, Himself guiding
these discourses, as He did, when He went up into the Chair at Nazareth, the
opening of the Books at such a place as spoke of Himself, we may imagine the
subject was some thing concerning the Revelation and coming of the Messiah;
whose gracious speeches there delivered, as with the modesty of a Child, so
with the gravity and authority of a Lawgiver sent from Heaven: and, now also,
not as the Scribes, but with strange force and inward conviction to his
Auditors, filled them and the others his hearers with strange admiration. And
this admiration probably would have produced a further inquiry after him, had
not, in the height of such their astonishment, the entrance in of such mean
people, as his parents, conduced on the other side to abate their great esteem
of him, and served to draw a veil over the faces of such either lazy searchers,
or already envious Rivals, that they could not discern him. When as the
meanness of his Education should have rather increased a diligent quest after
him, the more they saw no human way of his attaining either such science, or
Spirit and Confidence.

iis quae fuere Patris, let us return to the sad Mother and her Husband; who,
perceiving the Holy Child strayed from them at their going out of the City, and
after some search there-about not finding him, imagined him to have bin gone a
little before in the company of some of their friends and Kindred, and so made
the more have, for this, out of Town; and went so much the faster from the
place where he was to overtake him upon the way. After having finished thus in
a longing expectation their first days journey homeward, and not having found
the Child at night (as they had hoped) among their friends, they fell now,
especially his tender Mother, into no small solicitude and jealousy concerning
him. Now came into their minds the first noise and discovery of him, raised by
the Shepherds, and afterward much more by the Magi; and then again S. Simeon's
and Annas proclaiming him in the Temple; the Hereditary malice of Herod's
family and Party, and, who ever governed, his not enduring a Rival: the secret
intelligence and Spies that might have bin set upon him and them; and some
discovery of his removal into Galilee; their own negligence in not more
carefully attending on him and all his motions, whom God had so honored and
entrusted with the Guardianship of his Son; and perhaps their fault in carrying
him to Jerusalem, when as the law dispensed with his age as yet for performing
this Holy Ceremony. Such thoughts as these might much afflict them, besides
such their love and affection to his most amiable person, and obliging
behavior, as could not with any patience endure him to be out of their fight.
In that sad night, what abundance of tears may we imagine, especially his Holy
Mother, to have powered forth, so that she had great reason to represent this
her sorrow to her Son as soon as she regained him. -- Your Father and I have
sought you sorrowing. How may we imagine this desolate Virgin now to have
lamented like the Spouse in the Canticles cbap. 3.1, 2.etc: which also in a
special manner was the Type of her, as one above all other Spouses the dearest
to her Beloved for ever. -- Quaesivi quem dilexit anima mea; quaesivi illum,
and non inveni. Surrexi and circuivi Civitatem per vicos and plateas quaesivi
quem dilexit anima mea; quaesivi and non inveni. All this grief meanwhile was
well known to, and foreseen by, her Son amidst his Devotions in the Temple. But
these afflictions are the things which exceedingly endear the Saints to God,
and perfect in them his love; and therefore he is so liberal in bestowing these
upon them.



And here, says the Evangelist, they found him, sitting in the midst of the
Doctors, I suppose in the manner before related; (unless this his sitting among
them and also his proposing Questions to them may be thought to argue his
taking some authority upon him as an extraordinary Ambassador sent to them
from God; where the most apparent maturity of his Celestial wisdom abundantly
supplied the defect of his age.) At this fight his Parents also were amazed
says the Text: For as it repaired their joy, so it could not but cause in them
also great admiration; that he, who had hitherto observed so much humility and
silence, and privacy at home among the simple people there, should now on a
sudden disclose so much spirit, and confidence, wisdom, and Eloquence, abroad
among the most learned, sought out by him for that purpose.

Fili, quid fecisti nobis, sic? telling him, that she and his Father had
undergone a great deal of care and grief in seeking for him. Where we may note
her modest including all she says of his action, that caused her so much pain,
in one monosyllable [sic]. To whom he answered, (as unconcerned in any human
relations, and pleading no other thing than obedience to his Father for his
excuse, as he frequently does elsewhere, See John 2.4. -- Mat. 12.48) that
they might have spared such their solicitude; that he was to mind and attend
the business for which, that his Father had sent him. Which early fervor of
his, for yielding in all things exact obedience to the will of his Father,
calls to mind what in the like case he said afterward, Jo. 4.34, in answer to
his Disciples, -- that it was his meat to do the will of his Father; and, Jo.
9.4. -- That he must work the works of him that sent him; and, Jo. 14.31, --
That, as the Father gave him commandment, so he did; and, Jo. 18. -- That for
this cause he came into the world, to bear witness to the Truth. Which now
first, when yet a child, he did in the midst of the Great Doctors by his
Father's special appointment and order, and of the Holy Spirit and wisdom
wherewith he was replenished, if perhaps now they would take any notice of this
their Messiah: by seeing the Holy Spirit and wisdom wherewith his immature
years were replenished, and by comparing his present age with the time of his
Nativity; which God formerly made known to them by the Magi: whereas they
carelessly then neglected those homages to him, which Strangers performed.

Father, but not by his business: Those things in particular which our Lord was
to do and suffer, in this his Mission from God, for the Redemption of mankind
being not as yet discovered to them. As indeed no Saint was ever so great, to
whom God has manifested all his mysteries and Counsels; but this is done by
certain Degrees, that all may depend herein wholly on his good pleasure.
Neither is the ignorance of these things any fault in this Blessed Mother of
our Lord. In Luc 2. c. 50.
Of whose perfections thus Cardinal Tolet; -- Licet magnam gratiae and fidei
copiam acceperit in Conceptione sua, and quando filium concepit; tamen and fide
and gratia ac Sanctitate indies augebatur. And -- Possunt, says he, multa
mysteria ignorari, absque ulla culpa; Of which Mysteries also he observes, that
-- Saepe datur majora agnoscere and non minora, in his, quae non propria
virtute, sed divina gratia assequimur; ut sic ostenderetur omnia accepta esse a
Deo ex gratia and benevolentia.



In all which passages it seems strange, that these Doctors, after such a
Visit, and light given them of the extraordinary quality of his person, should
take no further notice of, nor make any further inquiry after, him: nor yield
him any suitable entertainment. But perhaps the coming-in of such mean people,
there appearing as his parents, might serve in some manner to abate their
esteem of him, and to draw a veil over the face of such lazy inquirers, or also
already envious rivals (in the by-standing people's much admiring his
discoveries of their ignorance) that they could not discern him. When As indeed
his mean parentage, if known to them, should rather have caused a more diligent
inquisition, the more they saw no human means either in so young an age of his
attaining such science; or, in a mean education, such confidence. But this
unworthy Generation was to be, as enlightened in some things, so blinded in
others; that what was decreed might be done unto Him.

the other Evangelists, in relating the passages of our Lords Nonage), that he
was subject to his parents: and that he increased in wisdom and stature, and in
favor with God and Man; that is, with those few, with whom he had some
familiar acquaintance; and elsewhere, that he assisted Joseph his reputed
Father in his Trade and manual Emploiments. And from this our Lord's permitting
that so much of the story of his life (in whose both words and actions, to
those who were witnesses thereof, must needs appear infinite wisdom, and
sanctity, and charity) should be so unknown to the world, we may learn the
little account we ought to make of our own fame or Reputation therein; and to
content our selves, as our Lord herein did, with the approbation and acceptance
which our good works or Virtues, if we have any, find with God, and the
everliving and only right-judging world of his the innumerable Angels and
Saints that are above. For He only has true Glory and Honor, not whom men,
but whom the Lord valueth, and esteems; and Tantus quisque, only, quantus
apud Deum.

chap. 2.44, where his parents, missing our Lord, chap. 2. verse. 40, that he
waxed strong in Spirit, and was filled with Grace and wisdom; so, verse. 52,
that he increased in favor with God and man [i. e. as he grew elder, he more
and more did things acceptable both to God and men. -- Non quod sanctior aut
gratior (says Cardinal Tolet) progressu temporis fuerit, sed quod, pro aetatis
incremento, perfectioribus gratiae and sanctitatis operibus incubuerit; or [
sapientiora verba and opera proferret apud, or coram Deo and hominibus; as the
Sun, always equally full of light and heat, yet is said to increase them as it
draws nearer to us and we more partake them.] I say from verse. 52 compared
with verse. 47. that in the 12th year of his age the Doctors and people in the
Temple were astonished at his understanding and answers, may be gathered; that
during this time of his minority in his words and actions he discovered and
sent forth continually many rays of his infinite prudence, Sanctity and
charity; not only before his Mother and S. Joseph, but among his other Kindred
and familiar acquaintance. and, that for this he was exceedingly loved and
admired by them, and they clearly saw concerning him, as it is said of the
Baptist Luke 1.66. that the hand of the Lord was with him. Out of which great
admiration of him, we find those called his Brethren to have followed him
afterward as well as his Mother. But yet, from Matt. 13.54. etc. and Luke
4.16, amp;c. it also appears, that he cast such a veil over these his divine
Excellencies, and was so reserved in his Conversation, that no great reputation
or fame of him was spread abroad, not so much as in his own City. And hence the
most of them wondered afterward at the first appearance of these Divine Graces
in his preaching at Nazareth; they excepting, though not against any
delinquency or deficiency in his manners, yet the meanness of his condition
(the common object of contempt) and his illiterate Education.

be taken so in general, that his time of doing any Miracles was not yet come,
which was already commenced upon his Baptism; but rather, that his time of
doing that miracle was not yet fully seasonable, till the failing of the wine
more appeared; or not now seasonable to do it in such a public manner as she
expected our Lord, to show who he was, should have done it before all the
Guests (see the like expression Jo. 7.6. about our Lords going up to the
feast.) For our Lord thought fit to do it more privately, none knowing thereof
but the Servants; upon which also, perhaps intimated to her, it was, that she
spoke to them to do what he appointed. But however, if this be here understood
of public Miracles, it opposes not his doing them privately, and within his
own family even from and in his Infancy upon necessary occasions.

Mat. 13.55, 56. and Mark. 6.3; where, (upon our Lords entering upon his office,
and after some time coming also to his own Town Nazareth, with a train of his
Disciples and a great fame of his Miracles following him, there to preach the
Gospel among his Kindred and acquaintance), it is said, the Citizens wondered
whence he should have that wisdom, and knowledge, and those mighty works,
considering his mean education and Kindred among them, stiling him there the
Carpenter's Son; and, in S. Mark plainly, Mary's Son; and himself called the
Carpenter (for before that time it seems S. Joseph was deceased). Wherein we
see it was his Fathers good pleasure, the more to show Our Lords wisdom and
knowledge, to descend from above and to be infused by him that sent him, that he
should neither be sent to the famous School in Jerusalem for teaching and
learning the Law, as S. Paul was Act. 22.3; nor to any of those Synagogues
mentioned Act. 6.9, Nor educated in the Temple among the Priests, as Holy
Samuel was, being from a child dedicated to the Lord; nor should retire into
the Desert for Solitude and Contemplation, as the Baptist, (Lives surely our
Lord, if indulging his own will, would much sooner have chosen) but in this his
state of Exinanition should descend far below John, and take on him not the
form of an Hermit or Contemplatist, but of a Servant and a poor Apprentice to
an ordinary Trade; and herein should earn his own victuals, and serve his
neighbors also as any had use of him, for the greatest part of his life. And
as it was appointed, that at 12 years of age, before such Divine knowledge could
be acquired by Industry, he should make an admirable discovery thereof among
the Doctors in the Temple, tho this was then, ungratefully or also enviously,
not taken any notice of by them; so it was ordained also, that all his youth
should be spent in this laborious handycraft. Whereby it might be most evident,
he stood in no need of human Arts or Sciences, and also he might give the world
an example, after so great an humiliation of his, being Gods only Son, not to
disdain to serve our neighbor in the lowest manual offices, in any necessities
concerning his Body, or also Estate, as well as Spiritual; but whereby also he
might the better disguise and hide the Dignity of his person till he had
descended yet further to the lowest step of his Humiliation, and accomplished
his Passion on the Cross.

Jo. 7.15. in the third year of his preaching, as he taught in the Temple it is
said; the Jews marvelled and said, -- How knows this man letters or learning
having never learned. [From which also may be gathered that in his Sermons,
like to that discourse of his in going to Emaus, were mixed many profound and
convincing Expositions of the Law and Prophets, and such as were not attainable
by others, if at all, without much study therein.] To whom our Lords answer in
the next verse giving this reason; Viz. that they might know that his doctrine
was not his [acquired by any his industry or Art] but his that sent him.
[Learnt and revealed from above and brought out of the bosom of his Father Jo.
1.18.] And his very kindred, from this mean exercise of his youth, when
afterward he began to open and discover the hidden treasures of his wisdom, not
believing on him says the Text Jo. 7.5. asked him, why, if he was such as he
made himself, he staid amongst them in Galilee, and went not into Judea to show
himself there among the Learned; when indeed our Lords usual abode in Galilee
was for the safety of his Life. Thus our Lords Carpentership was made no small
mortification to him.

Aratra conficiens and Juga boum says S. Justin Martyr Contra Tryphonem, a
very ancient Father); this suting much better with the retirement and Devotions
of so Holy a family, and also with the privacy of our Lord's education, than
seeking here and there work abroad in other men's houses. And this trade it is
probable our Lord followed for some time after Joseph's decease by those words
in S. Mark. -- Is not this the Carpenter, the Son of Mary; and so, a little
after our Lords Baptism, mention is made of his Mother only, none of Joseph; as
Jo. 2.1. -- Matt. 12.47; It seeming good to the Divine wisdom to leave our
Lord, for some time before his manifestation, without any reputed Father here
on Earth, whose true Father was in Heaven.

Thus our Lord, the second Adam, eat his Bread for many years in the sweat of
his brows, subjecting himself herein to the curse laid upon the first his
sinning fore-father in a Trade requiring much strength and force. And his Trade
an Emblem (if happily an house-wright) of his rebuilding that house of God,
which the other former had destroyed.

In Laboribus a juventute mea; Again, from his many times professing that he
came not to do his own will, but the will of his Father (where his own will
denied intimates natural inclinations different from his Fathers appointments
concerning him, but yet exactly subjected thereto), and that he came not to be
ministered to, but to minister; and, when he had so many attendants, that his
behavior amongst them was as of one that served, and as one that waited on,
and provided for them, whilst they sat at Table, See Luke 22.27. spoken upon
occasion of their striving among themselves for Honor; and about that time,
also his washing their feet, and lastly, from the Apostle's expression, that he
took on him the form, not of a man only, but a servant; From all these I say we
may well argue, that his youth was not passed without many mortifications and
hardships, such as poverty, and handy-labour affords, many great self-denials,
an exact obedience of his childhood to his Superiors according to the flesh,
such as a wise man suffers, whose duty obliges him to the service and
sometimes undiscreet commands, though in things lawful, of a person of much
less understanding; unless we may rather think, that the Holy Spirit by him
guided his Parents in all those commands, whereto it required his obedience.

Act. 13.27.) and among others his most devout Parents together with himself,
that, after his forementioned dispute with the Doctors at Jerusalem, and after
he was now arrived to man's estate, from 20 years old till 30, he should
patiently stand there among the rest in the quality of a mean labourer, and
this, the Lawgiver himself, in silence hear the expositions of it, not always
free from error, by others; which rendered his fellow-Citizens so astonished,
when afterward he, who had bin so long an Auditor with them, now showed himself
a Doctor. A stupendous Humility and Obedience this, so long practiced, in so
Sovereign a dignity: and an hard lesson for those to imitate, who have parts!
To our Lord therefore, stooping by Obedience to such a condition, seems
principally to be applied that complaint of the Psalmist Psalm. 38. -- Posui
ori meo custodiam, cum consisteret peccator adversum me. Obmutui and humiliatus
sum, and silui a bonis [sermonibus] and dolor meus renovatus est. Concaluit cor
meum intra me: and in meditatione mea exardescet ignis, whilst he, whom a fire
of Zeal for his Fathers glory, and for the salvation of mankind continually
burnt and consumed, (See Jo. 2.17), Conversed among the ignorant, and sinners,
without being permitted either to instruct the one, or reprove the other;
whilst he, who, to use the expression of Elihu Job. 32, was full of words and
his belly as new Wine without vent, and that breaks new Vessels; was so long
to be dumb and as one that hears not, and in whose mouth are no reproofs; No
discourses I say, saving such, as did not transcend the appearance of his
exterior condition and manner of Education and emploiment; and such
conversation, as in a private life gave good example to his few acquaintance
and friends, remaining so many years (even whilst repairing in the State of his
manhood to Jerusalem and the Temple, and the great Assemblies of the Nation at
the public feasts,) as it were a Candle hid under a Bushel, and not suffered
to diffuse its light, walking in this most difficult obedience, for so many
years, to the good pleasure of his heavenly Father: as also the same obedience
practiced the like silence whilst he suffered so many false accusations before
his Passion.



his Father, who also was professed by him to be so; no other being in sight,
nor receiving any honor as such. Therefore also is our Lord in St. Mark
(probably after Joseph's decease) himself called the Carpenter, and the Son of
Mary. But when ever S. Joseph's Death happened, doubtless it was undergone with
great Resignation, and content, and after our Lord's having first made known
his heavenly Father's good pleasure both to him and his Mother; in which, all
three most affectionately acquiesced, though Joseph by his Death in some sense
was to leave and lose his most beloved Jesus, Viz. as to the presence of his
Humanity, wherein his Saints by death do now enjoy him.

Quo non major inter natos mulierum (as our Lord says of him) was sent some
time before to proclaim to the world the near approach and appearance of this
heavenly Prince, for begetting a greater reverence in them to his person; And
also to prepare all men by a due Confession of, and repentance and doing
penance for, their sins, and correction and amendment of their evil lives
(which is called the levelling Hills and filling Valleys, and making the high
ways straight) and lastly, by their being purified by Baptism, for a more
worthy and Honorable reception of this great Lord, whose Kingdom was not
temporal but Spiritual; that so nothing in his Subjects at his coming might
disgust or displease him. And lastly, was sent, after his making such a
proclamation of him before hand, to show also and demonstrate with the finger
his very person to them, for removing all possible mistake, or just excuse.

their manners, nor distracted at all with human affairs, and the Holy Spirit
supplying to him all that knowledge of men's persons that was necessary to his
high employments; the many resemblances he had to Elias, and also to our Lord,
in his doctrine and in his Heroical Virtues, and especially in his stupendous
humility, and sufferings, these things I say have bin partly described before.
4. etc. in the Relation of the Baptists Nativity, where the inquisitive Reader
may review them.

Numb. 4.3, 23. for the Priests and Levits to enter upon the exercise of their
functions) and half a year elder than our Lord, as who was to be his forerunner
and to appear abroad sooner, came the word of the Lord; that he should now
leave his solicitude, and enter upon the Office for which he had bin thus
prepared, and which emploiment doubtless he had much expected and longed for.

Upon which John came forth not immediately to Jerusalem, or into the Cities of
Judea (this honor being left for our Lord himself, and the Kingdom of Heaven
being to approach still nearer by certain degrees) but into the out-skirts of
the Desert of Judea, and from thence removing to Bethabara, (where also our
Lord sojourned for some time a little before his Passion, Jo. 10.40.) beyond
Jordan, near to the great Road from the East for passing over the River into
Judea: by which way the Israelites, when they came out of Egypt, walking
through Jordan (a type of Baptism, as also their passing through the red Sea)
entered into the Holy Land; and by which way they were afterward carried away
Captives from it to Babylon; where also Elias, the type of John, after passing
this Jordan, was taken up in a fiery Chariot. Here then John in his Spirit
began to appear again, and to proclaim (as it were at a distance and afar off)
the speedy coming of the Jew's Messiah, and of his Kingdom, and to fulfill the
Vox clamantis in deserto spoken of in the Prophets. Some conjecture also the
beginning of John's thus proclaiming our Lord to have bin in September, or the
feasts of Trompets, which was the beginning of the Civil year of the Jews Lev.
23.24.25.9. and this same year also to have bin a year of Jubilee, which well
agrees with Esaias. 61.2. -- Vt praedicarem annum placabilem Domini, and in which
year of Jubilee also was a greater concourse of people from all Foreign parts:
but the various computations of the age of the world renders this thing very
uncertain.

Esaias 20.2^. 2 King. 1.8. Zech. 13.4. and his strange abstinence, not eating
any bread, nor drinking Wine, nor needing at all any human supplies for his
food: one part of his diet being a kind of Locust or Grasshopper, to be found
every where upon the grass (and which it seems was a Fare sometimes of the
poorer sort, in a case of necessity eaten by them either raw or boiled, or also
salted and dried, mentioned in Levit. 11.22. and allowed there for a clean
food): and another part (when these Locusts not to be had) wild honey, such as
the wood-bees wrought in the hollow parts of Trees, plentiful in this Country
See 1 Samuel 14.26; and his abstinence such, as the Pharisees concluded
supernatural, and so effected by his being possessed with a Devil: his lodging
also the hard ground in some Cave or Grot; By which things this Preacher of
Penance appeared also the greatest Example thereof, that as yet the world ever
saw. These things I say still advanced their great esteem and admiration of
him, and gave greater weight and credit to his words; the Pharisees ostentation
of fasting being quite eclypsed by it.

Mat. 3.7.
tho having no knowledge of, or conversation with them. The Counsels and advices
he gave them high and sublime, and like unto those of our Lord. As, among
others, that given to the people for the larger extent of their charity, that
he that had two Coats should impart to them that had none, and so also should
do for Bread and Meat. These his Counsels rightly also fitted to every ones
condition, whilst for the amendment of their manners each one desired to learn
from him the several Duties of their calling (the things belonging to which he
knew not by experience but the Holy Spirit;) His admitting (contrary to the
Pharisees) all persons with an equal mansuetude and affability; and not keeping
more distance from those esteemed greater Sinners, Publicans, or Soldiers; this
reprehending the greatest with all freedom and without fear before all the
people; and receiving the humble, though great offenders, without expostulation
or reproach. All these wrought in the people an Opinion of the Baptist, that he
was some eminent Prophet, or also the Messiah, though himself sufficiently
disclaimed it.

Acts 19.3, some Brethren living at Ephesus, and Apollo of Alexandria, to have
received John's Baptism, which argues also a resort to him from foreign parts:
unless we imagine an authority of Baptizing either committed by him to, or at
least assumed by, some of his more eminent Disciples. Hither also came the
Publicans, and the Soldiers, and those that were esteemed the most notorious
sinners to hear his Sermons made of Repentance, and remission of sin, which
seemed to concern such persons most. These therefore, terrified with his words,
made humble confessions of their former sins to him Mat. 3.6, Mark. 1.5. (as
those other Converts in the Acts did to S. Paul Acts 19.18); promised amendment
of their lives, were baptized by him in order thereto: Lastly, asked his advice
and directions concerning their Duty in their several Vocations and
Employments, where the Gentleness and tenderness, wherewith he treats the
Soldiers and the Publicans (yet the instruments of sustaining the Roman Power)
is very notable; not bidding them presently to desert, or change their
Profession, or proposing to them any high perfections, as he did to some
others; but admonishing them according to their present capacity, of avoiding
those faults to which their employments more tempted them: the Soldier to do no
violence to any, nor falsely accuse them to make way for plunder; but to be
content with that gain their wages afforded them; and the Publicans, that they
should not enhance the Taxes upon the People, nor require more than was
appointed them: instructing them first in acts of Justice, and doing no wrong
to their Neighbor, whilst he exhorted others to acts also of charity.

Luke 7, 30. (though perhaps not all) moved with curiosity to see and observe
the strangely habited person, and not with compunction for their sins (as
others), or the believing what he was, or said; no more than they did afterward
our Lord himself; to verify our Lords speech. -- Pauperes evangelizantur. These
bearing a show of sanctity, and accordingly reverenced among the people, so
soon as the Baptist beheld, seeing and knowing all their interior by the Holy
Spirit, he entertained not them with the same mansuetude and indulgence as the
poor Publicans and Soldiers, as the one appearing to him interiorly clothed
with humility and Contrition, the other with Pride and Hypocrisy; but presently
fell into a sharp reprehension of them before all the people (knowing this the
proper way, if any, for their cure): calling them a generation of Serpents
(which was also our Lords language afterward) denouncing to them the Novissima
the great wrath to come; and such fruitless Trees, and chaff their being cast
into an unquenchable fire, unless a speedy repentance for their sins and
reformation of their manners prevented it. And seeing them, from the
approaching Messiah he foretold, expecting much contrary to what he said at his
coming, (as heirs of the promises made to their Father Abraham), all Glory, and
prosperity, and Dominion, over the Gentiles, he fore-signified to them, by
using a similitude from the Rocks and Stones that lay about him, that God, upon
their incredulity and impenitency abandoning them, could raise unto Abraham
another seed, i. e. out of the yet stony-hearted and unbelieving Gentiles. As
indeed not long after he did.

made a preparatory commencement of the Gospel, according as our Lord says (
Mat. 11.13.) -- that the Law and the Prophets were till John; but that from his
days the Kingdom of Heaven, or of the Gospel, suffered violence [i. e. whilst
whole multitudes and crowds of people, Soldiers, Publicans, Sinners, came
flocking in to it]. Though indeed the Apostles of our Lord, consummating the
preaching of this Evangelium, with the Holy Ghost descending on the people,
baptized with it by them, and doing of all sorts of Miracles in confirmation of
what they divulged, far transcended the beginnings of the Baptist; and so the
least of them, in this respect, was greater than he, as our Lord says, Matt.
11.11. John then was a prodromus preaching so, as our Lord afterward, the
Kingdom of Heaven at hand, and judgment and wrath to come on the impenitent and
unbelieving. Confession, repentance, and so remission of sin (not by John's
Baptism, this being only with water and to be consummated in the other) but by
the Baptism of him that was to come after him, who should baptize them with the
Holy Ghost, Jo. 1. and who was the Lamb of God that should take away the sins
of the world, and in whom they were to believe Act. 19.4.

Act. 19.4.
which things were caused in the people by John's preaching, this also we have
from the power and virtue only of him that was to come after him. And that
those true penitents, who died under John's baptism only, and without our Lords,
became partakers of the Holy Spirit and of salvation, in the same manner as all
the righteous deceased under the Law, i. e. through the merits of Christ; in
their using the typical Ceremonies relating thereto whatever they were,
according to the divine appointment.

with fire. Where fire may be taken in a double sense, either for the fire of
the Holy Spirit, elegantly opposed by John to his water; or (as some rather
understand it) the fire of the Divine wrath. For S. John's Spirit had some of
that of Elias, and the context seems to favor this sense: for there it
follows Luke 3.17. whose fan is in his hand and the chaff he will burn with
fire, the one or the other baptism show that of the Holy Ghost or of fire was
to be received by every one. Thus, after John had began first the preaching of
the Gospel and using the new Ceremony thereof, Baptism, but deferred all the
power and virtue thereof to Christ, that was then at hand. And great multitudes
from all parts were now gathered unto him, and a very great number (as appears
by the expression Luke 3.21.) at least of the common sort were baptized by him:
and were in great expectation what would be the end of these things, since he
plainly and often told them that himself was not this Christ, nor showed he any
miracle at all, hereby the more to exalt himself.

Numb. 4.3, 23; and at which age his Father David was installed in the Kingdom
of Israel, and Joseph advanced to the government of Egypt, Types of our Lord;
Now was the full time come that he should throw off his long disguise and
manifest himself; And herein should first receive, in public before John and
all the people, a Commission from his Father speaking to the world from Heaven,
and a Solemn Unction to his Office from the Holy Ghost.

He then, to whom also and to his Holy Mother, all these things done by John
were related by their neighbors, that he might fulfill all righteousness, and
show obedience to all ordinances instituted by his Father (John's Baptism being
from heaven and not of men, as he argues against the Pharisees Mat. 21.25.) as
also that he might give good example to other Galileans (for which, see what he
did Mat. 17.27. -- ut non scandalizemus eos in doing any thing that lookedlike
disobedience), not many days after 30 years old, went up, as many others, from
Galilee, and humbly presented himself among the other multitude to receive
Baptism from John as a penitent, so habited, so mortified with grief and
confusion; remembering the burden he had taken upon him (for our sakes) of the
sins of the whole world, and completing the Confession and Contrition of all
those poor sinners, that stood with him desirous of the same Absolution, and
among the rest even those of the Baptist himself.

The place of our Lords Baptism probably from John 1.28. was Bethabara: viz.
where, the waters being divided, the people of Israel passed over Jordan with
Joshua into the land of promise; and whither our Lord also coming out of the
Desert returned to John. And it seems by S. Lukes words, chap. 3.21.
-- in which all the people were baptized etc, that there was a great conflux
of people to John at that very time; For indeed one end of John's baptizing
was, that our Lord should be made manifest to Israel Jo. 1.31.

Non noveram etc. Jo. 1.33. (as S. Chrysostom and others) is to be understood
more largely: Viz. of the time before our Lords coming from Galilee, and before
the solemnity of the Baptism; in which solemnity, because the most evident
testimony was the Holy Ghosts descent and sitting upon our Lord, therefore it
is instanced in by the Baptist; as if he had said, I knew him not at all
formerly, till the time when he came to be baptized, and the Holy Ghost in the
shape of a Dove visible to all sat upon his Head. The Baptist, then, presently
knew him; and, much astonished at his great humility in offering himself to
receive this Baptism of sinners, with a like humility prostrated himself before
him; and telling him, that himself had need to be baptized of him, desired to
be excused from so great a presumption, whose shoos-latchet he had formerly
told the people Jo. 1.27, he was not worthy to untie. But our Lord now no way
disguising or concealing himself to John, with a word that so he ought to
fulfill all righteousness, removed his fear and scruple; and so in all humble
obedience to his good pleasure John performed this Office to him.

services and sufferings for the redemption of mankind, which his heavenly
Father expected from him: as we find he did a little before his passion Jo,
12.17, desiring him to glorify his name (at which time also his Father spoke to
him, Jo 12.
being in great desolation, from heaven in the hearing of all the people.)
Whilst our Lord was thus praying; and the Baptist, who had had a preindication
from God that he should discern his Son by the visible descent upon him, at his
Baptism, of the Holy Ghost; and also the people (who could not but observe the
extraordinary reverence S. John gave to him, or also some of them hear his
words) had fixed their eyes upon him; Behold, the Heavens were opened: and
first descended from them, with a stream of light, the Holy Ghost in the
appearance of a Dove (the innocence and harmless simplicity of which gaulless,
peaceful and mourning creature Our Lord recommends Mat. 10.16; and several
qualities in it observed to resemble those of the Holy Spirit are mentioned by
the Apostle Gal. 5.22. -- 1 Cor. 13.4.) which streaming Dove rested or sat
upon him, as was presignified by God to John, and probably remained so
according to Jo. 1.33, till hasting toward the Desert he was carried out of
their sight.

beloved Son, in whom he was well pleased. The words, as also the descent of
the Holy Spirit upon him, are pre-related in the Prophet Esaias 42.1. and cited
also by the Evangelist Mat. 12.18; and do reveal to the world this joyful news,
as if he had said; This is my Son, the long expected Messiah, the new and
perfect Legislator, that declares all my will, that is the Compleatment of all
the Prophecies, the only Mediator between me and sinners; the Redeemer and
Reconciler of the world unto me, and my meek Lamb that takes away the sins
thereof; the only, Holy and Eternal, High Priest; Lastly, the King and Lord of
the Universe. In whom nothing at all displeases me; and in whom I have bin
pleased from all Eternity; and except in whom none other pleases me; and in
whom all others may please me; but, unless through him, I cannot love sinful
man, concerning whom the time was that it repented me at heart that I had made
him; Genesis 6.6.
but which grief this my Son has removed and again reconciled all things to me.

in the Holy Mount out of a bright cloud nearer hand, when this person, our
Lord, appeared also in great beauty and Majesty, and like himself, -- that this
was his beloved Son, Mat. 17.
in whom he was well pleased. And this then added to it, that [after Moses and
Elias, the law and the Prophets, vanished] they should in the last place hear
him: for which purpose, viz. their hearing and obeying this Lord, also was this
voice made unto the people here at Jordan. Again, a third time, when the same
our Lord, a little before his Passion, was in great desolation and desired to
be delivered from the approaching pains of death Jo. 12.27. but then
afterward resigning his natural will, as in the Garden, prayed that his Father
would not spare him but glorify his name, (Viz. in our Lords passing through
all those bitter sufferings preappointed for him;) his Heavenly Father himself
vouchsafed with a voice from heaven to answer his Prayer; telling him, he would
glorify his name yet again, Viz. in the admirable Resurrection and Ascension
of his Son, as he had done already, viz. in his glorious Miracles; where also
our Lord told the people concerning this voice from heaven, that it came not
for his sake or satisfaction, who always knew his Fathers will concerning, and
Love to, him, and the glory he had, and ever was to enjoy, with, and from him;
not for his sake I say but for theirs, that they, acknowledging this glory, the
Father both had and would bestow upon his Son, should accordingly honor and
obey him. As also now at his Baptism, the visible descent of the Holy Ghost was
for the peoples-sake, that they might hereby know that he (who was full of the
Holy Ghost as much before as after this visible descent thereof) had it in his
power, by baptism, to confer on others.

John 8.18, 54. -- 5.32, 37. -- 10.36. which relates, as to his Fathers
testimony of him by Miracles, so doubtless to this signal one received before
the beginning of his Ministry at his Baptism, and to his Sanctification at this
time by the visible appearance of the Holy Ghost sitting on him. And this very
manifestation thus of our Lord to Israel the Baptist names, as one of the ends
of his own coming and Baptizing Jo. 1.31. And most congruous also it seems,
that, our Lord's Institution of conferring Baptism for ever being in the name
of the Blessed Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all these should first
after this manner manifest themselves in his own Baptism. Which Unction of his
with the Spirit, foretold by Esaias chap. 61.1. our Lord also in his Sermon
Luke 4.18. openly applies to himself: And this was the first Scripture, he as
it were casually opened at, to explain it to his own country men at Nazareth.

Desert, from whence John formerly appeared. Immediately (says S. Mark) the
Spirit drove him into the Wilderness. And such Rapts of the Holy Spirit have
bin formerly seen, in Elias (see 1 King. 18.12. -- 2 King. 2.16.) and others,
Act. 8.39.
with an elevation of their bodies also into the Air; tho probably not so here,
of our Lords.

By wilderness also is here meant the most desolate, invious and unfrequented
recesses thereof. Where were the dens, and latebrae of wild beasts for their
safety (for the Evangelist says, he was there with the wild beasts; whence we
may conjecture, John Baptist's Desert also to have bin such; however some would
mitigate it). Where also, we may say, is the most ordinary dwelling and haunt
here on Earth of evil Spirits; not so much by their choice (though in some
respect they hate the places frequented by men, and where is some greater
appearance of Devotion, and of Gods service, and worship) as from their
Condemnation and the Divine restraint; See, Mat. 12.43, the evil Spirit, when
having lost his possession of the man, his walking in dry, or barren, and
desolate places; and -- Mark. 5.3, their haunting the Tombs; and, Esai. 13.21.
and 34.14, the Satyrs dancing in such places; and, Apocal. 18.2, Desolate
Babylon becoming the Habitation of Devils. To which may be added the experience
of Hermits, that inhabiting Deserts are more molested with them; and here also
our Lord met and had his chief combat, with the Devil.



And here he remained and separated himself, during forty days. [This being
the round number used for 7. sixes of days, or 6. multiplied 7. times, and a
number in Scripture most frequently prescribed by God, according to his
Creation of the world in six days, for the dispatch of any great work, labor,
or sufferings. Of which may be given very many instances, if this would not too
much divert the Reader. See Genesis 7.4.17. -- Ezec. 4.6, -- Jonah. 3.4. -- Genesis
6.3. thrice forty years. -- Deuteronomy. 8.2. -- Genesis 15.13. ten times 40. -- Judge.
13.1. Apoc. 2, 3. and about so many months was the time of our Lords preaching.
See before.] For this time then, he sequestered himself to be vacant (without
admitting the distraction of any human converse or secular business; and with
those advantages, that bodily fasting gives to the operations of the Soul) for
supplication and prayer; for the solemn preparation for that high service and
ministry he was now entering upon, and designed-to; and again for the making a
more solemn oblation of himself to his Father, as to the most voluntary
undertaking of all those hardships and sufferings that were set before him, and
that were desired by him, in all these the more to glorify his name. Now
though our Lord for such a more intimate conversation with God, and perfect
Contemplation, needed not to use such exterior means as retirement and
abstinence from food, and dismission from other Emploiments, by reason of the
supernatural perfections, which from his Deity and plenitude of the Spirit were
infused and refunded into his human Nature; Yet, as Suarez observes. In 3. Thom
2. Tom. Disp. 2^.. 1.
-- Per cognitionem anima naturalem non poterat sine speciali miraculo multa
simul perfect considerare; neque per operationem phantasiae simul comitari
operationem intellectus, si circa res varias, omninoque diversas versaretur.
For that naturally one action hinders another, at least as to the highest
intention of it: which hindrance might also be in our Lord, so far as his
Divinity pleased to leave in his humanity also these sinless infirmities; as a
resemblance of the constitution of other men.

there continued all night in prayer Luke 6.12. As also, when he was in
Capernaum, being much followed, and pressed upon by the people, he is said to
have made use of the solitude of the night, and to have risen a great while
before day, and to go into a solitary place to his prayers. Mark. 1.35. and said
Luke 5.16. to have withdrawn himself into the Desert for performing this duty.
But however this be stated, concerning the advantage our Lords Devotions might
receive from Solitude, doubtless one principal end of this his forty days, and
all his other, retirements afterward, was, that he might give us an example
herein, and show us the great necessity of solitude, fasting, and withdrawing
from secular affairs, for our enjoying a nearer conversation with God, and our
overcoming of Temptations, and especially, for our better Preparation in the
undertaking any weightier affairs: such as is in the first place the Ministry,
and predication of the Gospel. And another end seems to be this also; that He,
who, as other Teachers sent from God, must necessarily spend the most of his
time in an active life and common conversation; yet might also in these his
practices and especially this his for so long a time inhabiting the Desert,
allow also, and countenance, and recommend (to those that have more need of,
and are more disposed to it) the other life, that is more addicted to solitude,
fasting, continual prayer, and contemplation. In the same manner then, as our
Lord is said to have passed that whole night before the Election of his
Apostles, and the other times of his repairing to Mountains and Deserts, Viz.
in prayer and contemplation, so may we rationally imagine him to have spent
these forty days, and nights; and his fasting, in so great a suspension of his
natural faculties, to have bin an individual companion thereof.

Law from God, Exodus 24.18. -- 34.28.
which he was to communicate to the children of Israel, as our Lord now was the
Gospel; and, a second time, in his making intercession for the people, and
obtaining their pardon. [Concerning which he says Deuteronomy. 9.18. -- That he fell
down before the Lord, as at the first, forty days and forty nights, without
eating bread, or drinking water; because of all their sins which they sinned;
and that the Lord hearkened unto him:] And, in his then being admitted also,
upon his earnest supplication, to see Gods glory Exodus 33.18. -- 34.5. and as
also, according to this action of Moses before, we may suppose our Blessed Lord
to have thus also prostrated himself before his Father in these forty days,
and forty nights, for the sins of the world; and to have offered himself, as
Moses, to be made a curse for our sakes, see Gal. 3.13. and Exodus 32.32.
compare Deuteronomy. 9.26; and so to obtain pardon for all true believers. Of whom
also the Goat sent into the Desert laden with the peoples sins was, herein, a
type. And as this type Moses in the Law, so another preceded in the Prophets;
in Elias their Head, his fasting forty days, in the same desert and Mountain,
as Moses; and He there having also the Vision of, and extraordinary communion
with, God. As also our Lord's humanity, afterward in the Holy Mount, was
admitted to behold his Fathers Glory, in a bright cloud descending upon the
Hill, and to partake of the splendours thereof; and also these two Men, Moses,
and Elias, representing the Law and Prophets, were there present to do him
Homage, in whom both these were to be completed. Such exact resemblance were
the Law and Prophets to have with the Gospel.

Lords being here first conducted by his Father into the Desert, before his
beginning to take his possession of the inheritance both of the Jew and Gentile
promised him by his Father, has to that former divine conduct of the
Israelites, Ps. 2.8.
first into the Wilderness, after our Lord also, as they, had bin called out of
Egypt, Mat. 2. and the correspondence also which his forty days abode there
has to their forty years. Yet in this much unlike; that he, in this Desert
being pressed also with the same necessities as they, I mean as to hunger and
thirst after so long a fast, and upon it by the Devil much urged to the like
offending of God; Viz. not by not waiting his good time; Yet he stood, where
they fell: and with all patience contrary to them (though having Miracles in
his own power) attended the time of the Divine good pleasure for his relief;
and here also He, receiving at length the supply of his hunger from Angels sent
to him, may be said in some sense, as they, to have bin fed with their food.

chap. 4.1, and fulfill his Fathers good pleasure, in his being exposed also,
like unto us, unto the encounters and strangely-rude treatments of the enemy of
mankind, Satan. (For who has bin in his temptations so rudely handled and
carried about by him as our Lord was?) and that he might thus be, as the
Apostle observes Heb. 2.17. -- 4.15. a more merciful High Priest to succor and
assist us in those our temptations, the like to which he had experimentally
suffered himself; and again, that He might also in his fasting, solitude, and
prayer, show to us the arms by which we also may obtain the Victory over this
Tempter. It was also most congruous, that the second Adam should undergo the
same combat with him, as the first who was foiled in it, and ruined by it; that
so he might recover mankind after the same way as he was undone; and having
first mastered this strong man, who could find nothing in him Jo. 14.30. no
pride of life, no disobedience, no lust of the eyes or of the flesh, he might
proceed to spoil his house, and his goods, and the long possession he had
gotten of wretched mankind: as indeed our Lord did triumph over him in his
following Life, Death, and Resurrection.

the Father, and the Holy Ghost (as also in the rest of his life he used
frequent concealments of himself, and enjoined others silence for the
non-preventing his future sufferings,) that so his six weeks absence and
nonappearance might a little remit the former expectation, and the Baptists
immediately sending all men after him, whose manifestation was only to be
discovered by certain degrees; and therefore, when returning from the Desert,
his stay with the Baptist, much proclaiming him, was only for two or three
days.



The Devil, even the Prince of them, as may appear from Matt. 25.41. -- Apoc.
12.9. who had narrowly watched Him hitherto, and looked upon him with such an
envious eye, as he did on our first parents in their Innocence (but could not
attack him whilst in prayer) when this was ended, and he saw also so great an
hunger to pinch our Lord (which our first parents had not when he prevailed
with them to eat forbidden meats,) had entertained hence some hopes of
prevailing upon his infirm humanity, as he did on theirs; viz. not to wait for
his Fathers Provision for him in due time of such food as was necessary, but
with a power of Miracles presently in an extraordinary manner, after such a
meritorious Act of forty days fast, to supply himself with it. In which
Temptation also he hoped to make some advantage in reminding him of the dignity
of his person, and suggesting unto him that he was the Son of God. Especially
at this time, the honor done him lately not only by the Baptist, but from God
himself, both the Father and the Holy Ghost from heaven; and now also the great
Change of his life, entering upon the office of the Messiah, might seem to have
elevated his thoughts, and ambitions above the temper of his former meanly
entertained condition. For tho the Devil had heard those glorious words
pronounced from Heaven but lately at his Baptism; and in his ranging every
where for prey, probably was well acquainted also with all the former
miraculous passages of his life, lead also hitherto without all sin; and with
all the prophecies concerning our Lord, (if we see how readily he afterward
quotes Scripture to him, and how, in his first accosting of him, he pressed his
being the Son of God:) yet since our Lord was also clothed with our infirm
flesh, he might not so perfectly discern the Hypostatical Union of such his
lately assumed Humanity with the Deity, nor how far it might be invested or
assisted therewith, and its weakness receive influences from it.

For this General enemy of mankind saw this his human nature clothed with all
the infirmities (as here in suffering hungar) and passions or affections of it.
Whereby his flesh, or sensitive appetite, at that of others, did naturally
desire things delectable to it; as meat, drink, rest, sleep, etc. [But yet
these desires were always such as were perfectly subjected to the guidance of
right reason, and wholly ordered and moderated by it; and such wherein he had
hitherto never sinned (though it is most likely, that Satan had not forborne
before to tempt him, as others, to some exorbitancy therein, even from his
childhood); and again were such wherein he was also, by reason of the
Hypostatical Union of this nature to the Deity, and perfect sanctification
thereof by it, utterly impeccable (though this not known to the Devil.) Our
Lord, says the Apostle, not only felt our infirmities, Heb. 4.15.
but -- was in all points tempted like as we are, [i. e. by external objects
occurring and inviting his nature to the use of them] but without sin; this
sensitive nature was ever so overruled by reason, as never by the least consent
of his will, to proceed to any excess beyond the bounds set by the Divine
Commands. -- Poterat quidem anima Christi (says S. Thomas 3. Q. 15. Art. 4.)
resistere passionibus, ut ei non supervenirent, praesertim virtute divina: sed
propria voluntate se passionibus subjiciebat. And -- In nobis quandoque
hujusmodi motus non sistunt in appetitu sensitivo, sed trahunt rationem; quod
in Christo non fuit: quia motus naturaliter humanae carni convenientes, sic ex
ejus dispositione, in appetitu sensitivo manebant, quod ratio, ex his, nullo
modo impediebatur facere, quae conveniebant.]



Adoration from him; Or, as some think to be more suitable to the place, showed
himself in the habit of some religious Hermit; Or, perhaps not disguising at
all who he was (which also was well known to our Lord,) subtly desired some
evidence of the supereminent Dignity of our Lords person, as it were for his
own satisfaction, and that he might know his due subjection to him. His request
therefore was, that if he were the very Son of God, as he was lately proclaimed
from heaven to be; he would, for the honor also of his human nature hitherto
so meanly treated, now show an act of his Divine omnipotency; and taking some
pity of its present necessities command those Stones, that lay before him, to
become so many loaves of bread; especially since in that desert place he could
expect no other ordinary supply; (As indeed long ago, in the like necessity,
the same Lord out of the stony Rock in the Desert brought forth water). And the
more kind and harmless the request here seemed to be, the more dangerous the
temptation. Whilst hereby the Devil hoped to allure him, for the glorifying of
his humanity, to show some superfluous and vainglorious act of his power, (as
he mingled, with our first parents taking the forbidden fruit, a vain ambition
of knowing good and evil); and to make some breach of his former resignation,
and obedience in this his state of humiliation to his heavenly Father; as the
impatient Israelites also in the Desert, when pinched with hungar, presently
became clamorous against Moses; and would not attend Gods good time and
leisure, for making provision for their wants.

Jude 9, or, our Lord not indulging himself so much) not meddling with the
person of the tempter, chose to reply to the Temptation. And here also he
preferred to frame all his three replies out of the word of God. A direction
which the Apostle has left us, [ Tak, says he, the sword of the Spirit, which
is the word of God] as for the most powerful way of repelling this evil Fiend
by our showing to him Gods command contrary to his suggestions. As also our
Grandmother Eve, when yet in innocence, at first answered Satan tempting her
Genesis 3.3. That she had a command from God to the contrary. This well: but she
stood not firm to it.

miscarriage of Gods people, when an hungered and thirsty in the Wilderness, in
their presumptuously demanding a Miracle before its time, returns to this
Tempter those words of Moses in Deuteronomy. 8.3. (spoken by Moses concerning the
Manna; given to them so miraculously from heaven) telling Satan it was written
there. -- That Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God. The context there runs thus. -- He humbled
thee, and suffered thee to hunger, and fed thee with Manna (which thou know
not); that he might make thee know that Man lives not by bread only, but by
every word that proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord. Intimating, that we are,
for any our wants, with patience to depend on the Divine providence and
provision; who is all-sufficient and able with a word to supply our
necessities, as he did that of his people in the Desert with Manna: as also
that his meat, and drink, and life was the observing his Father's word and
command, and the yielding a punctual obedience thereto: As if our Lord had said
here to Satan, what elsewhere to his Disciples, Jo. 4.32, 34. -- I have meat to
eat that thou know not of. My meat is to do the will of him that sent me.
But lastly, what need of a Miracle here, where he could as he pleased satisfy
his hungar by other ordinary means; either by feeding on John's food in the
Desert at hand; or, by speedily quitting the desert, receive it elsewhere? Yet
this our good Lord, who would not here, at such a person's request, relieve his
own forty-daies-fast with a Miracle, did afterward, out of compassion, and also
to hew thee who he was, with a Miracle supply the peoples fast, though suffered
only for a day or two Mat. 15.32. Thus the Devils temptation, instead of
elevating our Lord to some pride, (by which himself fell) or curiosity in
showing vainglorious and superfluous wonders, or sensuality in lusting after
food, produced in him only an act of humble submission, obedience, and
resignation to his Fathers good pleasure and Orders.

taking him up, the Preface to the temptation following, is to be reckoned also
no small temptation, and trial of our Lords humility, and annihilation; to
suffer himself to be hugged upon the shoulders, or embraced in the arms, or
touched with the paws of such an horrid and accursed Beast, as our Lord, in
whatever external shape, knew him to be. For the transportation seems to be
literally understood and real, not representative only in a Vision. Which
Vision would either imply that our Lord's humanity must be so far imposed-upon
and deceived by Satan, as to think it real; or, if this transportation known to
our Lord to be only a show, must much weaken the Temptation.



Law too as the former; and out of the same book of it, prohibiting such a fact
upon any such Motive or promsie; the text being corrupted by the Devil, as to
the true sense and due circumstances thereof; telling him, that it was written,
that we may not tempt the Lord our God. The Text is found in Deuteronomy. 6.16. and
the instance there made is, not to tempt him as in Massah; where the Israelites
suffering some thirst, had not the patience of expecting the time wherein God
thought fit to relieve them, but irreverently and ungratefully expostulated
with, and importuned Moses for a Miracle in their supply for drink, after they
had but now seen that Miracle for supplying them bread, in the former Chapter.
So patient and resigned our Lord remained still in the place and posture as
Satan had set and held him in (for he, who was permitted to place him there,
had not the power to cast him down thence, so to try what would be the issue of
it) till he confounded thought of changing the Scene again, and, like Balak, of
trying his experiments upon him in another place, and in a contrary manner.

Concupiscentia carnis as to eating, which meat was rendered more alluring by
extreme hungar; and Superbia vitae, some vain glory, or Honor, when so mounted
on the top of a Pinnacle of one of the stateliest buildings of the world, by
there showing himself supported and born up by Angels in the Air; he now
thought of assaulting him with the third, Concupiscentia Oculorum, and wealth
and Coveteousness; that that Temptation might not be omitted toward our Lord,
with which we are most frequently over-thrown; and by which wealth and honor
once admitted, he could at least sooner work his ruin; these instruments of
his temptation being also great tempters.

the Son of God, as in the two former; Satan begins now to treat him not as
God's, but as the Carpenter's Son; and to take more upon him, and magnify
himself instead of our Lord, and to see if he could trample upon our Lords
humility, in whom he could not beget any pride. So taking him from the Pinnacle,
and from the prospect of Jerusalem, he transported, him to yet a greater and
statelier height, the top of a very high Mountain, as if to a place where
himself was Prince and Lord of all; and there makes a Scheme and representation
unto him of the great and spacious Kingdoms of the Earth; and of all the Glory
and beauty, as it were, set forth and spread before him in a large Map, and
showed too all at once (as it were in a moment says S. Luke) as all lying at
his his feet, the more to surprise him. Then tells him, that all these are his,
and to whomsoever he pleases he can give them, (and the prosperity and
flourishing of the wicked for a time in this world seemed to make good his
words) that therefore, if he would but bow his knee, and give him the honor
due to such a Patron and Benefactor; All should be our Lords, and he presently
possessed of them: Whence our Lord might see, that, for all the high titles
that might be given him, he had been in the world but poorly treated hitherto,
in being advanced no higher than a Carpenter.

Genesis 3.6. and as the Israelites, brought out of the Desert into the land of
Canaan, were by the plenty thereof Deuteronomy. 32.15. drawn away from God. --
Incrassatus, impinguatus, dilatatus, dereliquit Deum Factorem suum. But very
imprudent and no less silly was such a proposal of his to our Lord, and full of
Pride and lies. Whenas indeed himself was a miserable Bankrupt, and prisoner
tied up in chains, not able to help a poor witch, for all her, not only worship
of, but Contracts and giving her Soul to him, to a single farthing; nor to take
his lodging in a filthy Swine, without an extraordinary leave and permission:
and, when as most contrary, he, to whom he spoke, was the very person, to whom
all these things were given by the Father, and who was the true Lord and heir
of all. And therefore Satan in this third assault says nothing of his
Sonship; and having all things in heaven, earth, and under earth, to adore and
submit to him as such, will they, nill they, even Satan himself. And this
perhaps was one way, how Satan hoped his Temptation might fasten upon our Lord,
if he could, thus at least, provoke him unseasonably, at this time, to the
challenging of these things to himself; and so some little stain of
ostentation, and vain glory might possibly run along and mingle with it.

lies; nor the cheat of his deluding appearances; but, after he had showed the
highest detestation of his endeavoring to rob his Father of his due worship,
and of taking this to himself, in those words spoken to him, Get thee hence
Satan, (as if his last impudent, and blasphemous proposal had clearly
discovered to him who he was) he with the same spirit of meekness, as before,
answers him a third time out of the Scripture, and the Law; that we are
commanded to worship the Lord our God, and him only to serve; and in what ever
condition we are placed of poverty and want, may do no prohibited thing to make
our selves rich, great, or Honorable. Which it indeed we would, yet by this
way we cannot make our selves so. And the Devil, so often as he says this, does
but lie to us.

Thus our Lord stoutly repelled the last temptation also, the lust of the eyes
(the surprisal of which must be greater too in so barren a Desert). And so this
being the uttermost bait he had, with which to have caught our Lord, and not
able to disobey our Lords words, Get thee hence Satan (by the power of which
words our Lord at last manifested that, which he was not pleased to show at
Satan's request, Viz. that he was the Son of God) this evil Angel departed. And
now after the temptation, (as usually,) follows a Consolation; (as also
(before) the great Honor done our Lord at his Baptism was straight pursued
with a great humiliation) and for the verifying of our Lords most patient and
meek answer, that man lives and subsists, not by bread alone, but every word
that proceeds from God; God sent his good Angels to minister food to this his
Son, as also he had before in the Desert supplied with the bread of Angels the
anhungred Israelites, tho their murmuring and impatience did not so well
deserve it; and as afterward he sent by an Angel, in a desert place, provision
to Elijah.

they did afterward from our Lord. To this he answered with much asseveration
Jo. 1.15, to remove such an abhorred mistake from them, and from the people
(who also much debated in their hearts, says S. Luke chap. 3.15. whether he
was the Christ or not), That he was not He, but only his forerunner and
Messenger. This denied by him; they asked him then, whether he was Elias, whom,
being only translated hence, and yet alive, they expected according to the
prophecy of Malachy, to return to them in the latter days before the Advent of
the Messiah: which also denied by him, (For indeed he was not that person of
Elias, which they meant; and, who most probably, according to that prophecy,
will return before our Lord's second coming for a new Conversion of that Nation
to the acknowledgment of Christ); Then asked they him, whether he was some one
of the Prophets returned again to life, according to that fancy Mat. 16.14. --
Mark. 6.16; or, (as others more probably understand it) whether he was that
Prophet spoken of, and promised by Moses Deuteronomy. 18.15, 18, that should appear
like to him; and so the people charged by him with most strict Obedience to all
he should say unto them. Which Prophet indeed was the Messiah, and this last
but the same Question with the first; but the Jews are said to have imagined
this Prophet should be a Companion of the Messiah, or his chief Minister. This
again denied: and he further importuned to declare himself what he was, He told
them he was neither Elias spoken of by Malachy; nor the Prophet spoken of by
Moses; but -- The Voice of one crying or proclaiming in the Desert, spoken of
by Esaiah, that they should prepare the way for this their Messiah, and make
his paths straight; and so for this, that he preached repentance and amendment
of life, for their more worthily entertaining him.

Ezekiel. 36.25, 26. -- Zech. 13.1, 2. To which he answered; that his Baptizing
also was only a Preparatory Baptism with water unto repentance, not that solemn
one which was to follow, that should enter the People into the Kingdom of
Grace, and should be with the Holy Ghost; and conferred by the Messiah himself,
whom he proclaimed now come. Of whom he proceeded further to tell them, and all
the people; That though he came after him, yet he was before him [even from all
Eternity] the latchet of whose shoe he was not worthy to unloose; that he was
the only begotten Son of God, Jo. 1.15.
that came out of the bosom of his Father, (there knowing all his secrets, and
of whom he only had also always a clear vision and fruition), to declare to
the world all his will; That, as the law, and mystical Figures and Types came
by Moses, so Grace, and Truth by him; and that all men received what Graces
they had from his fullness [though indeed it is somewhat uncertain whether here
the latter part of this discourse be not rather the Evangelists than the
Baptists; yet see the Baptists like discourse Jo. 3.31.] Lastly, that he was
already come, and even then standing among them. [Or that but a little before
(Viz. at the time of his Baptism) standing among them,] though they knew him
not.



John. 3.29.) Contemplating also the divine Meekness, and Modesty, but mixed
with Majesty, that appeared in his countenance, fell on proclaiming to the
people that stood about him: Behold ye the Lamb of God that takes away the
sins of the world; this is that Sacred person, I told you yesterday, that does
so far transcend me, the Lord of his Church. Nor had I known him, but that in
my baptizing, God sent and revealed him to me, and also manifested him, as to
me, to the people by the Holy Ghost in the shape of a Dove sitting upon him:
and I saw, and now bear record, that this is the Son of God etc.

showed himself. Jo. 1.36.
Whom John beholding as he walked at a distance, iterated his former testimony
concerning him. And joyfully said to them, that there went the Lamb of God,
whom and not him, the world was to adore and follow. So that his two Disciples
(one of which was Andrew Simon Peter's Brother, the other not named by John, is
supposed to be himself; especially since he so punctually relates the
Circumstances as if himself present) much moved herewith, and perhaps also
expressly directed by the Baptist to apply themselves to this most Holy Master
so much excelling him, with much reverence straight made toward, and silently
followed our Lord: not presuming as yet to say any thing to him, but observing
his motions, that they might not lose him; and this perhaps might be, because
the day before, upon John's like Encomiums, he had suddenly withdrawn himself
from the People. Our Lord looking back upon them, asked them, whom or what they
sought for? they calling him Rabbi, a Title given to no ordinary person Mat.
23.7, desired to know his lodging, and where they might repair to him (it
wanting then only two hours of night) since they had heard from the Baptist
such a Testimony of the supreme dignity of his person, and were by him referred
to his conduct. He courteously invited them to it: and there they staid with
him the short remainder of the day, where, by his heavenly Discourse to them
(we may imagine such as to Nicodemus) concerning the Kingdom of God, and his
comeing into the world for the Redemption of man, they were exceedingly
confirmed in the belief of John's testimony; and had their hearts enflamed by
his discourses in such a manner, as those that went with him to Emaus; as may
be gathered from Andrew's language afterward to his Brother Peter Jo. 1.41.

Mat. 16.18.



upon Philip, a Galilean also, and fellow-Townsman of Peter and Andrew (perhaps
then found in their company as a familiar acquaintance, and with whom they had
already entertained some discourse concerning Jesus; otherwise Philip could not
have bin so punctual in that which he said to Nathaniel.) Our Lord seeing his
faith and interior inclinations, presently called and admitted him into the
Society; who was afterward a chief person among the Apostles; by whom the
devout strangers that came to Jerusalem to worship Jo. 12.20. made their
addresses to our Lord. He presently (set all on fire) to carry it more forward
went to seek out Nathaniel, an intimate friend of his, and it seems also a man
of letters. Who is probably conjectured from his early calling here, and from
Jo. 21.1, 14. to have bin one of our Lords twelve Apostles, called Bartholomew,
so as Simon Peter is Bar-Jona: in which Roll of them he is still coupled to
Philip. See 2. Part.. whom espying alone under a fig tree (perhaps at his
Devotions) he called him to him, and told him the Messiah, that Moses and the
Prophets had spoken so much of, was come into the world, and that this person
was Jesus of Nazareth the son of Joseph. For thus much he and the rest had
learnt concerning our Lord's secular condition. Nathaniel (as the more learned
commonly are less credulous) put a check to Philips forwardness, especially
when naming Moses and the Prophets to him; telling him that surely there was no
Prophet, that foretold the Messiah should come out of Nazareth (which thing
indeed was a great blind not only to Nathaniel here, but generally to the
learned Jews that they would not believe Jesus the Christ; and so darkened in
this, proceeded to fulfill the other prophecies in working his death.) Philip,
without farther disute, bid him but approach to him, and he would be abundantly
satisfied. So soon as our Lord beheld him, he manifested to him his exact
knowledge (whom he saw wavering in faith) of all the former course of his life;
and that he saw him and what he was doing when alone under the Fig Tree before
Philip called him. To this omniscience of our Lord, Nathaniel now (as Simon
Peter a little before) astonished thereat, yields up himself and contemning his
scruple about Nazareth, made a most noble Confession of our Lord (doubtless
from the same Spirit of God in him), as S. Peter did afterward Mat. 16. chap.
saying; Rabbi thou art the Son of God [for so the Baptist also before had
several times styled him] thou art the King of Israel, that has bin so long
expected by this Nation.

Mat. 26.64. Jo. 6.58, 62.
] And elsewhere, some of his followers wondering at his speech of his feeding
them with bread which came down from Heaven: What and if (says he) ye shall
see the Son of man ascend up [into Heaven] where he was before? And so his
young Scholar Nicodemus wondering at his Sermon of man's being born again of the
spirit, he tells him of things of greater wonder; Viz. of the Son of Man's
ascending up into Heaven again as he had descended from Heaven, Jo. 3.9, 44.
and also was then in Heaven.

looking upon such their sincerity, conferred on them the honor after thus
prepared by John, to be the first Disciples and Attendants on his Son.

Jo. 4.47. compared with verse. 52. which Cana also our Lord took in his way in
the second journey he made from Jerusalem into Galilee. See John 4.46. Now so
it fell out, that on this day he came thither was solemnized a Marriage, and
hither also were assembled our Lords Mother and his Brethren, invited to this
wedding (probably of some of their near kindred), the care our Lords Mother had
concerning the Wine, and her colloquy with the Servants, showing she had some
particular interest therein. Hither therefore our Lord coming with his new
chosen Disciples, they were also invited to the marriage. And all this seems
punctually so ordered by the Divine Providence, that whereas our Lord had led
his former life so obscurely; Now the dignity of his person, and Mission from
Heaven, and his Father there, might be manifested, in the first place, to these
his nearer Relations according to the flesh; for the rectifying any their
former misapprehensions, and their believing on this common Savior, and being
made partakers of so great a joy; and that also his inauguration into, and
entrance upon his Office, might be celebrated with a festival; and this
marriage signify that which he was one day to consummate with his Spouse the
Church: and therefore is he very Emphatically by the Baptist styled the
Bridegroom, on whom himself attended. Jo. 3.29. that, whereas John came with
fasting, he might enter upon his Office with a feast, and the children of the
Bride-chamber rejoice with him; therefore also his Miracle here was
corresponding, changing water and penance into Wine and mirth, answerable to
John's baptizing with water, and he with the Holy Spirit.

so, that at the end of the feast there wanted Wine.

Our Lords Mother perceiving it, and solicitous of their credit to whom she had
so near relation, presently told our Lord of it, expecting he should relieve
them herein, (either from his doing formerly some such domestic and private
miracles upon some necessity in his youth at Nazareth, or from the Holy
Virgin's having some prerevelation concerning this future fact. By our Lords
reply we may conjecture, that this was spoken by his Mother before some of his
Disciples or Kindred, and perhaps in the midst of some Discourse, when as our
Blessed Lady imagined some urgent necessity thereof. Hereupon our Lord for
their Edification returned this answer to her. What is it to me, and thee,
woman, in this matter? my Hour or time is not yet. Signifying his already well
fore-knowing by his omniscience this want or wine, and the due time of
supplying it; and that he was not to be sweyed in his actions by any human
relations or respects how near soever, but must act all things only according
to the will of his Heavenly Father. And thus frequently he takes occasion to
Vindicate his Divinity and heavenly Original, to beget early in his followers a
right apprehension of his person and authority, and omniscient conduct. Some
such answer as here he gives also to his Kindred Jo. 7.6. when they minding him
of going up to Jerusalem at the feast, and showing his strange works there:
saying, my time is not yet come. So after his desputing with the Doctors, he
answered his Mother, when she told him, that they had sought him sorrowing, why
did they so, since he was to follow his Fathers business? Thus raising them to
still higher thoughts concerning him. And we see, for fulfilling the end of his
coming into the world, what a distance he kept also from his Cousin the Baptist.
And it may be observed also, that upon all occasions he showed laying-aside any
indulgence, or carnal respects, or indearments for his kindred, and a perfect
abstraction from any inordinate affection to them, (see that place Mat. 12.48.)
for our example; seeing how many are drawn to offend God, and loose their own
Souls to humor, to gratify, to provide for, to enrich such their near
Relations. But this answer here our Lord seems to have returned to his Holy
Mother thus before company, chiefly because he intended to perform this Miracle
with all privacy afterward, when disengaged of this attendance, and we may
suppose him to have delivered it with such a submissin of his voice, and
fashion of his countenance, as showed him no way displeased with her request.
And the Blessed Virgin, thereby well assured of the fact, and that he answered
her with a dilation only, not a denial, hasted to the servants, and bad them do
what ever he commanded them; this her great faith well preparing the way to
such a great work, which presently begat so many more believers on him.

Mark. 7.4. unless the Jews wash first they eat not) as also for the cleansing
of Pots, Cups, and other vessels; (if perhaps used by persons unclean). These
water-pots thus made use of, and thereby partly emptied, Our Lord, after some
time, retired from the company, and commanded the servants to fill these Pots
brim full of water; who, by this pouring in the water so immediately before,
could witness, that there was no deceitful artifice used in the business. Our
Lord, without touching the Pots, or using any other Ceremony, bad them draw out
and carry to the Governor (see Ecclus. 32.1, 2.) of the feast; who tasting it,
presently called the Bridegroom, and asked, whence came that excellent Wine,
and why not it spent first, a meaner sort being good enough for those who
perhaps would use it to excess: the Bridegroom being as ignorant as the
Governor, and so the Servants examined concerning it, all was discovered, and
Our Lord generally magnified; their beholding also the great quantity of it
much increasing their wonder. As our Lords Miracles always super-exceeded
necessity, and in the Miracles of the Loaves and Fishes he would have great
plenty to be left. And so also he gave extraordinary strength and vigor to the
infirm he restored, to carry away the beds they lay on, to leap and dance, to
minister unto him etc. Upon the sight of this his first public Miracle, the
belief in Him, as the true Messiah the Son of God, was much confirmed in his
new gathered Disciples, and many others. And the matter of it, the wine he
miraculously bestowed on them at this feast, an Emblem of the Holy Spirit, they
should afterward receive at another, and at his last parting from them: which
spirit also then seemed to the people to have transported them even as new wine.

Mark 6.4. where he knew his former mean and obscure Education would much
prejudice their faith in him, as the Messiah; and so his visit bring a greater
guilt on them, (in which Act he showed also, how little he was sweyed with any
human affections, usually adhering much to the place of our Education, and
where men most desire applause): But to Capernaum, the Metropolis and chief
Town in Galilee for public, resort and Traffic; therefore said by our Lord
Matt. 11.13. exalted to Heaven for its building, wealth, and prosperity;
situate in the Borders of Zabulon and Nephthali, Mat. 4.13. on the East side of
the entrance of Jordan into the Lake of Genesareth, or Tiberias, or Sea of
Galilee, as it is variously called, being near 20 miles in length, and 6 miles
broad. The water and the fish of which Lake is much extolled by Josephus, who
very well knew these places, De Bello Judaico lib. 3. cap. 18. (See Rogier de
Terre Saint, saying much what the same lib. 1. cap. 9.) -- Lacus Genesar
(says he) quadraginta stadits in latittudine patens, centumque in longitudine,
aquae dulcis est atque potabilis. Palustri enim crassitudine tenuiores habet
latices: and undique in littora ac arenas desinens, purus est, ac praeter hoc,
temperatus ad hauriendum; and fluvio quidem sive font lenior est, semper autem
frigidior, quam lacus diffusio patitur, manet: aestivisque noctibus ejus aquae
sub divo perstatae, id enim facere indigenis moris est, nequaquam aestibus
cedunt. Varia autem sunt in eo piscium genera ab alterius loci piscibus tam
sapore, quam specie discreta; mediusque fluvio Jordane secatur. Thus also he
speaks of the coast adjoining to it. -- Ad Genesar vero lacum ejusdem nominis
terra praetenditur, natura simul and pulchritudine admirabilis. Nullum enim
ipsa pro ubertate sui negat arbustum, totamque plantis consevere cultores.
Coeli vero temperies etiam diversis aptissima est. Was sane and caricas, sine
intermissione, december mensibus suggerit, caeteros vero fructus anni spatie
senescentes. Nam praeter aeris lenitatem, and font quoque irrigatur uberrimo,
qui Capernaum ab indigenis apellatur. From which spring or stream this City it
seems took its name. This Lake is encompassed with the Tribes of Gad and
Manasses on the East, and with those of Issachar, Zabulon, and Naphthali on the
West; the Country thereabout very populous, and the Towns frequent, by reason
of the great fertility of the soil. Decapolis near to it, Coraizin at two miles
distance on the east side of Jordan on one side of it, and Bethsaida on the
other, Cities near adjoining: then the City Magdala, then Tiberias. This City
being lately repaired and adorned by Herod the Tetrarch, and in honor of
Tiberius the Emperor, this name given to it, as also Bethsaida was much adorned
by Philip, his brother, and called Julia. Lastly, standing very conveniently
for our Lords making his voyages upon the Lake to several places for his
preaching. Most remote also from Jerusalem, and it seems also from the Court of
Herod, and so less capable of disturbance from thence.

Jo. 2.12.) he, and his Mother, and his Brethren, and his Disciples. And our
Lord pitched on this City for the ordinary place of his residence; it seems
also that his Mother and Brethren changed their former habitation at Nazareth,
and dwelt here.

The names of these his Brethren, Mat. 13.55. are said to be James, and Joses,
and Simon, and Judas, besides Sisters there also mentioned: See Hegesippus apud
Eusebi. m l. 3. c. 10, 26.
and these are thought to be the sons of Alpheus (supposed brother to S.
Joseph, and elsewhere called Cleophas,) and of Mary his wife. See Matt. 10.3.
compared with Matt. 27, 56. called Mary Mother of James, Mat. 27.56. Mark.
16.1. and called Mary of Cleophas, i. e, as some suppose, wife of Cleophas Jo.
19.25. and called there Sister to the Blessed Virgin, i. e, a near Kinswoman.
Unless we will suppose her to be wife of Alpheus, brother to S. Joseph, and
Father of our Lords brethren, and daughter to Cleophas a person distinct from
Alpheus, and Brother to Joachim, the Blessed Virgins Father, or to her Mother
Anna. But if Cleophas be supposed Brother to S. Joseph, then Alpheus may be
brother to the Blessed Virgins Father or Mother, and thus our Lords brethren
will be his nearer Kindred. Salome also, wife to Zebedee, is supposed a
daughter of Alpheus, and so her sons, James and John, our Lords Kinsmen. I say
these brethren of our Lord seem to have removed their habitation to Capernaum;
For they made not only this journey with him thither, but here we find them
again Mat. 12.47. compare 13.1. and Mark. 3.20, 21, 31. comp. 2.1, 13. and 3.1,
7. where the Synagogue is that in Capernaum. And it seems their so solicitous
looking after our Lord Mat. 12.46. was for his taking some refection, the
importunity and pressing of the multitude disturbing the due times of his
repast, Mark. 3.20. and excluding his nearest friends from him, and his zeal
also of instructing the people, and bringing them into the Kingdom of Heaven,
whom he campassionately beheld, Matt. 9.36. as Sheep having no Shepherd, (which
zeal some of his unbelieving Kindred thought mingled with some excess, Mark.
3.21.) making him neglect his sustenance, and the care of his Body. Here it was
also, Jo. 7.3. as appears by the context, that his Brethren, perhaps having
also some little touch of ambition, spoke to him, that he would go and show
himself rather in Judea; some of them having as yet some distrust of his
Messiasship, and high pretenses, when they saw him keep so much in Galilee,
(though this necessary for prolonging his life, till the time was come of his
being offered up,) and far from Jerusalem, and the Highest Court of the Nation
there, as also from the Court of Herod. It is most probable also, that these
his Brethren attended on him in most of his peragrations and excursions through
the other Cities and Towns of Galilee, and elsewhere: they and our Lords Mother
are mentioned, Act. 1.14. among the attendants of our Lord at his Ascencion;
and if they had not bin part of his ordinary Train and Auditors, he would not
have called two of them, Viz. James and Jude, to have bin of the number of the
twelve. And it appears that our Lord had many, as it were, constant followers
of him besides the twelve, by those 70, that besides the 12, were sent abroad
by him, by two, and two, to preach the Gospel, Luke 10.1; and by what S. Peter
says Act. 1.21.

Cor. 9.5.) And such of these, as were rich, ministered to him also of their
substance* -- Many women were there [by the Cross], Mat. 27 55, 56.
says S. Matthew, which followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering unto him.
Among which, says he, was Mary Magdalen, Mary the mother of James and Joses
[our Lords Brethren, and so she the wife of Alpheus;] And the Mother of
Zebedees children [Salome.] The same is said by S. Luke 23.55. -- 24.10. he
adding there Joanna the wife of Herod's Steward. And chap. 8.1, 2, 3. the same
Evangelist says, that as our Lord went throughout every City and Village
preaching etc. the twelve were with him, and certain women, Mary called
Magdalen, Joanna, Susanna, and many others, which ministered to him of their
substance. And we find Salome's request to our Lord, for her two Sons, was not
made at Capernaum, but some where upon the way, in his last journey to
Jerusalem, wherein she, with many other women, waited on him as has bin said.
See Mat. 20.20. comp. -- 17. 29. So that I may say our Lord had an Holy Court
of pious men and women, following and attending on him, in most of his travels.
Among these therefore was our Lords Blessed Mother, and she most diligent in
the same offices, and contributing also the little she had, to the common
charges; or, supposing she had nothing, was, by the other more wealthy,
supplied with necessaries, as our Lord was. Yet I say not this of a perpetual,
but of a frequent, attendance; whilst they sometimes also were absent, and
ordered other necessary affairs: but then the residence of our Blessed Lady
seems to be not at Nazareth, but at Capernaum, whither our Lord made frequent
returns from his journeys about the Country. -- As for the Nazaren's words,
Mat. 13.56, -- His Sisters are they not all with us? This may be said only of
his Sisters exclusively, to his Mother or Brethren; or may be understood of
their ordinary former abode there.

January the sixth: after which, having spent six weeks in the wilderness, and
some time afterward with the Baptist, in collecting some Disciples, and then
making some little stay at Cana with his kindred, and the Paschal Feast being
celebrated at the full Moon it March, accordingly, our Lords abode in this City
was not above a fortnight, or three weeks. In which time is no mention of any
public Predication of his; the entrance upon which perhaps was intended to be
rather at Jerusalem, and in his Fathers house; there mean while employed in
more private Discourses, and instructions of his Disciples and others. Though
his Miracle done at Cana, having so many witnesses, must needs be much talked
of there, and the Dignity of his person, and the Baptist's Testimony of him, by
his Disciples communicated to many others, and the same thereof also gone
before him to Jerusalem.

At the great Feast of the Pasch he went up thither, accompanied with his
Disciples; as for the observance of the Feast, so there solemnly to begin his
Office, and the business on which his Father sent him, in his Fathers house,
now in the conflux thither of the whole Nation; which the Baptist, his
Forerunner, was appointed to do only afar off, in the skirts of the wilderness.
All this according to the prophecy of Malachy, chap. 3.1, 2. Behold I send my
Angel and he shall prepare the way before my face. And forthwith the Dominator,
whom you seek, and the Angel of the Testament, whom you desire, shall come to
his Temple. And who shall be able to abide the day of his Advent, and who shall
stand to see him? For he is as it were purging fire, and as the Herb if
Fullers etc.

Col. 2.9.

The zeal of thine house has eaten me up;) and with a multitude of People,
beholding this action, and wondering at so strange a Courage, and attempt, and
the success. One of the greatest miracles faith S. Jerome, In Mat. 21.12. etc.
that ever our Lord did, and which must needs raise great expectation in the
people, what things would follow such a beginning. And there appears an
extraordinary hand of Gods providence and protection in it, that our Lord
should suffer no molestation for the damages those persons must suffer hereby,
or stop by the Gards of the Temple, at such great Feasts very vigilant; and how
equitable soever the fact, yet being Censurable, in that it did not appear done
by the ordinary hand of authority. No sooner was this done also, but that the
persons thus ejected by him had soon acquainted the public Officers and
Magistrates with the fact, and this, joined with the Testimony of John
concerning our Lord, and the fame that was already spread abroad of him, laid
the Foundation of that jealousy, and hate, toward him, envying the greatness of
any, besides themselves, which at last ended in their killing him.

The Court of the Temple thus cleansed, our Lord began therein to preach to the
people the Gospel, and so declare his authority, and Mission from God, and to
do Miracles, that sufficiently attested the truth of his words. And among these
his Auditors was Nicodemus, a chief Magistrate among the Jews, and a Pharisee,
who, presently upon sight of such miracles, became his Convert. But those other
among them that already envied, and had conceived a prejudice against him,
through very hard heartedness, not satisfied with what strange things they saw,
desired, upon so high pretensions of his, he would show them some sign (i. e,
from heaven,) to confirm them (the Jews require a sign says S. Paul 1 Cor.
1.22.) as they did often afterward; notwithstanding the Miracles they beheld at
the same time wrought by him; which miracles our Lord, on the contrary, used to
plead, as a sufficient testimony from God, of the truth of these things he
delivered. Our Lord, though he might now (as elsewhere) have urged to them the
Signs, i. e, the miracles they already saw done, yet here took occasion
presently to declare to them, but somewhat parabolically and obscurely, as
their perverseness well deserved, that great and most admirable of all his
works, that he would perform for the salvation of the world, (see Romans 1.4. --
Act. 2.36.) namely, the raising up again of his sacred Body from the Dead,
after they had slain him. By which Resurrection of our Lord, He and his Father
confirmed to the world, the truth of his person and doctrine; and he also
showed the first Experiment in himself, of what he promised to us.

Destroy ye this Temple and in three days I will raise it up; Speaking of his
Body (says the Evangelist) which he might well call a Temple, since the Deity
inhabited it. See Col. 2.9. as also S. Paul calls the Saints Bodies the Temples
of the Holy Ghost. They were already Tempters and Hypocrites requesting a sign
of him, not to see one, but (he who for ostentation did nothing not giving them
one) to decry him; and he knowing their thoughts answered them accordingly with
a Parabolical speech, exceeding their understanding not worthy to be plainlier
dealt with. Mat. 13.10, 11. And thus at the first, in this speech our Lord laid
a Foundation as it were (seeing how they would misconstrue his words) for his
future passion. So afterward at Capernaum, when he had done before them such
miracles as the people (says the Text) were amazed at, being impudently asked
by the cavilling Pharisees that he would show them some sign; he answered them
to the same purpose, that there should be no sign given to that evil
Generation, but that of Jonah his being three days and three nights in the
Whales belly, and afterward coming forth from it; Now foretelling them of the
great design of his Death and Resurrection. In Galilee again, after the Miracle
of the Loaves Jo. 6. they desired also at that very time (most unreasonably) a
further sign from him, and urged that Moses had given them Manna from Heaven,
and there also in like manner our Lord presently told them of his Death, and
his feeding them with his Flesh and Blood, and then of their having everlasting
life by it, and his raising them up at the last day: things at which some of
them also then took great offense. So here also they, whether misconstruing his
words, as if he had said, first that he would destroy their Temple, (for this
at his Death they urged against him, and the false witness Mark. 14.5. to speak
home, interposeth, that he said he would destroy the Temple made with hands,
and in three days raise up another made without hands) and then that he in
three days would build it again: a Temple that they said was forty six years
in building, in the one made him impious, in the other ridiculous; and so
turned his mention of this his greatest work for the salvation of mankind into
a great scorn and flighting of him, and into the cause of a quarrel against him;
till at last they contrived his Death) the destroying of the Temple he here
speaks of) and brought these his words against him to justify it; and so He, in
raising up again this Temple of his Deity thus destroyed, exhibited to the
World this great Sign, which at this beginning of his preaching, he engaged
here. This was the success of our Lords first Sermon, and appearance amongst
them, as to the Pharisees, and their followers, already much degusted with him,
and filled with envy.



verse. 1. One of the Sanedrim, and a person studied in the law, (for our Lord,
chap. 3. verse. 10. styles him, a Master in Israel, showing also herein to him,
that he knew who he was; and on that account, blames his ignorance;) being
already a Convert, (as it is said, Jo. 12.42. many other among the chief
Rulers, were afterward, but timorous to confess him;) came privately to our
Lord, by night, for fear of losing his Reputation with his fellow-Rulers (which
shows a great envy and hatred toward our Lord, already kindled in them;) to be
farther instructed of him, in the matters of the Kingdom of God, and life
eternal; confessing to him, that his Miracles had convinced him, that he was an
extraordinary Teacher, sent from God. Our Lord very courteously received him,
and in a few words manifested to him fully who himself was, and the whole
substance of the Gospel. At the first, he began to acquaint him with the first
Foundation of the Christian Religion, Regeneration: which at the beginning he
proposed some what obscurely, perhaps to humble Nicodemus his too much conceit
of his own knowledge; telling him, that to enter into the Kingdom of God, one
must necessarily be born again; (which word, (...), translated here, again,
signifies also, from above) which Nicodemus much wondering at, and speaking of
entering again into our Mothers womb, our Lord graciously explained it to him;
that he must be born again, not of a woman, or the flesh, which would produce
nothing but flesh, but of water, the external Ceremony appointed by God to be
used in the new birth, signifying a being cleansed and purifyed from former
sin, and of the Spirit, which might render a man spiritual and enabled
therewith to bring forth good works; which spirit inspires as it pleases, 1
Cor. 12.4. -- Mark. 4.27. unperceived by sense, and being as the wind, of which
we know not whence, or whither it goes, but by its effects do discern the
presence thereof: and then gently reflected on Nicodemus his ignorance, (so to
render him more docible and humble,) that he, being a Master in Israel, should
know nothing of this. [For this Holy Spirit, and our Renovation by it, is
frequently spoken of in the Old Testament, and so also many types of Baptism,
and of the Sacraments of the new Testament, found there. See Psalm. 50.12, 13,
14, 9. -- 142.10, 11. -- Ezec. 11.36. -- 1 Cor. 10.2, 3, 4.] Further told him,
that these things, he now spoke to him, were the lowest matters: but that there
was much higher, that he came to reveal to mankind from Heaven, and from God
his Father. For that he was the only begotten Son of God, descended from
Heaven, and again ascends thither, and which also [according to his
Divinity,] remains always there; who spoke nothing but what he knew, and had
seen with the Father. See the like verse. 32. and Jo. 8.38. -- 5.19, 30. Because
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that men might not
perish, but have everlasting life; i. e, so many as believed in him: and that
as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, so he was to be lifted up.
See the like Jo. 8.28. [So acquainting him but obscurely, with his death and
sufferings.] That whosoever, stung with sin, beheld and believed on him might
not perish; but that those, whosoever did not believe on him, were already
condemned by occasion of his preaching to them, [not for their former sins,
which he came to take away, but] for their disbelief; See Jo. 9.39. -- 12.47,
48. [without which belief in him, no forgiveness of Sin.] That he was the
Light, that was come into the world, avoided only by those whose works were
evil, and so who feared the discovery of them by it, and therefore made such
opposition to him. But that he, that did truth, would come to it, as not
fearing the manifesting of his deeds by it.

Jo. 7.51. desired they would but hear him, what he might say for himself:
thinking that thus themselves might be as much taken with him, as was their
Officers in Jo. 7.46. and himself here. This of our Lords gracious discourse
with Nicodemus: but whether all that is said in S. John chap. 3. from verse. 10.
to the 22. be our Lords words, or part thereof, from verse. 16. be S. John's
dilating upon them, is uncertain. And the like happens in many other
discourses, found in the Evangelist, much resembling one another.

Jo. 2.24. Jo. 2.24.
(where the Pharisees, that had already conceived so much hatred against him,
in seeing his boldness and spirit far beyond the Baptists, and the great
concourse of the People to hear him, had so much power and followers,) departed
thence, and went into the Country, and the other Cities of Judea, where he was
also followed by very great multitudes, as appears Jo. 3.27. and preached to
them, we may presume, such things as before to Nicodemus, concerning
repentance, and the washing away their former sins by Baptism, and their
Regeneration of the Spirit; concerning his Passion, and Mission from God his
Father, and belief in him for remission of sin; All which he confirmed also
every where with charitable miracles among them, in ejecting Devils, and
healing their Infirmities (which miracles the Baptist did not); therefore his
Brethren afterward Jo. 7.3. making mention of the Disciples and followers he
had in Judea, advise his return to them, and the showing his mighty works among
them.

Mark. 1.15. -- 6.12. Luke 10.13. -- Act. 2.38.) and Converts to be baptized,
probably many of them together, in places convenient; to be baptized by his
Disciples, says S. John; himself not baptizing, except those his Disciples,
that baptized others, Epist. 108.
or some one of them to administer it to the rest. For as S. Austin, he* that
descended to the Humility of washing their feet, would much more to the
ministering of baptism: but yet if the Apostle, says he, was sent to preach,
not baptize; much more might our Lord, busied in greater affairs, in teaching
and relieving the peoples necessities, delegate this inferior office to his
Apostles, as a thing which was to be continued after his departure, in the
succession of them to the end of the world: whereas we do not find that the
Baptist committed or propagated this Office to any of his Disciples, but
continued it only himself till it utterly ceased, after that our Lord became
more publicly known, at the time of John's imprisonment, which followed shortly
after. For John's Baptism was only preparatory to that of our Lords; his
signifying remission and cleansing from former sins through faith in him that
came after him Act. 19.4. Our Lords conferred an ability also to live holily
for the future, by giving the Holy Spirit and planting Gods Grace in the
Baptized for newness of life; and bringing forth good works. Though those
extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit also was not as yet conferred, as were after
our Lords Ascension, and sending down the Holy Ghost at Pentecost in all its
miraculous and Stupendous operations and effects; Of which effects it is that
the Evangelist speaks, when he says chap. 7.39. That the Spirit was not yet
given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified. Such a difference therefore
being between John's and our Lords Baptism S. John's hindered not; but that those
baptized by him came and received it afterward from our Lord, by the hands of
his Disciples: as we see S. Paul, meeting at Ephesus with some that had
received John's Baptism, yet rebaptized them in the name of the Lord Jesus, Act.
19.5. and it cannot be thought, but that many of those thousands of Penitents,
Act. 2.41. -- and 4.4. that were Baptized by the Apostles, had received it
formerly from John.



Disciples of John and of the Pharisees, concerning the Virtue of the former
Mosaical Purification and cleansing: viz. whether those not equal, or much
preferrable, with this new Rite introduced by the Baptist, and afterward
continued by Jesus. Hence S. John's Disciples came to him, and told him
complainingly, that the person who came to him for baptism, and to whom his
commendation and testimony had procured so much reputation, for which they
thought he should have had the more respect for John, fell on Baptizing also
and gathering Disciples; and that all people repaired unto him, they meanwhile
making no mention also of his miracles.

Jo. 19.11.
that they themselves could witness the witness which he had always born to
our Lord; and how he taught that himself was not the Christ, but one sent
before to make way for him, as a paranymphus to go before him; that this indeed
was the true Bridegroom of the Church, and himself only the Bridegroomes
friend, who rejoices in seeing the Bridegroomes caressing of his Bride, and in
hearing all the sweet and gracious words he speaks to her, and in her amorously
gathering and adhering to, and panting after him; and that in this now his joy
was completed; That himself was to decrease, and cease this his office after a
little time, but not so the other; but his Kingdom to be dilated, and increased
more and more; that he being an earthly man could of himself speak only low and
earthly things to them; but that this was the Son of God, to whom his Father
gave not the Spirit by measure as to others Col. 2.3. -- 1.19. 1 Cor. 12.11. --
1 Pet. 4.10. -- Jo. 5.19, 20, 30. -- Apoc. 1.1. but that he perfectly knew all
his Fathers secrets; and was now descended from him, and from Heaven, to reveal
to the world what he had there heard and seen; 1 Jo. 5.10.
and that whosoever believed his words only set his seal to the truths of God:
but yet that many were so hard-hearted as not to receive his Testimony; finally
that God loves this his Son, and has given all things, especially touching
man's salvation, into his hands; and that the whole world being sinners, and
l^ing under the wrath of God, he came hither, that so many as believed on him
should not perish, but have remission of their sin, and eternal life, Jo. 17.2,
3. but for those who did not so, Gal. 3.10.
the wrath of God still remained upon them.



Mat. 21, 26. -- 14, 5.
either came to his Sermons in the place where John taught and Baptized; or,
which is more probable, sent for him to his Court. Of whom the Evangelist
further says, ( Mark. 6.20.) that he feared John, knowing him to be a just and
Holy man, and that he heard him gladly, and did many things according to his
advice and directions.

Levit. 18.16. -- 20, 21. and that whether his Brother were alive, or deceased,
for that his Brother had had a child by her, the Daughter that danced so well
before Herod. And in this thing Herod was still the more guilty, because he had
already a former wife, the Daughter of Aretas King of Arabia, whom in his
falling in love with Herodias, upon a new compact made with her, he put away;
and so provoked Aretas, in revenge of his Daughter, to make war upon him,
wherein he was deservedly very unfortunate; Josephus imputes the cause of such
his ill success, Antiq. Judaic. l. 18. c. 10.
chiefly to his slaughter of the Baptist; but however this war happened very
opportunely, for affording Herod less leisure to look after the motions of our
Lord, or giving any disturbance to them.

But, returning to the Baptists reproof, we find by the words in the Text, --
It is not lawful for thee, etc. that this was not spoken of Herod in his
absence, but made to himself, whether publicly or in private, or the one after
the other, both being lawful according to several circumstances (and the former
sometimes necessary 1 Timothy 1, 20.) is uncertain.

Matt. 14.3.
(says S. Matthew) and cast him into prison. For which imprisonment he wanted
not a more specious pretense of fearing from the concourse of people made to
him, some sedition and tumults; to which the Pharisees also were not wanting to
give their assistance, in representing John the Author of a new Sect, and
acting without, and against, authority; which though this crafty man knew to be
envy in them, yet he made use of this color to cover the true Cause of this
imprisonment; and therefore this reason thereof is given by Josephus. Antiq
Judaici: l. 18. c. 12.
-- Veritus (says he) cum ad audiendum cum quamplurima multitudo concurreret,
ne forte, doctrinae ejus persuasione, populi a suo regno discederent, etc. and
our Lord also intimates the Pharisees and Governors of the Jews, to have had a
hand in this restraint Mat. 17.12. where he says, that they knew him not, but
did to him whatever they listed, as they should afterward do to himself. Thus
cast in prison, Herodias, not appeased or secured herewith, next solicits Herod
also for the speedy taking away his life; but both the fear of the people,
esteeming John a Prophet, and his own reverence of him, as yet withheld him
from it. For which cause also in prison, he laying the blame thereof upon his
wife, indulged him so much liberty, as to have some converse with his friends;
and his Disciples, there to come to, and attend upon, him; and so neither here
(as also afterward S. Paul) was he an useless servant to our Lord.

Jo. 4.35. that it wanted but four months to the next harvest; and so to the
next Pasch, which Feast was celebrated at the beginning of the harvest; at
which time was offered a sheaf of the first fruits of their Corn, ( Lev. 23.10.
-- Deuteronomy. 16.9.) as at Pentecost the first loaf of bread after Harvest gotten in
between these two feasts. In this time our Lord converting to the Gospel, and
faith in him as the Savior of the world, and so baptizing by his Disciples,
such multitudes of people, far beyond the actings of John, and this so near to
Jerusalem, had already alarmed the Pharisees and rulers of the Jews, and more
and more incensed their wrath against him; who could not rest from devising
some way for his death or restraint, especially after they had bin so succesful
against the Baptist; and we find afterward in Jo. 7.1. the reason more plainly
given of our Lords residing no more in Judea, but in Galilee; because the Jews,
i. e, these chief Governors and Leaders of them, sought already to kill him.
By which we see also, that our Lord for most of his time, after he appeared
once, went in great danger of his life (for in flying from the Pharisees in
Judea, in Galilee also there was an Herod). Therefore Our Lord, says S. John,
Jo. 4.1.
knowing the Pharisees had heard of his making and baptizing more disciples
than John, Matt. 4.12.
and having heard also the severity used toward the Baptist, purposed to leave
Judea, and return into Galilee, so to decline, for the present, the evil
designs of the Pharisees a against him; and also to carry the light or the
Gospel into those remoter places where it had not yet appeared, and where John
was interrupted in his Ministry. For though Herod lived in the same quarters,
yet was he, by the Divine providence, so diverted by other affairs, and
especially the new dissentions between him and Aretas, and his mind also so
much afflicted with the unjust imprisonment of John, as that he had little
inclination to persecute any more Prophets; and when at last, after his
murdering of John, our Lords same from every side sounded in his ears, his
guilt presently imagined him John revived; and so rendered him less inquisitive
after matters that would little redound to his Honor.

Genesis 33.18. etc. the place, where Jacob, returning into Palestine from Laban,
purchased a field of the Children of Hamor, Father to Sechem, that afterward
defloured Dinah; and there first erected an Altar, probably on Mount Garizim or
Ebal, (since Altars used to be erected on the most eminent places and nearest
to Heaven) being two tops of the same Hill, near one another; where also, viz.
on Mount Ebal, God commanded the Israelites, that soon after their entrance
into Canaan, they should erect an Altar, See Deuteronomy. 27, 4. etc. -- and Josh.
8.30. etc. and also should set up some great Stones, on which plaistered over
should be written the law; and also on these two tops of the Hill, one over
against another, that there should be solemnly pronounced by the Levites, the
Benedictions and Curses, the people saying, Amen. (Which twelve Curses are
there set down, the matter of Benedictions being supposed to be the observing
the Contrary to these Maledictions, of which see more in Deuteronomy. 28.) Hereabouts
also, and perhaps in the same place, Abraham at his first entrance into Canaan,
upon Gods appearing to him in that place, built an Altar, see Genesis 12.6, 7. At
this place also Joshua assembled Israel before his Death, and made a Covenant
with them before the Lord etc. See Josh. 24.1, 26. And this Hill Garizim was so
near to this City, that Jotham is said, from the top or side of it, to have
spoken to the Sychemites Judge. 9.7. and the Samaritan woman calls it this Hill
Jo. 4.20. as a place very near to her. This City also was the first place, as
it were for a preludium, taken possession of by arms, by the seed of Abraham,
the Sons of Jacob, in revenge for dishonouring their Sister. Of which see what
Jacob says Genesis 48.22. Afterward being destroyed by Abimeleck, Judge. 9.45. it
was reedifyed by Jeroboam, and made his regal seat, Antiq. l. 11. cap. 7.8.
and so it was (says Josephus) in Sanballats time, a Gentile Governor of
Samaria, under Darius. Whose daughter being married to Manasses a Son of the
High Priest, and he for it ejected out of the Priesthood, Sanballet, calling
him into Samaria, (by Alexander the Great's leave, who had then conquered those
Provinces,) built a Temple for the worship of the God of Israel, on Mount
Garizim, in emulation of that of Jerusalem (in the rebullding of which the
Samaritans before had offered their concurrence, but was rejected, Ezra 4.2,
3.) wherein Manasses his Son-in-law should officiate. This was done some three
hundred years before our Lords Incarnation, which occasioned a Schism between
the Samaritans and the Jews, like to that former of Jeroboam, Part of these
Samaritans being Israelites; and many Jews also, when obnoxious to the Laws, or
for some other secular advantages, removing thither out of Judea. After which
times also another Anti-Temple (about one hundred and fifty years before our
Lords coming) was erected in Egypt, for the Jews flying together with Onias, a
Son of the High Priest, when as persecuted by Antiochus Epiphanes: which Temple
perished, as also the other near the time of the destruction of that in
Jerusalem; and both these foreign Temples seem preludiums of Gods worship,
shortly to be made common to the whole world. This is premised for the better
understanding of what follows.

Jews, see Luke 9.53. the other Samaritans seem herein more remiss, see verse.
56. Whilst our Lord was here left alone, a Samaritan woman came thither out of
the City to draw water. This happened also to be a woman, that had had already
five husbands, either all already deceased, or she by divorce separated from
them; for in latter times, women also used to procure divorces from their
husbands, and that now lived incontinently with one not married to her.

Jo. 7.38, 39. -- 6.35. -- Esai. 44.3.

more of her husband, presently begun to consult him concerning Religion: who
in the present division were in the right; the Samaritans, or the Jews: and
where God was more acceptably worshipped, in Mount Garizim (where the
Patriarchs, Abraham and Jacob, and afterward Joshua, by Gods appointment, and
their forefathers, that came out of Egypt, built an Altar, and offered
Sacrifices as has bin said) or at Jerusalem, a place of a latter consecration
and sanctity; the Samaritans also rejecting any testimonies produced out of the
Prophets against them; and see the vehement contest and dispute of the
Samaritans and Jews, that had bin before this in Alexandria, before Ptolemeus
Philometer made Judge in a cause Joseph. Ant. l. 13. c. 4.

Act. 15. (a thing that at this time the Samaritans would more willingly hear
of than the Jews.) And he speaks also here to her of worshipping not God in
general, but the Father, [the true worshippers will worship the Father] For
that all worship of God now was to be through Christ his Son, and by such as
were also made his Sons through Christ. Worshipping God also in Spirit seems to
be the worship of him in and by the Holy Spirit, given through Christ,
according to those expressions of our Lord to Nicodemus before, Jo. 3.6.
that which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit, and Mat. 22.43. -- David in
Spirit called him Lord. -- And of S. Paul -- whom I serve in the Spirit. Romans
1.9. -- and Romans 8.14. those, who are led by the Spirit, and verse. 9. -- Ye are
not in the flesh but in the Spirit.

replied, that she believed when the Messiah should come, he would declare all
Gods pleasure concerning his worship, and remove all the present differences.
Our Lord told her that himself was the Messiah. She hearing this, and much
transported with his former discourse, (whose words were with authority, and
setting hearts on fire,) and bidden also by him to call her husband, carelessly
leaving her water-pot behind her, ran presently into the City, (which also was
the intent of our Lords talking with her, Viz. to communicate the Gospel also
to these first fruits of the Samaritans who were half Israelites, and Midlings,
between the Jews and Gentiles,) And told them that surely the Messiah was come,
and was in the field, or at least some great Prophet, that had told her all
things that ever she had done: upon which the men of the City also hasted and
came forth unto him.

Ecclesias. 50.26; that whereas they reckoned yet four months unto harvest,
there appeared a great harvest every where to be gotten in (as it were
prenoting to them the conflux that would be made to him presently out of this
City); that the feilds were white already, and the world prepared for the
reapers; (the same Metaphor he used again afterward when in Galilee great
multitudes flocked unto him Mat. 9.37. sorry the laborers in this harvest were
so few); He proceeded also to tell them, that they were chosen to be the
reapers thereof, and to enter upon the former labors, and tillage of the
Prophets, and to gather much fruit to be stored up in life eternal: where also
both the former sowers, and they the latter reapers, should at last receive
their full wages, and rejoice together in those Heavenly Treasuries.

Mat. 15.26, -- 8.10. whom he saw extraordinarily prepared thereto. And it is
very observable (for a further conviction of the ungrateful obstinacy of the
Jews,) that this poor despised people were the first of his Auditors we read
of, that (after his first called Disciples) without also any Miracles of his
showed among them, made such a noble confession of him, saying, -- We know that
this is indeed the Christ, and the Savior of the world. Which conversion of
the Samaritans our Lord perfected some three or four years after, as our Lord
was now ascended into heaven, by sending his Apostles thither, before their
spreading further to the Gentiles. See Act. 8.5, 6. At which time also we find
the same credulity and alacrity in this people, as is here. -- And the people
(says the Text,) with one accord, gave heed unto those things which Philip
spoke; as commonly those more grossly erring are sooner convinced thereof, and
reduced to truth.



Luke 8.3, to have also bin his wife.

of which, and the great conflux of people thither, the frequency of Cities in
those parts, by reason of the extraordinary fruitfulness of the soil (some of
that part called Decapolis from the many cities there) the convenience of
passing any whither upon the Lake, and the remoteness from Jerusalem, and from
the molestation of the Pharisees, and chief Priests, things well serving our
Lords designs; Of all these I say see before.. 101, 102.

Here, says the Evangelist, Mark. 1.14. and every where as he passed along the
Country, our Lord began to preach the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, telling
them that the promised time of the coming of their Messiah was now fulfilled,
and this Kingdom at hand, that therefore they should repent and believe his
Gospel. And it seems Jo. 4.45. that this meaner and ruder people or Galilee
received him now at the first with much more honor and attention to his
doctrine than the Judeans, attracted also thereto by his miracles. Here his
Disciples, Peter and the rest, returned home; and not as yet invited to a
closer attendance, as also for the better providing for the necessities of
their families, betook themselves to their former trade off fishing: and
meanwhile our Lord, by his Miracles and healing their sick, brought in daily
greater flocks of people to hear his Sermons; this latter being his chief
design for salvation of their souls, as the other theirs, for releiving their
corporal necessities. And his fame was suddenly spread all abroad throughout
all Syria, says S. Matthew; and there followed him great multitudes from the
other parts of Galilee he had North; and from the East side of Jordan, and the
Lake; and from Judea, and Jerusalem more South; in fine, from all Quarters
round about. So that it was necessary our Lord should recollect to himself the
Disciples he had formerly called; and add some more to them; that should depart
no more from him, but give a perpetual attendance on his affairs, and assist
him in his predications, after they themselves had first, as his constant
Auditors, received from him all necessary instructions therein. He also had now
an intention, for some time, of leaving Capernaum, and making a peragration
throughout Galilee as to the places not already visited; and after this, of
crossing the Sea of Galilee, and passing to some remoter parts; being after
this to present himself at Jerusalem in the Paschal feast, now not far off. In
which travels the attendance of his Disciples was necessary to Him. Which
circuit also he began in the entrance of the week following.

Mat. 13.47.

post haec capies bomines said to Peter singly here, as the pasce oves was
after our Lords resurrection. He also much astonished hereat, falling down at
our Lords feet, acknowledged himself unworthy so great a favor; or, that our
Lord should vouchsafe his presence or conversation to so sinful a person. And
this profound humility and reverence of his made way for our Lords further
bounty and kindness; and himself still taken nearer unto him the farther
distance he imagined he ought to keep from him; bidding him not to be afraid
(for the Majesty of our Lord, from some extraordinary discovery from God Peter
had thereof, such as that in Mat. 16.17. when he was enlightened by God the
Father to know his Son, had strangely daunted him) for that he would have him
from henceforth wholly to quit his former employment, and constantly to be
with, and attend on, him and his ministry, for that he would make him now a
fisher of men, together with the rest of his companions and partners Andrew,
James, and John. All whom upon this gracious invitation immediately quitted
their Boats and Nets, and the great draught of fish he had but now bestowed
upon them, leaving also the care of their servants unto Zebedee the Father of
James, and John, and so followed our Lord now without any more departure from
him as before; Transported with this honor he did them, mean fishermen, when
also they saw the whole world, and even the great ones thereof, so admiring and
running after him. They left all (says Jansenius) -- Non ut nullam amplius cum
suis haberent consuetudinem; sed quod nulla amplius eis esset rerum suarum
cura, nullaque possessio, omnibus quae habebant relictis potestati
propinquorum. And we may gather from S. Peter's words to our Lord Mat. 19.27,
that they left all in some such manner, as the sad rich young man, being
advised to it, refused; and by our Lords reward promised there to them, we may
also gather the generality of this their fact.

Luke 4.31. he entered into the Synagogue, and there taught the people. [In
which Synagogues (or Jewish Churches) built in all places, even in Jerusalem,
were exercised; first, the Reading of Moses and the Prophets Acts 15.21. --
Luke 4.16. Then an expounding of them and Sermons of exhortation by the
learned, the Priests, Scribes, Lawyers, etc. See Act. l3.14, 15, 16. Luke 4.20.
-- 1 Cor. 14.31. In these also were used Prayer, Hymns, and Psalms (some
entiteled pro Sabbato) Collections also for the poor. Only no sacrificing, save
at the Temple in Jerusalem.] Here as our Lord taught, the people, says the
Evangelist, were astonished at his doctrine, for that his words were with
power, and he taught them as one that had authority, Mark. 1.22. Luke 4.32.
and not as the Scribes; authority, both internally with more satisfaction, and
conviction, and power over men's spirits by the Holy Ghost at the same time
working in their understandings and hearts, enlightening, subduing, enflaming,
and setting them on fire; and externally also with more assurance, and
asseveration Amen Amen dico vobis. -- Qui habet aures audiendi audiat. --
Quodscimus loquimur, telling them who sent him; and strengthening such
testimony with miracles and doing these also commandingly and with authority;
with authority commanding the evil Spirits says the Evangelist Mark. 1.27. --
Luke 4.36. Increpans, rebuking the diseases, the Seas, the Winds, all done with
great Majesty. This teaching with authority is in the Gospel frequently noted
of our Lord Mat. 7.29, after his long Sermon in the Mountain. This made the
High Priests Officers in hearing him say, Never man spoke like this man; and
the woman in his Sermon cry out, -- Blessed is the womb that bare thee: and the
brethren going to Emaus, reflect afterward upon it, that whilst he spoke their
hearts burned within them. And the men of Nazareth, that had so much prejudice
against him there meanly, and illiteratly educated, Luke 4.22. are said to have
wondered at the words of grace that proceeded out of his mouth. And many times
his Adversaries were so a mated with his speeches, Psalm. 45.2.
that they would not reply one word to him. All this according to the prophecy;
-- Diffusa est Gratia in labiis ^uis; and Esaias. 49.2. -- Os meum quafi gladius
acutus. And this Power and Spirit he communicated also to his Apostles; whence
S. Paul 1 Cor. 2.4, -- My preaching was in demonstration of the Spirit, and of
power. And 1 These. 1.5. out Gospel came to you in power and in the Holy Ghost,
and in much assurance: and so he directs Titus. Chap. 2.15.
-- Loquere, exhortare, argue cum omni imperio. Now if the Holy Spirit such in
the servants, what was it in the Lord?

Mark. 5.7, 8.) to quit his prey, or terrified with his words speaking of the
destruction of the Kingdom of Satan, cried out desiring that he would let him,
or them, alone, and not destroy them (sometimes speaking in the singular
number, and sometimes in the plural): the like request to which we find
elsewhere Mat. 8.29. and Luke 8.31. and Mark. ^.10. where in Matthew the Devils
beseech him that he would not torment them before their time; and in Luke, that
he would not send them into the Abyss; and in Mark, that not send them out of
the country. We find also several other passages in Scripture, that may further
explicate the present condition of these miserable and cursed creatures unto
us. As their being said by S. Peter, 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude 6.
and S. Jude to be reserved in chains under darkness; or, as S. Peter, to be
cast down to hell, unto, or until the judgment of the great day; Ephesians. 2.2. --
6, 12.
and S. Paul's calling Satan the Prince of the power of the Air, and these evil
Spirits the Rulers of the darkness of this [lower] world; and Satan being said
that He goes about here seeking whom he may [be permitted to] devour. 1 Pet.
5.8. (and the like is said in Job 1.7.) and the evil Spirit cast out of a man,
his being said to walk in dry and defart places, and so finds no rest there
Mat. 12.45. till permitted to return to his former lodging, by new finning,
better prepared for him; their crowding also so many of them (as they get
leave) into one person, and so much more mischevous there than a single one
could have bin, (as we hear of seven cast out of Mary Magdalen, and of the
Spirit returning with seven more worse and fiercer than himself; and of a
Legion in the furious Gadaren; and we have them answering our Lord sometimes in
the singular, sometimes in the plural number) by what is spoken Apoc. 20.3. Of
a closer imprisonment of Satan, and so of his Regiment of evil spirits that
shall be before the worlds end, than is yet for the present.

Cor. 6.3. -- Apoc. 20.10. compare 3.7. And 2ly, that, Though they are cast
down to hell, or the inner bowels of the earth full of darkness, as their
proper Prison, and place of present sufferings, whither also the souls of
wicked men descend, and are tormented with them; yet both they and the chief
Prince of them, are permitted by God to come forth of this lower prison upon
the earth, such of them and for such duration of time, and extension of place,
as the Divine Majesty pleases, for the greater exercise and trial of the just
here; and for the afflicting and executing of Gods justice on the obstinatly
wicked, sometimes even to the possessing, and inhabiting them, even many of
these evil Spirits in one man. After the same manner as the good Angels descend
from heaven, their place of Bliss, for the Protection of the just, and regular
government of this lower world against the malice of these malign Spirits.
Which evagation of evil Spirits, and their inhabiting here a less darkness, and
especially the hurt they can do to any men, seems, by some of the former
expressions, to afford some solace to them, and to be an accidentary diminution
of their present pains. Yet again, the absence of good Angels from the Court of
Heaven, and the glorious appearance of Gods Majesty there, when they sent
hither, is recompensed with the joy they have in doing Gods will, and
succouring his Servants here below, so the relaxation the Devils have from
their low imprisonment seems counterpoised in their ascent with the gnawing
grief they have here by reason of their malice its being so frequently
defeated, and the good Angels and also Holy men ruling over them, and Gods
continually bringing his greater good and Glory out of their evils, and by
their punishment, after the last day, to be increased according to the evil
also they have done on earth.

As for souls departed hence, the return of them hither out of those places of
joy, and repose above, or of torment below wherein they are received till the
last day, is much more uncertain, especially concerning the damned. And the
frequent apparitions that are made here of Saints departed; or, if any such
have bin, of some souls that are in hell, all these may be represented by the
ministry of Angels, good, or evil. Pardon this digression. Now to go on.

Mark. 3.11. where they also fell down before and worshipped him, and Luke
4.41. the Devils, says the Evangelist, came out of many, crying out, and
saying, Thou art Christ the Son of God, for they (says he) knew that he was
Christ. See also Acts 16.17, 18.) He being either made to speak this truth out
of constraint and against his will, or out of flattery, hoping so to find some
favor from him, who was neither able to carry his prey away, or himself to
quit the place. Our Lord first commands him silence, (as elsewhere Luke 4.41.
and as also the Apostles Acts 16.18.) not accepting any such testimony from the
Father of lies (which Author also might render it suspicious, and therefore
speak it, that it might not be believed) and charged him also to leave the
person. So roaring out again amain, as if dreading those greater sufferings to
which he was remitted, or at least the loss of his prey, he threw down the
person in the midst of the people, and so left him without any further hurt.
This is the first Devil that is mentioned to have bin cast out by our Lord (as
still greater works by degrees are showed by him) and the first Confession made
by them of his person, and of their subjection to him: upon which the people
much admiring cried out, what virtue and power has this man, that the Devils
straight obey his commands?

Luke 14.1. where it seems was his ordinary abode when in Capernaum. Here Simon
Peter's wives mother lay sick of a Feavor (probably seizing on her but the night
before, otherwise our Lord would have bin importuned for her sooner) whom he
presently healed with only touching her with his hand and rebuking, and
commanding the feavor to depart from her: who presently arose, and helped to
provide necessaries for them. For the rest of the day being the Sabbath, he was
free from the multitude till the evening after sun set. But then, says St.
Mark, all the City were gathered about the door; bringing their sick to be
cured, as also several possessed with Devils, whom trembling and confessing
him, as the former had done in the Synagogue, that he was Christ the Son of
God, he presently silenced them, both as unwilling to borrow any testimony from
such vile and detestable wights, and as these unseasonable now discovering the
Dignity of his person, which tended to the prevention of his sufferings, and
contradictions he was to undergo; as also proposing himself in a pattern to us
of modesty, and humility, in not permitting any thing to our own praise to be
said in our presence.

there betook himself to prayer: probably giving thanks here to God his Father
for the gracious benefits afforded to mankind by his ministry, and petitioning
for his Auditors their bringing forth worthy fruits thereof, and also for the
future like success thereof in those other parts of Galilee, of which he now
intended a visitation. And here in such his retiring into solitude, and that by
night (a time not encombred with other employments) giving us also an example
how we may best perform our devotions without distraction, by night-watching
and retirements, S. Peter and the other Disciples, when risen and missing him
in the house, went out after him, and having found, told him that all men
sought for him. And by this time also the people had discovered where he was,
and so importuned him for a longer stay, and that he would not depart so soon
from their City. But he answered them, that he must preach the Kingdom of God
also to other Cities and people, for therefore was he sent.



As for the following History of our Lords Travels, Sermons, and Miracles in
Galilee; (which are more fully related by the three first Evangelists) there
seems a great uncertainty as to the time and place of several of them; these
all endeavoring brief relations, and chiefly intending the matter, but not the
Order, as a thing of less consequence. Nor is the contexture of these stories
in the Harmonists, (though gathered by them with a most diligent and scrupulous
observation of the circumstances,) and of any necessary connection, expressed
in any one of the Evangelists; yet so evident, or agreeing with one another, as
that there does not remain probable arguments of ranging several of them
otherwise. Therefore I shall, without much solicitude or anxiety in a matter,
which seems by no industry clearly decidable nor an error therein much
damagable, choose to follow that Method wherein the most of them do consent, and
have already pitched on.



Mat. 8.18. Upon which a Scribe came to him, and offered his service to attend
upon him whithersoever he went; his intentions herein are not mentioned; but by
our Lords answer it may be suspected, that upon seeing such wonderful works of
our Lord, and such a fame of, and concourse to, him, he hoped (like Simon
Magus) the purchase of some great reputation, or gain to himself also thereby.
Our Lord the better to inform him of the hardship, and poverty of such a
service, told him; that the Foxes [perhaps intimating therein the cunning and
wise men of this world] had provided themselves holes, and the wandering birds
nests where to repose, and retire themselves; but the Son of man had not where
to lay his head. For our Lord had no house, no possessions of his own, even in
Capernaum was only a sojourner in another house, probably Peter's: and in his
travels and peragrations it seems by Mark. 1.45. took up his lodgings on nights
sub dio in desert places; His great fame also and conflux of people to him
hindering, says the Evangelist, that he could no more openly enter into the
Cities. Which deserts in any remission of business, and vacancy from the crowds
of people, he made use of for prayer Luke 16. So ( Mark. 6.46.) at night after
he had miraculously fed such a multitude, he went higher into the Mountain, and
there taking up his lodging (and it seems by what happened to his Disciples in
a very tempestuous night) continued, in prayer till the fourth watch, or the
third hour in the morning. And again Mat. 15.32. he is said to have remained
three days together in a desert Mountain, and many thousands with him, among
which many women also and children, whom it seems much transported with his
discourses, and having taken little care of themselves, he miraculously fed,
that they might not be famished. And the like was his practice at Gethsemane,
at the foot of Mount Olivet, at the times when he preached in Jerusalem. Yet
surely such hardships our Lord underwent, not necessitated thereto, either for
want of friends, and benefactors, who had obliged so many with his miracles, or
also of an inheritance (though this small) from his parentage; but such poverty
and dereliction of all things he rather chose, for a single attendance, without
any other solicitudes, or embarrasments whatever on the Gospel, because the
labourer he knew, at least from the Divine provision, could not want his
salary, viz. necessaries; and also for a recommendation of the like condition
to others that desired to be more perfect. And some such thing we see he
proposed to the young rich man upon the account of attaining perfection Mat.
19.21. with which answers of our Lord, it is probable the Scribe here (as that
young man) disheartened, cooled-in, and receded from his former purpose, and
pretentions.

constant attendance upon our Lord, either freely on their own accord, or also
by him invited to it, only requested his leave to dispatch one business first,
and this in order thereto; the one of them the burying of his Father; news
being supposed to have come then suddenly to him of his death, a matter
seemingly of great piety, and capable also of no long retardment, or delay
(though some other Commentators, think that his Father being aged, and near his
Grave, the Disciple desired to be dispensed with till after his death.) The
other desired his permission only first to show the civility to his friends and
kindred at home of bidding them Adieu; a thing of less stay or demur than the
other. Yet our Lord to show us the great importance of immediately prosecuting
good purposes, and especially the things belonging to the Kingdom of God; and
the nothingness of, and danger of temptation by, such secular diversions, and
Ceremonies, franckly denies both these seeming small and reasonable requests.
Answering them in Parables or Metaphors.

Coloss 3.2.
and of those of his Relations, dead to God and spiritual things; and that
there was enough of them to do this office to his Father; and that the
employment, he was graciously invited to, was not to bury but raise the Dead to
newness of life. To the other; that whosoever puts his hands once to the Plow and
looks back, is not fit for the Kingdom of God; for if the Plowman looks back
but for a minute, his plow cannot go right. Signifying, in both his answers,
great intentiveness and diligence without any distractions, required in
prosecuting that only business, our Salvation; and especially such as are
employed in the procuring also the salvation of others; and seeing much better
then they the harm to their new good resolutions that might be incurred by
these impediments; that the one in burying his Father, would next be engaged
about settling the inheritance too; and the other by his kindred disheartened in
his present good purposes; and allured by some other baits from further
pursuing them. Which answers of our Lord call to mind the Lesson elsewhere to
his Disciples Matt. 6. Quaerite regnum Dei, reliqua adjicientur, and to Martha,
concerning unum necessarium, and his Admonition Luke 17.31. -- non descendat in
domum tollere vasa sua, -- and memores estote uxoris Lot, and S. Paul's
practices, Phil. 3.13.
-- Quae retro sunt obliviscens, ad priora contendo.

pillow; when by the waves beating into the Ship, and it already seeming full
of water, and ready to sink, the Disciples, exceedingly affrighted, having
forborne hitherto to disturb our Lords rest, suddenly awaked him, saying,
Master, Master, save us, we perish. Whereupon he straight rebuked the Wind, and
the Sea, saying, Peace be still; and then blamed them not for repairing to him
in this their danger, but for their great fear, and want of faith, as he does
very frequently: want of faith in God; who expects a confidence in him (which
also cannot be without some degree of love of him) not only in the just and his
Servants, but also in sinners (among whom also the just ought to reckon
themselves) a confidence suitable to the most vigilant Divine providence,
extended not only to the good, but to all the Creation. Whilst he is, as
exceeding faithful to the righteous, so exceeding merciful also to sinners,
when they make their humble addresses to him; and this also is a great honor
to his mercy, that sinners also believe in it; and this faith also in them is a
very effectual means of receiving such his mercies. But our Lord might much
more blame their want of faith in him, after that they had now acknowledged him
the Son of God, and seen so many of his former Miracles.

After his rebuking the winds and Sea, followed immediately a great calm, and a
very great wonder and astonishment, and fear, and reverence of him (timuerunt
timore magno) both in the Disciples, and those in the other Ships accompanying
him (partakers we may suppose both of the same danger, and deliverance); this
being the first miracle they had seen of this kind.



Upon his arrival presently two possessed and strangely distracted, with some
torn rags about them, came running toward him (which if they had not of
themselves none could have brought them to him) and fell at his feet, and
worshipped him. Both of them hideous spectacles, but one much fiercer than the
other, who tore all his cloths, and day and night making grievous outcries cut
his flesh with sharp stones, and who having bin often bound with chains, when
the fits came on him brake them in pieces, nor could he be shut up in any
house; but both of them ranged in the Mountain, and among the Tombs (which
were placed out of the cities, and commonly dug in some rocky places, see 2
King. 23.16) places of greater horror sought out by the Devil in which these
men lay, and were so outrageous against any they met with, as none durst pass
by that way. Yet so soon as our Lord was landed they came submissively to him
(for the Devils soon perceived his presence, and had had already some
intimation from him of their departing and releasing those miserable
creatures;) And first, like the former possessed person in the Synagogue,
confessing who he was, and pleading they molested not, nor gave any affronts
to, him, they besought and then adjured him by God (by whose eternal laws their
extreme sufferings were yet deferred) that he would not presently send them
away into the Abyss, nor torment them before the time (of which see before.
210.) nor yet expel them out of that country; these having by Gods permission
perhaps certain regions and circuits of their ranging assigned to them, wherein
they are with all diligence to serve their Prince, the God of this world, as
the Apostles style him, and being perhaps more addicted to the places wherein
they have done much mischief.

God has over us, that the malice of so many thousands of them should be
confined to, and imprisoned as it were in, one person; and lastly, from which
is manifested the great Majesty and power of our Lord not only over single, but
whole armies and Legions of them, supplicating at his feet, and flattering him
with his Titles.

Levit. 7.^1. Deuteronomy. 14.8.
to punish thus a fault in the owners of them, if Israelites; nourishing such
numbers of them, which were only saleable to strangers, and neglecting
provisions more serviceable to their own people, or Country: Or, if these swine
kept by forraigners only, to punish the affront, and contempt thus offered to
the Jewish Nation, and their laws, in a country rightly belonging to their
possession. 4ly. Lastly to show the perpetual mischiefs, and damages these evil
Spirits could, and would do even to any thing belonging to us, if they were not
restrained by the divine goodness.



gratis, that they shall be qualified on our side with no other Crosses, by
which price as it were we may seem to purchase them of him, though the one be
unconsiderable in respect of the other. There must be here usually some
tarantello joined with the bello. And these people, by the undiscreet
impatience of a small damage with which our Lord made the trial of them, lost
an unvaluable treasure and reward for it, viz. the Gospel (that now came to
visit them) and the rescue of their whole country from the spiritual slavery of
Satan.

De Bell. Judaic. 5. c. 3. was the chief Metropolis of that whole country, and
who were the only people, that whilst all the world courted and run after him,
desired to be rid of him) making no reply, and being not departed far from the
Ship that brought him, returned into it, not receiving for himself or his poor
Disciples the least hospitality or refreshment from them; and, as he had said a
little before to the Scribe, not having there, where to lay his Head. Only the
man that was dispossessed of the Legion (cured we see in soul as well as body)
followed still after him; and when they took shipping, desired he might go with
them, perhaps having some fears lest left behind, the Devils expelled should
reseize upon him. But it was our Lords pleasure that he should rather abide in
his own Country, that had seen his former misery; and He, who elsewhere forbad
others to speak of the cures, and mercies showed them, yet commands him there
to publish the miracle he had wrought and proclaim how great things God (to
whom our Lord here for our example ascribes his good actions) had done for him,
and had had compassion on him, to publish it I say in a place where they were
so little sensible of it. Nordid our Lord that we read of ever return to this
place again; observing that lesson he gave to his Disciples, not to cast pearls
before swine; nor force the Gospel and religion, and as it were endeavor to
break open the doors of men's understandings upon them; that teaching being most
what without success that is not willingly received. Unless we may imagine this
repulse came from the Divine Providence, that this eastern side of the Lake,
half-Gentile (as the great number of their swine also intimates) should not as
yet be enlightened with the Gospel (as neither the Samaritans) till it first
amply preached to the main body of the 12 Tribes.

the door) gathered to him to hear his Sermons, and to bring to him their sick;
among which multitude were many great persons, Pharisees, and Doctors of the
Law, come from Judea as well as Galilee. In the house, then, he taught the
people; and healed all the sick that could get to him, the Pharisees and
Doctors, as persons of more note, there sitting by him; and narrowly observing
all his words, and actions.



their faith, not only of the sick man, but of his porters, Mark. 2.5.
(as he used to relieve one for the faith and prayers of another, as for the
Cananean woman's faith, he cured her daughter; and for the Centurions faith, his
Servant; and for one man's sake gives also grace, and faith to another; which
grace and faith given renders him capable also of further favors) first
applied himself to the cure of his greatest necessity, and infirmity, though
less in sight, that of the Soul; graciously calling him his Son, and bidding
him to be of good cheer, for that his sins were forgiven him.

In which action he intended also; first, to instruct us that all our corporal
sufferings come because of sin (see Jo. 5.14. what our Lord said to another
impotent man that he should sin no more least something worse happened), though
not these inflicted on all sinners, nor always chiefly for our sins (see Jo.
9.3.) nor on every one proportionably according to their sin, that we may judge
none rashly. 2ly. Again, to show us that the sanity of our souls is much more
important, and valuable than that of the body; and what ought chiefly to be
sought by us from him. 3ly. Lastly, to manifest that he was sent from God the
Savior of mankind, and came with authority from his Father to remit the sins
thereof, as Zachary, and the Angel to Joseph, and the Baptist, had foretold of
him. But yet we may observe here a certain modesty used by our Lord in his
expression, saying, not remitto, but remittuntur tibi, which might have bin
understood in such a sense, as the Prophet Nathan's to David 2 Samuel 12.13.
remittuntur i. e, a Domino; But, notwithstanding, these words heard by the
Scribes, and Pharisees, that sat by, gave them great offense, this appearing
to them no less than blasphemy, and the making himself God.

Chap. 2.8.
and what they reasoned within themselves; though as overawed by the peoples
esteem of him, that they forbear as yet openly to accuse him thereof, presently
replied to these their cogitations (which might have bin another indication to
them of his Deity, none save God also knowing thoughts) and declared to them,
that the Son of man (for so he humbly styles himself) had received from his
Father such power here on earth in behalf of mankind, as to forgive the sins
thereof: and which power also the afterward delegated to other men his
Apostles, and their successors, see John 20. and they also practicing it in
persona Christi 2 Cor. 2.10. -- Jam. 5.14. to this indeed, the curing of these
diseases of the Soul, not those of the Body, and the remission of men's sins,
and the purchasing thereof by his blood, being the principal business of his
coming into this world. And that they might be ascertained of this, he told
them also that he had received the power of doing that, in attestation of that,
which would seem to them a much harder matter, than the saying to this man that
his sins were forgiven him, (in which they had no means to know the truth of
his words) namely of making this Paralitick, that lay before them, sound and
well, and himself to carry away the bed on which others brought him hither.
Which at our Lords command was done accordingly; the man passing thus through
the multitude wonderfully astonished at it, and going through the streets
glorifying God: this carriage of his couch brought thither by four men being an
undeniable indication of the perfection of his Cure.

Mat. 18.17. Let him be unto thee as an heathen man, and a Publican
Notwithstanding this, our Lord before the Pharisees and multitude that followed
him, stops at this rich Publican's Office; and in the midst of his Accounts
calls him to leave all and yield a continual attendance on his person: and
indeed not only to have the honor of an Apostle, but of being one of the four
Evangelists, that afterward writ his life; and S. Matthew also did this the
first and more copiously than the others, reduced afterward into a short
compendium by S. Mark.

This action of our Lord was beheld by the people, and especially by the
Pharisees, with great astonishment; that he who pretended to so much sanctity
should make choice of such a scandalous servant; but no less, that his words
should have such a sudden influence upon one so much immersed in the world,
and at that very time so attent on his accounts; for says St. Luke, he
presently left all, rose up, and followed him. Luke 5.28.
But the Glory and wisdom of our Lord was exceedingly set forth in this
passage: whereby he first showed them again what he had said before, that he
had power to forgive sins, and what he said to them afterward, that he came
not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance; that by the example of his
own humility, condescendence, and mercy to the most despised conditions,
endeavoring to abate the Pharisees pride, and encourage, like the Baptist
before him, all penitents in what ever state of life, to apply themselves to
him; not breaking a bruised reed, or extinguishing the smoking flax: but above
all, whereby he showed that he did not find, but make fit for his service,
those whom he admitted to it; and acted all things with a great Majesty over
men's spirits, like a God and himself: this operation upon the mind of the
Publican in the midst of his business being a greater miracle than that done
but now upon the Body of the Paralytick.

factum est cum occubaret in domo, without an (ipsius): and so also when he
names himself, he adds Publican and Matthew the Publican chap. 10.3.) which
Feast also served for a farewell entertainment to his friends and former
acquaintance, a many of which were Publicans: and so also these sat down at
the Table and eat with our Lord, and his Disciples; in which matter of eating
and drinking, the Jews especially used the greatest caution of any defilement,
and therefore the Pharisees refused the invitement, or to mix with such a
Society. And now their displeasure, growing to the height, began to break into
words, which before was smothered in their thoughts.

Luke 7.39.
Upon which account the Pharisee elsewhere wonders that our Lord would suffer
Mary Magdalen to touch him; and from his companying with such liberty they
aspersed him as a glutton and a wine-bibber.]

Our Lord overhearing them, or otherwise knowing their words then, as their
thoughts before, first answered them, as usually, in a Parable: that they that
are found and whole need not the company of the Physician, but they that are
sick. And thus he justified such his conversation upon the account of his being
a Physician, and sent not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance (so
his disciples were excused as being there not for theirs but his company). But
otherwise doubtless, for these, that are not spiritual Physicians but
themselves also sick, such company ought most carefully to be declined 1 Cor.
6.10. 2 These. 3.14. all sin being very contagious, and also, by our withdrawing
from it, to be discouraged. This account given for himself; He also, knowing
the Pharisees great defect herein, zealous in their show of service toward God,
but failing in their charity, and mercy toward their neighbor, bids them learn
better the meaning of that saying in Osee. Chap. 6.6.
-- I will have mercy and not Sacrifice, God preferring mercy to our Brethren
before Sacrifice to himself. By which most prudent answer of his those poor
penitents, that surrounded our Lord, received much consolation, and the
Hypocritical Pharisees an inward conviction and confusion.

Luke 11.1. as our Lords disciples afterward did from him; and from the erant
jejunantes Mark. 2.18. some think this was one of their fasting days. These
therefore, rather chosen to be the speakers, more to aggravate the matter from
the rules and prescriptions of the Baptist, one so much commended by our Lord,
applied themselves now to our Lord himself; but questioned him only concerning
his disciples, as before they asked the disciples concerning him. And it was at
a very seasonable time too, when they both came but now from a feast: their
demand was why, whenas both they and the Pharisees used frequent fasts, his
Disciples did not so, but did eat and drink; thinking hereby to force him
either to condemn fasting, or his own followers for omitting it.

prejudicing his Order; nor as yet discovering the Pharisees Hypocrisy in their
fasting, which he well knew (see Mat. 6.16.) answers them again in a
Parabolical manner; first, that the children of the bride-chamber could not
mourn and fast whilst the Bridegroom was with them, in a time of joy and a
ready supply from him all-powerful of all their requests and desires; but that
the days would come, when the Bridgrome should be taken from them, and then
they should fast in those days: Fast, and also make prayers in such a
superlative degree, as that those of the Baptists disciples and of the
Pharisees were no way to be compared to what has bin practiced since in the
Church of Christ. And among the Christian fasts our Lord also is thought here
to have had a special regard to the solemnizance of Lent, which the Church
should observe for ever; specially relating to this Bridgroome at that time his
being taken away from her by a most cruel death. But after this reason of his
disciples not mourning and fasting for the present, the joyful presence of the
Messiah, Our Lord adds another, but this also delivered in Parable; viz. that a
new piece of cloth was not to be sowed on an old garment, lest the rent should
thereby be made worse: nor new wine poured into old bottles, lest so they
should be burst and the wine spilt; intimating, that for the present, before
their renovation by the Holy Spirit, his Disciples were not as yet so capable
of receiving or practicing the strictness and severity of the Evangelical
Counsels; but by the rigor of them, if now unseasonably applied, some of them
might rather be discouraged and apt to fall away from their new profession: as
also he told his disciples, a little before his passion, that he had many
things to say to them, which as yet at that time they could not bear Jo. 16.12.

flowed originally from our Lord the fountain thereof; and which from this Lord
was daily to be increased in them, as in his new disciples. As for the
disciples practice of fasting after the Bridgroom's departure, see Act. 13.3.
-- 17.22. -- 27.21. -- 2 Cor. 6.5. -- 11.27. 1 Cor. 7.5. -- 9. ult. And in all
times from the beginning, where was an absence of the Bridgroome and any
adversity, or distress, fasting joined with prayer was repaired to as a remedy;
public, 1 Esdras 8.21. -- Judith. 4.8. -- 2 Chronicles. 10.3. -- Jonah. 3.5. --
Ester. 4.16: Private, 2 Samuel 12.6. 1 King. 21.17. -- Dan. 9, 3. -- 10.3. etc.



Our Lord, though he could presently with a word, and without a journey, have
cured his daughter as he had done before the noblemans Son; yet graciously
bearing with the infirmity of the Rulers faith (who thought his coming to her,
and imposing his hands upon her necessary to her recovery) and also the more to
oblige him, and heighten the miracle by the account which afterward happened,
went along with him together with his disciples, and a crowd of people toward
his house.

Matt. 9.20.
For the fringe, so it was, that God would have his own people distinguished
from the rest of the world, as in their flesh by circumcision, so externally
and visibly by his appointing upon the border of their garment round about to
be worn a blew or Heaven and Sky-colored ruban (which the Pharisees loved also
to have broader than ordinary); to the end (says the Text Numb. 15.39.) that
they looking upon it (both their own and that of another) should remember all
Gods commandments, to do them: and not seek after [the lusts of] their own
hearts, and eyes. Some therefore think the woman's devotion directed more
particularly to the hem of our Lords vest as counted more sacred. Of which see
what is said Zachar. 8.23. But the other Evangelists express it more generally
of her touching any part of his clothes; which her desire as soon as the woman
had attained, she perceived her blood presently stopped. So that afterward,
when this thing better known in their bringing to our Lord Mat. 14.37, 36. very
many sick, they besought him, for saving more trouble that they might only
touch the Hem of his garment, and so many as did it were cured. This woman,
then according to her faith, coming behind him, and touching secretly his
cloths, had immediately her blood stopped: Only in this deficient, that she
thought this might happen without his knowledge.

Hist. 7. l. 14. c.
Eusebius relates this woman to have bin an inhabitant of Cesarea Philippi, and
there in gratitude before her door to have erected a brazen statue of our Lord,
and another of hers prostrate at his feet: and that under our Lords statue grew
an unknown kind of herb, which when so high as that it touched our Lords vest,
reaching to his ankles, was medicinable and cured any disease. This Statue
Eusebius says he had the curiosity to go to the city, and there saw: which
Zozomen says was afterward caused to broken by Julian the Apostate, Lib. 5.
cap. 20.
and his own placed instead thereof; But this by lightening to have bin cut in
the middle, and the upper part thrown down to the ground. -- Ex quo quidem
tempore, says he, ad hodiernum diem atra, tanquam fulminis ictu, ambusta manet.



Come to the House all was found full of lamentation, the minstrels and solemn
Mourners according to the custom of the Jews See Jer. 9.17. -- 2 Chronicles. 35.25.
were called thither, and by their doleful Notes and Voices (according to the
design of these) excited the grief of all those friends and acquaintance, that
came to lament with the Parents of the deceased. Our Lord commanded their
silence, and slighted the matter, to do this great miracle with the more
privacy, so the less, as yet, to provoke the envy and persecution of the
Pharisees, as also to be a pattern herein to us of avoiding applause. He
excluded all others, and took only into the room the parents of the Damsel,
and three of the Disciples (a competent number for witnesses); and taking the
deceased maid by the hand bid her arise; which she presently did (her soul
returning to her) and walked before them; Our Lord, to show the cure perfect,
bidding them to give her some food: the parents and Disciples must needs be
much astonished hereat. This being for the Rulers honor, and rewarding of his
patience, the first of the only three persons our Lord raised from the dead
during his whole life time. And therefore this, as the first, done with more
secrecy; the raising of the widows Son more openly, and of Lazarus again more
publicly than that. And his power herein also was manifested by several
degrees. First, this maid was raised not long after deceased, and whilst yet
lying in her bed: but the widows Son when already carried forth to be buried;
And lastly Lazarus, after his having bin buried, and lain four days in his
Grave. The Parents then being enjoined secrecy, but no way persuaded thereto,
thinking it a part of their gratitude to divulge it, Our Lord departed toward
his own lodging in Capernaum.

of their sight, and stiling him the Son of David; i. e, the promised Son to
whom the Kingdom of David should be restored (see Luke 1.32. and see the like
of other blind men Mat. 12.23. and Mark. 10.47, 52.) which was an act of great
faith in them. Our Lord took no notice of them in public, but when come into
the house he first, to try and strengthen their faith, asked them whether they
believed that he was able to do such a thing: and then touching their eyes with
his hands imputed the cure to their faith; enjoining them also secrecy but in
vain to men so overjoyed. As these cured blind men went out from our Lord, they
brought to him one possessed with a Devil, that rendered him dumb, and
speechless. Which Devil being cast out, the dumb presently had his speech
restored to him; the people wondering and praising God, the Pharisees raging and
blaspheming, and divulging among the people (when their mouths were stopped as to
his other miracles) that for his ejecting Devils, he did it by the power of the
Prince of the Devils (with whom he was in league) over the rest his Subjects:
perhaps by them now at first in our Lords absence, but afterward in his
presence too: where we shall also meet with our Lords answer to it.

Jo. 4.35, 42. and his visiting all the Cities and Villages thereof, teaching
in their Synagogues, preaching the Gospel, healing their sick, and doing many
miracles, among which was the raising of the Rulers young daughter deceased to
life; the next Paschal feast of the Jews now approached being the second of
those feasts succeeding his baptism, and he now in the thirty second year of
his age. For the Celebration whereof our Lord together with his Disciples went
up to Jerusalem: whose words and actions there are delivered to us by S. John,
writing after the rest of the Evangelists, and supplying many things omitted by
them: who declares chiefly these his words and actions transacted in Galilee,
the place of our Lords ordinary residence for declining the fury of the
Pharisees, and Rulers of the Jews, till the appointed time of his Death was at
hand.

Exodus 20.10. and particularly bearing of any burdens Jer. 17.21, 22; which
thing, when discovered by the great ones among the Jews to have bin done by our
Lord, so highly enraged them, says the Text, as instead of magnifying him for
so great and charitable a Miracle, they not only persecuted, but thought to
stay, him, for causing such a breach of the Sabbath Jo. 5.16. The Story is
this. Near the Sheep-or beast-Gate, and not far from the Temple was a great
pool, said to have bin made first by Solomon, where the Sacrifices were to be
washed, and made clean before they were carried into the Temple. This pool
serving for such an Holy use, an Angel of God at certain times, but uncertain
when, or how often, or whether more usually at the feasts, descended and moved
or troubled, and muddied, or ruffled the waters thereof. After which motion
discerned, the first person any way infirm of his limbs, lame, blind, withered,
paralytical, etc. that could get into the water, was immediately and perfectly
cured: (which curing of one only shows it to proceed from a peculiar divine
dispensation, and not any natural cause; and this because rarity recommends and
sets a great value on Gods works, as we see our Lord also, of many infirm, that
then lay here, cured only one). In the five porches thereof, built for this
purpose, and the place therefore called Bethesda, i. e. Domus misericordiae,
lay a multitude of infirm people, waiting for the troubling of the water. Among
these was a poor man lying on a bed, that had labored under his infirmity
thirty-eight years, inveterate, and incurable, who also had lain there a long
time; by reason of his poverty having no help, and still prevented by others
stepping into the moved water before him.

bad him presently take up his bed and walk. Upon which the impotent man was
instantly cured, and carrying his bed on the Sabbath, was presently questioned
by the Jews (probably these inquirers being either the Pharisees, great zelots
for the Sabbath, or some of their Disciples) for the breach of it in so doing;
who answered them, that he was bid to do so by the person that cured him. But
our Lord, there being a throng of people in the place, he presently conveyed
himself away, and returned into the Temple. All which occasioned the cure to be
more taken notice of, and the person looked after that had done it; nor could
the poor man give any account of him. But a little after he repairing also to
the Temple, probably there to render more solemn thanks to God for his cure,
Our Lord now discovers himself to him, and minding him of the mercy he had
received, exhorted him to amendment of life, least a worse thing yet should
happen unto him [ in die irae if not in this, Romans 2.4, 5.
yet after this, life.]

Mat. 11.5.) whether this were on Sabbath, or week days, or whoever should
suffer scandal thereat. But his answer now again was made by them worse than
his fault; collecting hence an higher accusation for destroying him, because
(faith the Text) he not only has broken the Sababth, Jo. 5.18.
but said also that God was his Father, and made himself equal with God, (which
equality had the Jews miscollected from our Lords words, as the Arrians say
they did, probably our Lord, or the Evangelist, would have reflected on it.)

his former discourse, and took this opportunity to declare to them plainly and
fully who he was; his Union and intimacy with God his Father, and why he was
sent by and from him into the world: and with what authority and power: that
all might provide for their Salvation by the believing in, and the honoring
of, him, as they did the Father. See his Sermon made to them Jo. 5. The chief
Contents whereof were these. That in nothing he sought his own will [our Lord
having the same natural affections as other men, but these in all things
subjected to the Divine good pleasure and disposal] but the will of his Father.
That he did nothing of himself but what he saw his Father do, and that as he
heard of him so he judged: that all judgment also was by the Father committed
into his hands; (see the like Mat. 11.27. -- Jo. 3.35.) and the power of doing
whatever the Father does. That every one, who heard his words and believed that
God had sent him, should not come into condemnation [.i. e. for his former sins
now remitted in him], but was passed from death to life [speaking of death and
life spiritual and eternal, and of their regeneration thereto by the Spirit,
See 1 Jo. 3.14.] that they who marvelled now so much at the present works he
did, namely in curing of diseases, etc. should yet hereafter see far greater
from him; namely, upon the hearing of his voice [by the Archangel] all that are
in their graves coming forth, and receiving from him their final doom; the
good to the resurrection of life, the evil to the resurrection of damnation
[the like things of his hereafter coming in the clouds, etc. he told to them
before his passion Mat. 26.64. and to Nathanael Jo. 1.51. Angels waiting upon
him, and going hither and thither as he sent them] that therefore it was the
Fathers pleasure, that all should believe in, and do honor unto, the Son as
they did to the Father; whose words and actions were the same, and they saw and
heard God the Father in the Son.

And concerning his being such a person, and the words he spoke to them Truth,
that they had an abundant testimony (though considering his person, his own was
sufficient Jo. 8.14, 16.) First from his Father, Mat. 17.5. which is mentioned
again by S. Peter, 2 Epis. 1.16, 17. and at his solemn entrance into Jerusalem
before his passion; God the Father then from heaven speaking to him, Jo. 12.20,
23. perhaps for a testimony also to the Greeks, or Gentiles (see Jo. 7.35.) who
then first, admitted by the Apostles, came to worship, and to make their humble
addresses, to him: which foresignifyed salvation to be shortly after
communicated to them by his now approaching death.] And aagain 2ly. that
testimony which his Father gave to him in the Miracles which he wrought by him,
which testimony he frequently urges, Jo. 10.25, 38. -- 15.24. 2ly. A Testimony
from John the Baptist (though having that of God he needed not that of men)
which John was sent before him amongst them as a burning and shining light,
till the time he was to be eclipsed, and silenced; and they, some of them at
least, were willing for a season to rejoice in his light. Jo. 1.45. Deuteronomy.
18.15.18. where, upon petitioning that they might not hear again the voice of
God, nor see that terrible fire etc, he tells them that God would raise them up
a Prophet like unto him, and would put his own words into his mouth, etc: and
to him they should hearken; whose words would sufficiently accuse unto God his
Father their infidelity, though our Lord should hold his peace. But that
notwithstanding such witness, and evidences they would not believe, because
they had not the love of God in them; nor (as our Lord did) sought the honor
that only comes from him, through whatever worldly disesteem; but was envious,
ambitious, (which shows he spoke chiefly to the Pharisees and their Disciples,
see Mat. 23.5.) and intended only the advancement of their own honor with men,
[which they saw our Lords eclypsed]. They sought to justify themselves before
men, says S. Luke, 16.15. and they did their works that they might have glory
of men, Mat. 6.2. and they loved the praise of men, says S. John, more than
the praise of God. Jo. 12.42. and this ruined their faith, founded on humility
and obedience, and sancta stultitia ut sapiens fiat 1 Cor 3.18. that therefore,
whilst now they thus rejected him (who coming in great humility, spoke all
things unto them in the name of God his Father, and no way magnifyed himself,
nor sought, as they, his own Glory Jo. 7.18. -- 8.50.) by Gods just judgment
upon them, they should hereafter be given up to follow others, who came to them
in their own name, many seducers and false Prophets, neither by true miracles,
or other testimony showing their Commission from God, as he did. Which things
were eminently fulfilled, by this nation prone to follow those who pretended
themselves Prophets, not long after our Lords ascent into heaven; by many Heads
of their factions provoking the Roman Armies, and the destruction of the Nation
following upon it.



On the first Sabbath succeeding the Paschal feast [as S. Lukes word (...) is
commonly understood, in reckoning in the seven Sabbaths till Pentecost, from
the second day of the Paschal-feast]. On this, or some other so called, Our
Lord with his disciples, perhaps in his removal now toward Galilee, after the
feast ended, (or, as some think, in his going from Mount Olivet through the
vale to Jerusalem;) passed through some cornfieldsd; probably in going to some
Synagogue, there to instruct the people, as was his ordinary practice on the
Sabbath; and as may be conjectured from the multitude of people that followed
him, and among them some Pharisees, who quitted him not, watching most narrowly
all his ways, words, and actions, for materials of accusation against him. Now
some shorter journeys on the Sabbath were not disallowed, because of repairing
to the public places of Gods service, when at some distance from men's
habitations. In this field, the Disciples, or some of them at least, being much
an hungered, began, as they passed, to pluck the ears of corn, and so rubbing
them in their hands, to eat it; a thing indulged by the law to any travelers,
through their Neighbors corn. Deuteronomy. 23.25. and a thing commonly done, had it
not bin on the Sabbath; and so this labor done in it, Viz. of rubbing the
ears in their hands. For it seems on other Festival days, besides the seventh
day of the week, (which festivals were also called Sabbaths See Lev. 23.11,
15.24, 32.) though in these also they were prohibited the doing of any servile
work, yet they might then do any thing relating to preparing their diet, see
Exodus 12.16. But on the seventh day they were prohibited any work whatever. See
Levit. 23.7. comp. 3. even in order also to their daily food, as to making any
fire for dressing it, etc. Exodus 35.3. Though this again could not be so
strictly understood, as that no motion might be used on that day in order to
our diet, as the carrying or setting it on a Table, the cutting of it into
pieces, or putting it in their mouths. And the Disciples food here seems to be
a provision ready-dressed, there only remaining their picking it out of the ear
to put it in their Mouths. The Pharisees, straight observing this their rubbing
of the ears, instead of any Compassion toward the poor disciples, who endured
much hardship, both as to diet and lodging, in this ambulatory life of the Lord
they waited on, fell on quarrelling again at their breach herein of the
Sabbath, and hereof made their complaint to our Lord.

To whom he answered, but out of the Scriptures, several things, all intimating
that these zelots were too strict and scrupulous in this matter. He represented
to them then, that David, in a kind of necessity, was excused in eating of the
Proposition Bread, and prohibited to any save the Priests: That the Priests in
the Temple on the Sabbath-daies, for the necessary performance of their office,
profaned the Sabbath, Viz. in the work of repairing the fire on the Altar,
killing and preparing the Sacrifices, etc. and were blameless herein; whence
the Jewish proverb, that -- In Templo non est Sabbathum: which Temple if it
excused them, that there was here one greater than the Temple, the attendance
on whom, and the wanting of other necessary provision, might excuse the
Disciples in this fact. That himself was Lord and Author also of the Sabbath,
(as also of the whole law) and a Judge of the true observance or breach thereof;
(our Lord taking occasion every where to let them know who he was, that so they
might believe in, and have salvation by, him). And that the Sabbath being made
for the benefit of man, the rest thereof was not extended to deprive him of any
necessaries. And besides these, he pressed them again with that place in Hosee
-- I will have mercy and not Sacrifice. -- Herein upbraiding their hypocritical
pretenses of sacrifice, religious ceremonies, and the worship of God, to
discountenance works of mercy and charity; which on this day, as to others, so
much more may be performed to our selves; and this in particular of repairing
our bodies therein with necessary sustenance: that therefore if they had well
known what that saying meant, they would not have condemned the guiltless. Thus
our Lord, where his urging misericordiam volo non sacrificium, and David's, and
the Priests fact in a case of necessity, argues his disciples, though it is
probable in a morning (as his own hungring was Mat. 21.18.) much pinched with
hunger; and that in this ambulatory and Pilgrim life, they made many poor meals
and missed many; and so their Master too; And that the same happened to them
for lodging. And therefore he forewarned the Scribe that would attend on him.
Mat. 8.19. what he must expect.

been and male facere, in any necessity of our neighbor; the non-releiving of
which, if in our power, is a sin); to which they being silent, not only to let
him go forward in his purpose, but because they knew not what safely to answer:
he demanded further, who among them having one Sheep fallen into a pit, would not
straight go, lay hold of it, and pull it out on the the Sabbath: and then how
much a man better than a sheep, and a greater charity this, where less our own
interest? And thus (says the Text) when he had looked round about on them with
anger, being grieved for the hardness of their hearts: upon his only bidding
the man stretch forth his hand, and his doing so, it was restored whole as the
other. Where it seems somewhat hard to find a breach of the Sabbath, as to any
corporal work. Our Lord held his hands still, touched him not, only spoke to
him: the man stretched out his hand; and who does not this on the Sabbath
without guilt? yet it appears they were, though silenced, not satisfied, but
rather more filled with madness.

Mat. 22.16. combining with the Pharisees, and questioning our Lord about the
lawfulness of paying tribute. And in Mark. 8.15. Our Lord warns his Disciples
to be-ware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of Herod, i.e. of the Herodians,
where S. Mat. c. 16.6. says of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the
Saducees. It seems then they were a looser and more profane Sect, much what of
the Saducee-opinions, much more addicted to, and complying with, Herod, and the
present Roman Government, than the Pharisees were, and so sufficiently odious
to them: but yet these, as siding with the Secular state, able to do more
mischief, and so they were made use of by the Pharisees in the persecution of
our Lord. With these then the Pharisees consulted how they might destroy our
Lord, and that presently, as appears by his sudden removal out of that place,
which (probably) was Capernaum. From whence he went (as he used) to the Sea of
Tiberias, giving order to his disciples, that a small ship should wait upon
him, so to avoid the press of the people, and more commodiously to teach them
out of the ship. For an infinite multitude of them from all Quarters, from the
coasts of Tire and Sidon, and of the other side of Jordan, and from Idumea, as
well as Judea, and Galilee, followed him what way ever he moved. Partly for
hearing his most admirable and ravishing discourses, and prudent answers,
partly for having their sick cured by him; cured without suffering any repulse
or delay; and all diseases whatever equally remedied, and no more necessary for
it than only the touching of him. Which thing also caused the greater press
upon him, and forced him to the help of a ship. As for the possessed, the
unclean Spirits presently fell down and adored, and with loud cries confessed
him to be the Son of God, though rebuked by him for it and silenced.

Where S. Matthew, who beheld these things, in writing his Gospel, takes
occasion to set forth the meekness, charity, patitience, humility, and
compliance of our Lords compassionate carriage toward every ones infirmity, in
the words of the Prophet Esaias foretold concerning him. Esaias 42.1.
-- Behold my Servant, whom I have chosen; my beloved in whom my Soul
delights. I will put my Spirit upon him, and he shall show judgment to the
Gentiles. He shall not contend [or use rigor or violence in his Office]; nor
[imperiously command and] cry outs; nor shall any man hear his voice [aloud] in
the streets. A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he
not extinguish [but treats his infinite supplicants with incredible tenderness
and meekness, and against his as weak adversaries no way shows his power],
until [by his own patience and sufferings], he send forth judgment unto victory
[and perfectly establish righteousness in the earth], and in his name the
Gentiles, received to mercy, shall also trust, [and believe and become Subjects
to his Scepter.]

Exodus 19.1. and 11. compared with chap. 12.18. from the 14th day of the first
Month to the 3d day of the 3d Month being just 50. days) and at which very
time also our Lord afterward sent his Holy Spirit upon his Apostles, enabling
them to keep the law formerly delivered]; and lastly, when now also our Lord
saw the multitudes that flowed to him from all Quarters, still greatly
increasing, and more laborers necessary for so great an harvest: at this time
I say, and on such a necessity, our Lord thought fit to make a Solemn Election,
out of the number of his Disciples and followers, of 12 persons, according to
the number of the 12 Tribes, to whom they were to be sent; that they might
assist him in his Ministry, and whom after some time of their instruction, he
might disperse abroad to preach the new Kingdom of the Gospel concerning him in
the several Cities of that Nation; and (for giving the more authority to their
Doctrine) to cure all diseases and eject Devils; but this not in theirs but in
his Name, that so all might believe in this their new Savior and obey his
Doctrine and Commands.

Mark. chap. 3. Luke 6. chap. we find our Lord, after his departing from their
Synagogue, by the Lake, teaching the people out of a ship, because they
thronged him immediately before this.) And there is an high hill a few miles
distant from Capernaum, westward, toward Bethsaida, described in Eugene
Rogiers Terre Sancte Lib. 1. chap. 10. that is called to this day Mons
Beatitudinum: On the top of which was anciently built a Church, the ruins
whereof still remain. We find also in Mark 1.35. mention of a Desert not far
from Capernaum, into which our Lord retired for prayer; and so from thence went
into Galilee: and again Luke 9.10. Such a desert, near to Bethsaida, whither he
retired with his Disciples returned from their preaching; and where also he fed
the five thousand, with five loaves and two fishes; and also where he is said
to have bin alone praying, Luke 9.18. which seems to be the desert wherein was
this Mountain. And Rogier in his Terre Sancte L. 1. c. 10. says the Oriental
Christians conceive the same Desert, to have bin the place of our Lords miracle
of the five loaves, viz. some where between Bethsaida and Tiberias. And indeed
many texts seem to confirm it, not easily explained otherwise. For Luke 9.10.
It is said to be a Desert near Bethsaida. - John. 6.23. Tiberias to have bin
near to the place; and Boats to come from thence that carried away the people,
perceiving our Lord gone thence, to Capernaum. - Mat. 14.13. The people said to
have followed him from the cities on foot, i. e. by fetching a compass whither
he was departed by ship - Jo. 6.14. Our Lords return to have bin first to
Capernaum, and after passing to Genezareth Mat. 14.34. which is called a
transfretation, because made over a great Bay of the Lake, though not crossing
it. As for the 30 furlongs, mentioned Jo. 6.19. these may be understood of
their rowing to and fro against a contrary wind. The latter feeding also of the
four thousand, Mat. 15.21. seems to have bin in the same desert: the place
being said to be near the Sea of Galilee, at his return from the Coasts of Tire
and Sidon; he, not taking ship first, but going there into a Mountain Mat.
15.29. And in the same mountain seems to have bin our Lords Transfiguration, if
we well compare the Context, and our Lords motions before and after it. His
being in the Town of Cesarea Philippi, or Decapolis (lying North of the
inferior Galilee, see Mark. 5.20. -7.31. - Mat. 4.25.) a little before, and
returning to Capernaum after it. (See Mark. 8.22, 27. -9.2, 30, - Mat. 17.22,
24.) and the multitudes and Scribes there following and attending on him, as
usually, about Capernaum, Mark. 9.14. well considering these, I say, Our Lords
Transfiguration seems to have bin also in this Mountain. And this from our
Lords so much frequenting it, as well as from his glory manisted there, to have
bin called by S. Peter the Holy Mount: which hill also standing in the midst
the chief habitation of his Galilean Disciples and Converts, seems also to be
the appointed place of his apparition to them after his Resurrection.

John. 17. and from that at the same time made for the Head of them S. Peter,
that his faith might not fail. Recommending these much to his Fatherly
Benediction, who were to be the twelve Foundations, whereon his new Church was
to be built for perpetuity, maugre all the Gates of Hell, Ephesians. 22.20. - Mat.
16.18. who were to be the salt, for seasoning and preserving eternally from
corruption the putrifyed world, ever since Adams fall, and the Tapers to
enlighten it, sitting hitherto in the darkness of Heathenism, and vain and
uncertain Philosophy; who were to suffer all the world over such hardships and
persecutions, and at last most cruel death, for his Name; and who were to have
their twelve Names written on the twelve Foundations of the Golden Celestial
Jerusalem, Apoc. 21. Namely, praying that these might be furnished and
fortifyed with all Graces worthy so high a Profession: but also herewith a most
admirable resignation of our Lord to his Fathers good pleasure, in the election
of Judas Iscariot, and in the entrusting him afterward with the common purse of
his maintenance, and charities; which Judas, however at the time of his
Election he might seem in a capacity for such office, preferrable before
others; yet our Lord, then well foreknew his future ill correspondence with it,
and it seems from our Lords words, Jo. 6.70. that a whole year before our Lords
passion, and this servants betraying of him, he had then much of the Devil in
him, (unless these words be to be understood prophetically, and relating to his
future Treason). And for-as-much as these his twelve Apostles are a type of his
Church, this example of a Judas a thief and traitor found among them, and yet
so patiently admitted and tolerated by our Lord, shows that it is not to be
expected, or exacted that his Church here on earth, as to the external members
thereof, should ever be in a better condition: but Tares mingled with the Wheat
in this field, and bad fish with the good in this Net. And it is a note of S.
Austin De Civ. Dei lib. 18. cap. 49. (making much against the Puritan
Donatists. -- Habet (says he) inter ^os unum [Judam]; quo malo utens been, and
passionis suae dispositum impleret, and ecclesiae suae, tolerandorum malorum,
praeberet exemplum.

Luke 6.17. that were his more constant followers and Auditors: out of which
number also he is said after this to have made a second election of 70 or 6
times 12 Luke 10.1. answerable to the 70 chosen by Moses for his assistance,
Numb. 11.16.) He chose 12 persons, according to the number of the 12 Tribe of
Israel, that they should continually wait on him, hear all things he taught,
and bear witness afterward to the world of whatever passed; and whom he might
send abroad as he thought fit, (after first well instructed by him for it) by
two and two together, to preach the Gospel as the harvest still increased, to
whom also for this reason he gave the name of Apostles. These were all
Galileans, and five of them his Kinsmen, viz. 1. and 2. James and John sons to
Salome (according to the common opinion, daughter to Alpheus or Cleophas,
brother to Joseph) and 3ly. James the less; the 4th. Simon of Cana (one of
James his brothers, being called Simon; and our Lord having kindred at Cana; on
which account was the invitation of his Mother to the marriage there, and
therefore is this Simon of Cana conjectured to be one of the Brothers, and a
Kinsman of our Lords.) And the 5th Judas Thadeus, James, Simon, and Judas being
suppose sons of Alpheus, or Cleophas and of Mary his wife, (styled therefore a
Sister to our Lords Mother, Jo. 19.15. because her husband was brother to
Joseph) and brother of Salome, and called our Lords brethren. Which Brethren it
seems, from out Lords first coming from the Baptist to Cana in Galilee, did
together with his Holy Mother, never part from him. See before. 177.

Jo. 1. and Matthew: to whom we add also hit three Brethren, James, Judas, and
Simon, his constant followers, and companions from his first residence in
Capernaum. So that there remain only two, Thomas, and Judas Iscariot, of the
time of whose beginning to be his Auditors and Disciples we are uncertain.

Jo. 1.42. (as foreknowing his Fathers good pleasure herein, and the particular
Revelation he would honor him with, Mat. 16.17. as also foreseeing his
extraordinary Love toward himself, though not he, but his Brother Andrew, was
his first follower, and James and John were his Kinsmen) foretelling I say this
his pre-election; and then changing his name (which also he now reiterates Luke
6.14.) into Cephas, a Stone or Foundation, the meaning of which he expounds,
Mat. 16.18. to him also in a more particular manner, Ibid. v. 19. committing
the keys of the Church, and more specially praying Luke 22.32. for the not
failing of his faith. The two next Disciples, that were most intimate with him,
were James and John, the Sons of Zebedee, whom he sur-named Boanerges, sons of
Thunder or Thunderers, probably from an extraordinary Valor appearing in their
Spirit, striking terror into their Auditors. Which metal and forth-putting
beyond others perhaps was discerned by their Mother, when that confident
request was presented by her, or also by them, to our Lord, concerning their
sitting next to himself in his Kingdom; and when also asked whether for sharing
with him in his honors they were able first to undergo his sufferings, they
returned that confident answer, we are able. And indeed one of them was he that
first drank of our Lords cup, and suffered Martyrdom the first of all the
Apostles, which seems to have happened from his great forwardness, and fervid
zeal in his Sermons, against the murderers of our Lord. Something also of S.
John's (but just) severity toward Heretics and Seducers, and refractory,
seems to appear in his 2 Epist. v. 9.10. -and 3d. v. 10. -and in our Lords
Epistles, penned by him,. Apoc. 2. and 3. chapters. And his confident behavior
in the High Priests Palace, pressing in there after our Lord, and introducing
Peter, then more timorous, shows him a person of much spirit and courage.
Lastly, that speech of these two brothers Luke 9.54. where says he. -- When
James and John saw this, they said, Lord will thou that we command fire to come
down from heaven, and consume them, as Elias did: and in the same place, v. 49.
John's hasty forbidding one, that cast out Devils in our Lords name, to forbear
it for the future, shows such appellation of Boanerges not given by our Lords
omniprescience without just ground. And indeed an extraordinary valor and
height of spirit appears in all these three Disciples, chosen for a nearer
attendance on our Savior, which valor also S. Peter, the third of them,
manifested on many occasions. To these three our Lord gave honorary Names, to
none of the rest.

Mark. 15.40. called James the less, son to Mary (i. e. Alpheus, or Cleophas
his wife, Jo. 19.25.) who is said therefore to be our Lords Mothers sister. So
the latter Simon is called the Cananite, or Cananean, or of Cana, it seems from
his living there formerly, which Hebrew word, signifying zeal in the Greek, he
was also called Zelotes. See Mat. 10.4. and Luke 6.5. Jude also, the brother of
James, is called Thaddeus, Mark. 3.18. and Lebbeus, Mat. 10.3. (for variety of
names to the same person was very usual with the Jews) so Matthew had another
name of Levi: and Thomas is called also Didimus, this Greek word signifying the
same as the Hebrew Thomas, viz. Geminus. As for Judas Iscariot, he is thought
to be called so from the Town where he was born. But Issachar, signifying
Merces (see Genesis 30.18.) seems also in this sense a name very proper to him.

After the Election of these twelve, out of the turba discipulorum, all the
rest of his Disciples, who were also (as appears in the History of the Gospel)
to stay with him yet for some time, to be better instructed before their
Mission abroad; and the multitudes also now again gathered about him, he
preached unto them that famous Sermon in the Mount, delivered in Mat. 5th. 6th.
and 7th. Chapters, and in Luke 6.20. containing all the most high, and noble
precepts and Counsels of Christianity, and his new Gospel, which it is said the
people heard with much admiration and astonishment, Mat. 7.29. far transcending
all those of former Philosophy; or also many of those expressly and explicitly
delivered in the former Law of Moses; and these new Evangelical Commandments,
given as I have said, much what at the same time as the law before was, and as
the Holy Spirit was to be, viz. about Pentecost, and in a Mountain also, as was
the Law: and this his Sermon also vindicating the Law to a tittle, and being a
most perfect Exposition of it, which was then in many things much
misunderstood, and the true sense thereof much relaxed.

This his speech he directed more chiefly to his new chosen Apostles, to whom
some part of it, and especially the beginning, is more particularly applied.
First acquainting them, in what things for the present consists their true
felicity, much contrary to the imagination and designs of the world; and
prearming them to the Hardships and sufferings to be met with in their Office;
from which they were not therefore to withdraw or desist, they being the light
and salt of the world, and a City set on an Hill, but were publicly to appear
against all opposition, especially giving every where good example; exhorting
them to dependence, as to all temporal necessities, without taking thought for
them, on the Divine providence. Then in the next place, expounding to them, but
so also to all the multitude, the true sense of the law, much contrary to the
then ordinary Glosses of the Pharisees; and which law, unless his Disciples
kept, and observed better than the other, they should not enter into the
Kingdom of heaven: which law also he told them he came not to destroy or to
relax (as he was traduced) but to fulfill, and vindicate even to the least
tittle thereof. Lastly, He instructs them in their behavior, and in the right
performance of the three great Christian Duties of Prayer, Alms, and Fasting.

Mat. c. 6.11, 19, 24. etc. to the end, and - chap. 7.11. The Beatitude of
which poor he declares to be their enjoying hereafter a Kingdom in heaven.
hate, and a thousand ways molest them; and so for the prefent. Job. 16, 20.
-- Mundus gaudebit (says our Lord) vos autem contristabimini. And Omnis
disciplina (with which God exercises here his Servants) in praesenti quidem
(says the Apostle) videtur non esse gaudii, sed maeroris; and lastly, All
being sinners it must be a continued penitential sorrow here, Heb. 12, 11.
that shall attain Bliss hereafter. Now the felicity of these present mourners
is promised hereafter to be perpetual Consolations. Meekness, humility, and
lowliness of mind, a sure companion of poverty and mourning. To which meekness
appertain those lessons and Counsels of our Lord, following in Mat. chap. 5.
from verse. 21. to 27. and from verse. 38. to the end of that chapter, and chap.
6.12.14. -and chap. 7.1. the observance of these Counsels being an effect of
lowliness of heart. And as the reward in the other Beatitudes is said to be the
Kingdom of heaven, so of this the inheritance of the earth, alluding to Psalm.
36.11. -- Mansueti haereditabunt terram; perhaps, partly because the good
things thereof are seldom gotten, or at least not long preserved, or quietly
possessed, by turbulent, contentious and litigious spirits. But the ultimate
and eternal inheritance of these meek souls, is the new Heaven and Earth spoken
of Apoc. 21.1, 2. to which this promise relates. 4ly. Consisted in hungring and
thirsting after, chap. 6.19. etc. and from verse. 24. to the end of the Chapter,
and chap. 7.11. But yet by the woe in S. Luke, that is opposed to this Blessed
here, -- Woe unto you that are full, for ye shall hunger and thirst; this
beatitude (like the former) seems to include also a great temperance and
abstinence, and the not satiating themselves with, or having any thirst after,
secular pleasures and contents; These two hungers, after earthly, and after
heavenly things, not consisting well together. For which see what our Lord
says Mat. 6.24, 33. Now to this present hunger and thirst, the felicity
promised hereafter is a full satiety of all good things.

chap, 5.44. -6.12, 14. -7.1, 12. viz. in performing such mercy to them, as we
in our needs would desire from them, freely forgiving (without wrath and
expostulating which is a degree of revenge all their faults and trespasses
toward us. Nay even loving them when they hate us; blessing when they curse us;
doing good to them when they evil to us. The reward of which our mercy to
others is promised hereafter Gods like mercy to us, in pardoning all our
trespasses against him, that excludes us from his friendship and from Glory.

munditia carnis) abstaining from Lust, and concupiscence, and irregular
passions there toward him, explained in these following Lessons in his Sermon,
chap. 5.19, (observing the little commandments) again verse. 22, 28, 29. - chap.
6.22. -7.1, 2, 21. Keeping not only our hands from killing, but hearts from any
passion of anger against our neighbor; not only from committing adultery or
fornication with, but lusting after, a woman; not only from accusing our
neighbor falsely, but making any sinister judgment in our hearts of him;
wherefore think ye evil in your hearts, said our Lord to the Pharisees, Mat.
9.3, 4. when they said none of him? And out of the heart proceed the things
which defile us, Mat. 15.18, 19. For out of the heart (says he) proceed
(because in the heart they are transacted) murders, adulteries, fornications,
thefts, falsewitness, blasphemies; and out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks; and how can ye being evil speak good things Mat. 12.34. and
there beginning every evil and good work. And therefore it is on this part that
God chiefly casts his eye, 1 Samuel, 16.7. and there sees the breaches of both
tables, and the beauty or deformity of the soul. And the happiness promised
hereafter to such purity of heart is their eternal seeing and beholding of God,
according to. Apoc. 22.4. (for without such purity none may see him Heb. 12.14.
- Apoc. 21.27.) And an extraordinary fruition, and sense of his Divine presence
in such pure hearts also, here in this present life Jo. 14.23.

Cor. 5.10. to reconcile men to God, and especially our own peace with him;
keeping all quiet, and in due subordination within our selves, in the obedience
of the flesh and inferior appetites to the Spirit. 2ly. Again procuring by all
means the peace of men among themselves; where either they have given us, or we
them, any offense, endeavoring a speedy reconcilement; contributing here even
so far as not to resist the evil received from them; patiently to put-up
quarrels, and endure affronts, suffer wrong from, rather than go to law with,
them 1 Cor. 6.7. Taking all things said or done in good part, and the best
sense. See 1 Cor. 7.15. - Romans 12.18. the likelyest ways surely to gain every
ones peace with us; and lastly making them also friends, as much as we can, one
with another, as Christ came down from heaven, and shed his blood, to make us
friends with God. Col. 1.20. See this peacemaking explained in his lessons
following Mat. 5.24, 25, 39. etc. And the happiness promised to such
peacemakers is: that they shall be specially called the children of God,
(repeated Mat. 5.45. and see Ephesians. 4.32. and 5.1.) of God, who is the great
peace-lover and-maker reconciling, though by the death of his only Son, the
world to himself Col. 1.20. and doing good continually even to the unjust and
unthankful Mat. 5.45. and that as his children they shall be made Heirs of all
things, Apoc. 21.7.

Mat. 5.12.

Heb. 12.11. but that for these it is promised us hereafter; our then receiving
mercy, and being satiated and filled, our possessing the Kingdom of Heaven,
inheriting the new Earth Apoc. 21.1, 2. Our seeing God, and being made his sons
and heirs of all things Apoc. 21.7. and especially the persecuted and sufferers
here receiving an exceeding great reward there beyond all others.

chap. 6.22.) Our Lord pronounces four woes: 1 To the rich here; 2 To the
full; 3 To the merry and rejoicing, 4 To the by-all-well-spoken of, honored,
and applauded, Viz. to such as would place their happiness, and seek their
content, and take out their good things here on earth. Woe unto you, says be,
because ye have already received your Consolation, and because hereafter shall
follow to you poverty, and hunger, and thirst, and eternal mourning, and
ignominy: as we know was said and happened to the rich man Luk 16, 24, 25.

Luke 12.26.) which is still less in their power. Mat. 6.22.
That the life it self was much more than meat with which it was nourished, and
the Body than raiment with which it was covered: and that if these were not
made by, but freely bestowed on, them, that he that gave them that which was
more would give them also what was less; and being so bountiful, as to give
that which was much more valuable, would in like manner bestow in their
necessity that which was much less considerable, viz. food for the one, and
clothing for the other; which also they saw he did to his other creatures, much
inferior to themselves, without any solicitude of theirs: food to the fouls of
the Air without their sowing or reaping; and apparel to the flowers of the
field even with more pure, lively, and resplendent colors than that of Solomon
when in all his glory and this without their carding or spinning is done to the
flowers, that though so shining to day are to morrow to be cut down and cast
into the Oven: as also elsewhere he tells them, that not so much as a Sparrow
(that five of them are sold for two farthings) is forgotten before his Father,
nor falls to the ground without his taking notice of it; and that they were of
more value to him than many Sparrows; and the very hairs of of their head all
numbered by him. Mat. 10.28. Luke 12.6.7.
That their heavenly Father, to whom they had now through him the Son, acquired
so near a relation, well knew before all their want, and as being such would
provide for them: that such lower cares took up the thoughts of worldlings, but
that theirs ought to be raised to higher matters, seeking and pursuing after
the Kingdom of God and the righteousness and holiness thereof; and that all
these other necessities should be (unsought for) sufficiently supplied; that
therefore to day the should not be distracting their thoughts concerning to
morrow, for that the provisions of to day were trouble enough.

relaxation to men's former obedience thereto, but to exact the observance of
them to the least iota (having procured for them from his Father the Holy
Spirit for enabling them also to such observance) and that he, who did not
endeavor to keep those that were slighted and accounted the least of these
Commandments, (some of which he mentions below verse. 22, 28, 34, 39. not being
angry, not lusting in our heart, not swearing at all, etc. not rendering evil
for evil, etc.) as well as those thought greater, could not reach Heaven or
eternal happiness. In prosecution of which our Lord began to expound to them
the true meaning and just extent of several of these Laws corrupted by the
former glosses of the Pharisees and human Tradition.

That the precept of not killing or committing murder extended not only to not
taking away our Neighbors life, but to any reproaching or vilifying them by
words, as calling him silly, or a fool (which said without cause, and in
malice, toward him, incurreth not the sentence of a Civil Judge to some corporal
punishment, or also death (in these lesser Courts in the several Cities, or
that greater at Jerusalem), but even of damnation to hellfire); again,
extends also to any anger or disaffection against him in our heart. Therefore
that before they brought any Sacrifice, offering, or gift, or made any
addresses to God concerning themselves, or implored his pardon of their faults,
or any his favors to them, they should call to remembrance, if there were any
displeasure or disgust between them and their neighbor; and should presently
procure a reconciliation with him, especially if such neighbor have any just
quarrel against them on the former account; that thus they might wisely prevent
their neighbors complaints to God the Supreme Judge of all. Whose exact
justice, upon such wrong done, would certainly cast them into prison, and
before any releasment require of them the uttermost farthing, if they were not
diligent thus before hand, and whist they have opportunity in this life, to
make their composition and peace with him.

but not to much as looking on her, or any other woman (not our own wife) with
any lustful thoughts; for that all such persons were guilty of committing
adultery already with such persons in their heart. And therefore, that it even
our right eye, or right hand should be the instrument or tempter to offend God
in such a manner, it were better (if we could procure no other remedy of
committing such sin without doing this) even to pluck out this, though our
right, eye, or cut off our right hand, than to sin against God, and so have not
this eye or hand only lost, but our whole Body cast for such offense into
eternal flames. Intimating at least our cutting-off the observed occasions of
sin, even though these seem as precious and dear unto us as our eye or right
hand.

That also in marriage they were religiously to observe such an Holy Contract,
and patiently bear this great Yoke, when not well and discreetly engaged,
without expecting any relief or indulgement of a separation or divorce
afterward (contrary to the great liberty they had taken herein) except in the
case of Fornication. And in such case also that the parties might not upon this
presently clap up new marriages better suting with their new affections and
amors, but were to live continently and single (for God gives ability) in such
a separation. Things which said by our Lord elsewhere the Disciples so check d
at, Mat. 19.10.
that they concluded it was better to forbear marriage if having so streit
obligations upon it.

Lev. 19.12. and Deuteronomy. 6.13. Viz. that they should not forswear themselves, and
should perform unto the Lord their Oaths did not allow them a liberty to
swearing also whenever they spoke a truth; swearing, either by God himself, or
by any of his Creatures. Or secure them that swearing also by some of Gods
creatures (at least such as by some Consecration had not a more special
relation to him as the Sacrifice, the Gold of the Temple, etc.) signified
nothing and had no guilt in it (according to their false Glosses, thinking
reverence in using Oaths was only confined to the name of God, and to his name,
not as to swearing, but only false-swearing by it.) But that, Mat. 23.16.
(excepting where necessity and matters of great consequence required it) in
which case we find Gods greatest Saints for advancing truth to have used it
Heb. 6.16.) And an end of all strifes among men, faith the Apostle, is an Oath)
their ordinary communication, and discourse, and dealing with their Neighbor,
was to be without any swearing at all; either by God himself, (whose name they
were at no time to take in vain;) Or by any of his Creatures, over the least of
which, even an hair, they had no power to make it white or black; and all which
they ought to reverence for the relation they have to him, who at the first
made them, and always replenishes and dwells in them. But that their
ordinary communication should be plain and simple (and without endeavoring
with any such attestations, or artifice to add weight to their words) Yea, Yea:
Nay, Nay; as our Lords Amen, Amen, their assertion only being reiterated where
less credited; for that what was more than this came of Evil, i. e. some
irreverence toward God in himself, or in his Creatures; and again, of evil
either others having more jealousy of the truth of our words than they ought,
which in them is malice, or from our own desiring to add more weight to our
words than the matter requires, which in us is a faulty ambition. See this
Lesson of our Lord repeated again by St. James chap. 5.12. -- Above all things,
my Brethren, swear not, etc. least ye fall into condemnation. Swear not, as for
the former reasons, so also for the surer avoiding perjury, a great and
dangerous sin; a sin, not only as other sins, inheriting, but also mocking,
Gods vengeance.



That herein, whereas it has bin said formerly Exodus 21.24. - Deuteronomy. 19.19, 21.
An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth; they should not take any such
revenge, or call for justice and satisfaction for the injuries or losses, done
to them; but if they would be perfect, remit and pardon them: and to any evil
done them make no resistance; at least in smaller wrongs, and damages (a cuff
on the ear, losing a coat, going a mile or two, bearing opprobrious words,
etc.) or where the public good was not concerned, or their own absolute
necessities. That if any one should smite them on the one cheek, they should,
out of the amity they bear him, and love to peace, rather turn the other, than
make a quarrel and strike again. [And the same behavior here seems to be
commended by our Lord in words, which is in actions; that in opprobrious
language, discourses, disputes, we should not make to them any replies, where
these probably effectless; and which may rather offend, than edify; expressed
in this Sermon, in his warning us not to cast our precious things before those,
who for them will only be more enraged against, and sooner fall upon us: and a
lesson himself so eminently practiced before his passion. -- Propter te
sustinui opprobrium Psalm. 68.7. -And -- Like a Lamb dumb before his shearer.]
-- So if one takes away their cloak they should give him their coat also; Act.
8.32.
forced to go a mile in another employments, go with them twain. So any taking
away by violence their goods, not require them again of him; at least when they
can any way spare them, rather than break friendship, or make a quarrel for any
of these things, or go to law. That also they should freely lend to every one,
not only friends, or kindred, that would borrow, tho he not able to repay it;
and give to him that asked (supposed necessitous) though he never able to repay
it. Deuteronomy. 24.12.


Mat. 18.15. and convert him to us; and receive voluntarily from him, by such
our condescension, that amends, which we could not by contending; at least we
are recompensed abundantly by God for what we have, with such an holy
intention, suffered from them; Lastly all these are Heroical practices of
Humility, and do show a true contempt of these temporal things (not thought
worthy our strife), and a desire in us of sufferings, in Conformity to our
Lord; and therefore such things, by a right eye, are looked upon as favors to
be embraced, when ever offered.

Luke 10.29, the Lawyer harping upon it, who, to justify himself in this point,
asked, who was his Neighbor, and our Lord, to instruct him herein, instanced
in one professed enemy showing mercy on another, a Samaritan on a Jew.) And
perhaps the Pharisees and people were induced to such a persuasion from Gods
commanding them to cut off the Nations, who were by him sentenced to such a
destruction; that the severity thereof might be a warning to themselves if in
like manner offending. But herein the Israelites indeed were only Executioners
of Divine justice and express Commands; and without doubt ought to have done
this thing with all pity, and without any hate toward these miserables, or any
men whatever, or any other of Gods creatures; who are all to be loved for his
sake. And the law plainly taught, and the Saints under it practiced, the
contrary to this Pharisaical corruption: See Exodus 23.4. - Job. 31.29. - Psalm.
7.4. -35.14. - Prove. 24.17.-25.21. quoted by S. Paul Romans 12. - If thine enemy
hunger, give him bread, doubtless in the first place to gain our enemy to us,
as Mat. 18.15. though if not gained the issue would be heaping more wrath upon
him: but this contrary to our intention. Our Lord therefore informs them, that
their enemies also, without any distinction, were to be reckoned amongst their
Neighbors, and so they were also to love them as themselves; do good to those
that hated them; bless those that cursed (which thing was punctually practiced
afterward by these his disciples. -- Being reviled we bless, being defamed we
entreat, being persecuted we suffer it, and resist not, 1 Cor. 4.12, 13.) and
that they should pray for those that despitefully use and persecute them (as
our Lord did on the Cross, and St. Stephen in his lapidation). For that if they
loved only the lovers of them; did good, gave, or lent money to those returning
to them again the like favors; what extraordinary thanks or reward could they
expect from God, for this, usual amongst the worst of men, Publicans and
Heathens? but for doing this to others (where nature so much relucts) their
reward should be great, and they truly the children of the most high, and much
resembling him herein; who every day makes his Sun to rise upon, and his rain
to descend for, the unjust, and his enemies; and is kind unto the unthankful
and evil; and is the great reconciler of, and peacemaker in, the world: and of
peacemakers he said before that they shall specially be called his children.



God (whilst the Pharisees in all these, doing them with a wrong intention,
lost but their labor and charge). [Rewardable I say, For as in Alms and
charities to our neighbor God has engaged to pay to us again, and that
pressed down, what ever good we do to others; So in Prayer he looks upon us as
much honoring him thereby; and in fasting, as suffering something for his
sake, in order to better serving him by subduing of the flesh; and so also for
these in his great bounty provides a reward. But in all these our Lord saw the
vainglorious Pharisees to loose their recompense with God, by doing them to be
seen of men; as by their sounding a Trumpet for gathering together the poor,
when they had alms to bestow (as is said also to be done in distributing the
poors Tithes); and as their standing in the marketplace, to perform their
Devotions, supposed to be made there, for Gods rewarding their Benefactors, and
for averting his judgments from the people, etc. By this device gaining much
charities from silly women; and by their hanging down their heads, and looking
pitifully, when they fast upon like occasions. But our Lord told his, that
these duties, to be recompensed by God, were to be so cleansed from all
applause from men, as that in the distributing of their Alms, if it were
possible, the left hand should not know what the right was doing: and that in
fasting, they should rather disguise it by washing their face and anointing
their Head: and in their prayer, that they should betake themselves to their
Closet, and shut the door after them: for that thus the more they endeavored
to hide their work, the more would God, that sees all secret things, manifest
it in a public rewarding thereof.



compassion. [But here we must not forget, that the same our Lord elsewhere
much recommends assiduity and importunity in prayer, as n^cessary to excite
those holy affections in us which may render us more capable of his Favors.
Upon this account, pist. 121.
St. Austine, in his Epistle to the religious Lady Proba, giving her directions
concerning her prayer, exhorts her especially to the spending of much time
therein, instancing for it in the importunate widow, and neighbor Luke 18.
commended by our Lord. -- For that (says he) there a nobler effect will
follow, where a more fervent affection goes before; And, - That such
importunity and perseverance is necessary; that our desire, faith, hope, may
not in some manner grow cold. For neither (says he) is praying long time, as
some imagine, to pray with much speaking. Much discourse is one thing, a
continued affection another. For it is written of our Lord himself, that he
continued all night in prayer; and that he prayed longer, or more vehemently:
where what did he but give us an example, Luke 6.12. -- 22.43.
etc Thus he commending to us not many words, but much affection: praying long,
and saying little.]

For their prayer also he prescribed them that form, full of Spirit, but
sparing in words, Our Father etc. where in the first place, we give and offer
up all Glory to this celestial Father; desiring that every where, and in all
things his name may be Sanctified, his Kingdom come, and his will be done. Then
we petition for our selves, viz. for the supply of our daily necessaries; for
the pardon and remission of our former sins and offenses against God (but for
the obtaining of this, engaging also the remission of other men's trespasses
against us; without which, he tells us no pardon was to be expected of any from
God, he indeed remitting us pounds, for our remitting pence); then, for the
future, his delivering us from any temptations, that may hereafter induce us to
offend him; and from any evil, punishment, or misery deserved by our former
having offended him. Only for one of these Petitions, the obtaining pardon of
our offenses against him, he lays one burden upon us, namely our engaging the
remission of other men's trespasses against us, and that so full as we desire
his toward us: without doing which he tells us no pardon is to be expected
from him.

were the Salt of the earth, which he had provided for seasoning the
insipidness and unsavoriness thereof toward God, and for preserving it
eternally from corruption: and that they were the light of the world, for
illustrating its darkness: And lastly, a City or Society, in which all the
world were to be joined and collected, and to become Subjects and members
thereof, and one Body or Corporation, one Faith, one Spirit etc, being therein
Ephesians. 4.4. that therefore they were to provide, that this Salt should not become
unsavory or insipid: for then, wherewith could that, which is to season all
others, be seasoned it self; And that this light should not be put under a
bushel; nor this their City hid as it were in a vale, or such which should not
be eminently discovered; for then, how could the world know where to join
themselves to the communion thereof.

Lastly, that also their light and their doctrine were to be accompanied with
their good works; that people might see the one as well as the other; (though
such good works not done to be seen of men; nor that themselves, but their
heavenly Father, working such Sanctification in them, might be glorified
thereby 2 Cor. 8.21.- Romans 12.17.) Their example, and practicing of their
doctrine, being much the more difficult, and this much more effectually
converting others, than teaching does 1 Pet. 2.12. -3.16. And that at the last
day, many of them should come unto him, saying, Lord, Lord, and telling what
great matters their preaching and prophesying in his name had effected; yet
should they be rejected on this account, that their works were evil. And that
every tree thus bringing forth ill fruit, should surely be cut down and cast
into the fire.

2 Cor. 11.3.13.
and that there was one sure test by which they might know them, Viz. by the
fruits they bare; for that as the tree was bad or good, so would the fruit
certainly be.

[Which rule our Lord seems to have given them upon a double account: Both
because truth and goodness, or Holiness proceed from the same Holy Spirit
within us, the fountain of both; and are eternally linked together: and so
error and vice. So that (all things truly weighed) no true doctrine can ever
tend to an evil life, nor error to a good: and Holiness, always suffers, not
gains, by a lie. Therefore also are truth and iniquity frequently opposed -1
Cor. 13.6. - Romans 2.8. -1.18. So that no man's wickedness can be the effect or
consequent of any truth he holds: though who holds the truth may still be
wicked, from another principle in him. That therefore thus true and false
teachers may be known by the fruit of their doctrines in their Auditors; if
these tend to the infusing into them higher degrees of all kinds of piety and
charity; Or, on the contrary do infuse any seeds of impiety, injustice,
uncharitableness, sensual liberty, uncleanness, or sedition, and disobedience
to Dignities and Superiors. This as to the fruit of their doctrines. But
secondly, because as to their persons, the root in such false teachers always
is evil; i. e. their affections and intentions are perverted, which perverse
affections at last manifest themselves in their lives and practices; these
either for secular ends, teaching doctrines not believed, and known by them to
be false, purposely to deceive, which ends and hypocrisy will certainly
discover themselves in their works; or tho the doctrines taught are also
believed by them, yet there are some vicious inclinations respecting secular
interests, which do induce such a belief (especially where they depart from the
Traditions of the Church, and former Superiors): and such secular interests
will appear in their works, and manners; and the heart, bad in one thing, will
be so in another. Therefore the Apostles do describe frequently such false
teachers, as vicious in their lives, and seducing with their fair speeches
(when in their sheeps clothing) See Romans 16.17, 18. - Phil. 3.19. -2 Cor. 11.3,
13. -1 Timothy 4.2. - Tit. 3.11. -2 Pet. 2.3, 10. etc. in which texts they are
represented as -- Sibi placentes, gloriae sitientes, assentatores, invidi,
maledici and obtrectatores, ventri dediti, suis temporalibus commodis and
avaritiae servientes (and suum negocium agentes [some way or other]) non
veritati: noting them specially, as covetous, sensual, speaking ill of
Dignities. But here note, that by false Prophets are chiefly meant those who
know their doctrines to be false; and intend to deceive and teach in Hypocrisy,
and live in disobedience to a Superior Church Authority. Otherwise some good
man may teach an error; and some bad, truth. But as these have or want the
Grace of God in their heart, and have their will and affections sincere or
corrupt, so will their fruit mostly be good, or bad; and among other things
their teachings and instructions will have a relish thereof.

After this our Lord concluded his whole Sermon thus; that the Foundation of
Happiness was their good works: and their not-hearing, or teaching, but doing,
what he taught: which was laying the Foundation upon a sure rock, so that no
storms should shake the building raised upon it. But that the Hearer of his
words, and not practicer, was like a fool building his house on sand. Upon
which a time would be, when the raines should come, and the winds blow, and the
floods arise, and the storms beat vehemently upon it; and the fall thereof
should be very great and terrible. And thus ends our Lords great and famous
Predication in the Mount, to his Apostles, and to all the People; who, says
the Evangelist, were much astonished as at his doctrine, so at the manner of
his delivery thereof; For he spoke to them all these things with a kind of
Majestical Authority, and not as the Scribes.

An Historical Narration OF THE LIFE OF OUR LORD JESUS. PART. II. Beginning
after the prayer recorded Joh. 17.
Jo. 13.27. and Satan had desired, Luke 22.31, 32. etc. concerning them, as he
did concerning Job; That God (who keeps a continual restraint upon this hater
of mankind, not only for his hurting us after sin, but also for his tempting us
unto it) would but now let him have the sifting of them a little, after all the
great works they had seen done by this their Master, and all the gracious words
they had heard from him, to try their fidelity to him. Our Lord therefore,
foreseeing the great temptation, that at this time they also foreseeing his
Fathers permission to these Powers of Darkness) were to undergo, and how
greivously they might otherwise miscarry in it, interceded to his Father for
them; and in especial manner for Peter, their chief, and Leader (whose
forwardness, he saw would expose him to so much more trial, and danger that his
faith, however shaken in this storm, yet might not utterly fail; and that, in
his deficiency to confess him, he might not also cease to believe in him; and
that, speedily recovering of his lapse, he might also be an instrument of
confirming the rest.

him in this great time of trial; Meanwhile Judas was departed, before, out of
this holy Society, either, upon the violent instigation of Satan, that he
should not omit the present fair opportunity to perform his Treason; or also
perhaps, because he was disgusted that our Lord should discover before the
company (though this done out of great compassion to him, if he would yet
perhaps repent of it) his purpose of acting that, which yet he had already
proceeded in so far, as to have agreed with the Jews on the very price of his
Masters liberty, if not life; or also because, after his silly fancy, that he
had carried his matter so secretly, as that our Lord knew nothing thereof, he
now perceived by our Lords open discourse of this treason; and also his direct
answer to his impudent question; Master is it I? (whereby he expected to have
bin cleared together with the rest) that his plot was already known; and,
without much have, would have bin prevented; and so both the reward thereof,
and his credit be lost. Judas, I say, thus having left the company, was gone in
all have to the chief Priests, and Pharisees, to give them notice of this
opportunity; both of the time; in the setting of the Evening, and covert of the
Night; and place, whither he presumed, according to his custom, our Lord would
resort (a private Garden remote from the City) his Attendants very few; only
Eleven persons; the solemn Festival of the next night not affording the same
convenience of a numerous company to apprehend him; and, if this deferred till
after the Feast, that he would suddenly retire again out of the way, as he had
done twice formerly.

Jo. 11.47.) upon our Lord's raising of Lazarus from the dead not long before
this, and such a multitude of people converted to him by it, had formerly
concluded upon apprehending and putting him to death: lest the Romans should
make a quarrel upon it, and question the whole Nation for a conspiracy against
the Empire, and setting up a King of their own: and had given a strict charge,
Jo. 11.57. That, if any man knew where he was, he should show it, that they
might take him. Which made our Lord also to forbear appearing in public, and
to absent himself from the City Jo. 11.54. till his entering in triumph thither
upon Palm Sunday, when was the time preappointed for offering up himself for
the sins of the world. But now, after his public appearance again in such a
manner, and such new acclamations given to him, they were by this still more
enraged and confirmed in their purpose. And it seems from Mat. 26.3. compared
with verse. 57. and from Luke 22.4. That upon Judas his repairing unto the High
Priests Palace (or also before) they were met again, and in serious
consultation how they might apprehend him before the Feast, lest done in the
time of the Feast it should raise some tumult: as also that thus might be
prevented the peoples concourse to him in the Feast time. And all this they did
out of zeal to the safety of the state in show, but out of mere malice and envy
to him in truth. And for this Judas his arrival was no unwelcome accident; with
whom also they sent some of the Council, together with the Tribune and Soldiers
for his apprehension, and meanwhile attended the success see Luke 22.52.

Mat. 27.65. Jo. 18.12.) And partly of the Jews own Officers and Sergeants,
called (...), Ministri, of whom we find frequent mention; see Jo. 7.32,
45.-18.3, 12, 22.-19.6. - Mark. 14.65. Act. 5.22, 26. Together with their
Commander see Act. 4.1, 5, 24. and partly of the servants and other adherents
of the chief Priests and Pharisees; with whom also, as is said, were some
Zelots of the chief Priests, and Elders themselves Luke 22.52; in all, a great
multitude; some armed with swords, and other weapons; some also with staves, or
clubs, as the have of the business would permit; they having not above an hour
or two's warning. Who carried also with them some Lanthorns, and Torches,
because of the darkness of the night, it seems, extraordinary; suitable to this
great work of the Prince of Darkness (for this was the time of the full Moon)
unless We will say, these lights were to make a more narrow search (if need
were) in the grots, or other Garden-houses.

Jo. 8.1, 2. (as he had formerly done also at the Feast of Tabernacles) partly,
for his security, the Jews now more vehemently seeking his life, see Jo. 7.30.
-8.59. -10.39. and partly, for his Prayers, and Devotions, being private, and
disengaged of those crowds of people, with which he was environed on the day
time in the City, and Temple; and sometimes here (as other times in Bethany) it
seems, he with his Disciples took all the night-repose they had (otherwise
Judas his Troops would not have come, so late, with Torch-light to have sought
him here): It being night already, as S. John says Jo. 13.30. when Judas left
our Lord. Nor would he have bin so confident, or have informed them that there
they should find him, if his Nights lodging was in Bethany (which being about a
mile further was somewhat too remote from the City) or elsewhere. And it seems
also his Disciples expected no other lodging in their betaking themselves there
to their rest. See below. And perhaps from hence it was (though called Bethany,
because not far from it, see Luke 24.50. compared with Act. 1.12.) That our
Lord returned in the morning so hungry, that he went, as he passed, to get some
figs. And from thence again very early in the morning Luke 21.37.38. he
returned to teach the people in the Temple, the whole body of the Nation, as it
were, being then at Jerusalem; whither also (says the Evangelist) the people
came early to hear him. See for these things Jo. 18.1, 2. Luke 21.37, 38. Mark.
11.11, 12, 19, 20. well compared. This he had done now for several days
together; after his humble triumphal entrance into Jerusalem riding on a little
Asse-colt on Palme-sunday. All the day showing himself in the Temple to all the
Nation assembled at this great Feast, and teaching them publicly, and using
now greater authority than ordinarily there Mat. 21.12. Luke 19.45; healing
also there, the corporally diseased, that were brought unto him Mat. 21.14; and
afterward retiring to this garden, or to Bethany, every night. From whence one
of these mornings, as he was travailing toward the City, being an hungered, he
went to gather some fruit on a fig tree in his way; and finding none thereon,
to show to his Disciples the great power of a strong faith in God that is
joined with purity of life Mat. 11.25, he cursed it; and, as they passed by it
the next morning following, the Disciples saw it withered away. Probably, in
this Garden also it was; that, as he, and his Disciples were sitting, in one of
these days, after his coming from the Temple, on Mount Olivet, and beholding
the Temple over against them, and the stately structure thereof; he made to
them privately there, now before his approaching death, and departure from them,
that large prediction of the final destruction of it, and of Jerusalem, etc.
Mat. 24.3. Mark. 13.1, 2, 3. set down Mat. 24. - Mark. 13. -and Luke 21. After
he had spoken of it formerly weeping when he entered into the City in his humble
Triumph on Palm Sunday Luke 19.41. and again in his Sermon in the Temple Mat.
23.37. And our Lords Ascent into heaven also upon Mount Olivet seems to have
bin somewhere hereabouts: For, it is said Luke 24.50. That our Savior, at the
time of his Ascension; led his Disciples forth (...) [not to be taken strictly,
as if he carried them thither]. Now Bethany was almost fifteen furlongs, that
is, almost two miles from Jerusalem, on the side of Mount Olivet Jo. 11.18. And
his Ascent is said ( Act. 1.12.) to have bin upon Mount Olivet, which was a
Sabbaths-daies journey from Jerusalem; which Sabbath days journey is
ordinarily accounted seven or eight furlongs (i. e.) about a mile. Now, his
ascent, being not in the village of Bethany, where can we more probably
conjecture it to be, than in or nigh to this Garden, the former usual place of
his private resort with his Disciples: That, as Grotius observes; Qui locus
submissionis istius testis fuerat, idem esset and Gloriae: That, where he had
his Agony, there he should begin his Glory. Again, the valley between this place
and Jerusalem being called the valley of Jehosaphat, where it is thought the
last judgment shall be; it is probable, that, here also, on that day our Lord
will descend in Glory, where he was with so much unjust violence apprehended,
and bound, and carried away to judgment.

through the valley of Jehosaphat, straight toward the place, where he knew he
should be looked-for; cheerfully resolved to meet his approaching sufferings,
and presenting this Lamb in that piece or ground, where he knew these Butchers
would look for it, to hurry it to the slaughter. Such Resolution he showed,
when he took his leave of Galilee half a year before ( Luke 9.51. Dum
complerentur dies assumptionis ejus, ipse faciem suam firmavit, ut iret in
Jerusalem). And such an order of finishing this his passion he discovered, in
that speech (upon mention of this his Baptism in sweat, and blood Luke 12.50.)
Baptismo habeo baptizari and quomodo coarctor, donec perficiatur; and
discovered but now at the Table again: saying, Desiderio desideravi etc. Luke
22.15.

offended in him (not expressing their future fault in its worst terms); i. e.
should take offense at such things, as they should see happen unto him; and so
forsake him, whom they had formerly confessed for the Son of God. For that now
the time foretold was come, that he the Shepherd should be smitten, and the
Sheep be scattered; making use here of prophecies, and his fathers good
pleasure declared therein, as a consolation and an unviolable prescription in
all these sorrowful events. And, after this prediction of their miscarriage,
instead of reproaching, he comforts, them, and bids them take heart again, for
that he had, like a careful Shepherad, prayed for them to his Father; and there
should be no final revolt in them; nor their faith in him suffer more than a
short Eclipse: and that, after his Resurrection, he would render himself before
them in their own Country, Galilee: and that there, after his sufferings were
past, they should with great gladness again enjoy his presence. [Galilee being
the place both where he had most Disciples, and where was most privacy for its
remoteness from Jerusalem; (the divine Wisdom having Decreed, for leaving the
more reward to faith, that his appearance should not be to all the people, or
Nation, that saw him die); and therefore a certain Mountain therein Mat. 26.32.
-28.7. (probably, that of his Transfiguration, which St. Peter calls the Holy
Mount 2 Pet. 1.18.) was appointed by him, and probably also the Particular time
set, when and where he would make the most public Manifestation of his
Resurrection; which his Father's good pleasure admitted: where also above five
hundred of his Disciples assembled together had at once this beatifical Vision
1 Cor. 15.6.] To return.

Jo. 11.16. that was afterward as backward in his faith as any* resolutely
said; Let us also go, that we may die with him) so they would still be faithful
and constant to him. But especially Peter, as more affectionatly loving our
Lord, so more forward in expressing it, now also carrying one of the two
Swords, said; That though all the rest should possibly withdraw themselves, and
he stand alone, yet he would never leave him; would go with him into prison,
and to death; would dye with him and for him: To whose confidence our meek
Savior replied only to this purpose; That, though it was now already night,
yet before the Cock-crow of the very next morning, he, that was so forward now
to dye for him, should not once, but thrice, deny him. And indeed amongst
others at the questioning of a silly Maid he did not only say, but swear and
curse, not only that he was none of his followers or company; but that he not
so much as knew him. A Passage very punctually related by all the Evangelists,
though Peter's friends: That this example might remain for ever upon Register,
to show the world what the best of men, what the very chief of the Apostles of
God is, when in an hour of temptation, God's supporting grace is, for never so
little time, withdrawn from him: that the highest Saints, to keep themselves
from falling, might learn to walk in profound humility and perpetual fear of
falling; and might also learn to compassionate the falls they daily see of
their weaker Brethren, and to bear with them their burdens Gal. 6.2, 3. whilst
(as the Apostle) if any man whatever thinks himself to be something (except
only our Lord, who stood in his temptation, and by his standing we also stand)
when he is nothing, he deceives himself. Yet, after this which was said by our
Lord to Peter, we find that Peter replied again more vehemently: That, if he
should dye with him, he would not deny him in any wise Mark. 14.31.

Psalm. 110. and so came to the garden, a Garden of sorrows; to expiate herein
what the first Adam had trespassed in a garden of pleasure. Of which Passage of
our Lord, David in some manner seems to have bin a Type; when he passed over
the same brook toward Mount Olivet, flying from the face of his ungrateful son
Absalon conspiring against him, and seeking his life, see 2 Samuel 15.23. Where
also he worshipped, wept, and prayed, verse. 30.32. And was heard, and delivered
from death, but not so our Lord: Where Ittai also his friend verse. 21. promised
(like St. Peter and the Apostles) to live and dye with him, but was more
faithful and steadfast herein than St. Peter was: And where Hushai another
friend verse. 34. departed from him to the adverse party, that sat in Council
against him, as also Judas did, but it was to betray them, not him. Here
arrived, this careful Shepherd, seeing this great storm now ready to fall,
first thinks on the safety of those poor sheep, whom his father had committed
to him: and seeing greater danger toward their souls from Satan (who was now
permitted to invade both them, and their Master with all his powers of
darkness; and who had gotten one sheep from him already by his wiles: not by
any defect of this vigilant Pastor Jo. 17.12. but by his own naughtiness, and
Gods permission) than toward their bodies from their Fellow-Disciple, and his
Troops, our Lord sets no sentinels, nor provides no defense against these
corporal Enemies: but, the better to prepare his Disciples for the trial and
sufferings approaching, so soon as entered into the Garden, straightly charge
them not to sleep that night, but to spend it in watching and prayer, that they
might not fall into, or at least in, their, Temptation. Thus leaving eight of
his Disciples (who perhaps might have bin apt to take some offense at the sight
of his Agonies) to their devotions, near the entrance of the Garden; and
foreseeing his own great desolation of spirit approaching, he takes those three
of them more especially loved, and familiarly treated by him, and conducts them
to the further part of the Garden: that those, whom he had formerly (as it were
to forearme their faith against this hour) taken apart into Mount Tabor, to
behold his Glory, might now be Spectators also of this his great Eclipse, and
exinanition.



Satan now in the greatest Relaxation also, that ever was, of the power or
darkness Luke 22.53. - Jo. 14.30. -12.31. immediately forerunning the great
conquest over it, we know not.

[Tentatus per omnia, ut possit compati infirmitatibus nostris]: Heb. 4.15. As
also for our encouragement in the like; It pleased him, I say, now so far to
suspend from the humanity of our Lord the influences of the Divinity, and so
far to withdraw and Eclipse the consolations of the holy Spirit; as that it is
to be presumed by his unparallelled Agony, that never any of his Followers have
or can suffer the like without falling away from his innocence; for, through
his strength it is that all they are valiant, or do persevere. And we see, when
some drops only of the same storm fell on the Disciples, how soon they shrunk
under them: not only like us, then, he was in all our innocent infirmities,
even those of the soul and natural affections thereof, as well as those of the
body and senses thereof, but far beyond us. That in all things, even in human
miseries, and in those miseries also, spiritual desolations, so far as
innocent, he might have the preeminence: and that out of the depth of this his
humiliation might be raised a greater exaltation: and that also, how much
greater in him the natural fear, and horror of death seemed to be, so much
more his love to us might be demonstrated, that notwithstanding for us he would
so cheerfully undergo it all. And, whereas his Divinity could so easily have
hindered, or mastered and diverted any such tender apprehension and sense of
grief in the lower faculties, (which he does also not unfrequently in his
Martyrs; the joys of their spirit and superior part, drowning and intercepting
the Grief and Pains of the inferior, whilst the intensiveness of the soul to
one act disenableth it as to all other) yet he, to march before us in all our
greifs, voluntarily admitted also our sorrows and anxieties of spirit to the
highest Degree; that might include no Rebellion in it against the subjection
due to Reason, and to God.

his all-foreseeing eyes (of which no other sufferer ever had such a
foresight, as himself). At this sight therefore, being already a Spectator in
Spirit of whatever he was to act or feel in his person, His flesh began to have
horror, and a supernatural fear of death, and a mortal sadness and amazement to
seize upon him. Mat. 26.37. Mark. 14.33. He began (...), say the Evangelists,
coepit pavere, and taedere, as the vulgar renders it. And now the inferior
faculties of his soul, as it were, rose up to plead for the preserving of the
life and liberty of an only son from his fathers knife; of such a Son, as had
never once offended his Majesty in all his life in any thing little or great;
Nor by any sin of his forfeited these: especially when it may be presumed; That
that world also, which had sinned, might many other ways have found a
redemption, from the contrivance of the divine Wisdom rather than by his only
Son's sufferings: or, if only by these; yet surely all the worlds guilt might
have bin abundantly expiated by all those sufferings, and straits, and
annihilations of his Glory undergon formerly; or also (if blood be necessary
for remission) by his blood shed for it already in his Circumcision, or also
here in the Garden.

Jo. 13.21. Mat. 26.26. and heavy wrath of God that would pursue his Enemies
cruelty and injustice, not knowing what they did; which also troubled him when
on the Cross. On another side the great sufferings which so many Martyrs and
Confessors should undergo for his sake, whose torments his infinite love of
them made his own; the scandal and Desolation also of his poor Disciples; and
Peter's iterated denial of such a Master; The afflictions of his dear Mother, a
Spectator of such cruelties to her innocent Son, and so highly meriting from
all the Nation. All which, and much more, presenting it self to him, whose
omniscience suffered no human infelicities to be hid from him, struck to the
heart so passionate a Lover of all Mankind, and one who had descended so low to
make them happy, now that he had suspended all those other thoughts and
considerations which might easily counterpoise and weigh down these.

Gal. 3.13.) that was turned away into the Wilderness, going into this solitude
with all the sins of all the world, by the hands of all the congregation of
mankind from the beginning thereof, laid upon his head; and all the vengeance
or his Father's wrath due unto them as it were now pursuing him (at the
greatness of which wrath we may well Guess by the Eternity and extremity of
those torments which are inflicted by it on those, who deprive themselves of
their share in the sufferings of this Lamb of God). Under the weight then of
this heavy burden freely undertaken by him for love of us, and our eternal
safety, he falls down on his knees, and prays on this manner. Abba, Father (
Mat. 26. peircing words like those of Isaac Genesis 22.7. from so innocent a
person, and also an only Son going to the slaughter) If it be possible, as all
things are possible unto thee, Mark. 14.36. let this cup pass from me. And thus
far, as he being true man, Nature for self-preservation presents to God its own
innocent and harmless desires, and inclinations; but then, as also being a most
faithful Subject and servant, obedient in all things to the will of God,
proceeds further in another Note; Nevertheless, Not what I will, but what thou will. And herein consisted his innocence; not in wanting these natural desires
of self-preservation, for this would take away all merit of obedience; but in
submitting them. Such desires of nature being sinful, not wherever they are,
but only where they rule, contrary to what a Superior power, exterior or
interior, commands, or requires of them. And to instruct us, that no man
ought to take such desires arising in him (so long as the person thus concludes
them in Not what I will) to be sin, the Son of God also, for our consolation,
shows them in himself. And from him we may also learn, that he, as we, daily
had, and underwent all those other harmless appetites and inclinations of
Nature, respecting food, rest, apparel, lodging, society and other delights of
the senses; and that, in the confining of these within their due limits, in
obedience to his Fathers commands, consisted the merit of his innocence: never
any one of these appetites, throughout all his life, though from time to time
motioning their natural contents, yet having bin for once any way exorbitant,
or transgressed the bounds his Father, and his God had prescribed it.

chap 12. as it were in lieu of this in the Garden, which that Evangelist
wholly omits, who, it seems, writ his Gospel (upon occasion of some Heretics
so early denying our Lords Divinity) chiefly to Register therein those
discourses, and works of our Lord, which more manifested to the world his
Divinity, than those discovering his human infirmities]. In the Temple, then,
certain devout Gentiles, by the divine providence now desiring to be brought to
him, and to be made acquainted with him, as it were, already suing to be
admitted into his fold, which thing was only hindered by his death not as yet
accomplished, our Lord took great notice of it: and upon this occasion
foretelling the coming in of the Gentiles, and how, as soon as he was once
lifted up upon the Cross; as soon as this standard was erected, and he displayed
upon it, he should draw all the world unto him. Upon the mention of that cruel
death he there also let fall this expression to them Jo. 12.27. Now is my soul
troubled, and what shall I say? And there also first he makes his request, as a
man sensible of misery; Father, save me from this hour; but then, as a Son, and
a Servant perfectly obedient, he, with his Superior reason and the Spirit,
restrains these sensitive desires in their true bounds, in saying to himself
again: But for this cause came I unto this hour: and then adds an Act of
Resignation: Father Glorify thy name [i. e. in any sufferings of mine
whatsoever, which may be for the enlarging of thy Glory, even to the Gentiles,
and to all the world]. At which time also, after his prayer his Father answered
him with a voice from heaven, which the People called an Angel's speaking to
him Jo. 12.29. as here he sent an Angel to him; to show that he always hears
and accepts prayers, joined with such a Resignation, from all his sons. See
Jo. 12.30.-11.42. So again, at the Table, in looking upon the horrid design of
his own Servant against him, read in his heart, it is said by the same
Evangelist; that he was troubled in Spirit chap. 13.21. But straight his
absolute Resignation to his Fathers will appears in his permission of Satan to
enter, and act further against him in that malicious Soul; and in his saying
then; That thou do, do quickly. So, in his last sufferings on the Cross,
wherein he seems to have undergone a second Desolation of Spirit; when he began
those words of the 21 Psalm, composed by his Father David touching his Passion,
- My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? This also was then accompanied
with a most placid Resignation of himself into his Fathers hand that smote him,
saying, presently after these words, - Father, into thy hands I commend my
Spirit. But to return. This Request, and perfect Resignation being offered
together, (that Model that should be of all our prayers also) he returns, in
this his Agony, to receive the solace of the company of his three dearest
Disciples, left not far behind him; as also, like an ever-careful shepherd, to
look to his sheep, and so afford them his company, and assistance, in this hour
of their temptation as well as his. And behold he finds them, being stupefied
with sorrow Luke 22.45. and amazement, at such a fight of his sorrow, and
amazement, and for the sad presage he had made to them of his approaching death
(Peter and all) fallen a sleep. Our Lord straight awakening them, asks Peter
(who had but now made such great promises of going to Prison, and dying with
him) how it chanced, that he and his Followers could not, for so little a time
as he had now to spend with them, even for one hour, so much as watch a little
with him? And this for his own sake too, to spend it in prayer to be delivered
from that great temptation, that was coming, especially on Peter. But this meek
Lord, what with one word he questioned, presently with another he excuses; in
saying, with much compassion for them; The Spirit indeed is willing, but the
Flesh is weak. (Upon which Flesh of theirs, not only their grief, but Satan
probably at this time, was permitted to have some influence, in this first
degree of their desertion of our Lord). Where also by his mentioning the
weakness, and infirmity of their Flesh (which he now also felt extraordinarily
in himself, but without sin) he excites them also to a stronger vigilance over
it. Then repeating again to them the same charge of watching to prayer in this
dreadful hour of temptation, which he gave them before, He departs again to a
certain distance, sore pressed with that great weight that lay upon him; and on
his knees made a second time the same request with an earnestness of Prayer
Luke 22.24. increasing according to his Agony; when also his innocent words
conclude again in the same manner; -- Not my will, My Father, but thine be
done. And as S. Matthew gives his last words Mat. 26.42. If this Cup may not
pass from me, except I drink it, Thy will be done. Then rising up, and adding
no more words after these, as it were hereby restraining his innocent desires
of self-preservation from being too importunate, and showing his perfect
resignation also in the shortness of his Request, he visits again (agitated
still to and fro with his unparallelled sorrow) his three most trusted Friends;
and finds them fallen asleep again; speaks to them; and now receives from them
no answer; For, says the Evangelist, their eyes were heavy, neither wist they
what to answer him thereunto; like to those three Comforters of Job, who sat
down by him, but in a deep silence. Thus solitary, and destitute of any
Companion in his sorrow, not answered by his Father, nor his Friends, here
those complaints of the Psalmist are verifyed, which he spoke of him in this
his state of Desolation Psalm. 141. voce sua ad Dominum clamavit, voce sua ad
Dominum deprecatus est. Effudit in conspectu ejus orationem suam, and
tribulationem suam ante ipsum pronunciavit, in deficiendo ex se spiritum suum
ante ipsum qui cognovit semitas suas [rectas]. Considerabat ad dextram, and
videbat, and non erat qui cognosceret se: Periit fuga ab illo, and non erat qui
requirat animam ejus [qui sollicitus esset de vita ejus servanda]. Yet, knowing
this for at time of his treading the Wine Press all alone, Esaias. 63.3. he again
straight withdraws himself from them; and as the floods of his Anguish grew
still higher, who drank a larger cup of Desolation than ever any other man did,
according to his greater capacity to receive it, and greater cause (the sins of
the whole world, past and to come) of undertaking it; He returns a third time,
in the continuance still of the heavy hand of his Father upon his spotless
Innocence: who stood now over him, as it were, with a knife in his hand ready
to slay his only Son, to save the life of some inconsiderable wretches; He
returns, I say, a third time to the ordinary remedy of afflicted persons. And
now falling prostrate on his face, he beseeches him, yet once more, on the
same manner; but still concluding with the same perfect obedience, and
resignation; rendered so much more precious to the Divine Majesty, by how much
the natural motions of his Humanity were more intense to the contrary: saying
again: O My Father, not my will, but thine be done. In all this leaving to us a
perfect pattern of our behavior in Prayer when distressed; both of
perseverance, in demanding what we have need of, and of resignation, to
acquiesce in what God pleases to grant.

When, Heb. 5, 7.
says he, in the days of his Flesh he had offered up prayers, and
supplications with strong crying, and tears unto him that was able to save him
from death, he was heard, etc.] I say, besides these, his whole body, though in
a very cold Evening (for they made a fire in the High Priests Hall Mark.
14.54.) poured out a Sweat; and this no ordinary Sweat, of a Dewy, tenuious,
and aqueous matter, but a thick, viscous, and clammy Sweat; such only as is
seen to happen in great agonies, and in the Pangs of death. But yet his sweat
beyond this too; for it was (says the Evangelist) as it were great drops of
blood; the pores of his body, by the strange pressure of his Spirit from
within, opening and enlarging themselves, and letting out the grosser part also
of that substance running in his Veins; and this in such quantity, as the
drops fell on the ground where he lay; whether true blood, or some other
glutinous humor clotted like it, who can tell? But a strange, and miraculous
Sweat it was; and a miraculous cause it must have, and such as no other Son of
sorrow has tried the like. And (could we now go no further) what world can
there be so numerous, or its sins so great, that the only Son of God might not
end his Passion here; and offer only this, as over-sufficient to redeem it; and
thus pay the due sufferings, in such an afflictive Deprecation of his
sufferings?

more sufferings before its dissolution. When methinks in great confusion, this
his Vassal prefaceth to him in some such manner, as his servant John did at his
Baptism; Lord, I live, and move, and have my being by thee, and must my Lord
thus be strengthened by me? To whom this answer seems to be returned: I Permit
it to be so now; For thus it is meet to fulfill all sufferings, and to give my
Servants an Example of disdaining help from none of Gods Creatures, though in
Dignity never so inferior to them. This Angel then (some think the chiefest, S.
Michael; some S. Gabriel; named Gods strength, and the Messenger formerly of
our Lord's Incarnation) appears from Heaven strengthening him; strengthening
him corporally; that his sufferings might not end here, where it seems Nature
was brought to the utmost of her passibility, and was dissolving her self in a
mortal Sweat; and strengthening him spiritually, in the Ministry of of those
Motives, and consolations externally to him, which internally he himself
withheld from his lower self; probably, representing to him, the infinite Glory
to God, and benefit to men, and Exaltation to himself, The fulfilling of
Prophecies, and of the will of his Eternal Father, the rescuing of mankind from
everlasting destruction, according to his Father's preconstitution, His
approaching Resurrection, and entrance into Glory; that should arise from
accomplishing the rest of his appointed sufferings; Our Lord vouchsafing now to
receive, as it were, by the reflection of an Angel the vivificating sound of
his own words that were spoken but two or three days before, in the Temple,
with much rejoicing in his future Passion, when he said Jo. 12.23. etc. -Now
the time is come, when the Son of man should be glorified. -And except a corn
of Wheat fall into the ground, and die, it abides alone; but if it die, it
brings forth much fruit; -And - Father Glorify thy name. -- Now shall the
Prince of this world be cast forth. And I; if I be lifted up from the earth,
will draw all men unto me. -- And if any man serve me, let him take up his
Cross and follow me; and where I am, there also shall he be. Thus then serenely
contemplating his Cross, for the joy set before him, he despised the shame
thereof; that afterward he might sit down at the right hand of the Throne of
God, and his Servants by him. By such ministerial applications from the Angel,
of that which the Angel originally derived from himself, his great anguish of
soul was assuaged: and exduditus est pro reverentia sua: and his companionate
Father afforded him now in due time a Deliverance, though not from his
fore-designed designed sufferings, yet from his present fears, from the present
amazement, and toedium, and mortal contristation, he was seized with; restoring
his mind to its former serenity, and courage.

Cor. 12.9. speaking to him; our Lord by an Angel speaking to him Luke 22.43.
Heb. 5.7. And thus both their prayers were heard, as all those of all Saints,
rightly made with the clause of Resignation, always are. And God ever upon
such Prayers straight gives some new thing to the suppliant; either some new
thing without him, or some new thing within him: either Grants externally the
thing prayed for, or changes internally (for he is omnipotent) the desire of
the person praying for it. Thus he, who perfectly resigns his own Will to
God's, has at last his own will, because it is God's; and God's will now so
far his, that, to grant him his former Will, would be a thing against his will:
and giving to him his past, would be but a denial of his present, desires. And
far better and more satisfying seems this change of our mind within us, than of
the world, or its affairs without us. (Wherein also Gods course is many times
unalterable by our Prayers). For our mind to us is all in all, and not the
things without us. Joy, and sorrow, Pain, and pleasure, lodge here, and the
heavenly Physician works the shorter cure, when we come to him for some ease,
in applying his medicines to the soul it self; and in altering, and with his
Cordials strengthening, and supporting it, than in altering external things for
its satisfaction. And when we beg these things to content it, he does not
deceive us if he give the same content to it without them, or also in the
contrary to them: and it seems to come all to one, either to receive, or
possess a thing, or not at all to want or desire it; or also, now to desire to
want it. And S. Paul, after our Lord's speaking to him, and his new Grace given
him, was as much satisfied and transported, and took as much pleasure in his
infirmities, which he would have had removed, and in the thorn sticking in his
Flesh, as if he had had it, at his request, pulled out. Especially if this also
be put into the Scale, That God, in denying any present Good wished for,
presents always to us the possession of a future good (much more valuable) in
the same kind; and indeed denies this present good in order to our attaining
this future; and also, for the present, feeds the mind, in its instant
pressures, with most strong hopes thereof, and consolations therein. And thus
it is declared of our Lord himself in this matter Heb. 12.2. -- That for the
Joy that was set before him he endured the Cross.



Mat. 26.15. but not yet received, his bloody wages) marching at some distance
before them; the better to discover our Lord, and give them notice, with his
salutation and kissing of him, which was He. Whom our most meek Lord (though
well he knew his design) admitted not only to his presence, but also embraces,
and to a kiss; not only to leave us an Example of his infinite meekness, and
how we also ought to love our Enemies; but to show his perfect obedience to the
will of his Father in this first taste of his bitter cup. And so in a most mild
manner stiling him Friend, asked him for what purpose he came. By this, as it
were fore-pitying his great Damnation, to reduce him now at least to some
reflection upon his bloody Treason, and prostrate himself at his feet to beg
pardon. And then (he being silent) spoke yet more plainly to him, the rest of
the Disciples standing by; Judas betrayest thou the Son of man? (i. e. The Son
of God to save thee become the Son of man, by which name, to express the state
of his humiliation, our Lord usually styled himself) to death, with this
dearest expression of love to him: Tu unanimis meus and notus meus; Who but
now, simul mecum dulces capiebas cibos; and but this day; in domo Domini
ambulavimus cum consensu; as the sad Psalmist, in Spirit foreseeing this
Tragedy, aggravates it. After which said (and this Satan-possessed miserable
creature no way relenting) our Lord moves forward toward the Band that was
coming on to apprehend him, his Disciples following; And, asking them first
with great Majesty, whom they sought for there, and they answering, for Jesus
of Nazareth, upon his speaking two words: Ego sum, as if it had bin the
terrible name Jehovah, or Ego sum in Exodus, they all recoiled, as if repulsed
with some mastering force, and fell flat upon their backs before him; so that
he and his company might not only have gone from them, but marched over them,
if they had pleased. In which action he shows to them and to the world his
All-Powerful Godhead; and that oblatus est (as the Prophet) quia ipse voluit;
Esai. 53.7.
and that not by their force, but his own mere good pleasure, it was, that he
would be taken, bound, and led away by them; as also used this act of his
power, as a means to reduce them to their duty, and prevent their Guilt; and
make them, next, to turn to another prostration forward, in a due reverence and
honor to his Sacred person; Jo 7.32, 46.
moved with the like Spirit, as those were, who came formerly to apprehend him
in the Temple. But they, after a while, by his permission recovering their
strength, made toward him a second time; perhaps thinking their former fall an
effect of his Magic, or black Art, able to procure a Blast to throw them down,
but not to hold them there; and full ignorant that they rose again, only by
the strength he infused. Again, he asked them the same Question; And, answered
by them as before; he, next, lays a powerful command on them (which though
assaulted by his Followers, they punctually obeyed); That, seeing he was the
man they sought, they should dismiss, and not touch, the rest of his company;
mystically showing thereby, his sufferings to be our ransom; and his
apprehending, our freedom; He, in the yiedling up of himself, yet taking most
tender compassion (as S. John observes) of his poor sheep; Jo. 17.12.
That, though they might be scattered, yet cone of those, whom his Father had
given him, might be lost, by falling into that storm which he well saw, (now
all the Powers of Hell were let loose) that none could withstand but himself;
and that Satan's sifting them at that time would have turned to the ruin of
their Faith; and all of them bin, if not as Judas, Betrayers, yet Denyers of
him. For, if Peter, when at free liberty, and only asked the question by a
Maid, did so; what may we imagine would he, or the rest have done, under
Restraint and tortures?



Genesis 9.6
and of Justice (as those sent then to apprehend him were) should incur the old
Lex talionis mentioned in Genesis, and perish by the Sword. Adding also, that
he needed not his, nor any others, defense; having at his command more than
twelve Legions of Angels (and, had he pleased to have opened theirs, as he did
the Servant of Elisha his eyes, they might have seen all these celestial Armies
now environing him; but what needed this, when they saw the late powerful
effect of his breath only, in the pronouncing of two words, enough, had he
pleased, to have unmade the whole world, as also it was made only with a word).
After which, he concluded his speech with those gracious words, full of
patience, humility, and resignation (after his usual manner) to the good
pleasure of his Father: The cup, that my Father has given, or appointed me,
shall not I drink? And, if I now make such a rescue, how shall that, which is
written of me, be fulfilled? Taking care that not one syllable of his Fathers
good pleasure, declared in the former Scriptures concerning him, should fall to
the ground; and accepting these his sufferings, with all willing submission,
not as from the hands of the Enemies, but of his Father.

Luke 22.52. he expostulateth with them; thereby to reduce them to some remorse
of their fact, why they came against him thus by night, as against a Theif, and
a Robber, and one that sought concealment, who indeed was not a Destroyer, but
the Savior, of mankind; and who conversed amongst them all the day publicly
in the Temple; at what time they had nothing to say to him. Then presently as
it were recalling himself from this arguing with ungrateful men, and resuming
the sweet contemplation of the divine preordination: But, says he, Luke 22, 53.
This is your hour. Intimating that, only by the divine Dispensation, and his
own full consent to it, the Powers of Darkness were now let loose upon him; and
these their wicked Instruments licensed to act in a time suitable to their
designs.

usage of him, as imputing their former prostration to a feat of his Magic or
black Art, able to play some pretty pranks, but too weak to do them any real
mischief or affront. But, indeed, this only Son Isaac was bound by his Father,
not them; in obedience to whom, and thirst after the Redemption of mankind by
it, this Lamb of God offered himself to be Sacrificed on the Altar of the Cross
the next morning, and thus freely yielded up his liberty into the hands of
sinners.

Jo. 16, 32:
And that prediction of our Lord, but some hours before, was fulfilled -- venit
hora, ut dispergamini unusquisque ad propria, and me solum relinquatis. Only a
young man, lodging in some house adjoining; that, awaked with the noise, arose
out of his bed, and throwing a sheet loosely about him, came forth to see what
such tumult meant, had the courage to follow our Lord; and so was laid hold on
by them; who leaving his sheet in their hands escaped away naked; a lively
prerepresentation of our Lords escape from them (after their stripping him of
his Garments) that was to be three days after, at his Resurrection, leaving
his Syndon behind him.

Jo. 13.30. After which followed our Lords long Farewell Sermon made to his
Disciples Jo. 13.31. etc. to the chap. 17. and Prayer for them after it; Jo.
17. his Journey to the Garden about a mile off; his prayers and Agony there,
and his Disciples there falling a sleep, and all the Circumstances of his
Apprehension; and the young man's rising out of his bed. The night, it seems,
though the Moon then at the full, was much overcast and dark, suitable to the
work. Thus bound they joyfully led away our Lord, through the valley, into the
City, now silent and quiet: and carried him first to the house of Annas,
probably in the way to Caiphas his Palace, and he a great Encourager of the
design; and some think that Judas there received his reward; his treason having
now given them full Possession of his Master. Annas also, though some years
before deposed from the office of High Priest by the Roman Governor, who in
those days disposed of it yearly, as seems to be employed by those words: Jo.
11.49. Caiphas being High Priest that same year, and Luke 3.2. Annas and
Caiphas being the High Priests [i. e. by turns]; or after what time he pleased,
yet still retained the title, Luke 3.1; and still had some special interest and
sway in it, from Caiphas's marrying his Daughter; and from his having a son
also, Eleazer, that had born the same office before Joseph. Antiq. Jud. lib.
18. cap. 3. Who was also a chief Member of the Council then met in Caiphas's
Palace, and likely was called on to accompany them thither. The officers also
might have had order to House our Lord as soon as they could, for prevention of
any tumult or resistance.

Mark. 14.53. assembled together, expected them. Our Lord being set before
them, the High Priest, instead of producing a charge against him, and hearing
his Defense and Answer to it, fell on Questioning him about his Doctrine, and
his Followers, (whom, as they had said elsewhere, Mat. 22.16. they knew free to
speak truth; and, as to this, regarding, or fearing no man's Person) to see what
he would confess; and, if confessing any thing liable to their censure, thence
to draw up an Indictment; when as indeed this seemed very great oppression, to
apprehend, bind, make a man a Prisoner, and bring him before the bar of
Justice, there to gain from him something, for which to question him. Our Lord,
having many times before bin thus examined by them or their order, who he was,
who sent him, what authority he had, etc. answered them briefly; That, both for
Doctrine and Disciples, they had seen who these, and heard what that, was; (and
indeed if the latter, his Doctrine, good, the more Disciples the better); That
he had taught publicly in the Temple, and in their Synagogues, and in private
said nothing, but what abroad. That therefore, if he were any way faulty in
sowing Errors, or plotting sedition, they might have enough to bear witness of
it, and upon their legal testimony, proceed to condemn, or acquit him; and
therefore that they should not ask him, but ask them that heard his words, and
saw his actions; even amongst which were many of themselves, that then sat on
the Bench, or stood before it: and amongst these the very Officers, sent
formerly by them to apprehend him. Who indeed thoroughly convinced of his
Innocence and Sanctity, had returned to them with a Never Man spoke like that
man.

Pet. 2.23.) he threatened not; and we may imagine, with great charity said this
to reduce that poor Wretch to a sense of his fault: And it is a wonder, that
herein those Judges, or some of the Assessors, did not prevent our Lord in the
censure and castigation of such a wicked and impudent act.

Defecerunt scrutantes scrutinio; and mentita est iniquitas sibi; as the
Psalmist. Our meek Lord continuing all the time with most profound silence;
enduring, as the Apostle observes, such contradictions of sinners, unprovoked
and as it were unconcerned, to the great wonder of the Council, where occurred
such advantages of clearing his cause and Innocence.

assurgebant in S. Mark, chap. 14. that they were also two of the Assessors)
that pitched both upon the same matter; and this bearing the show of an high
Crimination; his threatening to destroy and demolish their Temple; which also
they reproached him with when he hung upon the Cross, Mat. 27.40. at the very
time when indeed they themselves were dissolving the Temple he spoke of. But
these also, in reciting of his words, varyed, as from the truth of what our
Lord said, so from one another. One testified, that he said absolutely he would
destroy it: Destruam; Mark. 14.58. The other, that he could, or was able to
destroy it, in the space of three days. ( Possum destruere Mat. 26.61.)
Whereas his words were, neither destruam nor possum destruere, but Solvite,
Destroy ye (as now indeed they were about it, and his excitabo not long after
to follow it). One witnessed in general, That he said, he would destroy the
Temple; but then, he might mean some other Temple; as indeed he did, the Temple
of his Body: but the other, that he said he would destroy the Temple made with
hands, that very Temple of Jerusalem; and that, in three days also, he would
undertake to build it up again (reaedificabo); whereas his own words, speaking
of the Resurrection of the Temple of his body, was excitabo. Thus they urged
against him things that he knew not Psalm. 34.11. and laid to his charge things
that he never meant. But, then, his saying, he was able to destroy it, seems
only a vaunting and vainglorious speech, not deserving death or bonds: and, it
he said further, that he would do it, this argued only a malicious intention
where no possibility of acting. Words they were also spoken some years before,
without attempting any such thing in the least afterward: Nay one of his
valiantest acts, and wherein he most showed his power was quite contrary to it,
the cleansing of the same Temple from any profanation of it, in the least
manner, even in the outward Courts thereof: of which there wanted not Witnesses
many, who suffered by it. But, making the worst we can of his saying; yet, when
the witnesses added the following words also, that within other three days
again he would rebuild it, the one I hope, if they held him such a
Miracle-worker, would make amends for the other; and sure he would not after
pulling down rebuild it, but to build it better; and his good intention in
reedifying it, may balance, if not disprove, a bad one in demolishing it. But,
alas, these words (now in the scarcity of any other solid accusation so
aggravated) were before, at the time he spoke them, even according to the Jews
understanding them, only slighted as a a vain brag, and not thought liable to
bear an action: they then replying to him, that he spoke impossibilities; for
that a Temple, that had been before forty six years in building, could not by
one person so speedily be pulled down or reedifyed. Jo. 2.20.

slightness of it; and therefore, though here the only alleged, not a word
was said of it (for shame) before the Roman Governor Pilat, which would but
too apparently have betrayed their empty and causeless malice. But our Lord,
all this while that such things were tumultuously objected, remaining
recollected, and silent, the Judge seeming well satisfied with what was laid to
his charge, and observing our Lords resolute silence, stood up; and asked him,
whether he did not hear what they urged against him? why he answered them not?
and what he had to say for himself against such mighty accusations? As if he
had forgot that, for the last words he spoke for himself, he suffered him to be
stricken over the face.

Pet. 2.23. Tradens se Judicanti illum injuste. Silent upon higher grounds yet
1 Pet. 2.24. Heb. 9.28. Now were laid on him all our iniquities, Esaias. 53.5.
Now was he, who knew no sin, made sin and made a curse for us, because out of
infinite love he would be so; Oblatus est, quia ipse voluit. Now he presented
himself before Gods justice in our stead, and who were most notoriously guilty
of whatsoever he was accused, Whether blaspheming, Destroying Gods Temples, or
whatever else, and had all reason to stand speechless; -- Languores nostros
(says the Prophet) ipse tulit, and dolores nostros ipse portavit; quasi
leprosus, and percussus a Deo, and humiliatus; vulneratus propter iniquitates
nostras: attritus propter scelera nostra; disciplina pacis nostrae super eum:
sicut ovis ad occisionem ducta; and quasi Agnus coram tondente se (the shearers
stripping him not only of his clothes, but his life) obmutescens, and non
aperiens os suum; quem, propter scelus populi sui, percussit Deus: As the
Prophet at large describes there his condition Esaias. 53. And so we ought to
imagine him now putting himself in our stead before the Tribunal of his Eternal
Father: and, without justifying himself at all, speaking to him, with a love
far transcending that of David 2 Samuel 24.17. Though I have never sinned nor
done wickedly before thee, yet, for what these my Brethren have done, let thine
hand, I pray thee be not against them, but against me. And so silent and
without any Defense of himself, for what could he say for us, or in our
Defense, but only confess our guilt? offering himself to Gods vindicative
Justice for all our Blasphemies, Treasons, and affronts, done to this divine
Majesty ever since that of Adam's; and, amongst the rest, even for their sins
also, that thus unjustly persecuted him, with the same Deprecation for them
now, as on the Cross. Dimitte illis Pater: Non enim sciunt, quid faciunt Luke
23.34. Lastly silent, obediently to fulfill what all the Prophecies had so
punctually foretold of him. For at this time it was, that all those doleful
complaints occurring in the Psalms and elsewhere, concerning his innocence,
and suffering mute, and not replying, were exactly and perfectly verified.
Psalm. 34.11.
-- Surrexerunt Testes iniqui; quae ignorabam, interrogabant me, Psalm. 38.2.9,
10
-- Posui ori meo custodiam, cum consisteret Peccator adversum me. Psalm. 37.13.
-- Opprobrium insipienti dedisti me. -- And obmutui and non aperui os meum,
quia tu fecifti. -- Qui inquirebant mala mihi locuti sunt vanitates, and dolos
etc. Ego autem tanquam surdus non audiebam, and sicut mutus non aperiens os
suum. And -- Factus sum sicut homo non audiens, and non habens in ore suo
redargutiones, Ego in flagella paratus sum, and dolor meus in conspectu meo.
Quoniam iniquitatem meam [That of the whole world taken upon me] annuntiabo,
and cogitabo pro peccato meo [i.e. meorum.]

Kings 8.31.32. Numb. 5.19. 1 Thessalonians. 5.27.) to declare then openly, whether
indeed he was the Messiah, and the Son of God. Which if he now denied, having
before professed it, he might pass for a grand Impostor, and Deceiver formerly;
or, if he confessed it, with the Court it amounted to blasphemy, and the
punishment thereof Death; and which the divine Wisdom then so ordered; That,
what our Lord had so often declared in his life and confirmed with Miracles, he
might also witness before all the world at his Death, and seal this great truth
with his blood for the greater confirming of true Believers, and greater
conviction of all Opposers at the day of Judgment.

Thou say that I am, being amongst the Jews a modest way of Asseveration
concerning a thing that includes some self-dignity or commendation. Thou say
that I am, being as much, as, thou say that which I am. See the same
language used by our Lord before to Judas Mat. 26.25. and the High Priest his
renting his clothes for Blasphemy shows our Lords Answer to be understood as a
clear confession. Therefore S. Mark puts instead of it more briefly, I am. And
it may be here observed, that, when as he said the same thing often in his life
time, and they upon it had charged him with blasphemy; and so went about to
stone, and kill, him see Jo. 5.18. Jo. 10.32. etc. He there confuted them, and
stopped their mouths by many proofs, that this was no falsehood or blasphemy;
viz. by his so many miraculous works; by the Testimony of the Holy Baptist; by
the immediate testimony of his Father from heaven; lastly, by the infallible
Scriptures, calling those Gods to whom God had given some extraordinary
commission or authority; whereas himself had received beyond them such a
Plenitude of Sanctification, appearing by the Descent of the Holy Ghost upon
him at his Baptism, by the Purity of his life, and Doctrine, and mighty works;
see Jo. 5.20, 21, 33, 37. the 10.33, 37: yet here, at their crying Blasphemy,
he repeats no such defense, notwithstanding all the Nation could witness the
truth of it; but retireth again to his former silence, as loath to disappoint
their purpose now his hour was come.

Psalm. 109.1. [which Messiah his sitting on the right hand of Power, and so
being David's Lord, the Pharisees could not reconcile with the Messiah being
also David's Son, when our Lord asked them this question Mat. 22.44. No more
than they could now his bonds with it] and that they should also see him come
in the clouds of heaven, as Daniel had foretold of the Messiah, Dan. 7.13. to
judge the world, and even them his then Judges. Of which he had also in his
preaching told his auditory many times before; see Mat. 16.27. Where advising
them not to mind the gain of this world, but to save their poor Souls in the
next, he tells them that the Son of man (for so he styles himself also there)
shall come in the glory of his Father [which showed him the Son to another,
higher than man] with his Angels; and then reward every one according to his
works. And this his premonition, here given to his unjust Judges, shall again
bear witness against them in that his day of Judgment; when, says the Prophet
Zachary chap. 12. -- Aspicient in eum quem transfixerunt. And Ecce venit in
nubibus, and videbit eum omnis oculus, and qui eum pupugerunt, says S. John
Apoc. 1.7. Nay, a-modo, says S. Matthew chap. 26.64. very suddenly, within
three days after his saying this, they should see the beginning of this his
Exaltation and Glory. -- He being exalted by the right hand of God, (says S.
Peter Acts 2.33. after his Resurrection, and Ascension) has showed forth this
ye now see, and hear. In which speech of our Lord, thus standing at the bar, we
may observe that his singular modesty was accompanied with a great freedom,
Authority, and Majesty. Nor had their treatment any way daunted him, or
remitted the resolution, and courage, belonging to an innocent person, to the
dignity of his office, and to the necessary confession of truth, as appears in
his whole carriage; at his apprehension; -- Are ye come out as against a Theif,
etc. I sat with you teaching in the Temple, etc. And here, at his appearance
before the High Priests and Jewish Courts; Ask thou me? ask them that heard
me: And afterward before the Roman Governor: say thou this of thy self etc.
And, for this cause come I into the world etc. And every one that is of the
Truth hears my voice. And, Thou could have no Power against me, but what
is given thee from above. Jo. 19.11.


Acts 24.25.) their malice made also ill use of; and improved it so much more
to complete his blasphemy; And presently the High Priest fell a rending his
clothes; (as it was the manner in such a case, to rend their vest before, with
both their hands, from the neck to the middle) and said, there was now no more
need of witnesses, (who well knew, how little they besteaded him); that he had
sufficiently condemned himself. The rest also of his Assessors charged him with
blasphemy (themselves, in this, blaspheming); and that for this he merited
death; and so delivered him into the custody of the High Priests Officers till
the morning, which now approached, it being now after Cockcrow; and raised the
Court. See Luke 22.26. Mat. 27.1. Or, if some of our Lords Judges may be
thought to have sat in consultation the rest of that night; yet our Lord was
removed from before them, and remitted to the Officers custody till a fuller
Assembly of the next morning should determine their further proceedings.

Mat. 27.55.56. compare Luke 8.2.3. And this also might be some reason of her
confident request Mat. 20.20. of having her two sons more highly preferred in
our Lords Kingdom; and lastly, of our Lords recommending his mother to John, as
for other reasons, so because he was better able to provide for her; and
perhaps, as having also an house in Jerusalem Jo. 19.27. -- but be this as it
will].

Jo. 18.25; but Peter, perhaps more timorous for the Exploit he had done in the
Garden, stays without till his companion, speaking to a woman the Portress,
brought him in, which made her presume him a Galilean. Peter, thus entered,
presumed not to go up into the Court where the Council sat on the trial of our
Lord, as probably the other Disciple did; but stayed below amongst the servants
and officers at the fire in the Hall or Court of the Palace, Mat. 26.69. Mark.
14.66. warming himself, and expecting what would be the end, Mat. 26.58. When
the Maidservant, the Portress, remembering who brought in Peter, and probably
the discourse of the company then being of our Lords apprehension, and
Followers, said unto Peter before them all: Art not Thou also one of this man's
Disciples Jo. 18.17? Peter much amated hereat denied it; and said he was none
of his Disciples, he knew no such man, nor understood what she said; and after,
taking an opportunity, withdrew himself from them into the Porch, perhaps,
intending to have gone clear away; but, the gate being shut, he thought it not
best to discover his fears, but return again into the Hall and former company;
where doubtless he heard talk of the severe proceedings against our Lord in the
Court. Meanwhile, he being absent in the Porch, the Cock crew, and gave him a
fair warning of his fault; but his troubled thoughts took no notice of it.
There he had not stayed long but another Maid said of him to the standers-by,
that he was one of the company that was with Jesus. But he denied with an oath
Mat. 26.72. the second time, that he knew him. Near upon an hour after this,
some others of the company again began to compass and question him saying; That
surely he was one of them, for his speech also bewrayed him for a Galilean.
And, which was the worst of all, one of the High Priest's servants a kinsman of
his whose ear Peter had cut off, pressed him yet closer, saying, did not I see
thee in the Garden with him? Here, having cause to fear, his assaulting the
High Priests servant and making resistance to Authority might also come into
Examination, still in more distraction he began (says St. Matthew) execrari
and jurare, that he knew not the man; and presently the Cock crew again. And
upon it our Lord by this time, after the Court was risen, being brought down by
the Officers into the Hall, looked back and gave a glance upon Peter.



seems to be greater than most of the rest; in his following his Master to his
trial, and venturing into the High Priests Palace, when it was he that just
before had cut off the ear of his servant. In his denial, its being without any
great scandal, not in public, but to some idle people standing about a fire,
and meddling with a matter of no concernment to them. In that it was done upon a
sudden surprisal, not done with premeditation, or put to any formal Trial of
his fidelity; and where perhaps hazarding also the reputation of the other
Disciple that brought him in might run in his mind, and much more his being
questioned for Malchus. And, as it seemed a shame to deny our Lord at the
accusation only of a poor Maidservant, so it might seem a thing of no great
consequence to confess him before such a mean person. But, which is most to be
noted, he denied not that Jesus was the Messiah, or the Son of God, he
renounced no part of his faith; no such thing was he asked; nor, if put to it,
would he ever have denied it: but he denied only his knowledge of, or
acquaintance with, such a person. Lastly, the Fall of this great Apostle God
permitted, besides for the aggravation of our Lords sufferings, by his chiefest
Disciple denying, as another of them betraying, him, for many other good ends:
As, to beget a perfect humility in him, a little before too confident of
himself: to show us, what frail things we are, the best of us, when our Lord
leaves us a little to our selves, and has not his eye upon us: To comfort poor
sinners in their great miscarriages, since the greatest Saints, as David, and
Peter, have had their falls: To show the infinitness of Gods mercy to Penitents
in his pardoning such great offenses; and that to persons most obliged to him,
and from whom he had reason to expect the greatest fidelity: Lastly, to teach
Peter the chief Pastor of his sheep the more compassion to sinners, in
reflecting on his own infirmities and faults; and to bear with those who are
tempted and fall, in as much as himself stood not, when he was so.



Nunquam sic locutus est homo, sicut hic homo, should now have treated him with
some ordinary civility, especially no final sentence being yet passed upon him;
and the Judges being to reexamine his cause the next morning. The ear also our
Lord restored but two or three hours before to Malchus, and his reprehending
Peter for his cutting it off, might not have bin so soon forgotten by them. But
indeed now was the Power of Satan and of Darkness, and his chain never so much
loosened as at this time, before the approaching ruin of his kingdom; who
therefore ceased not by all those his Instruments to act his utmost malice, nor
to suffer our Lord to rest one minute.

gradatim through all sorts of sufferings, instead of indulging him or
themselves any repose (in which our Lords servant S. Peter was more civilly
used Acts 12.6.) after their watching all the forepart of the night, compass
him about in a ring; and, notwithstanding his modest silence no way provoking
them, fall on abusing him both with their tongues and hands, as far as was
permitted. They spit on his face (being the greatest note of ignominy and
disgrace that was amongst the Jews see Deuteronomy. 25.9. where the man was to be used
so, that would not raise up seed to his brother; -- And they abhor me (says
Job) in his typical complaint. Chap. 30.10. they forbear not to spit in my
face) when his tied hands also could not cleanse it. They smote him also on the
face with the palms of their hands: They punched and thumped him with their
fists: and, by the Prophecies, Esaias 50.6. it seems they also plucked off his
hair; being not tondentes but vellentes of this meek Lamb. These Jews also
treated him this night as a Mock-Messias; as the next day the Gentiles abused
him as a Mock-King; and, after their cruelty wearied, in this way, and his rare
faculty in Prophesying coming into their mind, they remembered a Boys-play to
this purpose, and got a cloth and blindfolded him (whereof the Philistines
abusing blind Sampson was a Type) and fall on beating him a fresh thus
hoodwinked, that he being the Messiah, and the Christ, and the great Prophet
that was to come into the world, should now so hooded prophecy, and tell them
who it was that smote him.

Jo. 10.32.) who left heaven to save you, and in whom you never saw fault, and
who went about every where doing good; for which of these do you thus treat
him? And how could the blessed Angels, at least that waited on our Lord, have
the patience to suffer such vile wretches, and the dregs of the people, to
strike, and spit on their Creator the Lord of Heaven and Earth? but that they
well knew it was the pleasure of their great Master out of his infinite charity
to suffer this even for the salvation of those his Tormentors; and to receive
these blows for the satisfaction of their fault that gave them. All this while
our meek Lord stood silent, nor was a Reproof found in his mouth: but to those
that struck him on the one cheek he turned the other; and received without
reply such derisions, scorns and contradiction of sinners, of which St. Luke
intimates, that the Evangelists mentioned only some part. -- Et alia multa
(says he) blasphemantes dicebant in eum, Luke 22.65. and they that could not
hold their hands off him before the Judge, what would they not do to him left
to their Guard?

Neque iniquitas mea, neque peccatum meum, Domine; sine iniquitate cucurri and
direxi -- igne me examinasti, and non est inventa in me iniquitas Psalm. 58.5.
Non locutum est os meum opera hominum: and propter verba labiorum tuorum
custodivi vias duras. -- Psalm. 16.4. Jer. 11.19. Ego quasi Agnus mansuetus qui
portatur advictimam; and non cognovi quia cogitaverunt super me consilia,
dicentes; mittamus lignum in panem ejus, and eradamus eum de terra viventium.
-- Jer. 12.7. Reliqui domum meam, dimisi haereditatem meam; and dedi dilectam
animam meam, in manu inimicorum ejus; and facta est mihi haereditas mea quasi
Leo in sylva etc. -- Psalm. 68.8, 9, 21. Propter te sustinui opprobrium, operuit
confusio faciem meam -- factus extraneus fratribus meis [to my own People, and
to my own Followers, affrighted at my troubles] and Peregrinus filiis matris
meae -- opprobria, exprobrantium tibi [in all thy merciful designs for their
salvation] ce^iderunt super me. -- Sustinui qui simul contristaretur, and non
fuit: and qui consolaretur and non inveni etc. -- Psalm. 108.1. etc. Os
peccatoris super me apertum est, and sermonibus odii circumdederunt me: and
expugnaverunt me gratis. Pro eo ut diligerent me, detrahebant mihi. -- Et
posuerunt adversum me mala pro bonis: and odium pro dilectione mea; non sunt
recordati misericordiam; sed persecuti sunt hominem inopem, and mendicum, and
mortificaverunt compunctum cord [superadded affliction to affliction]; Ego
autem pro eis orab^m.

Deus aperuit illi aurem [saith the Prophet Esaias chap. 50.5, 6. to become
obedient in all things to the extremity] Non contradixit: retro non abiit:
corpus suum dedit percutientibus, and genas suas vellentibus: and faciem suam
non avertit ab increpantibus, and conspuentibus in eum. -- Et virga (says the
Prophet Micha 5.1.) percutient maxillam Judicis Israel and dedit percutienti se
maxillam, and saturatus est opprobriis, say the lamentations of the Prophet
Jeremy. Lam. 3.30. And -- factus opprobrium hominum, and abjectio plebis,
(says Psalm. 21.) and with these insolences so disfigured the Prophet Esaias
chap. 53.2. etc. describes him, that -- Non erat species ei, neque decor: that
vid^runt eum; and non erat aspectus ut desiderarent eum. And again, -- Quasi
absconditus vultus ejus and despectus; unde nec reputavimus eum. Thus the
Prophets. And whatever they said, his obedience was resolved to go through with
it, and make it good, without a contradixit or a retro abiit: and therefore he
foretold also to his Disciples several times Mat. 16.21. -- 20.19. Luke 18.31.
a little before his last return to Jerusalem; that all things spoken by the
Prophets of his sufferings must be accomplished even to this now acted, his
being mocked, spightfully entreated and spit upon: and that they should do unto
him as they had done unto the Baptist, what ever things they would Mat.
17.12.13. And, at his apprehension, his last words to Peter were, after his
having told him that he could procure of his Father more than twelve Legions of
Angels to his rescue, But (says he) How then will the Scriptures be fulfilled,
that thus it must be? Thus all this night, under these barbarous Guards, whilst
they were acting cruelties, he was fulfilling Prophecies.

as the Jews and the Gentiles were to have an equal share in the benefit of his
sufferings and his death, so were they to have in the inflicting of them; that,
as on the one side all receive the mercy of being saved by his blood, so on the
other none should be freed from the guilt of shedding it.

Luke 22.66.) the Council met again; and, as appears by St. Matthew chap. 27.1.
and Mark. 15.1. in a much fuller body, than over night. The Ancients of the
people, the chief Priests, and the Scribes, and the whole Council (say they)
consulted together against Jesus. And, probably, Nicodemus and Joseph of
Arimathea were there also; who, St. Luke says Mark. 15.1. compared with the 2 Chronicles. 30.2. and Acts 5.21. -- 23.50. consented not to the Council and deed of
them: God having reserved these here to represent to the rest their injustice;
as also to bestow on our Lord so murdered an honorable funeral. Our Lord
being already precondemned by them over night, the chief design of their
consult now was how to put him to death by the Roman Governor, who had the
sole power thereof: this being taken from the Jews not long before Jo. 18.32.
so that the stoning of S. Stephen seems rather to proceed from a popular
Tumult, than a legal course of Justice. But, had the Jews now bin possessed of
this power, our Lords sufferings had bin much abbridged: for, so he had bin
stoned to Death for Blasphemy, as is intimated by S. John chap. 18.31, 32. see
Levit. 24.16. which death would both have prevented all the cruelties
afterward inflicted on him by Pilat, and the Roman Soldiers; and had bin
speedily dispatched; it being neither so dolorous and painful, nor of so
protracted a duration; nor so solemn, and conspicuous, and exposed to shame and
opprobry, as that of the Cross was: and so also all those sweet speeches, he
made upon it, had bin lost. There was a sort of death, the hanging of the
Delinquent on a Tree, inflicted by the Jews sometimes under the law upon the
special Divine command; and it was the only death, that was solemnly accursed
by God: (see Deuteronomy. 21.22, 23.) who commanded, when the crime was such as
incenst his wrath against the whole Nation, whereof the Delinquent was a
Member, that for the diverting this from them they should take such person and
hang him upon a Tree before the face of the Sun: and after this take down and
bury this accursed Corpse before night, that the land might not be defiled
therewith. For this see Numb. 25.4. -- Josh. 10.26. 2 Samuel 21.6. Our Lords
death then being appointed, and offered to Gods Justice for the Expiation of
all even the most horrid crimes of the whole world, Jew and Gentile, ever since
the fall of Adam, he voluntarily became such a curse for us, and was to undergo
this solemnly accursed death; to be suspended on a Tree before the Sun, and
taken down, and buried before the Evening; as the Apostle has observed Gal.
3.13. and cites the place in Deuteronomie for God's pronouncing this particular
death accursed.



Mat. 21.24, -- 22.45. -- John 5.36. convincing them from the testimony of the
Prophets, of John Baptist, of his Father from heaven, of his miraculous works)
would they answer him; Nor, upon the truth said, dismiss him (their distemper
lying not indeed in their understanding, but in their will): But, however, that
they should one day find true, what the Scriptures had foretold of him, that
this Son of man, that stood before them now so despicable, and vilifyed, should
hereafter sit on the right hand of the power of God. Upon which speech, they
collecting plainly, from this Exaltation spoken in Scripture of the Son of God,
that he made himself so, the question was put again to him, now by them all,
says the Text, Luke 22.70. which was over night only by the High Priest;
whether, then, he was the Son of God? And the same answer was returned to it
now also the second time. Whereupon all pronounced the same sentence as was
given over night; and concluded, that there needed no further witnesses against
a Person sufficiently condemned from his own mouth.

Mat. 27.2. for, whilst he stood before the Council, his bonds were loosed,
according to the custom, Acts 22.30. and so without delay led him away to the
Roman Governor Pilat, to request that by his authority the sentence of Death,
which his crimes had deserved, might speedily be executed before the great
Feast commenced; or any Insurrection of the populacy to his rescue, famed for a
Prophet. Though indeed they wanted not other motives of deferring this
proceeding (as also afterward Herod did concerning Peter Acts 12.4.) since they
could not so well then present him in Pilats Court, nor enter into it for fear
of defiling themselves, by touching persons unclean, who were that night to eat
the Paschal Lamb. And again, should the persons executed have hung upon the
Gibbet so long as was needful, in so lingering a torment, for the finishing of
their life, they had continued upon it, some of them perhaps, till the next
day, which would have bin a great Profanation of their highest Feast; but
malice is impatient.

of Justice, and from the Presidents residence, who might observe and curb his
Insolences. These crimes, I say, and the like, for we may imagine there was
nothing in our Lord's actions capable of an ill sense (as most actions of great
persons are) that the Devil now loosed did not suggest to the High-Prei^t's
malice. And the Evangelists Mat. 27.13, 14. Mark. 15.4, 5. say, that they
accused him of many things, in so much as the Governor questioned our Lord,
continuing in a constant silence, whether he did not hear how many things they
witnessed against him.



his, in their condemning that innocent blood, he had betrayed. But they,
regardlesly, bidding him to look to his own faults himself; and asking what his
infidelity to his Master was to them, hastily repelled him from before them.
What is that to us? say they Mat. 27.4. Yes surely, something it is to you; for
besides that you Priests are the Physicians of sick souls, to whom poor sinners
repair for your Spiritual Counsel, and making their atonement and
reconciliation with the offended God, you may remember, that you are the
persons that hired this poor Wretch to commit this sinful Act: or, if he did
well in it, your charity stood engaged to pacify and assure therein his
troubled conscience.

Mat. 26.24. Filius quidem hominis tradetur, sed vae homini illi: bonum erat
illi, si non esset natus homo ille etc; for the Devil, we may imagine,
suggested whatever might more swell his Despair. Here was a most bitter
Compunction for his sin; repentance and confession; and that public; lastly
restitution; and all too little, for him, who had done such despite to the
Spirit of Grace, and was now fallen into the hands of the living God, Heb.
10.29, 30. and a fearful expectation of Judgment and fiery indignation: Cap.
10.27: which spirit now having abandoned him, all such his relenting could not
be sound, sincere, or acceptable to God; but like that of Esau; not finding
place of a [right] Repentance, though sought carefully with tears Heb. 12.17.

Psalm. 108.18. Intret Maledictio sicut aqua in interiora ejus. For his body,
thus hung up, burst in pieces, and his bowels, so void of compassion to the
persecuted Innocent, were ejected and emptied out of his body; full of stench,
and corruption, and most noisome to all that approached and beheld it. Which
strange and sad accident also could not but be presently diffamed and spread
abroad; and might have bin a second warning to those others, Actors in this
Murder, so to prevent that unparallelled Judgment that shortly after followed
upon the whole Nation; in which also by Josephus this is noted as one of the
greatest Roman torments used toward those poor Jews, who fled to them for
mercy, that the Soldiers frequently ripped up their bowels for swallowed Gold.

Deuteronomy. 23.18. and not permitting David, because a shedder of blood, though such
as ought to be spilt, to have a hand in building it: they resolved therefore to
dispose of it some other way; and the divine Wisdom so ordered it, that they
should lay it out upon land, a known piece of ground, that, ever after called
the field of Blood, might perpetuate the memory of their wicked fact. This
ground they designed for a burying place for strangers, such Proselytes of the
Gentiles as much resorted to their solemn feasts (their buryals generally being
out of the City): a type of Christ's blood benefitting those strangers, whilst
they that shed it lost their share in it, Nec introierunt in requiem ejus; and
a type of the Gentiles now admitted, by the Purchase of that blood, to be
joined, and to take their everlasting rest and repose with his former people,
the Church of the Jews. All these particulars we have, punctually foretold by
the Prophet Zachary, Zac. 11.12, 13. both the just sum of the price thirty
shekels or pieces of silver; and the vileness of it exaggerated; being the
value of a Servant, in case his Master was any way deprived of him Exodus 21.32;
and the projection of this money in the Temple; and the disposing of it* to a
Potter; (yet had not these learned men, that fulfilled it, light to discover
it). To a Potter, i. e. one that traded in vile and cheap ware, which showed
the sum fit for a very mean purchase. The field, it seems by the price of it,
was some neglected place perhaps where potsherds were cast out, as
Montetestaced at Rome; or, where clay was dug for pot-making; and it was
ever after by the people called the field of blood, for a Witness against the
cruel purchasers; but also, as it seems by St. Peter's words Acts 1. upon this
account, that Judas chose the same piece of ground, wherein to make away
himself, and where his bowels and blood, by the divine Justice poured out
before our Lord's, became such a loathsome and offensive spectacle to the
beholders.

Luke 23.1. not spending much time in consultation concerning a matter long
before resolved, betimes in the morning. Jo. 18.28. led away our Lord, thus
condemned and bound, to the Roman President's Palace, and delivered him up
into the hands of the Romans. And so were they themselves afterward for it,
the whole Nation, led into captivity by Titus; their City destroyed, a thing
sadly foreseen, and deplored by our Lord in his Palm Sunday Triumph, when, as
from Mount Olivet he beheld the City, he wept over it Luke 19.41; and again, in
the Holy week of his Passion, when in the Temple he told them their house was
now left unto them desolate Mat. 23.38; and again, when he sat on the Mount
Olivet over against the prospect of the Temple Mat. 24.1. etc. with his
Disciples, and lastly, as he went to Execution and saw the people weeping for
him. As the chief Priests in this sudden transmitting of our Lord to Pilat,
showed the great zeal they had of his speedy dispatch: so this Eve of the great
feast of the Passover seems also to be one of the usual days, if not of the
trial, yet of the Execution; of Malefactors (thus made more Exemplary at the
time of so great a confluence of People hither). Because we find others then
executed besides our Lord; and because it is said to be the custom, in honor
of this great Feast, for the Roman Governor at this Sessions to release one of
the Persons condemned to the Jews: who, as they had lost the power of putting
any to death, so of pardoning or releasing any from it.

Praetorium or Court of Judgment. But the High Priests and Ancients of the Jews
entered not in with him, because this Evening they were to eat the Pasch; not
performed by them in its proper time as it was by our Lord, because the
Paschal-Feast-day happening this year to fall on the day before the Sabbath,
was by a former custom transferred to it. Now, the eating of the Paschal Lamb
was prohibited to all that were any way unclean. Numb. 9.11; and the Jews held
the touching or any Gentile (whom they esteemed unclean, as not being cleansed
at all from their pollutions according to Levit. 5.3. and 15.1. etc.) to render
them so; he, who touched any thing unclean, becoming unclean Lev, 5.2. For this
cause they stayed without; and it happened also opportunely for their better
prevailing with, and persuading, the people by and by, that they should save
Barabbas rather than Jesus; the one a true raiser of Sedition, and the other
falsely accused of it.

Jo. 18.12.) and doubtless had heard much of the fame of Jesus, and had a
vigilant Eye upon his motions, and on the concourse of the people made to hear
him, but without discovering any harm in his actions; and also who knew (says
the Text) that [not for any capital crimes of his, but] for meet envy, no small
Guilt of theirs, they had delivered him. He therefore, seeing the Prisoner
stand before him without his Accusers, rises from the bench, and unexpectedly
goes forth to them, and asks them what accusation they brought against him:
who now answered him also in general; that, if he were not a Malefactor, they
would not have sent him to him. Pilat, somewhat moved with such their declining
his further examination of the matter, desires them then, since they had found
him such, they would resume the matter into their own hands, and finish the
work they had begun, and punish the Delinquent themselves, according to his
demerit. Upon which they replied, That his crimes were such as deserved death,
and that in the most severe and exemplary manner; which it was not permitted to
them to inflict: and so, when thus urged to it, began to accuse him to the
Governor of such things as they imagined might be of most weight with him and
the Roman-Militia; pressing in particular, his forbidding to give Tribute to
Caesar; and saying that he himself was Christ a King. An accusation, in the
sense they intended it, and as it might any way entrench upon Cesars rights,
very false. For, as for Tribute, he had both actually before paid it, when
demanded of him, to Caesar, Mat. 17.26. and also being asked by them (the
Pharisees joined with the Herodians Mat. 22.16.) the question about the
lawfulness of it, but two or three days before his apprehension, on purpose
(says the Evangelist Luke 20.21.) that they might take hold of his words, that
so they might deliver him into the power of the Roman-Governour, he affirmed
it, and utterly silenced them with that divinely prudent answer of his, Reddite
quae sunt Caesaris Caesari, and quae sunt Dei Deo, that they should give to
Caesar Cesars Coin. And, as for his Messias-or Kingship, he had confessed it
indeed; but that his sitting upon his Throne should be not here, but in Heaven,
ad dexteram Patris; and the Glory of it not present, but hereafter, Quando
veniet cum nubibus. The like account whereof he gave afterward to Pilat; and
also de facto, when the Multitude purposed to have made him King: Jo. 6.15. he
had declined it, and presently withdrew himself; and elsewhere, in a
contraversy between two Brothers about dividing Luke 12.14. a piece of land, he
refused to be an Arbitrator: and sent his Disciples about the country without
carrying a penny of money, or so much as a staff Mat. 10.10. i. e. wherewith to
defend themselves, or offend others; taught them continually Patience and
non-resistance, if struck on the one cheek to turn the other, the fundamental
way of the propagation of his Kingdom. In his late apprehension he commanded
Peter to put up his Sword, and forbad the use of it against authority; and
presently repaired the hurt he had done with it. -- All which fulfils that so
often repeated of our Lord in the Psalms, -- Oderunt me gratis, without any
cause. -- Et quae ignorabam, interrogabant me.

Praetorium, where he had left our Lord in the custody of the Roman-Guards,
and, calling him before him, asked him whether he was the King of the Jews,
meaning that Messiah, or Christ, or King that the Jews had so long expected:
perhaps because that his Accusers had told him, that our Lord had before them
openly, himself, confessed it. Our Lord, though well knowing what had passed
without, yet to reduce the Governor the more to reflect on his own
observation, and experience, and on the malice and envy of his Adversaries well
known to him, desired (doubtless with a great appearance of gravity and
Majesty) to know whether he asked such a Question of himself, and from any
jealousy our Lord's life and actions had raised in him of his aspiring to the
Crown of Juda; or whether he had it from the relation of others viz. the
Highpriests, the envious oppressors of his innocence and merits, as the
Presidents own conscience witnessed unto him. The Governor replied; that he, a
Roman, understood none of those matters, about his Messias-and Kingship; but
that it was his own Nation that accused him of it, and had delivered him as a
person very criminous, and deserving death. Then our Lord, to inform him
further of the truth, answered that the Kingdom he only ownned was not a
Kingdom of this World, nor such as did disturb any Prince's temporal Rights; as
did sufficiently appear, that he had no Subjects to fight for him, or rescue
his person from his Enemies and persecutors. You are King then, said Pilat. Our
Lord answered, he was; and that he was sent into the world to bear witness of
the truth (which himself was); and that this was a Spiritual Kingship over
hearts, there to rule over and destroy all Error; and that all those who were
the sons of Truth would hear and obey his Doctrine, and become his Subjects.
The Governor asked him, what was that Truth he spoke of, and wherein he
labored to render all men his Scholars and Subjects: and, having no mind to
engage any further discourse about matters, as he supposed, of the Jewish
Religion, debated between our Lord and their High Priests, he rose suddenly
from the bench and went forth the second time to the Jews, taking our Lord with
him, and told them, that he found no fault at all in the man.

Mat. 27.14.) made the Governor wonder exceedingly, as both knowing his
innocence, and himself countenancing it.

[perhaps relating to his last triumphal entrance into the City five days
before on Palm Sunday, Pauper and humilis, riding upon a poor young colt of an
Ass without a Saddle, and weeping as he went along; and a great part of his
applause, the Hosannas of the children]. Now Galilee was a place noted formerly
for several rebellions. See Acts 5.37, 38. how one Theudas appeared there that
made himself a Prophet, and pretended he could do miracles, and drew much
people after him (mentioned but mis-timed by Josephus Antiq. Judaic. lib. 20.
cap. 5.); and, after him, Judas of Galilee about the birth of our Savior in
the time of the enrolment under Cyrenius Luke 2.2. which Judas also opposed the
paying of taxes or tribute to the Romans: Both which Rebels and all their
Followers were dissipated and destroyed. After these also it seems some
Galileans within a few years before had so highly offended Pilat in his
government, that, when they came up to Jerusalem at the solemn Feast to offer
Sacrifice, he caused them to be put to death; and that in some cruel, sudden,
and unexpected manner, it should seem by the expression in the Text Luke 13.1:
and, by their relating it to our Lord, some think they might be some relics of
Judas his Sect that denied tribute to Caesar (for which reason also some made
mention of them to our Lord to hear his judgment of their opinion) and that
made at Jerusalem some opposition in the Feast to the Sacrificing for the
safety and prosperity of the Emperor. And Pilat is noted both by Philo Judeus
De legatione ad Caium and Josephus to have bin pervicaci and duro ingenio, and
very uncompliant with the Jews; and who at last, complained-of by the Nation to
Vitellius, then a Superior Prefect of Syria, for a slaughter made upon the
Galileans, was sent by him to Caesar to give an account thereof; and so deprived
of his government and confined. The Jews mention therefore hereof Galilee seems
to have conduced much to their purpose. But, when this was suggested to Pilat,
he made another use of it; and though Herod and he were now at enmity between
themselves, perhaps for Pilat's cruelty showed to the Galileans forementioned:
yet resolved to send to him the Prisoner, who was born, as was commonly
imagined, his Subject (Galilee being under Herod's jurisdiction) and lived most
of his time in his territories; as being desirous to rid his hands of this
business with as little displeasure to the Jews as might be, and to devolve the
odium of it upon Herod, now come up to the Feast; and, because Herod being well
acquainted with the Jews law and Religion (which also he professed) might better
discover the Justice of the quarrel the Jews had against him about his
Messiasship, and the Truth he said he came to promulgate; and would perhaps
protect him, as his Subject, against the High Priests malice. Thus Satan, to
whom God gave leave to persecute his only Son, not excepting his life as he did
Job's, hurried our Lord as it were in Triumph, to prolong his sufferings,
before inflicting the last, of death, from one great person to another, to make
him the more public object of scorn and contempt; and, that all might have an
hand in his afflictions and torments, the Court of Galilee, as well as that of
Judea: foretold by David Psalm. 2. Principes convenerunt in unum, adversus
Christum tuum; and observed by S. Peter Acts 4.27.



projicere sanctum canibus, or to satisfy the curiosity of so wicked a person
polluted with Incest and Murder, stood silent before him, instead of rendering
him, by some obsequious answer, his Friend and Patron. But silent he was with
that meek and humble countenance and carriage, as that Herod rather took him
for a simple person and a fool, and not answering the report he heard of him,
than for any dangerous conspirator against the State. Meanwhile the High
Priests and Scribes had pursued him thither; and, before Herod and his Court,
reiterated the accusations, which, before Pilat; by Herod's killing of the
Baptist, that gave testimony of our Lord, having some hopes of his doing the
same to him: all which unjust slanders our Lord heard and entertained with a
profound silence, and without any defense of his Innocence. But Herod little
regarded their clamours, as one who had well bin informed of our Lord's
actions, and integrity; and, being a crafty Fox (as our Lord once styled him)
had formerly watched him very narrowly: and his Jealousy, as the Pharisee
truly informed our Lord, wanted only some fair occasion to have destroyed him.
But his generally doing all manner of good, and giving heavenly counsel,
without Wealth, without Arms, preaching only humility and patience, working
also great cures, ejecting Devils etc. (our Lords Apology for himself when the
Pharisee told him, Herod would kill him), as also sending his Disciples abroad
without any weapon for their defense, were things this Tyrant could not make
criminous. But, from such his silence, conceiving him without wit to answer for
himself; and to show he had no jealousy of his Crown from such a poor Rival,
thought fit only to make sport with him, and treat him as a Fool and a
Mock-King; for his Kingship was the thing his Accusers most pressed. And so
after he himself, resenting his silence, had showed some scorn and neglect of
him, he gave order to his men of war to array this their new King according to
his dignity in a white Garment, the Ornament of Priests and Princes, some old
cast-off Robe taken out of his wardrobe: and, after much jeering and slighting
of him, and some Giuoco di Mano's doubtless mixed, the like usage to that
received overnight from the High Priests Officers, he returned him in this
dress to Pilat, with his Guards commanded to wait upon his Majesty; and the
people deriding and hooting at him as he passed, according to the Prophecy
concerning him Psalm. 21.8. Omnes videntes me deriserunt me: locuti sunt
labiis, and moverunt caput. But Herod by this dress sufficiently signified his
mind to Pilat, that his person was rather an object of scorn or pity, then of
his Justice; which no doubt gave little satisfaction to the cruel Higst
Priests, in whom neither Pilat's nor Herod's absolving him, nor yet the
admirable meekness of our Lord (who, they well knew, wanted not words to defend
his Innocence; and who by his silence seemed to conspire with them against
himself, and to long for his Cross before it was brought him) could work any
relentment, or reflection on their Guilt.

Ipse enim est pax nostra, qui fecit utraque unum. Ephesians. 2.14. And the white
Garment, wherein he was arrayed in derision, was truly a symbol of his purest
Innocence; and a vestment suting to his Sacerdotal, as well as Regal, office.
And as for Herod, his unjust Judge, he, as also Pilat, by the divine Justice,
was ejected from his Government, and dyed miserably in Exile and disgrace.

Luke 23.13, who at this time had a custom by the common suffrage to free a
Prisoner, and setting him before them, told them, that, whereas they had
brought him to him as a seditious person, and a Perverter of the people, he,
upon due examination of him before them, could clear no such thing; That he had
also sent him to Herod the Tetrarch of Galilee, and ruling where this man most
converst, and where he was said to have done most of his works; and, that
neither had Herod done any thing to him worthy of death: that therefore he
would chastise him, perhaps guilty of some smaller imprudences and excesses of
undiscreet zeal in his former behavior; and so release him. And, in speaking
thus of releasing, he put them in mind of the custom at this great Feast, of
his releasing such a Prisoner to them (but probably, of such whom he thought
fit to nominate) as they should demand; which also the people that stood about
as readily called for Luk 2.18. compared with Mark. 15.8. And it is said to
have bin a custom first instituted as a grateful remembrance of their freedom
at that time from the Egyptian bondage; used long before their subjection to
the Romans; and so indulged still after it. Or perhaps rather some later favor
of the Roman Governors allowed them, after the power of condemning or
pardoning any capital offender taken from them. So the Governor upon this
account motioned to them, that is, to the people, whom he knew better affected
to our Lord, the release of Jesus.

Esaias 53. cum sceleratis deputatus est, matched the chiefest offender he could
find with Jesus, to determine the people's election on him rather. And it seems
the people were not so ill inclined toward our Lord, as rather to free the
Murderer; but the chief Priests, and great ones using their authority and
persuasions with the multitude, and perhaps representing our Lords pretended
blasphemies, and destroying the Law of Moses etc. as much more heinous, and
perilous to the Nation, than the other man's Guilt, at last prevailed with them.
And those who cried Hosanna to our Lord, men, women, and children, and spread
their garments in the way, but five days before, are now as loud for the
Release of Barabbas before him. Away with this man, cry they Luke 23.18. and
release to us Barabbas. And Pilat, much displeased at it, asking them, what
then they would have done with Jesus (whom this Heathen by a particular divine
instinct called also the Christ and their King, because indeed he was so) all
the people, now, engage themselves also in the like guilt, as the High Priests,
and Elders before; and publicly renounce our Lord, meekly standing before
them, for the Christ, or their King; and cry out also against him, Crucify
him, Crucify him: not only demanding Justice, but impudently prescribing to
the Judge the manner of his punishment; and that the cruellest could be named.
And when also, before all the people, the Governor now the third time declared
that he could find no fault at all in him; they a second time redouble their
clamours, and cried out more exceedingly (says the Text Mark. 15.14.) Crucify
him, Crucify him.

more necessary, he supposed, in the issue it would be, for preserving him from
such an horrid death. The Roman manner of scourging offenders is said to be
this, To strip the person naked, and tie him by his hands and feet to a pillar
with his face toward it; and so beat him with a whip made with cords, or
thongs of leather, that wound much worse then rods. A very sore and ignominious
torment it was, and therefore no citizen of Rome whatsoever, or any having this
privilege, might be so punished. See Acts 16. 37, 22, 15. -- Facinus est
vincire civem Romanum, scelus verberare, prope Parricidum necare; quid dicam in
crucem tollere? says Cicero in Verrem orat. 5.

Praetorium Mat. 27.27. Jo. 19.4. or atrium Praetorii, says St. Mark chap.
15.16. And, to do this and the rest of their pranks the more solemnly, after
they had seen the sport Herod's men had made with this Jewish Prince, and
perhaps some of them that also of the High Priest's officers overnight, and
not meeting with such a joculary object every day, they assemble the whole
Cohort consisting of some hundreds to come and perform their homage to him;
some of them looking on, whilst others acted. By whose obsequiousness, as
servants use to go beyond their Lord's Commission, we may imagine his stripes
were laid on without any regret, or common humanity, in such a multitude of
military Spectators; till he, being rendered all in a gore blood, excepting only
his face and head, was made a fit spectacle to show to those Adamantine-hearted
Jews. And indeed, if what we owed in this kind was undertaken to be paid by him
(as it was, and that without his speaking a word to decline it) we may hence
measure the greatness of his sufferings from that of our demerits. Multa
flagella Peccatoris, says the Psalmist; and our Lord pronounced, as it were
against himself! -- That our knowing his Fathers Will, and not doing it,
deserves many stripes; which at last came to that, That he himself must defray
for us. And thus also were all the Prophecies fulfilled by him to the
uttermost, which the Scriptures long before had delivered. Psalm. 34.15.
Adversum me laetati sunt and convenerunt: congregata sunt super me flagella,
and ignoravi [for what cause]. Subsannaverunt me subsannatione: frenduerunt
super me dentibus suis: Quem tu percussisti, persecuti sunt, and super dolorem
vulnerum meorum addiderunt Psalm. 68; and again Psalm. 37.18. Ego in flagella
paratus sum, and dolor men's [my stripes] in conspectu meo semper: And the
reason follows, -- Quoniam iniquitatem meam [ i. e. meorum, taken on me]
annuntiabo, and cogitabo pro peccato meo. And again Psalm. 128.3. -- Supra
dorsum meum fabricaverunt peccatores: prolongaverunt iniquitatem suam. Or, as
the Hebrew, -- supra dorsum meum araverunt arantes, prolongaverunt suleum suum.
For doubtless his back was strangely furrowed and plowed-up. And now was that
chiefly verified Esaias 53.2. etc. Non est species ^i, neque decor: and vidimus
eum, and non erat aspectus. -- Languores nostro ipse tulit, and dolores nostros
ipse portavit: Et nos putavimus eum quasi leprosum [with his broken skin] and
percussum a Deo and humiliatum. Ipse autem vulneratus est propter iniquitat^s
nostras, attritus est propter scelera nostra: Disciplina pacis nostrae super
eum, and livore ejus sanati sumus. -- And after -- Propter scelus populi mei
percussieum. And of this also particularly he several times foretold his
Disciples; saying that his own People should deliver him to the Gentiles, to
mock, and to scourge, and to crucify him. Mat. 20.19. Mark. 10.34.

illudendum, as well as flagellandum, our Lord foretold; and to prepare him
further for the show their Master intended, they thought fit to dress him like
a King, as Herod had done before them; and so pulling off his garments again
now cleaving to his scarifyed back, (if perhaps these were at all put on after
his whipping) they arrayed him with an old-cast purple cloak; and, wanting yet
a Crown for this King, they took a bunch of thorns, and platting them together
made a wreath thereof, and pressed it about his Temples; whereby his Sacred
face and head also (hitherto blood-free) became of the like dye with the rest
of his body, pierced every where with the spikes of the thorns [of which Sacred
head now compassed with a bunch of thorns (when God saved Abraham's only Son,
yet so loved the world as not to save his own) the head of the Ram, which so
Abraham took and offered for him, all entangled and wrapped in thorns, seems
to be a lively type.] Then, for a Scepter also suitable to his Crown, they took
a reed, and gave it him in his right hand. This done, for his Inauguration,
they fell on their knees and worshipped him, saying, Ave Rex Judaeorum; God
save the King of the Jews. And then, that their merriment and mockery might not
end without strokes, they rose often their knees, and fell a beating him with
their fists; and, spitting in his face, mingled their excrements with his
blood: and took the reed out of his hand, and said him over the head with it,
and so nailed his Crown closer to his Temples. And, by this time Pilat calling
for him, they put the reed again into his right hand, which he meekly held so
as they placed it; and so brought him forth all imbrewed in blood, head, face,
and body, with his Robe, Crown, and reeden Scepter; and presenting him on the
Gallery, or Terrace-walk, before all the Jews, Pilat said Jo. 19.4; I bring him
forth to you again, that ye may know that I find no fault in him, [being thus
ill treated by Pilat, not for his, but their, crimes; so to have mitigated
their cruelty and malice] Ecce Homo; as if he had said to them: see this rueful
spectacle of suffering Innocence: and at length have ye some compassion. Is not
here punishment too much already inflicted, where none deserved? But they, the
chief Priests, and officers especially, as soon as they saw him in this pickle
(says the Evangelist Jo. 19.6.) renewed their former clamor, Crucifige,
Crucifige. The Governor replied: Take ye him and crucify him, if you can be
so unjust: for I cannot do it, finding no fault in him. The Jews, seeing Pilat
so resolutely still clearing our Lord, as to that accusation of theirs, which
they thought would most take with the Romans, Sedition etc. retreat again to
his blasphemy, and his crimes against their Law, (whereof the Roman President
wholly ignorant could not so well discern his, or their, Guilt) saying; that
they had a Law, according to which their Justice had proceeded against him; and
that by this Law he ought to dye on a higher account than Rebellion against
Princes; seeing he made himself the Son of God, and became thereby guilty of
the highest blasphemy against God himself, which in their Law was punished with
death. [But, were it so, this will not bear out or warrant their Crucifige, or
demanding the death of the Cross].

Truth etc; began to be seized with a religious fear (to the great confusion
and shame of our Lord's own people) that there might be some such thing indeed;
and so to reflect also on his scourging of him, and the danger, if he should
proceed further to Crucify him. For his own Religion also had such opinions in
it; That the Gods sometimes do descend from heaven, and take on them the shapes
of men, see Acts 14.11. etc; And they also imagine some inferior Semideos
begotten by the Gods of women. And perhaps these fables had their first
original from some mistaken passages of the Sacred story of God's sometimes
assuming a human shape, and discoursing with the Patriarchs; and from the
Prophecies, concerning the Son of God to be born of a woman. To which may be
added the extraordinary Gravity, Modesty, Fortitude, Constancy, Prudence, and
holy reservation, so great unconcernedness and neglect, as it were, of what
they said or did to him, which he had observed in our Lord, as one strangely
elevated above all human passions, and infirmities. Startled, I say, with this
fear, and reflecting on his former ill treatment of such a person, he returns
again from the Jews into the Praetorium; and there questions our Lord anew,
whence he was? i. e. whether of an human, or divine, race? by this question
giving our Lord occasion, as Herod before, to set forth and justly magnify
himself; the former, as to his divine power, in showing some Miracle; and this
latter, as to his divine Nature, in declaring his descent. But our Lord, before
him, as before the other, stood mute and silent; not willing to admit the least
detrectation or declining of his sufferings, or the least endeavors contrary
to his Fathers good pleasure; well knowing also of Pilat, as of the Jews, that
-- si responderet, non dimitteret: and lastly, having before answered him
sufficiently to this question, when he told him that he was a King, but not of
this lower world; that he descended to teach men the Truth of God. Nor were
those many divine works of his concealed from the Governor's knowledge, which
evidenced an extraordinary Mission of him from God.

the power of man (as also he did at his apprehension, when he told the Jews,
this was their hour) made a charitable breach of his former silence; to check
the Governors vaunting of his Power, where he showed so much injustice;
telling him, with a very great gravity and majesty in his words, and carrying
himself as the very person Pilat feared he was, that he could have no power at
all against him, except it had bin given him from above; therefore those, who
delivered him (an innocent person) through malice to him [invested from above with
such a power] had the greater sin. In these few words representing to Pilats
passion and heat, that all this was done by the permission and good pleasure of
his Father; to which, not man's, he yielded this meek obedience (as he told the
Jews before at his yiedling himself to them in the Garden). That he had no
power over any person whatever, but what a Superior power, who would call him
to account, permitted; and, again, no just power over any person innocent, as
to the condemning or crucifying of such an one; but yet much more, no power
over him, who was the Son of God, and King over all the world (a thing he
mentioned also to Peter, when they called on him for Tribute Mat. 17.24.) But
yet, that, though he offended in what he did to him, he was through his
ignorance, though not of his innocence, yet of his person, much more excusable
herein than those others, who delivered him to him: who, both against so many
infallible evidences he had given them, denied him to be such a person, and
with so many false criminations brought him to him as a capital offender, and
abused the power of the lawful Magistrate to serve their malice; thus
representing to him, both the Jews guilt, and his own; though withal he
modestly excused his fault, as much the less.

brake out into that speech, which quite subdued this timorous Judge; and now
begat in him another quite contrary fear, which drove out the former; the base
fear of displeasing Caesar, or perhaps also losing his place, expelling that
noble and just one of shedding the blood of an innocent person, and of
crucifying the Son of God. And, as he feared offending Caesar, when he had no
just cause thereof, (For all Religions, and Magistrates, desire the protection
of innocence;) to he afterward suffered that which he feared; being, upon the
same Jews complaint, ejected by Caesar for cruelty, who here feared offending
him by being too indulgent and merciful. They cried out unto him therefore;
that, if he dismissed that man, he was no friend of Cesars: for surely he, who so
pretended himself a King of their Nation, spoke and acted against Cesar's
title, and Right.

Praetorium (where he had left him, as perceiving that the sight of him did but
more enrage them) and so, sitting down on the Judgment Seat (which, it seems by
what St. John says, was in an open Gallery on high, conspicuous to all the
people) to pass his final sentence upon him, a sudden message came to him from
his wife (see Mat. 27.19. sedente illo pro tribunali) dehorting him from having
any thing to do with that Just man. This great Lady (whose name Nicephorus Lib.
1. cap. 30. says was Procula, and whom the Greek Church honor as a Convert of
our Lord's) doubtless had heard the report of our Lord's Miracles; of his late
solemn entrance into Jerusalem (at which all the city was generally moved,
says the Text); of his apprehension, condemnation by the Jews, and at last
remission to Pilats Tribunal, and had her thoughts much troubled in his behalf;
as that Sex uses to be more tender and compassionate, and averse to such
cruelties. Upon which, that morning, she had also a dream or vision that much
affrighted her, perhaps of her Husbands being accessory to his death, and of
the Tragical end he should incur after such an impious fact, ejectment out of
his government, banishment, and at last making away himself, like to that of
Judas, as Histories do relate the Event: and upon this sent such a resolute
message to him in the midst of so public action, and in the sight of all the
Jews. In all which God showed an extraordinary favor to Pilat, though not
signified to his own person, yet to another the nearliest related to him, and
most prevalent with him, to have prevented his guilt, and kept his hands from
being embrued, at least, in this divine, and Sacred blood, which were afterward
washed in vain. And this message, which she sent, either being audibly
delivered in the Jews presence to Pilat, or at least presently spread amongst
them by Pilats Courtiers, another admonition this seems to have been also to
the cruel Jews, after that of Judas.

Ecce Homo: representing our Lord at his lowest (to which he humbled himself
merely for our sakes) thus inviting their compassion, so now by the special
divine Providence directing him (as Caiphas before) he changed his Note, and
said, Ecce Rex vester: as it were demanding their subjection; alluding in this
to the Robe, Crown, and Scepter, with which he appeared before them: as, in his
former, to the miserable scourging and stripes. Pilat in all probability being
really persuaded, upon the several motives forementioned, that he was their
Messiah, and their King, in that sense our Lord confessed it; and therefore he
persisted afterward in making his title on the Cross exactly such,
notwithstanding their importuning him for the alteration of it.

Toll, Toll, Crucifige. And he again iterateth to them our Lords Messiah and
King-ship, saying; what must I take and Crucify your King? Here the chief
Priests, like good faithful loyal Roman Subjects, cried out, they had no King,
but Caesar. And this their renouncing him so formally and expressly for their
King or Messiah, so often inculcated to them by Pilat, and of which they had
had so many infallible proofs, exceedingly aggravates their guilt, and will
doubtless rise up against them at the great day of Judgment. Neither, though
always they have expected, have they had, a King of their own, but served
under foreign Princes, ever since to this day.

himself, as not faulty in this matter, because they much more; see Deuteronomy. 21.6.
called for water and washed his hands in the sight of all the Jews, telling
them he was innocent of the blood of that Just person (using the same Epithete
concerning him as his wife before,) and that they should look to it: God herein
also warning them by him of the sad consequence thereof. But indeed, as to the
Governor's act, this was but a foolish fancy, that the washing thus of his
hands could any way cleanse his conscience; or his professing the persons
innocence any way compensate his delivering him up to death, and not rather the
confessing it double the iniquity of his injustice; proceeding from a cowardly
fear of Caesar, and a sordid compliance with the Jews. To this, their rage and
fury (even all the people, says the Evangelist, not the High Priests alone)
returned that fearful imprecation; His blood be upon us and upon our children;
which blood accordingly came upon them, and upon their children, at the set
time after seven sixes of years, i. e. forty years (as also Nineve was
threatened after forty days) and that, such vengeance, as never fell on any
Nation since the Creation; nor the like ever read in any other story. One of
their own Nation, that was present in the action, writing it exactly. Where,
amongst other their sufferings, he relates, Joseph. de Bello Judaic. lib. 6.
cap. 12. when, pressed with famine great Multitudes of them fled out of the
City to the Romans for some releif, -- Romanos Milites illos verberatos, and
modis omnibus excruciatos contra murum cruci diversis modis suffixisse ira, and
odio, and ludibrii causa; donec propter multitudinem quam cepissent, jam
spacium crucibus deerat, and corporibus cruces: and this misery brought upon
them, when at this great Festival the whole body of the Nation, as it were, was
gathered together in Jerusalem; and so was encompassed and shut up there by the
Romans. See Eusebius. Ecclesiast. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 5. and Joseph. de Bell.
Judaic. lib. 7. cap. 17. Ab omnibus regionibus ad Azymorum diem festum
congregati bello subito circumfusi sunt etc. Thus they devoted themselves here
to God's Justice, and thus it happened to them. But their words taken in a
better sense, and as the divine goodness and pity is pleased to interpret them,
for all Penitents, are a Prayer piously offered not only by them, but the whole
world, to his offended Majesty; to be saved through the sprinkling upon them of
the blood of Jesus. Our Lord's blood also crying to God from the Earth, not as
that of Abel, or any other just Person's shed by the impious, for vengeance,
but for Mercy. Nor has the whole world any salvation or shelter, but from his
blood being upon it, and its children for ever; who also all had a hand, both
Jew and Gentile, in offering it: and in this sense God also will admit this
prayer to be fulfilled, (see Romans 11.) but in the last place, upon this most
miserable Nation.

Jesus to the Centurion and his Soldiers to be crucified according to their
request.

Mat. 20.19. -- Jo. 18.32. and other-while called by him his Exaltation Jo.
12.32. And I, if I be exalted from the earth will draw all men unto me
signifying (says the Evangelist) what death he should die: and by the context,
verse. 34. it appears, the people well understood his language: And again Jo.
8.28. -- When ye have (says he) exalted the Son of man, then shall ye know,
that I am he:] So was it foresignified by many expressions in the Old
Testament. See Psalm. 21.17. The Council of the malignant has besieged me: they
have dug my hands and my feet: they have numbered [in that racking posture]
all my bones; they have beheld and considered me [every limb of me stretched
out before them;] and then speaking of his being stripped of his clothes. -- They
have divided my garments amongst them, and upon my Vesture they cast lots. To
which stripping of him also that expression seems chiefly to relate, where he
says Psalm. 68.8. -- That Confusion covered his face. See Zachary 13.6. (where
the Prophet mentions this smiting of his Pastor, and the man that clave to him,
and so scattering of his sheep) verse. 7. speaking thus of his being treated by
his nearest relations as a false Prophet; that he shall be asked: What are
these wounds in the midst of thy hands? and he shall answer, with these was I
wounded in the house of my friends. To which wounds also is applied that loving
expression Esaias 49.16. -- Ego tamen non obliviscar tui; in manibus meis
descripsi te; I have engraven thee upon the palms of my hands. See Zech.
12.10. where speaking of the conversion of the Jews in the latter times; and
the great sorrow they shall then have for their crucifying their Messiah, the
Prophet says -- Et adspicient ad me quem confixerunt: and plangent eum planctu
quasi unigenitum etc. See Jer. 11.19. -- Ego quasi agnus mansuetus, qui
portatur ad victimam; cogitaverunt super me consilia dicentes; mittamus lignum
in panem ejus [for his bread] and eradamus eum de terra viventium. To it
likewise seems to relate Esaias 52.13. -- Ecce intelligit servus meus;
exaltabitur and elevabitur, and sublimis erit valde: For it follows: Sicut
obstupuerunt super te multi, and inglorius erit inter viros aspectus ejus, and
forma ejus inter filios hominum [like to verse. 2. of the next chapter]. -- Iste
asperget gentes multas. -- And Esaias 11.12. -- Et levabit signum in nationes.
Concerning his thirst also in the violent and fervorous heat of such lingering
pains, see Psalm. 21.16. -- Aruit tanquam testa virtus mea, and lingua mea
adhaesit faucibus meis. -- And Psalm. 68.22. -- Dederunt in escam meam fell; and
in siti mea potaverunt me aceto.

Typified also this death of the Cross was by many instruments of the peoples
preservation in the Old Testament: By the Tree of life, provided to remedy the
mischiefs done by the Tree of Good and Evil: by the blood of the Lamb sprinkled
upon the posts of the door, that the destroying Angel seeing it might passover
Gods people: by Moses his Rod smiting the Rock, and bringing out of it a
fountain of water for refeshing the people: By the Brazen Serpent listed up on
high, and fastened to a pole, curing all, that looked upon it, of the other
fiery Serpents bitings; which our Lord also mentions as a Type of his own
Elevation, and drawing the eyes of all upon him Jo. 12.32. Jo. 3.14. Sicut
Moses exaltavit serpentem in deserto; ita exaltari oportet filium hominis, ut
omnis qui credit in ipsum [looks upon him with the eye of faith] non pereat: By
the Expansion of Moses his Arms and Hands on high made in the Mount for the
conquest of Amalek: which posture of his also by others help was continued for
several hours; and being any way altered, changed presently the fortune of the
battle: By Elias his lying with arms stretched out upon the Child, to raise
him again to life: By marking with the letter Thau the form of a cross, the
foreheads of those that were to be saved from the slaughter of the six
destroying Angels Ezech. 9.4. Lastly, by Abraham's only Son Isaac carrying the
wood, upon which he was afterward laid, and destined to be Sacrificed. But God
was more favorable and kind to Abraham, if I may so say, than to himself.

(who as he voluntarily suffered for us, so what death he pleased) for many
special reasons. First, because his suffering being to save us, and we by our
sins having incurred the curse of God, and so he for us taking this curse upon
himself, this was that special death which had Gods curse annexed to it; Deuteronomy.
21.23. when upon some grievous crime, God required the Malefactor to be hanged
up upon a Tree before the Sun, and as it were openly in his sight; to be hanged
up, as unworthy to touch or tread upon the Sanctified land, and not to be
dispatched in a moment, as by stoning, or some other speedy death; but there
fastened to remain till near the going down of the Sun; and then taken and
buried, that the land might not be defiled by his being above ground; Gal. 3,
13.
See Deuteronomy. 21.23. as has bin said already..

That he was obedient to the death, even to this death of the Cross. By the
greatness of his sufferings, therefore, our Lord would have us learn the true
weight and heinousness and desert of our sins; the cancelling of which cost him
so dear. As also such exquisite pains both he and God his Father chose, to show
their great love to man, and his salvation: and, if there were no absolute
necessity for the Son of Gods satisfaction for us by such exquisite torments,
the least prick of whose finger would have bin a ransom for a thousand worlds,
yet surely, the more he suffered for us, the more he showed he loved us; and,
the less of his pains were necessary for any satisfaction, the more these so
grievous demonstrate the greatness of his affection.



resemblance to all those former made under the Law, that were only Types of
it. Resemblance, In our Lords being laid and spread, when they fastened him with
nails, on the wood of the Cross, to be consumed on it by degrees; so, those
Sacrifices laid on the wood of the Altar; but this, on the Cross, during much
longer before it was consumed, the heat of which torture also forced a sitio
from our Lord. So says S. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.24. Ipse pec^ata nostra pertulit in
corpore suo super lignum. And S. Paul, Ephesians. 5.2. Tradidit se ipsum pro nobis
oblationem and hostiam Deo in odorem suavitatis. Again, in our Lord's being
elevated and lifted up toward Heaven: as those also were on an Altar raised up
in Salomons Temple ten cubits high, 2 Chronicles. 4. and ascended by steps; and the
Sacrifice also upon this Altar was elevated, or heaved up again, and waved
before the Lord in the hands of the Priest; and the Altar of the oblation of
incense was made also of wood.

Again, this death seems the most convenient also for the pouring out of the
blood of this Sacrifice; even the whole Mass of it gathered to the heart, in a
great stream, at the foot of the Cross (as the Priest did to that of the legal
Sacrifice at the foot of the Altar) as it were all at once, by the Soldiers
lance, instead of the Priests knife: but this not till such tedious and
lingering torments for several hours first endured; whereas the legal was
presently dispatched out of its pain; and lay a long time indeed to be consumed
on the Altar, but after it was first deprived of life and sense. This death
most convenient also for this Lamb of God fulfilling the type of the Paschal
Lamb; and the prophecies whereby God signified that he would not have a bone of
his only Son to be broken, nor his body any way mangled, or divided any
further, than four holes made in his hands and feet, and a wound in his side;
whilst meanwhile his stripping, and then his long and scorching pains, suffered
from the fire of Gods wrath against our sins, falling all upon him, which he
endured on the Cross, answers to that Lambs being first flayed, and then whole
and entire stretched out at length; and, by degrees, roasted by fire. Thus then
this Evangelical Sacrifice, in this manner of the offering thereof, most
resembled the legal.



Father in the midst of that severe handling of him; and meekly resigning his
dying Spirit into his hands. Lastly, in his dying before the other two; and
sending out a loud voice at his expiring; which showed his Divinity; and that
he gave up his life not upon any constraint of torments; but voluntarily, and
when he pleased.

And I (says he) if I be exalted from the Earth, will draw all unto me Jo.
12.32. And the Apostle calls it his triumph, having taken out of the way the
Decree, that was contrary to us, he fastened it to his Cross; and having
despoiled the principalities and potentates, triumphed over them in it. Col.
2.15. So also, in the nailing and fixing of the flesh of our Lord to the Cross,
significative of the mortifying and crucifying of the flesh, and its lusts;
that is required of us in imitation of our Lord; so, disenabling it to stir
hand or foot, as it were, any more to the breach of Gods commands; and
signifying our now dying to sin, as he for it: and this death of the Cross is
often, thus, alluded to by the Apostle.



Having made this Digression upon the Jews so often vehement demanding, and at
last Pilats consent to, our Lord's Crucifixion, to show the multiplicity of the
divine wisdom in the choice of this manner of death, rather than any other: I
proceed now in the relation of the story, after Pilats having committed to the
Roman Guards the execution thereof.

Praetorium, and Exits to the Jews, whilst he endeavored by all means to have
preserved our Lords life; i. e. so far as his own safety with Caesar, and his
reputation with the Jews, would permit; and after our Lords being sent to, and
returned from, Herod; and the soldiers scourging and dressing him so, as to be
made a fitter object of the hard-hearted Jews Pity, drew well toward Noon, Jo.
19.14. Luke 23.44. about the sixth hour, says St. John, and St. Luke; though
called as yet the third hour by St. Mark, because the sixth hardly yet begun.
The scoffing Soldiers, then, seizing on our Lord, after some further abuses
(which, both in words and actions, by Satan's instigation were committed both in
the way, and at the place of Execution; as we may gather from the very Theif,
in the midst of his torments, not tempering himself from reviling of him with
the rest) stripped our Lord of his Purple, and put on him his own garments, whose
prize shortly they were to be; and so making all speed laid a cross already
prepared upon his torn shoulders: and so led away this only Isaac of God,
carrying the wood of his Sacrifice upon his back.

cum sceleratis reputatus est, Esaias. 53.12. and that there might be some
greater appearance of Justice, and our Lord mingled with company whom the
people might think like himself, there were two notable Thieves, on either hand
one, joined with him, and haled along to their Execution: but these also; or
one of them at least, railing at him even when suffering with him: and such
companions he was to have of his greifs, as offered him no solace therein. And
indeed, if we consider the person he now took on him, what Malefactor or crimes
so great, as could match him, or his? for he carried on his shoulders all the
sins of the whole world, present, and past, and to come, and even those too of
these Malefactors; and so also this Anathema, as the chief, was crucified in
the midst; and the reason in the Prophet of his cum sceleratis reputatus seems
very apposite, -- quia and ipse peccata multorum tulit. Graced with this
company, and laden with an heavy Cross, the long beam thereof being probably
more than twice the length of a man; for his body was to be stretched at its
full length upon it; and to be exalted to such a convenient height, as might
render him a spectacle to all the multitude; and de facto so high it was, that
the Soldier to pierce his side used not his Sword, but his Lance; and, to give
him drink they tied a sponge to the end of a long reed, and so reached it to
his mouth; It was also to carry a Title over his head, and to be fastened in the
ground; and the cross Beam of it also was to equal the breadth of his body and
length of his arms; I say, thus laden, he made a painful, but most cheerful,
march under it through a good part of the City; (the Governors Palace being
near the Temple on the East side of it; and Calvary the place of Execution at
the North-West side thereof) till, when coming without the Gate, he fainted
away under it; his body being now grown very feeble, and his spirits exhausted,
by reason of his cruel scourging, and other base usage of the three Guards of
Officers, Caiphas's, Herod's, and Pilats, he had passed through; and of his
being kept all night without the least sleep, or repose, or refreshment, or his
former temperance having any superfluous humors to feed on.

Because our Lord alone was unable to bear it any further, and it was an
ignominious thing to carry or touch the instrument of the Execution of a
Malefactor, whence the word Furcifer was a common name of reproach, by chance a
poor man, that came then out of the country, one Simon a stranger; of Cyrene
in Africa, where was then a great Colony of the Jews, Act. 2.10. -- 6.9.
Joseph. de Excid. Hieros. l. 7. c. 38. meeting them, the Soldiers laid hold on
him, and forced him to bear our Lord's Cross after him, either the whole, or
the heaviest end thereof: whose sons, Alexander and Rufus, are particularly
named by the Evangelist, Mark. 15.21. which shows, that they were not only
Converts to the Christian Faith, but persons of some note amongst the Primitive
Christians (see Acts 19.33. -- Romans 16.13. it those the same). And it is to
be presumed that our Lord rewarded this service done him to their Father also
in making him a Member of the Church and of his Kingdom; and that he was saved
by the Holy Cross he bore; who thus had the honor even in the truest sense to
take up the cross, and follow our Lord, and to partake of his reproach and
ignominy. But the divine Counsel ordained this accident thus significative also
of a greater matter; viz. That our Lord would not bear his cross alone, but
that all his Followers for ever were to bear their parts of it.

Psalm. 21.13.17. describes him compassed about with so many ravenous Dogs, and
fierce Bulls) there should not want those, that accompanied such sufferings
with their tears, and lamented and deplored these pittiless and undeserved
cruelties, for a testimony against the others, as before, Joseph and Nicodemus,
and Pilat's wife, and Judas also, when too late, were. Many persons there were
of the more devout and compassionate Sex, and more secure from the soldiers
affronts, that followed and lamented him Luke 23.27. So holy and innocent a
person, from whom they had heard so many charming Sermons, and in whom seen
such mighty works. Among whom we may imagine were those Galilean Women, that in
his former life time had waited on and ministered unto him, and his beloved Mary
and Martha: All whose exceeding affection to our Lord, doubtless, had so
conquered their fears, as to run thither wherever they could have a sight of
him, of whom they were likely so soon to be totally deprived.

Piazza before Pilats Tribunal; and there saw and heard all that sad Tragedy
that had passed between our Lords own people persecuting, and the
stranger-Govervour defending, him: whose miserable usage, there, still
heightened their love and compassion, and in them added to all the former
endearments of him; as it did, in the people, to their rage and fury.
Especially amongst these the Blessed Virgin, his afflicted Mother, who could
not be absent from him in life, or death, where she could have any access, and
who, here, most diligently observed all her Son said, or did, or that was done
to him; as the Evangelist says Luke 2.19. she formerly did those even in his
minority and childhood; she, I say, especially, may be supposed to be wounded
at the heart, not only when she stood by the Cross, but, during all this time,
with those Sword-points of most pungent Grief (which Simeon foretold her of) in
her and the rest of her Friends hearing their away with this fellow; and their
crucifiges, and their acclamations for Barabbas, before the Son of God. And the
sight of him so used, when Pilat cried Ecce Homo, and again Ecce Rex Vester,
that had no operation of pity upon the hard-hearted Jews, I may say had too
much on them. But that we are to believe his Holy Mother, as being full of
Grace, and of the Holy Ghost, to have bin endued with a most perfect patience,
and resignation, and silence; and her carriage also to have bin an edifying
pattern to the rest. Thus was our Lord, in all those his former sufferings,
beheld and lamented by his Friends; But, now after his Condemnation, and the
Jew's cruelty according to the divine Will satisfied, the tide in the people
also began to turn; and these of our Lords former acquaintance to have many
Companions of their Grief; and such a mind began to repossess some of them at
least, as they had had when but two days before they heard and admired him in
the Temple; and as they had on Palm Sunday; and those also of the people, who
all this while retained the same affection toward him, his safety now despaired
of, began more to show it. And thus a great multitude attended our Lord his
death and Funeral full of bitter lamentation; though amongst these the more or
more open in their grief were those of the female Sex.

On whom our Lord lifting up his all-bloody and disfigured Countenance, in
great comiseration not of himself, suffering nothing but what he pleased, but
of them, being infinitely afflicted for the sins of his own people (to whom he
came in such love, and they received him not, but were now casting him the only
Son and heir out of his Vineyard, and killing him:) and for the unparallelled
judgments of God, that he saw now approaching upon them for this fact, brake
out into that passionate and prophetic speech: ye Daughters of Jerusalem, weep
not for me, but for your selves and your children: telling them, the days were
now at hand, if their tears, at least of their own particulars, prevented them
not, wherein they should bless the barren, that never had any children prepared
for such a misery; wherein they should wish the Mountains to fall on them, and
the Hills to cover and bury them deep from the face of the divine vengeance,
Hos. 10.8. Is. 2 10, 19. Apoc, 6.16.
descending from above on that people. For, if the flames of Gods wrath merely
for their sakes and sins brake out now in such a manner upon him, a Tree
always green, and flourishing, and fruitful, and no way deserving or qualified
with any cumbustible matter, for them to feed on; what would this fire do
(where their impenitence should make them unworthy of his blood to quench it)
upon their dry, dead, fruitless, wood; serviceable for nothing else, and so
well prepared for it? The consideration of which had but a few days before
drawn tears also from himself; when the Evangelist says, he, in the midst of
his triumph from Mount Olivet, beholding the City, wept over it, saying with
sobbs interrupting his speech, If that thou had known, even thou, at least,
in this thy day etc. Luke 19.41. This then our Lord in pity to them said, to
procure the application of their tears not to his sufferings, but rather to the
cause of them; to their own sins, and the sins of their people; as doubtless,
from his powerful words, many of them afterward did apply themselves and found
mercy, obtaining salvation by his blood, within the arms of the Church; and so,
when the time came, fled from the face of that fire, and escaped in the time of
that destruction; when the Romans, the same Instruments the Jews employed to
consume this Green-wood, were used afterward by God to burn the dry. For it is
observed, that those Jews of the christian Profession, warned from our Lords
prediction, by their retiring betimes out of the City and out of Judea, were
generally preserved.

Lev. 16.10; and the bodies of those beasts, which were offered for expiation
of sins, and whose blood was carried by the High Priest before God into the
Sanctuary, were burnt also without the Camp, (It is the Apostle's observation
Heb. 13.11, 12, 13); so was it to be here in the prototype; whose Blood was
afterward carried into the Heavenly Sanctuary, to make an atonement for the
world, and was carried thither by himself, the Priest, as well as the
Sacrifice; none else worthy, or sufficient, for either of these.

There they brought him to a rocky Hill on the North-West side of the City,
where, it seems, Executions were usually made, by the Hebrew name of it
Golgotha signifying a skull; perhaps, from some bones of the Malefactors lying
scattered upon it, where the rock affords little convenience for covering
them. Here, in the soft stone of the rock were dug several holes, wherein to
put the crosses; Three such are there seen at this day about Eighteen inches
deep (says Eugen. Roger. La Terre Saint lib. 1. cap. 14.) and nine the
Diameter; and the distance one from another near two yards; and, between two of
these, a rent or cleft in the rock from the one side of the Hill to the other
(which hill runs length-way Northward) about a Palm breath: but the profundity
of it, he says, not discoverable. And on this same Hill probably it was, that
Abraham was appointed by God to offer up his only Son Isaac. Genesis 22.2*
For it was to be upon a certain Hill, that God would show him in terra Moriae,
or visionis, as the land thereabouts was called; of which Hills that of Calvary
was one: God having placed his own people and his true worship in the middle of
the Nations round about Ezec. 5.5. and again Jerusalem in the middle of this.

Prove. 31.6. (but so was it also of the Romans from a natural compassion) to
tender to persons condemned, before the undergoing their torments, some
comforting and strengthening drink; and that ordinarily mingled with some
aromatical ingredients, that had a stupifying quality, and one of these to be
Myrrh.

To observe the custom therefore, and, as it were, to prepare and strengthen
our Lord for the great sufferings that were to follow, who was almost spent by
those endured already, and who but now fainted under his Cross, they brought
him some of this compounded wine; but their malice first mingled it with gall:
changing this cup, which common pity provided for the consolation and
refreshment of poor condemned persons, into a Nauseating and bitterness not to
be endured. A circumstance of their barbarous treatment of him, not neglected
to be taken notice by the Psalmist in the description of his sufferings: --
Dederunt in escam meam fell etc. Psalm. 68.21. for it was given to him whatever
was deserved by us: of whom the Prophet Jer. 8.14. Potum dedit nobis aquam
fellis, peccavimus enim Domino.

Our Lord, though he well knew their inhuman composition of this cup, yet to
avoid the showing any offense or passion, tasted it, and consolated himself in
calling to mind the prophecy of it; but, here left to his liberty, would not
drink it; though no doubt he then labored with very great thirst, if we
consider all his former usage, the time of the year, the climat, the crowd
about him, no sustenance since that which he said should be his last cup at the
Paschal Supper; at which time doubtless a cup of cold water would have bin a
great refreshment to him, but none offered it to him. He would not drink it, as
no way serving for that end for which he needed it, the quenching of thirst;
but rather the contrary; and again, as not admitting any artificial means of
accelerating his death, or stupifying his senses (if such a virtue this drink
had): for he knew how great our debt in this kind to his offended Father was;
and desiring to pay it to the uttermost, would accept nothing that might any
way lighten, or mitigate it.

received but an hour or two before exposed to the cold air, and made raw again
by their pulling away his clothes, that sticking to them served him for a
plaster, they spread him upon the wood of the Cross, and racking his arms to
their utmost extent with great spikes of Iron driven through the palms of his
hands, fastened them to the cross-piece thereof: and so also his feet, stretched
out, and put one upon the other, with one spike driven through them, fastened
them to the long beam of the Cross; whilst our Lord without reluctance
permitted them -- facere etiam in se quaecunque voluerunt Mat. 17.12; yielding
his body, and stretching out his Limbs so, as they required: cum pateretur non
comminabatur, sed tradebat judicanti se injuste 1 Pet. 2.23. says S. Peter:
and meanwhile, amidst those sharp pains he must needs feel in those most
nervous and sensible parts, afflicted himself for their sins; and,
compassionating their condition, as he did before in the way that of the
Daughters of Jerusalem, he prayed for them to his Heavenly Father; and pleaded
to him their ignorance of what a person he was. Prayed for them; not only for
those Soldiers, who so cruelly tortured him, but for all whosoever, Jew or
Gentile, that had their hands in his death, saying aloud those words which
might have melted down such stony-hearts, -- Father, forgive them, for they
know not what they do. Which admirable Pattern of this meek Lamb of God, who
had no gall in him, being set to all his Followers in whatever their
sufferings, the Prophet Esaias in his prophetic History of him chap. 53.12. lets
not pass unmentioned, where he says; -- Ideo dispertiam ei plurimos, and
fortium dividet spolia; pro eo, quod tradidit in mortem animam suam, and cum
sceleratis reputatus est, and peccata multorum [even of those scelerati] tulit,
and pro Transgressoribus rogavit. Whose prayer also was heard by his Father,
not only for the more simple, but even for the most culpably ignorant, so they
were penitent, a great company of the Priests also afterward becoming obedient
to the Faith. Act. 6. And, among others, St. Paul, a great Persecutor of our
Lord in his Members, says, he obtained mercy 1 Timothy 1.13: Quia nesciens fecit.
And S. Peter Act. 3. invites the People and their Rulers to repentance for this
fact upon this account, for that, if they had known who he was, they would
never have done it. And a great relenting and change of mind was found
afterward in many of those that stood by him in these sufferings; seeing the
strange things thereof, not only among the People, but the Roman Soldiers, and
their Commander, the Centurion; whom the Gospel describes beating their
breasts, greatly fearing and glorifying God, and confessing him, not only a
righteous man, but the Son of God. All effects doubtless of this our Lord's
prayer on the Cross.

Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews. Many came thither (says St. John) it
being so nigh the City (for now this Sacred Hill of Calvary is taken into it)
and reading this Title thus exposed in so many tongues, the chief Priests much
resented it; which in plain terms affirmed Jesus to be their King, and made
them the Betrayers and Crucifiers of him. Which Kingship of his, it is most
probable from what has bin said, that Pilat verily believed in such a sense as
our Lord had challenged it, and as he had often confirmed it with Miracles of
all sorts, not unknown to Pilat; and so indeed held them guilty of his blood,
whilst he thought himself, by his open Declaration, to have sufficiently
cleansed his hands of it. They therefore have to Pilat to procure an alteration
of the Title; not to run that he was, but that he said he was, their King. From
whom they received only this sullen Answer, that what he had written he had
written, t^^t what he had written, should stand so. It being the Divine
pleasure, that without any of their false glosses it should now be published to
their shame who he was; and how unjustly betrayed by them; viz. the King of
Heavens only Son, Jesus, their Savior sent with the Gospel of everlasting
happiness and peace, to reign over them for ever, and by them thus deserted and
rejected, tortured, and made away. But Pilat also perhaps might reflect on the
loyal service herein he might be thought to have done to the Roman state, in a
Nation noted for rebellion, by his executing their Prince of the race of David.
And besides, had he corrected the Title to their mind, namely, that he said he
was so, considering in what manner our Lord both said it and menaged it, not
intermedling at all with terrene powers, he had but the more divulged his own
injustice, in taking away his life only for his saying so. But, what motives
soever Pilat had of this, he seems guided herein, as Caiphas in his
prophesying, by the Divine hand, that this title might be presented by this
High Priest of the new covenant before the Lord, as was that on Aarons Miter;
Sanctum Domino Exodus 28.36, 38. whilst he thus bare the iniquity of the people,
and dyed for them; and Pilat in some sense was thus the first Apostle declaring
to the world his Sacred persons.

Jo. 3.14, 15. Thus, out of too much love to us, though equal with God he
descended from his Throne above, and emptied himself; became a servant, or
slave so far, as to be obedient to the death, even this death accursed: and,
stepping in between the Divine vengeance and us, was voluntarily thus made an
Anathema and Curse in our stead, and hanged up before the Lord, and before the
Sun; taking the malediction and the handwriting of the Decree, that was gone
forth against us, away; and fastening it with himself unto the Cross, Col. 2,
14, 15.
as the Apostle writes in contemplation of our Lords passion: a thing that,
when preached, was a stumbling block to the Jews, and foolishness to the
Gentiles; and a thing strangely incredible, at first, to the Heathen also now,
whom the Church's Missioners endeavor to convert to Christianity.

Deuteronomy. 22.12; and a coat closer to his body; and, it seems, his was made a knit
one, all in one piece, as Wast-cotes use to be; perhaps the work of his poor
Mother, the Blessed Virgin, for securing him the more against cold; who often
lodged abroad a-nights, not having where else to lay his head. Whether our Lord
had any linen under this close cote, either covering his whole body, or at
least the secret parts; or, whether this knit coat was next his body and
another coat over it, is somewhat uncertain.

His outer garment made of four pieces the Soldiers divided into four parts, to
share it equally; but the coat, not dividable without spoiling it, they cast
lots for; and so fulfilled that prophecy Psalm. 21.19. very punctually, as to
all the circumstances of our Lords sufferings, -- They divided my garments and
on my vesture cast Lots. Thus our Lord saw his poor goods, all he had, seized
on, and distributed before his face; but, as God would not suffer them to break
a bone of him, so neither to tear his coat: a Type of his Church, which will
never admit any Schism; and they, that offer to tear it, cease to be of it.

omnes (says the mourning Psalmist) videntes me deriserunt me: locuti sunt
labiis, and moverunt caput, aperuerunt super me os suum, sicut Leo rapiens and
rugiens; subsannaverunt me subsannatione; frenduerunt super me dentibus suis,
dilataverunt super me; dixerunt Euge, Euge. -- Psalm. 68.25. Sustinui, qui simul
contristaretur, and non fuit: and qui consolaretur, and non inveni Psalm. 108.2.
Locuti sunt adversum me lingua dolosa, and sermonibus odii circumdederunt me:
and so Psalm. 30.14. Audivi vituperationem multorum commorantium in circuitu. Et
ego factus sum opprobrium illis: viderunt me, and moverunt capita sua. Where
also their very words Mat. 27.43. -- He trusted in God, Let him deliver him
now, if he will have him, for he said, I am the Son of God, are set down Psalm.
21.9. Speravit in Domino, eripiat eum; salvum faciat eum, quoniam vult eum. And
so Psalm. 3.3. Multi dicunt animae meae, non est salus ipsi in Deo ejus: and so
in Wisdom chap. 2.16. Gloriatur patrem se habere Deum, videamus ergo si
sermones illius very sine. -- Si enim est verus filius Dei, suscipiet illum,
and liberabit illum de manibus contrariorum. Contumelia and tormento
interrogemus eum, and probemus patientiam illius. Morte turpissima condemnemus
eum: erit enim ei respectus [apud Deum] ex sermonibus suis [i. e. if we may
believe his words]. Thus the Holy Ghost foresaw and foretold these their
Blasphemies; and, whilst such ungrateful treatment added to his anguish, the
fulfilling these prophesies yielded him great consolation. Thus was he exclamed
on by all manner of people; sustinuit qui simul contristaretur, and non fuit:
by the chief Priests, and Scribes, and Elders (says the Evangelist); who, not
satiated with their former cruelties, it seems, came hither also to see him die;
by the common people; by the Roman Soldiers; acting here the second part of
that they had done in the Praetorium to this their mock-king; by the Passengers
on the high way; our Lord being crucified near the road, that passed to Shiloh
and Gibeon: Lastly, by the very Thief, in the midst of his like torments: by
all these jeering at his pretensions of being Christ, and the King of Israel,
(taking Pilats superscription also for a mock) at his making himself the Son of
God, and his constant faith and trust in him; and that, since he had so near a
relation to God, they would fain see now, if his God would deliver him; jeering
at his former good works and Miracles; and that, since he was so bountiful of
them toward others, they would fain see him now do one upon himself; unpin his
nails, and descend from the Cross; at his vain boasting to destroy the Temple,
and rebuild it in three days (for it seems this, for want of worse, was spread
amongst all the People, for his great crime; for it was the passengers on the
high way that twitted him with it, whilst indeed they themselves were now
acting that thing he foretold of, their destroying the Sacred Temple of his
Body); that now therefore he should repair his own ruins: Ah, thou that
destroyest the Temple and buildest it in three days etc. jeering at his being
Jesus the Savior of the world; that now therefore he should show it, and save
himself. Such were their scoffings: somewhat like Satan's former jeers in the
Desert (whose also these were) That, since he was Gods Son, he should make the
Stones there Bread, and he should throw himself down from the pinnacle, to be
held up by Angels etc; and such as those, wherewith he usually afflicts the
Members of Christ when on their deathbed; representing, in those their present
sufferings, their former hope and Faith in God as vain. The Thief also hanging
by him, in the midst of his own like torments, could not forbear, now
despairing of the hopes he had of deliverance by him, famous for Miracles, but
fell also on mocking him, and asking him, if he were the Christ, why he did not
save himself, and them? But the penitent Malefactor on the other hand, whose
heart God had touched, amidst so many blasphemies, to Glorify and confess our
Lord, seeing his silence, fell on rebuking his Fellow; and asked him, if he at
least, whilst others, at liberty, said what they pleased, had no more fear of
God, especially being himself in the same sad condemnation, and justly, for his
wicked deeds, and so near his End, than to fall on railing upon an innocent and
just person, that had done nothing amiss; instead of acknowledging and
confessing his own Guilt? And, this said to his Fellow Theif, he with a strong
faith beleiving our Lord to be indeed what he was, the Christ, the Son of God,
the Savior of the world, the King of Israel, began to make his humble
Addresses to him; and desired that he would remember him when be came into his
Kingdom. A stupendous faith, and divinely inspired, now, when he saw our Lord
upon the very lowest step of his humiliation; now, when faith perhaps failed
his very Apostles. Yet there wanted not also some external excitements, that
might partly raise such a devotion in him to our Blessed Lord: as, perhaps the
great fame of his former Sanctity, and Miracles; and also many circumstances,
which he beheld, of his passion; his divine patience and meekness; his
compassionate and prophetic speeches to the women of Jerusalem, which lamented
him; his praying for his enemies, when they nailed him to his Cross; his
admirable silence to so many unjust reproaches, and particularly to that of his
fellow-thief. To whom our Lord graciously promised, and that with an Amen, that
he should be remembered, and that very day be with him, his Lord, in the
heavenly Paradise, appointed for the reception of all blessed Souls till the
Resumption of their bodies; applying the merits of this his passion to that
poor Wretch, which first humbly acknowledged his own sins and demerits, in
saying; and we ind edjustly; and then, confessing our Lord's innocence, and
personal dignity, implored his mercy. And thus was the saving of this believing
Thief the first fruits, as it were, of the infinite benefits to mankind of
these our Lords sufferings; and the early pledge of that eternal mercy, which
all penitent sinners should receive from him to the worlds end.

All this while stood, first at a greater distance, then nearer the Cross, as
their fears, or the Soldiers fierceness, or the crowds of people, grew less,
the Holy Virgin the sad Mother of our Lord, and the Women, our Lords former
Attendants, that accompanied her; among whom was Mary Magdalen, and Mary of
Cleophas our Blessed Lady's sister-in-law, her husband being brother, or else
she sister, to Joseph; which Mary was the Mother also of James the less, and
Joses, and Simon, and Judas, that were called our Lord's Brethren; i. e. near
Kinsmen, by the relation they had to Joseph. For, if this Mary had bin the
Blessed Virgin's own sister, her Name would not have bin also Mary; this being
not usual, or convenient to call two sisters, undistinguishable, by the same
Name. There was also present Salome, John's Mother, and others; and John
likewise our Lords beloved Disciple (whose confidence above the rest we saw in
the High Priests Palace) was there with them; but, likely, none other of the
Eleven, at least so near; afraid of being apprehended, if they should have
appeared; and perhaps John more presuming here, as in the Palace, because known
to the High Priest. Here then stood the sad Mother of our Lord, beholding and
hearing all that was done to, and said against, her Son; with the like patience
and resignation, as he suffered it: and ready with Abraham, for the love of
God, to have offered him up her self, had he commanded it. Here she and the
rest heard also that admirable confession of our Lord by the penitent Thief,
and our Lord's gracious answer to him, which must needs be a great consolation
to them. After which Answer, our Lord, looking down upon his Mother, and
compassionating her condition, as well as Grief, spoke to her first, and
calling her Woman, perhaps for preventing those affronts, to which her near
relation to him, hated of all, if it had bin known, made her liable,
recommended John his beloved Disciple to her love and affection, instead of
himself, as one that thence forward would perform the duty and observance to
her of a Son; and then speaking to John, recommended to him the care, and
providing for her (now aged about fifty, and a desolate widow, Joseph being
formerly dead, and now also her only Son taken from her) as his Mother, he
being a single person, and Virgin, as she; and having no Wife or family of his
own to take care of, as many others had; and by reason of his wealthy parents
(out of which wealth also John's mother formerly made provision many times for
our Lord) having the command of so much maintenance as was necessary for their
decent subsistence.

Which recommendation of our Blessed Lady to John shows, that, notwithstanding
the mention we find of her sister and four of our Lords Brethren, yet that they
were not of so near a Relation, as that our Lords Mother, after the death of
Joseph, had any family of her own; or these had any constant habitation with
her, so as that she might rather have bin committed to their care and provision
in her now declining age.

Will, and disposed of his only charge his dear Mother, whom St. John took to
himself, and served with all fidelity, and supplied with all necessaries till
her death, spoke not at all after this for near the space of three hours, from
about the sixth till the ninth hour, a little before he gave up the Ghost; but,
continuing in silence, and prayer, and his countenance lift up toward heaven,
went on finishing that Sacrifice which was to be the redemption of the world:
consuming and melting away in the flames of Gods wrath toward sinners; now, in
its effects, seizing on him in their stead, for all the offenses of all mankind
that had or should be. When, as he grew nearer to his end, the Sun, now at
midday see Amos 8.9. and when not capable of any natural Eclipse; the Moon
being now at the full, and at its greatest distance from it, began to be
darkened, and to lose its light; this noblest body of the Creation sympathizing,
as it were, with its Lord, and covering its face at such a horrid Spectacle,
and indicating to the hard-hearted Spectators the true Sun of righteousness,
and that true Light, that enlightneth every one that comes into this world, to
be now setting, and its glory ecclipsed so far, as the malice of the Prince of
Darkness and his Instruments could effect it: and intimating now also the chief
reign of the power of darkness permitted by God to the Prince thereof.

away their life) to show, that he laid his life down, not compelled, but when
he pleased, though without shortning the time of the sufferings belonging to
that cruel death; and to testify also, against Heretics, the Reality of his
sufferings, saying with great force, that all the multitude heard him, those
first words of the Psalm penned by the Holy Ghost for a Description of his
Passion, Eloi, Eloi, lamma Sabbacthani? My God My God why have thou forsaken
me? expressing the last pangs of death now approaching, and the inexplicable
torments and anguish of Body and Soul due to our sins that now lay upon him:
which he calls his sins in the following part of this verse of that mourning
Psalm [longe a salute mea verba delictorum meorum] and which sin of ours made
this patient Lamb of God, after three hours silence, so break out into this
complaint under them: where more grievous than the corporal sufferings was the
interior anguish of Spirit; in his Divinity its suspending from his Humanity
all those consolations, which might any way relieve its sorrows, and with which
his Servants in their greatest sufferings are usually refreshed. This, like to
that his Agony in the Garden; but now without an Angel; where the Apostles
mention ( Heb. 5.7.) of our Lord, in the days of his flesh offering up to God
prayer and supplications with strong cries and with tears, may well be
understood, as of the tears, and prayers, and strong cries, made and shed in
the Garden, so of these now iterated on the Cross: for the weight of Gods
wrath, lying on our sins which he assumed, is inexplicable.

These words of that prophetic Psalm might have hinted to the learned High
Priests and Elders, that the Tragedy of this Psalm was just now acted, and
lively expressed in every part of it: and they those miserable Wretches by
whose persecutions this prophecy was fulfilled; and so might have begotten some
compunction in them. But, either they, so blinded as not to understand those
words, or the other common people at least mistaking them, nor knowing them for
the beginning of the Psalm, and hearing them pronounced with such a loud voice,
thought, from the similitude of the word Eloi twice repeated, that our Lord
called upon Elias; that he would not forsake him in this his misery, but come
to help him. For, it was the common belief that Elias was yet alive in his
body, and was to return among them to rectify all things before the coming of
the Messiah; the darkning of the Sun also filled them full of wonder, and
expectation of some other strange things; their hearts also now being somewhat
mollified and beginning to entertain another opinion of our Lord, than not long
before.

I thirst; as if it were to accomplish the drinking up the last dregs and
portion that remained of the cup of Gods wrath against sinners; remembering the
words that follow in the same prophetic Psalm verse. 16. Aruit tanquam testa
virtus mea, and lingua mea adhaesit faucibus meis: and in pulverem mortis etc.
and Psalm. 68.22. potaverunt me aceto. And, there being a vessel of vinegar or
small sour Wine, with which mingled with water the Soldiers and common people
used to quench their thirst, one of the Bystanders, running and drenching a
sponge in it, put this upon the top of a long reed, and so applied it to our
Lords mouth (the darkness now diminishing) to refresh him; and prolong his life
a little, in expectation of what perhaps Elias would do for him; whether he
would come at last, and take his Fellow-prophet down from the Cross. After our
Lord had received the Vinegar, which was as it were the last dregs of the
bitter cup, prepared for him by his heavenly Father to drink, he said those
precious words so full of consolation to poor sinners, consummatum est; that
all was finished; a Passiones consummavi now, as he said an opus consummavi,
before he entered on his passion Jo. 17. All the prophecies being now fulfilled,
the Sacrifice offered, and the Ransom of mankind from Gods wrath, and the
Prince of Darkness, and from eternal Death, fully paid. And so with another
loud and strong voice like the former, recommending his now departing Spirit
into the hands of his celestial Father, in the words again of the Psalmist,
changing Domine there into Pater, and exhibiting this as the last act of his
dutiful submission to all his Will, he pronounced those last words of his on
the Cross: In manus tuas Pater commendo spiritum meum Psalm.30. And so meekly
bowing down his head (which perhaps hitherto was held erected toward heaven in
prayer see Heb. 5.7.) gave up the Ghost; not when the torments of death forced
it away, but when he pleased, seeing all now fulfilled, voluntarily to regive
it; Showing, in his strong outcries, his miraculous power and strength to have
kept it longer in being; about the ninth hour, the time of offering up the
Evening Sacrifice, and in the end of the sixth day of the week, as entering into
his Sabboath of rest. The two Malefactors that suffered with him being both yet
alive; not that our Lord any way abbreviated for himself the torments of this
cruel death, but that the barbarous usage of him all that day and the night
precedent without any sustenance, refreshment, or repose, and the loss of so
much blood under his coronation, and scourging, had so debilitated and
exhausted him (which was also seen in his fainting under the Cross) that these
his last torments on the Cross must needs have a speedier period, unless he
should have continued his life by miracle.

Calvary, where our Lord suffered, cleft asunder some two or three foot from
the hole wherein our Lords Cross was fastened, from one side of the Hill to the
other, to be seen at this day; gaping about an hand breath; and the depth of it
not to be sounded. Yet the infinite mercy and long-suffering of God, who, to
show his displeasure, rent the rocks, forbear to take present vengeance on the
Murderers of our Lord, giving them longer time to repent; as some of them also
did. The veil of the Temple also, remote from this place and standing at the
other side of the City, was rent in two, says the Evangelist, from the top to
the bottom. Which veil divided the Sanctum Sanctorum, where was the Ark, the
symbol of Gods presence, from the outer Temple; and into which the High Priest
entered only once every year, carrying in thither the blood of the Sacrifice to
sprinkle it before the Ark on the solemn day of Expiation. The renting of which
Veil, at this time, was very significative of the effects of our Lords passion:

1. To show now an end and consummation, and so Abolishment of all the former
Typical Ceremonies of the Mosaical Law; this new High Priest succeeding and
abrogating now the former Aaronical Priesthood; who, having offered the only
pleasing Sacrifice to God on the Altar of the Cross, was to enter with the
blood of it into the celestial Sanctum Sanctorum, and there, with it sprinkled
before God's Throne, to make an atonement for the sins of the whole world. Who
(says the Apostle much prosecuting this matter in his Epistle to the Hebrews)
took away the first covenant, that he might establish another following: and
dedicated to us a new and living way of access to the throne of Grace, and
entrance into the Holy of Holies, through the veil [of his Deity] that is, his
Flesh; which veil also was rent on the Cross, the members of the body rent
first, and at last his soul also rent from the Body. And chap. 9.11. etc. Who
(says he) an High Priest of good things to come, by the Holy Ghost offered
himself unspotted to God, and so by [or through] a more ample and more perfect
Tabernacle not made with hands [i. e. the Heavens verse. 24.] nor by [or with]
the blood of Goats, or Calves, but by his own blood entered into the Holies,
eternal redemption being thus found and effected.

2. Again; to show, that the Partition was now taken away between Jew and
Gentile; and his service no longer confined to his Temple at Jerusalem; but
that it was to be every where equally accepted of him, and his Church to be
spread over the whole world, and a general and free access admitted for all
people to God the Father, and to the Divinity, through this veil of our Lords
humanity: -- Neither Jew nor Greek, says the Apostle, Gal. 3.28. neither bond
nor free etc. now; But all one in Christ. Wherefore our Lord foretold to the
Samaritan woman ( Jo. 4.) That the time was coming, when they should neither in
that Mount of Samaria, the Temple of Garizim, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the
Father; but the true worshippers should worship him [every where, not with
carnal Sacrifices any more, but] in spirit and in truth

3. To signify, that God was now departed from the Jews, and left the place of
his former residence amongst them; (as also Josephus says, that a little
before the destruction of the City a voice was heard in the Temple, Eamus
hinc); because they had forsaken his laws, refused the Gospel, and crucified
his Son, for which this Garment of the Temple was also rent, as in a time of
Mourning.

Luke 23.47.
surprised with great fear, in the midst of these hard-hearted Spectators,
Glorified God, says St. Luke; and said, that certainly, this was a righteous
man: Nay further, confessed, that surely he was the Son of God (as he had, in
his arraignment, confessed himself to be): and the Guards also that attended
there, sore afraid, made the same confession with their Commander, says
another Evangelist; Mat. 27.54.
that truly he was the Son of God. The common people also, that came together
to this sight, filled with terror, and their hearts accusing them for what they
had either done or consented to, not shaking their heads at him, as they had
done a few hours before in derision, but smiting their breasts, Mat. 27.39.
went away mourning and sorrowful, as they came full of jeers and merriment.

strangers, the Roman Centurion and Soldiers; and to behold the peoples
resentment at last of their former cruelties done to him; though now too late
for the preservation of his life.

Meanwhile, of the repentance and relenting of the Governors of the Jews we
hear nothing; who, probably, in seeing these wonders, said of these at his
death, as they had of those in his life; that all came from the Devil: That
this darkness, Earthquake, and renting the Rocks, were effects of the rage of
Satan, thus deprived by their Justice of his prime Minister and Instrument for
overthrowing of their law: or else, that they were expressions of the Divine
displeasure against such an Impostor and Blasphemer: as almost all prodigies
and strange accidents receive a double and contrary interpretation, as the
person wishes their prognostication (and so predictions hinder not events,
though, after these, they manifest the divine predisposal of them): wherein
also they were the more confirmed by that high affront, that seemed to be done
to his Divine Majesty in the renting of the Sacred Veil that covered his Sacred
presence in the Temple. For otherwise, if this man had bin so dear and nearly
related to God, why did he not rather save his life? And, if these things were
done by his power, why not he rather by it unfasten his nails, and descend from
the cross?

chap. 21.23. that the body should not remain all night upon the Tree: but that
they should in any wise bury it that day (for he that is hanged is accursed of
God) that the land might not be defiled; Thus the Text. They besought him,
therefore, that, though some of them not yet dead, they might by all means be
taken down, having their legs first broken to hinder, if any strength yet left
in them, their escape from the Guards; well knowing also, that their chiefest
prize, our Lord, was made sure, and dead already: the mangling of whose body
also thus, though no torment, yet might be a further disgrace. The Roman
Governor at their request presently sending such order to the Soldiers of
breaking the Malefactors legs, and taking them away, they executed it upon the
two Thieves, who they saw as yet have some life in them; but, when they came to
our Lord already deceased, they forbear this; because indeed it was his Fathers
good pleasure that his body should not be mangled, nor a bone of him broken;
which was also punctually observed in the roasted Paschal Lamb, the Type of him.
This thing was done, says St. John, Jo. 19.36. Exodus 12.46.
that the Scripture might be fulfilled; A bone of him shall not be broken; to
which end also his death was hastened; inflicted on the others in whom they
perceived some life.

our ascending Lord in the Sanctum Sanctorum, not made with hands, above, when
he entered into it before the Throne of God his Father: whereby the Celestials
themselves are said to be purified and prepared for our Lords Pontifical
service of Intercession for us there Heb. 9.23. -- which sprinkling of the
blood of Jesus upon us (says St. Peter 1 Pet. 1.2.) Sanctifies us with his
spirit. And we are now come to the Mediator of the new Testament, and to the
sprinkling of blood, that speaks better things than that of Abels, says S.
Paul. Heb. 12.24. and by which blood we also have confidence of entering into
the Sanctum Sanctorum; now with our prayers, hereafter with our persons. Heb.
10.19.

the rock was Christ 1 Cor. 10.4. And these two, the water and blood, lively
represented the two Sacraments, left by our Lord to the Church for the
cleansing of sin, and commemoration of his death; the Sacrament of Baptism, and
of the Eucharist. And thus, as out of Adams side, when lying a sleep, was
formed his Wife Eve; so by the water and blood issuing out of Christ's, lying in
the sleep of his death, was formed in these two Sacraments his Spouse the
Church: regenerated in the one by Christ's Spirit; and nourished in the other
with his grace, redeemed by the shedding of blood; and cleansed by the water.

And he that saw it bare record, and knows that he says true, that we might
believe. By which he says, the Prophecies were fulfilled, that the
Executioners should pierce his Sacred body, but not break a bone; and says,
that this water, and blood, in the two Sacraments, and the plentiful effusion,
that was not long after accomplished at Pentecost, of the Holy Ghost, and which
also continues to the end of the world, begetting and nourishing children to
God, joined with them, are the three Witnesses that here on Earth give
testimony continually of this redemption: which the same Evangelist, that saw
this, prosecutes also thus in one of his Epistles, 1 Jo. 5.6, 8. This is he
that came by water and blood, Jesus Christ: not in wat^r only, but in water and
blood; and [in these] it is the Spirit that testifyeth, that Christ is the
Truth. For there be three that give testimony in Earth, the Spirit, Water, and
Blood; Thus S. John. Meanwhile, abstracting from this contemplation, we may
imagine what a ruful Spectacle this was to our Blessed Lady and the women with
her, in beholding such barbarous cruelty used to her Son, even after his death,
and his most precious blood so spilt on the ground.

chap. 23.50. of him) one who had not consented to their Counsel and doings,
but expected the Kingdom of God; formerly a Disciple also of our Lord, but
secretly, as also was another great man, Nicodemus, for fear of the Jews; their
estates, and their Esteem, lest either should be lost, making them more
timorous: this Nobleman, residing constantly in Jerusalem and rich, had in a
garden of his, close by the place of our Lord's execution, newly caused to be
hewed out of the soft rock of the hill a Monument or Sepulcher for himself: but
ordained by the divine predesignment for the interring of our Lord's body near
hand, so that all things might the better serve for the evidence of his ensuing
Resurrection.

He therefore, though so timorous before, and who had now also a special reason
of not touching or coming near a dead corpse, because of eating the Paschal Lamb
at even, prohibited to any unclean, (as those were to be for seven days that
touched a dead body Numb. 19.14.) yet, probably, much animated both by our
Lords patient and innocent sufferings; and, besides his former Doctrine and
Miracles, the many signs he saw now from Heaven and Earth of the transcendent
dignity of his person, and that he was what he believed him to be; having heard
also of the order of the persons executed their being presently taken down, or
perhaps being one of them also that procured it, boldly, says the Text, went
in to Pilat to beg our Lord's Body of him, though well foreseeing he must incur
a great hatred from the chief of the Jews his acquaintance herein. Pilat, after
he had called the Centurion, and certainly informed himself of his being
already dead, and no design herein of saving his life, freely gratified him
with it, and commanded it should be delivered him; not prohibiting him a decent
Burial, whom he had always esteemed an innocent person.

That Joseph might not undergo this sad office alone without a companion, and
for the greater honor of our Lords funeral, the time of whose humiliation was
now expired with his death; Nicodemus, another great person, one that had
formerly by night conversed with our Lord, and also in the Council spoken in
his defense John 7.51; and probably more familiarly acquainted with Joseph, by
reason of their condiscipleship, joined with him in this service: mutually
encouraging one another against the Priests and Elders of the Jews, who must
needs be much displeased with this fact, as upbraiding them with the Murder,
if not of the Messiah, or a Prophet, yet, of a just person. Joseph therefore
suddenly prepared fine linen for a Syndon, and Nicodemus a great quantity of
Spices, (about an hundred pound weight, says the Text) and so coming to
Calvary by the Governors authority, took down the naked body from the Cross,
and, removing it into Joseph's Garden close by, probably there performed to it
all the usual Ceremonies before burial; washing his stripes and wounds; and
cleaning it from all those indignities, the malicious Jews and Soldiers had
done to it; anointing it with sweet Oils, and wrapping it in the linen filled
with the spices and sweet odours, and binding a Napkin about his head (used for
hindering the falling of the Jaws); all, to make good that in the Prophet Esaias
11.10. Et erit Sepulchrum ejus gloriosum. In which office we may imagine these
great persons were assisted, as with their Servants, so with the help of the
blessed Mother of our Lord, and S. John, (more punctually relating this story
than the rest) who, we may not think, left our Lord after expired; but waited
still in the same place, to observe how God would dispose of his Sacred Body;
and no doubt were much comforted in seeing that authority committed into the
hands of those honorable persons, our Lords Devotes, and formerly known to
them as such.

being only six foot square, and eight foot high, and the entrance into it on
the East Side about three foot high, and three foot three inches broad. On the
right side of which Sepulcher from the entrance the Sacred body of our Lord was
placed, see Mark. 16.5. compared Jo. 20.12, with his head toward the West.
After this the door or mouth of the Cave was shut up, and fenced with a massy
piece of rock cut out for the purpose; not to be removed but by the help of
many hands; to hinder any violation of the Sepulcher, or Body; or robbing it of
those costly linen and spices, that should be bestowed upon it. Such a cave it
was, where Lazarus was buried, Jo. 11.38, 31, 41. with a great Stone rolled
upon the entrance into it; which our Lord then commanded to be removed; and our
Lords raising of him, a lively type of the same thing he would shortly after
perform in raising himself. Meanwhile, those women, our Lords former Disciples
and Attendants, that assisted not in this action, keeping some distance,
perhaps in respect of these honorable persons, with whom they had no
acquaintance, observed all that was done, where their Lord was laid, and how
the Sepulcher made fast: and, it being now too late, because night approached,
they intended, after the Sabbath ended, to express their last love and
affection to there dear Lord also, in bringing some more sweet odours and spices
for preserving and perfuming of his Sacred body, and the narrow room, where it
lay; more to show the honor and devotion they bare to it, and once more to
behold, to touch, and kiss those most holy Relics, than that there was now
need of any more such cost.

Zee. 9.11. -- Tu quoque in sanguine testamenti tui emisisti vinctos tuos de
lacu, in quo non est aqua; and so with them entered into Paradise, the place of
joy and Repose for all happy souls, till the resurrection of their bodies;
where he was adored by them as the Author of their Salvation and endless
felicity; and, amongst the rest, by the Soul of his late Fellow-sufferer
(though upon a just account) the penitent Theif; and so this its beatifical
presence they there enjoyed, till the appointed time of its return to exalt
also his crucified body to the state of glory. Thus, I say, our so cruelly
murdered Lord was now at rest, but not so the consciences of the Pharisees and
High Priests. Whose seeing these two noble persons Joseph and Nicodemus, through
so much popular hate, to have so honorably interred his Body, gave them a
great jealousy: and the predictions also about his rising again the third day
much disturbed them. Though, a thing, which was quite forgotten by our Lords
Disciples and Followers, who, one would think, had most cause to have remembered
it, and which he had so often told them of; and they had, upon hearing it from
him, also disputed amongst themselves, what should be meant by it, as they
descended from the holy Mount, after our Lord's Transfiguration: and, after
this again, were by him minded of it but the night before his passion, as they
went along to the Garden; he telling them then also, that, when risen, he would
go before them into Galilee Mat. 26.32. I say this, forgotten by them, yet now
very much troubled and disquieted the thoughts of the High Priests. They could
now call to mind, how, when they asked him a sign once and again Mat.
12.38.16.4. he alleged to them that of Jonah; and that the Son of man, as Jonah
in the Whales belly, should lie three days in the heart of the earth, and so
be cast up again, and the jaws of Death not be able to detain him; And his
saying, that, if they destroyed the Temple, meaning his Body, after three days
he would raise it up; which speech of his, though before they made it
(misconstrued by them) an Article to condemn him, yet now they could apprehend
in another, and its right, sense; and might thereby have condemned themselves:
Now also perhaps the words of our Lord spoken with so much Majesty before them
at his arraignment ran in their mind, that they should shortly see him sitting
on the right hand of Power: and lastly, the obsequious respects, they saw given
to his body by those two eminent persons, they conceived, might arise from some
such hopes; and were performed from some such expectation. Remembering therefore
these predictions, and perhaps not free from all fears of such an event, after
having beheld such wonderful things at, and before, his death, they thought it
meet, at least to prevent any cheat in the business; and to hinder that his
Disciples might not, upon such rumor of his rising again, to deceive the
credulous people, remove secretly his body, and so show the empty Sepulcher,
and suborn some to say they had seen him etc; though indeed no reason they had
to suspect any such thing, but rather that his Disciples, if finding his words
false, would at least recant their former error, and confess him an Impostor
and a false Prophet. Therefore they hasted again to Pilat, for all that it was
the Sabbath, it being late over night before they were informed of his solemn
and sumptuous Burial, and relating to him these predictions, and the bad
consequence that might be of them, importuned him that there might be set a
watch before the Sepulcher till the third day: and, as if jealous also of the
corruption of the Watch, that the Sepulcher might be sealed, besides. But why
this seal? because, if the body were taken away, there must be a breach of the
seal, and so this theft discovered? But so would there be a breach of it, if
the body risen again. For, how could they imagine, that that power which raised
the body, might or would not also throw open the door for its passage? But this
Seal served well, meanwhile, to save it from the pillage of the Soldiers, and
to guard it from the Guards. Some Ancients say, that the stone was by them
fastened to the Sepulcher with iron. These things were done accordingly by
themselves, the Governor leaving this wholly to their own ordering; and
doubtless much wondering at these their extravagant jealousies and fears. So, to
the Monument they go, set this Guard, and seal the stone, and this with no
regret that it was on the Sabbath; of the breach of which, but by better works
surely than these, they had so often, so heavily, accused our good Lord. But
all this their diligence by the Divine providence was turned quite contrary to
their intents; and rendered our Lords Resurrection much more clear and evident,
whilst this very Guard were the first witnesses of it; and that to the High
Priests themselves; and quite took away the pretense, which else they might not
only have reported, but verily believed, of his Disciples carrying away his
body. Which witness of the Watch doubtless confirmed the faith of many, who
would not give so easy credit to the Disciples Testimony of it; and was a means
of converting some of the High Priests also. And their testifying likewise our
Lords prediction of it before Pilat still added more to the truth and
reputation of this Event. Of all which Daniels being cast into the den of
Lions, and the entrance into it being sealed by his Enemies, that no fraud
might be used in his deliverance out of it, seems to have bin a
prerepresentation and type.



At the same time, as before at our Lords death, happened a terrible
Earthquake. And an Angel of great Majesty, his countenance like lightning,
says the Evangelist, and his raiment white as Snow, was seen by the astonished
Guards to descend and roll away the stone, so to expose the open Sepulcher to
every ones view, after our Lords glorious Body had already passed through it,
when yet shut up and sealed. The All-glorious Angel, when he had done this,
sitting down upon the stone that he had rolled away, as if he would now be the
sole Guarder of that place. So terrible was this sight, as also the Earthquake,
that the Soldiers (though they fell not into a sleep, as they afterward
reported, yet) fell into a swoon, and became for a while, says the Evangelist,
as dead men Mat. 28.4. After some time recovering a little strength, and seeing
the Sepulcher thrown open, the body gone, and only the linen clothes and
spices wrapped up and left behind (which though it had bin much for their
interest, or excuse, in raising a report of its being stolen away, as well as
profit to have taken, and their necessity but two days before had shared his
former garments) yet they durst not touch, but from the Angel's presence
speedily fled away: and in a great fright some of them came to the chief
Priests and related all that had happened; our Lords Body gone, the Sepulcher
empty, the linnens and spices left behind, (touch them he that durst) the
terrible apparition of the Angel, with an Earthquake, breaking their seal and
rolling away the stone, and there staying and sitting upon it.

were the wily taken in their own craftiness; and, by their setting the Watch,
those truths are now declared, both to the people and themselves, not by the
Followers of our Lord, but their own Officers and Servants, which otherwise
they might with some show of a good conscience have disbeleived and endeavored
to suppress; but now acted purely against it.

extraordinary witnesses thereof. For, in the great Earthquake, and at the same
time as our Lord's, were other Sepulchers and graves about the city opened; and
out of them also, by virtue, and in honor, of our Lords Rising, came forth the
revived Bodies of many other formerly deceased Saints. That, as his triumphant
Soul entering into the innermost bowels of the Earth brought a multitude of
other overjoyed Souls attendants upon it from thence, so his glorified Body
should not remain alone, but have also a great train of other glorified Bodies,
whom he thought meet, to wait upon him, and with it ascend to Heaven. Who, to
show his conquest not only over his own, but our, death; and to confirm to us
also our resurrection by virtue of his, were together with him the Primitiae
dormientium: and the primogeniti ex mortuis, in whom the divine Wisdom thought
fit then to foreshew what is to be performed, and made good to the rest of the
bodies of all his Saints now lying in their dust, at the great day. And some of
these Saints also, in these their new restored bodies, came into the Holy City,
says the Evangelist (stiling it so, as if now sanctified with their presence,
and in alluding to the celestial Jerusalem, of which these glorified bodies
were now to be eternal Inhabitants) and there these also appeared to many,
says the Text, according as the Divine providence disposed, testifying to them
the Resurrection of our Lord, and further confirming it with their own; and so
presently disappeared again. Now, what glorified persons these should be,
whether some holy men, or also Disciples of our Lord, that were lately before
deceased, as the Baptist, S. Simeon, Anna, Zachary, S. Joseph; or others, whose
Sepulchers were near the City and well known, and now viewed to be opened and
empty by such as remembered their interment, appearing to such, to whom their
persons were formerly well known; or also, whether most of the more eminent
former Patriarchs, and Prophets, that had lain now so long a time in the dust,
and whom our Lord would gratify with a more early Resurrection, we not knowing
how far his favors now at this his entrance into his glory might be extended
(though what S. Peter says of David Act. 2.34. seems somewhat to weaken such
an opinion); here, I say, it would be too curious to inquire further into such
a matter hidden from us: to whom several things of the Economy of the next
world, for certain reasons of the Divine Wisdom, are as yet but very sparingly
revealed.

remained, after this beatifical sight, all this morning in the posture of so
great a Mourner retired, continuing in a rapture of joy and uncessant praises
and thanksgivings to God. For none can here rationally imagine, that our Lord,
who vouchsafed to honor Mary Magdalens love and tears, and S. Peter's primacy
and extraordinary affection to him, with a gracious sight of him before the
other men or women, omitted this to his own Mother, more loving, and beloved
by, him.

Luke 10.42. of such by-businesses, more fervorous and impatient in her
affection to be with what was yet left her of our Lord, whom only the devout
observation of the Sabbath could have restrained from the Sepulcher so long,
ran before the rest, whilst it was yet dark (says S. John) with a valor more
than a woman's to this place, there rather to expect and stay for her company.
For, this, S. John's particular story of her, as also our Lords appearing to her
alone before the other (mentioned also by S. Mark Mark. 16.9. He appeared first
to Mary Magdalen) seems to intimate. But here some of the Evangelists writing
things more compendiously, in which others are more copious, and some, with
more, others with fewer, circumstances; and so, for persons also, some
mentioning more than other do (wherein yet is no contradiction); whilst I give
the substance of what these Sacred Historians have delivered, I desire your
pardon, if I do not or cannot punctually observe the order of every thing done
in this so small a time, and yet so very full of various occurrences: since, as
S. Jerome on Mat. 28. observes particularly of these women, there seems to have
bin several excursions to, and returns from, the Sepulcher made by them; and
perhaps not of all of them together. -- Crebro abeunt (says he) and recurrunt;
and non patiuntur a Sepulcro Domini diu abesse aut longius.

Mary Magdalen, then, coming thither thus alone, when the soldiers were already
fled away, of whom she knew nothing, saw the great stone rolled from the
Sepulcher and our Lords body taken thence: at which surprised with great wonder
and grief, she ran back into the city, to the house where S. Peter abode with
S. John and the Blessed Mother of our Lord (probably all the Disciples not
lodging together) to tell them the sad News, See Ink. 24.9, 12, 24.
that the Monument was thrown open, and no body there. These two, the chief of
the society, and between whom seems to have bin a more particular friendship,
who also had before entered together into the High Priests Palace, hearing the
coast also was clear, went with all speed to the place, the better to inform
themselves and the rest concerning this matter. John much younger and
outrunning Peter came soonest to the Monument; where he stooped down and looked
into it, and there saw the linen cloths; but proceeded no further till Peter
also was arrived, who presently according to his usual forwardness went into
the cave, and S. John after him, and observed the linen cloths decently
wrapped-up, and the napkin, as if taken off his head after them, laid in a
place by it self: and now they began (which also his night-cloths thus put off,
and the linen not taken away in have with the Body, but so orderly folded up,
might hint unto them) to have the first thoughts of that which our Lord had so
often foretold them, his Resurrection: but yet much checked in it, because
that, if so risen, he should no where show himself, to his most Holy Mother, to
them, or others, who had so near a relation to him; and so they stayed not long
here, where was no more to be seen, for fear of danger; but returned hastily to
their company, much wondering, says St. Luke, at that which was to come to
pass. Our Lord making trial of the Faith of these two Pillars of the Apostles,
without either any manifestation of himself, or Apparition of an Angel.

But Mary, still thinking the Body taken away and removed some where not far
off, and desirous to bestow their preparations upon it, and for this expecting
her companions, staid still behind at the Sepulcher weeping: and, as she was
stooping down and looking again into it, perhaps upon her discerning some
extraordinary light there, she saw two Angels arrayed in white and shining
Garments well suting to that joyful solemnity; and sitting there, as if they
gave some particular reverence to the place that Sacred Body had touched, one
at the head, and the other at the feet, where the Body of our Lord had lain;
that part of the rock where the Body was placed being left somewhat higher than
the rest of the floor; who asking why she wept so much (in a time indeed of so
great joy) she, not much surprised, told them, because some person had done
violence to the dead, and carried away the body of her dear Lord, to which she
came to perform her last service and duty: and, before she received any answer
from them, perhaps seeing some alteration in their gesture upon our Lords
approach, or hearing some noise of his steps behind her; she suddenly turns
her self about, and seeing a man, whom by his habit or instruments she took to
be the Gardener of that place (who also questioned her what she looked for
there, and why she wept) and fancying he might, perhaps, have thrown out the
Body of a criminous person, executed by Justice from such a costly Tomb,
prepared for his own Masters body, and suddenly cast there without his order,
she requested to know where else he had disposed of it, and she would carry it
away (for her love boggled at nothing) and none should be further molested by
it.

Mary, whereat ravished with joy and answering him Rabboni, she fell prostrate
to adore him, and kiss his feet. But our Lord, to perfect her yet too terrene
affections, and render them more celestial, forbids her present embraces, or
touching him, and signifies to her things most unexpected, of his shortly
departing hence, and ascending to his Father; and so commands her, without any
longer stay, to haft presently to his Brethren (for so he now styles his
Disciples) and to tell them, that, his Resurrction accomplished, he was very
shortly to ascend not only to his Father, and God, but now also theirs, through
the merit of his Passion that had reconciled the loft world to God: but yet
disjoining these, and saying; my Father and your Father, because God theirs
only derivatively from being his. Signifying to her, that there was no time yet
of fruition and embraces, but more business to be done by him, for her, and for
mankind; viz. his Ascent to his eternal Father, where he was to make an
atonement with his blood in the celestial Sanctuary, and prepare an entrance
also for them in thither: where should be the proper time of a beatifical
enjoyment, kisses, and embraces for ever; and where he was also to procure of
his Father the Mission of the Holy Ghost, not to dwell here only with, but in,
them; and, by enriching them with all heavenly Graces and Gifts, prepare them
for that heavenly kingdom. Thus our Lord, so soon as risen, pursuing rather the
perfection of his servants than their present content, began to remove out of
their minds the conceit of any terrestrial Scepter, and advance their thoughts
to a celestial Throne and the knowledge of further mysteries. Of which Ascension
and Glorification of his, as a thing of the greatest consequence and weight, he
had also spoken often to them before, but especially before his passion. See
John. 1.51. -- 3. 13. -- 13.33. -- 14.2, 28. -- 16.5, 17, 16, 28. -- 17.5. and
having said the former words to her, he, much contrary to her expectation,
suddenly disappeared: leaving her, as overjoyed with his return from Death, so
a new afflicted with his absence.

Spirits: as, in their agility and subtility, impassibility, immortality, and
splendour or clarity, for which see Mat. 13.43. -- 1 Cor. 15.41, 43, 49. called
Glory Phil. 3.21. -- 1 Jo. 3.2. [yet of which Clarity it was necessary that our
Lord in these his apparitions should divest himself, that he might show himself
to his Disciples to have the same Body wherein he suffered, and that he might
familiarly converse with them, and negotiate the business he had yet here to
finish on Earth. But this state of Glory in him was prerepresented to some
persons selected out of them (who were after his Resurrection to declare it to
the rest) Mat. 17.9. before his sufferings, at his Transfiguration in the Holy
Mount, Mat. 17. when his face is said to have shined like the Sun etc. But such
also, after his Resurrection, he appeared to Stephen; whose face shone, like
that of Moses, from the reflection Act. 6.15. compared with 7.55. and again to
S. Paul in the way to Damascus, Act. 9.10. so that the Glory quite took away
his fight]. Resembling spirits also, in passing how soon, and whither, they
please; without any gravity, or retardment, or impediment of solid bodies
interposed, we may imagine according to the swiftness of a Sunbeam, or of our
thoughts; with which we render our selves in our imagination present in places
most remote, and acting there what we please.

Mary, as commanded, hasted to the main Body of the Disciples, that remained
together; and told them this joyful news, as they mourned and wept, says S.
Mark chap. 16.10, 11. But they (says he, aggravating their great incredulity
and disconsolation) when they had heard that he was alive, and had bin seen of
her, yet believed not; and so she hasted again toward the Sepulcher to meet
with our Lord again, or at least the women her companions.

All hail to them too: Before whom they presently fell down, and took hold of
his feet and adored him. A thing, which to Mary, when all alone, he would not
permit but here indulged, perhaps that this might the more confirm to them, as
also to the Disciples to whom they carried the news, the reality of his person.
And so, them also he presently dismissed to go and tell his Brethren, as he
styled them, that he was risen; and in Galilee they should all have a full view
of him: and vanished again out of their sight.

Act. 1.6. Whilst, on the other side, our Lord this while afforded his presence
to others, and withheld it from them; to try and give occasion to the greater
operation of their faith (a thing in us ever most highly prized and valued by
him) as who had bin more particularly instructed by him concerning this
reviving, than others; and should have needed less conviction for the
persuasion of it (and yet in this outdone by the High Priests, who much
suspected it): and therefore at St. Peter and John's repairing to the Sepulcher,
no Angels appeared; nor was the message there delivered by an Angel to the
Disciples, but women. But this was done also, to show them their great weakness
and hardness of heart, which also in his next apparition in the Evening he
objected to them; and had a good effect for preserving in them the greater
humility, without which no person can be gracious to him: the courage of these
women meanwhile well deserving those manifestations of our Lord, of which their
fears were unworthy. But indeed the Divine providence also seems thus to have
disposed things, that their Testimony, who were to publish to all the world the
Gospel of our Lords Resurrection, might be rendered the more credible from the
great averseness and difficulty themselves had at first to admit, or believe
it; as also S. Thomas his standing out and trying further experiments, after
all the rest convinced, served for the same ends. This also much more
illustrated the wonderful operations of the descent of the Holy Ghost upon
them, that was shortly after obtained of his Father by our Lords Ascension,
showing all their spiritual strength and courage to have bin from its efficacy.
Who, though now full of fears and incredulity they hid themselves, and
despaired, as it were, of the Divine Omnipotency and Goodness, then proclaimed
to all the world the Magnaliae Dei, and feared neither Prisons nor death for
the Testimony of Jesus; -- Quales Doctores Sanctae Ecclesiae ante adventum
bujus Spiritus fuerint, scimus; and post adventum illius, cujus fortitudinis
facti sunt, conspicimus; says S. Gregory.

Luke 24, 34. 1 Cor. 15, 5.
An Apparition mentioned by St. Paul, and St. Luke; some think it might be at
his return from the Sepulcher, whilst John as swifter on foot was then also
gone before him, to tell the Disciples the strange and joyful news. For he
doubtless, together with John, had much argued the case; as knowing the
Soldiers report of the Disciples a fable; and that Enemies in spoiling the Tomb
would in the chief place have taken the linen and spices; and friends not have
stripped the Body of them: and, from this also, had called to mind the
predictions of our Lord, and of the Scriptures, concerning his rising again,
intimated by St. John chap. 20.9. and so returned full of joy, faith, and hopes
to see and reenjoy him. But this appearance to Peter seems to have bin later,
being not known to the rest, (whom this Apostle would immediately have
acquainted with it) when the women brought the same news; nor yet, when
Cleophas and his companion took their journey to Emaus, who knew nothing of it.
To this Apostle our Lord first appeared; both, as being the chief of them, by
whom he would have the rest confirmed in this faith, before he further
manifested himself to them; and also, as being one that more exceedingly loved
him, see John 21.15. and so more passionatly lamented the absence and loss of
him; (as he also appeared to Mary Magdalen, before the other women); And also
to him, as one more dejected and disconsolate for so late and cowardly a denial
of him; at which also he might think our Lord, having taken some great
Displeasure, withheld that gracious sight and fruition of him from him, which
he vouchsafed to the women: for which denial, so soon as our Lord was pleased
to comfort his grief with this most beatifying sight, we may imagine he
straight fell down at his feet, and with many tears begged pardon. And so,
after our Lords sudden departure (who, now glorified, entertained no long
conversation with Mortals) he hasted to the rest of the Society to confirm his
Brethren herein, as one of the greatest Authority with them; and the first man,
that our Lord made choice of to preach the Resurrection to them. But several of
them still, (to force, as it were, our Lord to a more open and public
discovery of himself, and not to entertain a joy hastily, which, defeated
again, would so much more deject them) remained incredulous both after the
testimony of Mary, and of the women, and of Peter (see Mark. 16.13.) nor at
first did they believe, when he himself appeared to them. For the apparition of
spirits ran still in their mind, see Luke 24.37. and not seeing (as too much of
seeming human reason usually darkens-faith) why our Lord, if risen and having
conquered Death, should thus appear and disappear (a sign the Apparition had no
reality in it) and should not come along with Peter to them; and show himself
either to his friends, or also to all the rest of the Jews, to consolate the
one, and confound the other; else who would credit a report of him risen, that
was not forthcoming, or to be seen?

Jo. 19.25, who is also called there sister to the blessed Mother of our Lord,
and who was one of the women that stood with the Blessed Virgin by the Cross,
and that this morning had visited the Sepulcher and brought the good news from
thence, who was also the Mother of James, Jude, Joses, and Simon or Simeon.
[All which were called our Lords Brethren, and who probably all lived in the
same family, at least after the death of Joseph the Blessed Virgins Husband,
and lived at Capernaum after our Lords residence there (see John chap. 2.22.
Luke 8.19, 20. -- Mat. 12.46.) of which sons of Cleophas and this Mary, two,
James and Jude, were chosen Apostles: James, in relation to the other Apostle
James, the Son of Zebedee, being called James the less ( Mark. 15.40.) and
Jude, in the recital of the Apostles names Luke 6.16. -- Jude 1. called his
Brother (so that those texts Mark. 3.21. and John 7.3, 5. are to be understood
of his kindred or friends more remote, or with exception at least to these):
only James there being called the son of Alpheus, Alpheus is imagined to denote
the same person with Cleophas: or, if this be not admitted; we must style this
Mary, not wife, but Daughter, of Cleophas; and Alpheus to be Joseph's Brother,
and her husband. This Cleophas or Alpheus then, we see, had a near Relation to
our Lord, two of his sons being Apostles, James and Jude; and two of them
afterward Bishops of Jerusalem, James first, and, after his Martyrdom, his
Brother Simeon].

where presignified and foretold in the Scriptures. Here he showed them, how
all the legal Sacrifices were only Types of the killing and Oblation of the
Messiah, and expiation of sin by his blood. Here he remembered them, of the
representation of this only Son of God his being offered up by his Father, by
Abraham's offering of his only ion Isaac: of the roasting of the Paschal Lamb,
his Type, without a bone of him being broken: Of Moses his smiting of the rock,
and so water gushing out of it: of his nailing a brazen Serpent on a Pole, that
all who looked with faith upon it might be healed (as our Lord also came in
similitudine peccati): of Aarons dry and withered Rod afterward rebudding and
flourishing: of Jonah lying three days in the Whales belly and afterward cast
up: now also he expounded to them Daniels weeks, remembered them of Hosea's
chap. 6.3. -- vivificavit nos post duas dies, in die tertia suscitabit nos; and
of David's Psalm. 15.10. -- Non dabis Sanctum tuum videre corruptionem. -- And de
torrente in via bibet, propterea exaltabit caput. -- Of Zachary's chap. 13.6,
7. Quae sunt plagae istae in medio manuum tuarum: and his Percutiam Pastorem,
and dispergentur oves. These, and all the forementioned descriptions of his
passion, especially in the Prophet Esaias chap. 5.3. and in the Ps. 21. and 68.
he set before them; and many more in these Books, than man's weak apprehensions
has bin able to discover; the whole History and Prophecies of the Old
Testament principally prefiguring and representing the great Mystery of the
salvation of mankind, that was in the latter days to be wrought by the Son of
God. These things our Lord discoursed, continuing his Speech till they were now
arrived at the Village where their business called them; whilst their hearts
were all on fire in hearing what he said, according to that of the Psalmist,
Ps. 18.15. Ignitum eloquium tuum etc. Our Lord, making as though he would have
gone further, gave them occasion to show their hospitality; and so, importuned
by them to stay and eat with them, or also to stay all night, the day being
near an end, and they infinitely longing after more of his conversation and
discourse, he yielded to their request; and so sitting down at Table he took
the bread, blessed, brake, and gave it them, suddenly appearing to them in his
own likeness; or also performing this Ceremony in some singular manner of
benediction, as was formerly his custom, well known at least to Cleophas,
Joseph's Brother, used to the same table. Or, because we may imagine our Lords
actions done in the most perfect manner, in this breaking of bread celebrating
with them the memorial of his Passion (after his long discourse thereof) in the
holy Eucharist; sometimes expressed by breaking of bread, see Acts 20.7. --
2.46. after he had first sufficiently instructed them in this great Mystery;
wherein he now, when personally departing, yet would continue a miraculous
presence of himself to his Church to the end of the world. After which given
them, and their hospitality thus amply rewarded, upon eating it, their eyes
also were no longer held, but that they clearly discerned with great reverence
his Sacred Majesty now in his own form and likeness, and knew him; and after
this he suddenly departed out of their sight.

chap. 16.13) still remained incredulous: probably, arguing from our Lord's
presently vanishing both from the women, and from St. Peter, and last from
these two at Emaus, that it was some Spirit only appearing in his likeness; For
the same conceit they had also by and by when our Lord appeared to themselves
Luke 24.37.

Pax vobis, the usual and Ancient salutation of the Jews; but this pax of his
extraordinary, and not sicut Mundus Jo. 14.27. working in the Soul the effect,
whilst he spoke with his mouth the words. Then, mildly reprehended them, that
they had remained so obstinatly incredulous to the Eyewitnesses that came to
them, in a matter also so often foretold them, nor yet believed their own eyes
at present, but took him for a Spirit: then proceeded to discover and show them
the scars of the wounds he had received in his hands, feet, and side; those
noble scars which his glorified Body in heaven still retains, eternal Witnesses
of his love to mankind, and with which he will appear at his second coming, for
the greater confusion of his Enemies; when, says S. John Apo. 1.7, they shall
look on him whom they have pierced; and whose tender of mercy, after it, they
also rejected. He bad them also to feel and handle his true flesh and bones
different from Spirits; therefore says the Apostle, not only -- Quod
audivimus, quod vidimus, but, manus nostrae contrectaverunt de verbo vitae.
Then, what only remained for their satisfaction, whilst the excess of their Joy
and wonder still suspended their full assent and belief, he called for meat,
and eat also before them of that poor fare, which they were provided of, though
in this great Feast, and to which our Lord also had bin most accustomed, a
piece of a broild fish, and of an honeycomb, the one plentiful in the woods of
this country, and the other a common food among Fishermen; perhaps the relics
of their Supper but now ended. Of which after he had eaten, he gave to them the
remainder, says the vulgar in S. Luke chap. 24.43. Et cum manducasset coram
eis, sumens reliquias dedit eis. To partake of what he Sanctified, and that
they might say they had eat and drunk with him, as also those at Emaus. See
Act. 1.4. After he had thus eaten before them, and by all these ways satisfied
them (excepting only Thomas absent) of the truth and reality of that, the
Testimony of which they were to spread abroad through all the world, and for
which afterward to lay down their lives; he made much what to them the same
Sermon or Discourse, as to the two Disciples that went to Emaus; instructing
them in what they were afterward to instruct the Jews and all other Nations;
expounding to them the Law and the Prophets; showing them the many predictions
concerning the Messiah his Sufferings, Resurrection, and so entrance into his
Glory (a many of which they mentioned afterward in their Sermons in the Acts)
opening their understandings to understand the Scriptures.

That all power both in Heaven and Earth was given to him; that therefore by
this his Authority he also sent them to preach the Gospel to all Nations, and
witness to them the things they had seen and heard from him, but beginning
their predication first at Jerusalem and to Gods former people the Jews: That
they should preach to them repentance and remission of sin through his name, and
also the observation of all those things which he had commanded them: And that
they should also Baptize them In the name of the Father, and the Son, and the
Holy Ghost; instructing them, that who so believed in him and were baptized
(which was the Sacrament instituted for washing away their sins, for conferring
on them the Spirit of regeneration, and for initiating them into his Church)
should be saved; and the unbelieving damned: And that great signs also should
follow them that believed, and were of the Christian profession; which signs
should bear witness to the truth of their faith and Religion: That in his name
they should speak strange languages, cure the sick, cast out Devils, and have a
special command over all the powers of the Enemy (as they are called Luke
10.19.) in taking up or treading on Serpents, or in happening to drink any
poison, not to receive any hurt from them. Not that all Believers should do
such Miracles, but that these should still remain in the Church or Congregation
of true Believers, Testimonies and Evidences of Gods special favors to, and
presence with, them.

Pax vobis, and a sicut misit me Pater, and ego mitto vos, He breathed upon
them with his most Sacred mouth, and said these words, used ever since by them
and their Successors in the ordination of others; -- Receive ye the Holy Ghost,
whose sins ye shall forgive [i. e. by Baptism, or for those committed
afterward, by Absolution, upon confession and repentance or penance] they are
forgiven them; and whose sins ye shall retain [i. e. by not baptizing, or
absolving; or further binding with Church Censures the impenitent, and
obstinat] they are retained; And so solemnly promised to be with them and their
Successors, with his power and protection, till the end of the world, and the
time of his return to judge it.



John 11.5. that he might not be as yet returned to the Society since their
dispersion on Thursday night at our Lords apprehension; and so might not have
heard, as the rest, of our Lord's former appearings, at all to the women and to
Peter etc: He, whether the same night, or afterward, being come to them, and
informed of their having seen our Lord, yet, for a greater manifestation still
of our Lords Resurrection, and for begetting in this Apostle more humility,
continued in the same incredulity as to their relations, (though so many) as
they had done to the other; likely, persuaded by the Circumstances, of his
appearing in the night, coming through Doors shut, and making scarce any stay
at all with persons to whom he had formerly showed so much affection, but
suddenly vanishing again, that it might be some airy spirit subject in his
motions to the order of a Superior power. And, though they related to him also
their having seen his scars, and touched his body, (or at least invited to do
it) yet he fancied that this was not done to purpose, but ought to be better
examined; and, that, if he had bin there, he would have thrust his hand into
the Gash in our Lords side, and his fingers into the holes made by the nails
etc: Notwithstanding that this person, besides his hearing our Lords many
predictions to them of his Resurrection, was present with the rest at our Lords
raising from death, after laid upon the Bier, the widows son at Naim; and
again, at his raising of Lazarus out of his Sepulcher, when he had lain longer
time there, than our Lord had done. But this too-much suspicious and despondent
inclination of his had appeared also several times formerly (that we may see,
what materials our Lords Grace wrought upon, and not to be discouraged): as, in
those words of his at our persecuted Lords return into Judea for the raising of
Lazarus; Jo. 11: 16. He then presently resolving that there our Lord, and they
must lose their lives; and in his words again John 14.5. where, our Lord
telling his Disciples of his departure shortly, and that they knew the place
and the way whither he went, Thomas dejectedly replied, that they knew not
whither he went, and how could they know the way thither? To whom our Lord
answered: that his Journey was a Return to Heaven to his Father whence he came,
and that He himself, believed-in, was the way thither. Yet, after the descent
and renovation of the Holy Spirit, this Apostle especially was made choice of
to be a most eminent Assertor of the same Resurrection, and Propagator of the
Gospel throughout India, and the remotest Nations of the East, fulfilling our
Lords words Acts 1.8. -- Et usque ad ultimum terrae; and there at last laid
down his life for it.

Lords Day, see Apoc. 1.) when this great Festival was now concluded, and the
Disciples were all together again at Even, whom perhaps business in the day
time had divided, purposing now their return into Galilee; and Thomas now with
them, being also a Galilean (where we find him afterward going on fishing with
St. Peter and others); our Lord, I say, about the same time of night, and the
doors shut, as before, appeared again in the midst of them: and, after his
usual salutation Pax vobis, He, according to his zeal John 17.12. Quos dedisti
mihi, custodivi; and nemo ex eis periit, particularly addressed his speech to
St. Thomas; and when, showing his omniscience, he had repeated to him the
incredulous words spoken by him in his absence, with a most gracious
condescendence to his weakness, invited him to examine his body freely; to put
his finger hardily in the holes of the Nails, and his hand into the larger
wound made in his side, and at last become a true Beleiver; and join his
Testimony thereof to the world with the rest of his Apostles. St. Thomas,
doubtless, upon such an appearance, and speech to him, much confounded, and
being already sufficiently persuaded and convinced of his error and fault,
needed now no further experiment for the confirmation of his Faith, had not our
Lord pressed him to it. After which, as it were elevated into another extreme,
he cried out My Lord, my God: and, acknowledging more than these scars
evidenced to him, not only the Resurrection of his true body, but the Divinity
of his Person, which effected it, equalled that confession of the highest
Apostle. Mat. 16.16. Upon which our Lord, gently reprehending such an obstinat
and resolute unbelief, as had formerly lodged in him, uttered those gracious
and comfortable words for all those, that, by reason of his sudden removal
from the Earth, could not have St. Thomas his lot to see, feel, or touch him,
that he indeed believed because he had seen him; but Blessed they, who have not
seen and yet have believed; leaving this Benediction on the greater virtue of
their faith for ever; who in latter times, not having the like Evidence, should
nevertheless persevere in the like faith and adherence to him. In the
constitution of which faith a pious affection of the will is indeed a principal
ingredient (according to Quod volumus facile credimus); and that which God most
valueth and rewards.

Agnus tanquam occisus (says S. John Apocal. 5.6.) and with those he will
appear in Majesty at his second coming to Judgment; for the greater confounding
of those Beholders who inflicted them, and of all the wicked, when he then
represents to them the great things he suffered to have saved them. See Zach.
12.10. and 13.6. compared with Apoc. 1.7. Behold he comes with Clouds, (says
St. John) and every eye shall see him, and they that pierced him, and they
shall bewail themselves upon Him: and those his scars he now sitting at Gods
right hand, perpetually shows to his heavenly Father for mitigating his wrath
to sinners: and these himself also daily looks upon, to mind him how much out
salvation cost him, and so the more to perfect, preserve, and take care of, so
dear a purchase. For which gracious ostentation of them they seem also to have
bin placed in the most visible parts of his body; so that he cannot now stretch
forth an hand, or move a foot, without showing these holy Relics of his
infinite love to mankind: Therefore are they so quickly observed by the Prophet
Quae sunt plagae istae in medio manuum tuarum? Zach. 13.6.
These also remain to be hereafter to all his Saints in the beholding of these,
plagae, quibus plagatus est (as he answers in the Prophet) in domo eorum qui
diligebant eum, wherewith he was wounded in the house of his friends (or who
had reason to be so) an eternal incentive of their love and gratitude toward
him; as also, now the meditation of them an excitive of a penitent grief in us
for our sins that caused them; as the same Prophet foretold chap. 12.10.
alluded to by St. John Aspicient in eum quem confixerunt, and plangent eum
planctu, quasi super unigenitum; and dolebunt super eum, ut doleri solet in
morte primogeniti [the only begotten Son of God, slain for us]: Magnus planctus
sicut planctus Adadremmon in campo Mageddon; i. e. like the mourning for the
pious Josiah, the great Darling, and last good King, of Judah; shortly after
which the Nation of the Jews was delivered up into captivity, as it was also,
after our Savior slain. Yet here we may not imagine, that these piercings of
our Lords Flesh, that now still remain unclosed, are any Deformity to that
Sacred Body, but rather are represented therein with some extraordinary
splendour and beauty, and become a singular ornament to it.

Mat. 28.16.) when he would, yet more publicly, show and manifest his
Resurrection from death; not only to them now well confirmed therein, but also
to the rest of his Disciples and Converts, most numerous in that Country of
his most frequent residence and preaching; and, where also such a concourse of
them might be with the least noise, or notice of the State. And so the Paschal
Feast ended, the Apostles, as also our Lords Mother and the other Galilean
women; that had (...) on him, returned with great joy to their ordinary abodes,
there expecting the time of this happy revisit; and publishing (to all his
Followers especially) the glad news of the revivification of our Lord, and at
what time and place they, also, might be made eye witnesses thereof.

Act. 1.14. in Prayer, and Praises, and holy discourse; and frequented by many
others, that had bin former Disciples and Admirers of our Lord; to whom
privately they communicated his Resurrection, and confirmed them in the faith.

Luke 5.5. some think, because our Lords apparitions were usually on the first
day of the week, his Resurrection day, that this was the Evening after the
Sabbath was ended, and when they had bin two or three days in Galilee. This
employment St. Peter might undertake for the present (but without all thoughts
doubtless of any continuance of it) not to seem void of business, or ashamed of
his former Trade; as also, to make some better provision for their necessary
sustenance. The Disciples, that were present, consented also to go with him;
probably, all or most of them also formerly Fishermen. The Persons were
Zebedees two sons, James and John. (Between the latter of which and St. Peter
was a more intimate affection, and they seldom parted from one another.)
Thomas, Nathanael, and two others not named; some conjecture these might be St.
Andrew, Peter's Brother: and St. Philip his Fellow-townsman. And Nathanael
here, (who is not mentioned by this name but only by St. John, being a
Galilean, a familiar acquaintance of Philips, and called at the same time with
him, and who then made such an early and noble confession of our Lord Jo. 1.49.
acknowledging him the Son of God and King of Israel; and then also declared by
our Lord so sincere and upright a Person, and here also joined with them, by
the name of Disciples here Jo. 21.14. being meant Apostles) is supposed to have
bin one of the twelve, and in the other Evangelist called by his Fathers name
Bar-Tholomew, as Peter Bar-Jona; which Bartholemew, in reciting of the Apostles
names, is also joined and placed next to Philip, Mat. 10.3. and Mark. 3.18. The
Ship and Nets, they used, probably were those which in their former constant
attendance on our Lord, were left to the management of their near Relations,
and friends, old Zebedee and his Servants; and perhaps St. Peter's Wife, and his
Mother, for their better livelihood, by some hired servants still continued
the trade. Which Ships, or Barks, also, were on several occasions made use of
by our Lord, whilst he passed to and fro, upon the the Lake to the Regions and
Towns adjoining.

These Persons then being many of the chief of the Apostles, seven of them in
all, which is a number much celebrated in Scripture, went out together on
fishing; and that they might be the better prepared for the next mornings
Miracle, all that night, though laboring hard, caught not a fish; as it also
happened to Peter before, at our Lords first calling him from his trade, Luke
5.5. etc; and he might imagine this a punishment of his return to it, now so
long deserted, when designed for another employment. The next morning our Lord
standing on the shore, but unknown, in his former loving, and familiar way
calling them children, asked them if they had any meat, as if he would have
bought some fish of them: to whom they answering they had none, he directed
them to cast their Net on the right side of the ship and they should find some;
which they very obsequiously did; perhaps suspecting something concerning the
Person by his language of calling them children [he making choice of this
dearest term of love and affection, rather than others of subjection, and
frequently using it. See Mark. 10.24. children, how hard is it, and John 13.33.
little children, yet a while I am with you etc: which word also the Apostles
used to their Disciples, and Converts 2 Cor. 6.13. Gal. 4.19.] perhaps also
they calling to mind the former Miracle our Lord had wrought in this kind,
after they had labored so another whole night and caught nothing. This was no
sooner done, but they perceived their Net so ponderous with the fishes it had
enclosed, that, not able to lift it up into the ship, they were forced to drag
it along toward the shore. Upon which St. John said to Peter, that certainly it
was our Lord, either by his quicker sight better discerning him; or from this
great Miracle persuaded thereof. Peter, according to his wonted fervor and
courage, and moved by an extraordinary love he bare to our Lord, impatient of
the slow motion of the Ship, dragging gently the laden Net, girding only close
to him his Fishers coat without further apparelling himself, threw himself into
the Sea, it being not far to the shore. (Methinks this action somewhat
resembling these two Disciple's behavior at our Lords Sepulcher, where John
first discovered, and Peter first entered) where, after his having adored our
Lord, and the others now arrived, he went up again into the Boat to help them
to land the Net, full of great fishes, in number one hundred fifty three, yet
without the least breach of the Net.

The former story of the Apostles fishing, at their first call to follow
Christ, and so to become Fishers of men, and the Miracle then done by our Lord,
varying in several Circumstances from this, gave occasion to St. Austin in
Johan. Tract. 122. (knowing no casualty to be in our Lords Works, but all as
Parables, significative, and predesigned with an infinite wisdom, more than we
can for the present discover) to conjecture these two fishings to represent the
two states of the Church, before, and after, the Resurrection, when all things
will be perfected. In the first therefore he observes; That the Disciples were
bidden by our Lord, then in the Ship together with them, to cast their Nets;
but not so particularly, on the right side of the ship; That the fish caught
were some great, some small; not drawn to the land, but taken into the ship;
that by the Multitude of them the Net was broken; and by their weight the ship
in hazard to be sunk; no certain number of them taken; no feast or
entertainment of the Fishermen after their toil: But in this latter, Our Lord
is standing on, and calling to them from, the shore; the Apostles being seven,
that is, a complete number, are bidden to cast their Net, and all the fish are
taken, on the right side of the ship; these a certain number; all great ones;
drawn to land; no Net broken, or ship hazarded sinking by them; no tempest
rising, as formerly, in St. Peter's passing through the Sea to our Lord; All things
now made ready before hand here by our Lord for the Apostles Entertainment, and
they here feasted by him, and eating of the fruit of their labors etc: The
first of these therefore seeming more generally to represent, in the present
Sea of this world, the gathering of Nations, by the Net of the Preachers of the
Gospel, into the external profession of the Christian Faith; where some also
break these Nets and are lost; and by their factions also hazard the Church,
the Ship that carries them etc. But the latter seeming to represent, at the end
of the world, when our Lord is on the shore, the collection of the Elect, the
children of the right hand; whereof there is a certain number; none lost out of
the Net; all great and considerable; the number of which also expressed viz. 153.
(which number as St. Austin observes is the sum of a computation of all the
numbers from 1. to 17: and, as S. Gregory, the product of 17. multiplied by 9.
or 3 times 3.) contains in it some mystical signification; which, whether
relating to the several Nations, or to the most eminent Saints, converted by
them, or to some other thing, remains to be manifested hereafter: where it is
observed, that the number of people of the Nations, that were found in Israel
in Salomons days, and by him made Laborers in the building of the Temple,
came to 153. thousand see 2 Chronicles. 2.17. not reckoning the Fraction. Lastly,
after all, follows our Lords entertaining these his Servants with eternal Joys
and Festivals prepared by him for them. See such a fishing alluded to by our
Lord, Mat. 13.47, in his comparing the Kingdom of Heaven to a Net etc; which at
last is drawn to shore, and the good gathered into Vessels, but the bad cast
away; And see such an Entertainment mentioned Mat. 12.37. The Lord of the Feast
ministering to his Guests. Mat. 26.29. -- 8.11. Apoc. 19.9.

As Soon as landed, they all saw clearly it was our Lord, but in great reverence
and fear, perhaps his appearance being also more full of Majesty than formerly,
durst not ask him any curious questions, who he was, where he abode, from
whence he came thither, concerning his stay with them, his kingdom etc. There
also they saw a fire already kindled on the shore, and fish of our Lords own
providing laid thereon, and bread, all things miraculously prepared for their
entertainment, without any necessity of their provision or assistance: and that
our Lord could feast them from his own store; and called to them from the shore
to supply their wants, not his. But also he bad them to bring some of the fish
they had taken, that they might partake of their own labors, and he also
receive an Entertainment from them; so after his usual Benediction he took the
bread and fish, and divided and distributed these unto them, sitting with him
in very great reverence and silence. And, of this taking their repast with him,
or that on the night after his Resurrection, it seems to be, that St. Peter
speaks to Cornelius and his company, Act. 10.41. That they did eat and drink
with him after he rose from the dead.

Jo. 4.10. -- 6.27. -- 7.37. -- 8.34, 38. -- 9.5.) he began to speak of their
feeding his sheep (as also, after their former great and miraculous draught of
fishes Luke 5, he discourses of their catching of men): and here he addressed
his speech also particularly to Simon Peter (as he did after the other
miraculous draught Luke 5.10. Simon, fear not; from henceforth thou shall catch
men; and frequently elsewhere; see Luke 22.31, 32. -- Mat. 26.40.) Simon Peter
being both the chief of them, and also one, who now had showed an extraordinary
love and devotion to him, when, being as yet hardly discovered by him, he threw
himself into the Sea, not minding his fish, for have to come to him.

Him, then, he kindly bespake on this manner. Simon Bar-Jona love thou me
more than these? As thou have often Mark. 14.30, 31, Luke 22.33. and now
particularly by this last action of thine made great profession of it. To whom
the Apostle modestly answered; passing by any companion with others, That our
Lord well knew, he loved him. If thou do, says he, now I the chief Pastor am
quitting this world, and leaving them to others, feed my Lambs; these little
ones, who as yet are but Neophytes in, and newly acquainted with, the Christian
Faith; our Lord showing herein the bowels of his affection not only to the
twelve, but also those others formerly instructed by him; And Qui redempti sunt
pretio magno. 1 Cor. 6.20.

Now, to St. Peter our Lord commits here more particularly the feeding of them,
because he was ordained by God his Father to be the chief and prime Pastor of
them, under Christ: And therefore elsewhere, at the first sight of him (no
doubt from the divine ordination) he gave him the name of Cephas, Stone, or
Foundation Jo. 1.42: though Andrew the first called, and, some say, the Elder
Brother. And again, upon the Catholic Confession he made, by God the Fathers
revealing it to him Mat. 16* 17. of our Lords Divine person, he further
expounded the reason of this name, that upon this Cephas he would build his
Church. And again, at his Passion, Satan being permitted by God to tempt our
Lords Disciples, he made some particular intercession for the not failing of S.
Peter's Faith in such temptation: (For, though Satan, laying his closest siege
to this chief Apostle, he failed in his confession of our Lord, out of fear
(which was a great fault), yet not in his heart, out of any infidelity; and his
conversion from this fault immediately followed with bitter weeping). And, as,
here, he enjoines him the feeding of his sheep; so, there also, he recommends
to him the confirmation of this faith in the other his Fellow-shepheards of
these sheep; -- Tu conversus confirma fratres. And, to this special Commission
here given to Peter over our Lords Flock, S. Paul seems to relate Gal. 2.7.
where he says, that the Apostles saw the Gospel of the Circumcision committed
to Peter, which we see it was in this place; our Lord then having no sheep or
flock, when he said this to Peter, save the Circumcision (in which respect also
our Lord himself is styled by the Apostle, signifying his first employments,
Mat. 25.24. the Minister of the Circumcision Romans 15.9.) and God also more
eminently wrought by St. Peter, than by the rest, the great signs and wonders
in converting of the Circumcision, as appears in the Acts; as he did by S.
Paul, more than by any other, for the conversion of Gentiles. Tho, for the
Gentiles also, the honor of the first conversion of them was given to S.
Peter; see Acts 10.34. -- 15.7. And, as S. Paul had an extraordinary Mission
from Christ Acts 9.11. So had he one from the Church of Antioch; Act. 13, 3.
and, both his Baptism and Mission from the Ministry of those, who received
this Power from the College of the Apostles, of which Peter was the Head.

Our Lord, to make this charge effect the deeper impression on Peter, and all
his Successors, ceased not thus; but repeated it; asking him again and again
(only omitting the first comparison) till Peter was grieved, Jo. 21.17. and
ashamed, whether he loved him; and, upon the same Answer of his, appealing to
our Lords omniscience, made now three times (from whom our Lord may seem to
require this trinal confession to expiate and reverse his former trinal Denial)
he thrice iterated to him the same charge, that in the absence of himself he
should return this love to his little ones; whom he sometimes called Lambs,
sometimes Sheep, to show all in his fold, old or young committed to his
government, and that all, strong or weaklings, have need of the Pastors feeding
them, and were subjected to him.

After our Lord had thus instructed this chief Servant and Steward of his
household, Peter, what he should do, he began to preacquaint him also with what
he should suffer, for him, the more to pre-arm him for future Events; and that,
nothing happening unexpected, or that was not known to be by the divine
Providence predesigned; such things might afterward less surprise him; and
that the conceit of a present secular Kingdom of our Lord, and their
advancement in his Court, might be removed out of his mind. He then began to
tell him, with a double serious Amen pronounced before it; That, as in his
younger age he had gone whither, and done what, he pleased, so hereafter in his
old age he must expect a change: That, as he must undertake great labors for
his sake, so undergo great afflictions, and be made like unto his Master he so
loved, Mat. 26.35.
as in his preaching of, so in his sufferings for, the truth; and fulfill the
promise he had once engaged of dying, if not with, yet for, him: That one day
(as himself had done) he must stretch out his hands, and another gird him, and
carry him away whither he would not, to Prison and to the Cross; signifying to
him that he should glorify God his Father by Martyrdom, and the Cross, as
himself had done. Which accordingly happened in the thirteenth year of Nero,
after he had diligently fed Christ's sheep, after this ( transiens universa,
visiting all places Acts 9.32.) for thirty five years.

follow me i. e. my example, in undergoing such Events as he had discovered to
him with all valor, alacrity, and constancy, he walked on the shore, Peter at
a nearer distance attending him. Who turning him about, and seeing John coming
after them, probably, somewhat before or faster than the rest, presuming on the
love our Lord bare to him; to whom also Peter, as well as our Lord, had an
extraordinary affection, he took the boldness, having heard his own doom, to
inquire of his al-knowing Master concerning this his dear friend, what the
Divine good pleasure had ordained also touching him. To whom our Lord,
repressing the Apostles curiosity, returned somewhat a dubious Answer: That, if
he would have John tarry till his coming, this nothing concerned him; but that
he should prepare himself to follow him in that way of death and suffering as
himself had trod before him. See Jo. 13.36. Now, John's stay till our Lords
coming being capable of several senses; viz. either our Lords last coming to
the general Judgment, in those times imagined not far off; or his coming in
that signal Judgment of his upon the Jewish Nation at the destruction or
Jerusalem, which St. John only outlived; or his coming, when he calls and
removes his Servants away from hence by natural death; ordinarily in
Scripture Language called his coming, see Mat. 24.42, 46, 50. Apoc. 2.24. --
3.5. this last, we may imagine from the Event, was our Lord's meaning: though
the Disciples, either hearing these words from our Lord, or related to them by
St. Peter, from hence gathered, that John, our Lords Favorite, should not dye,
but remain till his second coming, then commonly thought near at hand: to which
imagination of theirs, as also of others following, St. John's long life and
some miraculous deliverances, gave still more strength; who died not till sixty
seven years after this was spoken by our Lord, and remained alive almost thirty
years after the Destruction of Jerusalem.

This opinion St. John, now much aged, when he writ this his Gospel endeavored
to remove; telling them, our Lord had expressly said no such thing: but left our
Lords words any further unexpounded; as not seeming any way to decline or wave
his own Martyrdom, which doubtless he much thirsted for, and had in some manner
already undergone, and outlived it; Tertull de Praescript. Cap. 36.
being in Domitian's persecution of the Christians, sent by the Proconsul of
Asia, as a chief Heresiarch, to Rome; and there cast into a vessel of scalding
Oil to have taken away his life, but was miraculously preserved to make good
our Lords words, and so banished into Patmos: from whence returned, he writ his
Gospel; shortly after which our Lord came to call him away in a natural and
peaceable death, when above ninety years old.

chap 21. after he had finished his Gospel, Chap. 20. One Motive of which
Postscript perhaps was the rectifying a mistake in some of the Disciples
concerning our Lords Prophecy of his staying till he came) Our Lord suddenly
disappeared; leaving them in a longing expectation of his return to them, and a
more public manifestation of himself in Galilee at the time and place
preappointed.

together (this being supposed the Apparition St. Paul speaks of 1 Cor. 15.
when he says, he was seen of above five hundred Brethren at once) in a certain
Mountain of Galilee, imagined the same upon which he was transfigured; and
where Moses and Elias appeared to him, and which was by St. Peter called the
Holy Mount. This Mount is by many thought to be Mount Tabor, a most beautiful
Hill, exactly round, and ascensible only on one side, not so steep as the
others, and having a Plain for about half a mile Diameter at the top: which
hill our Lord, living so near it, situate about some three or four miles from
Nazareth, perhaps had sometimes frequented in his youth. But it seems rather to
be another Mountain nearer to Capernaum (the place of his ordinary Residence in
Galilee) where also a-nights he frequented Prayer; called his twelve Apostles;
delivered the Beatitudes; miraculously fed the Multitudes Mat. 15.29. and which
was more convenient for the assembling of his Converts; of which see what is
said before.. 251. P. 1.

And such a place our Lord seems to have chosen for the greater Eminency,
Solitude and Privacy thereof, free from Buildings, Highways, or Passengers;
he purposing no general manifestation of himself to the Jews, or to the World;
but only to some chosen Witnesses, that some contradiction might add the more
virtue to the Christian Faith. Here then were assembled, with many others, the
eleven Apostles with the Mother of our Lord, and doubtless the other Galilean
women, who carried the first message both from the Angel, and afterward from
our Lord himself to the Apostles, of his meeting them in this place. To whom
our Lord first showed himself at some distance from them; upon which they
presently fell down and adored him Mat. 28.17. but some of them, says the
Evangelist, (unless he intimates here the doubt, not that was then, but had bin
formerly) viz. not of the Eleven, but of the company, had some doubt, whether
it was he, i. e. at the first: yet which, by his nearer approach and discourse
with them, was presently after removed.

Our Lord then approaching told them; that the time of his Exinanition being
now finished, all Power (the exercise of which was suspended before, see Mat.
11.27. -- Jo. 3.35.) was given to him by his Father, in Heaven and in Earth:
and, upon this, he renewed his charge unto his Apostles; that they should go
forth, in his name, and by his authority, and proclaim him Lord of all: and
deliver his Laws and Commandments taught to them, not only to the Jews, but
all other Nations: that they should baptize Believers in the name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; declaring to them that such as believed and were
baptized should be saved, but the unbelieving damned: then further promising
them, That he, though corporally departing, yet in his Grace and Holy Spirit,
would remain with, and assist, them and their Successors to the end of the
world: that he also gave them Authority over all the Power of the Enemy of
mankind; and in his name to do all sorts of wonderful works: repeating here
again what he had formerly said to them in his first Apparition at Jerusalem;
which see before Sect. 127. P. 11.

Lastly, commanding them to bid an Adieu to their country, and return to
Jerusalem, in which place they were first to begin their work. Where they
should also, after a few days, reenjoy his presence, and take their last leave
of him; his so often-foretold Ascension into Heaven to his Celestial Father
being now at hand; and necessary, as for his own Glory, so for the further
promoting with him the business of their's, and the world's, salvation.

Cor. 15.7.) afterward our Lord appeared singly to St. James (i. e. our Lord's
Brother, shortly after made Bishop of Jerusalem) perhaps out of a singular
honor to him, or also for negotiating something with him relating to his
office; whose constant residence was to be at Jerusalem, and who was a Person
of special Eminency among the Apostles: as appears, Gal. 1.19. -- 2.9. and Acts
15.13, 19. But the word (...), used by the Apostle, perhaps may not signify
afterward in that Text (as denoting a Posteriority of time to the appearance in
Galilee,) But only besides, as it is used by him, 1 Cor. 12.28. and the
apparition to James be rather in some part of the day of his Resurrection (see
St. Jerome de viris Illust. in Jacobo); between whom, as being a Domestic in
the same family, and our Lord, passed a more intimate familiarity; and from his
appearance to James we may also much more presume of his frequent particular
apparitions to the Blessed Virgin his Mother, though, none mentioned.

preparing of his Apostles for their future employment of propagating the
Gospel and advancing the Kingdom of Christ in men's hearts over all the world. A
number frequently observed in Scripture for the accomplishing of any great
work, made up of six (the number of the days God spent in creating the world)
seven times multiplied: (as the number of 7. is a number of perfection and
rest, after the finishing such a work, answering to the 7th day, the Sabbath)
only in 42. the last two are usually cut off to make it a round number. So,
Genesis 7.4. in the flood the rain descended for forty days; and, after the
abating of it, Noah stayed forty days; and opened the window of the Ark Genesis
8.6. For thrice forty years God had patience with the old world before he
destroyed it with the flood. Ten times forty years the children of Israel were
to sojourn in Egypt. Forty two Generations were to pass between the coming of
the Messiah and the promise made to Abraham thereof: of which forty two
generations, two sevens were to run out before the Kingdom of David; and two
sevens again in this Kingdom before the captivity: and two sevens till the
coming of Christ. See Mat. 1.17. Acts 7.23. Moses, when forty years old,
visited his Brethren, and would have undertaken their protection; and ibid.
verse. 30. after forty years more was sent by God to them for this purpose.
Again, forty days he stayed in the Mount for receiving the Law: and for this
time was continued his fast; as also that of Elias, and of our Lord. During
forty days were the persons deputed to view the land of Canaan Numb. 13.25.
and during forty years were the children of Israel appointed to do penance, and
bear their Iniquity for the Evil account given of it, and murmuring concerning
it. Numb. 14.33, 34. Forty days were allowed to the Ninevites for a time of
Repentance, before their City was to be destroyed. Forty days, after the
woman's bearing of a Male child, and twice forty days after a Female, were to
be accomplished before their coming into, or presenting their Son in, the
Sanctuary. In the Judges we find, whether rest, or troubles, given to the land
of Israel ordinarily for the space of forty years. The Prophet Ezekiel Ezekiel.
4.5, 6. is appointed to do penance by lying on his side for forty days, for so
many years of God's patient suffering the iniquities of Judah: and for so many
years again God forbear the wickedness of the Jewish Nation after their
crucifying our Lord, and persecuting Christianity, until the destruction of
Jerusalem. And forty two Months, i. e, seven sixes of Months is the time
prescribed for the duration of Antichrist, and the last great affliction of
Gods Church. This, to show, that all Gods works are pondered before hand, and
contrived in a certain number, weight, and measure; and the precedent works
exact patterns of the succeeding; and nothing here casually happening; especially
the numbers of six and seven have bin very mystical and Sacred, ever since the
work of the creation in six, and rest on the seventh day.

Eleven Apostles and some other Disciples also, and the Galilean women with the
Blessed Mother of our Lord, and his Brethren, were now returned to Jerusalem;
and there remained together, probably, in the place where our Lord had
celebrated his last Supper; and which our Lord had first made choice of (in the
house of some wealthier Disciple, when he sent Peter and John to provide the
Paschal Feast) for the more commodious transacting of all these affairs. And
there our Lord the last time showed himself unto them; and, having discoursed
several things concerning the Kingdom of God, and their publishing and
proclaiming to all Nations the universal power and Glory that was now given by
God to him, he promised, before their going abroad in his service, to endue
them also, speedily after his Ascending, with power from on high, by sending
upon them the promise of his Father he had so often told them of: which you may
see promised of old in Joel 2.28. (cited for it by St. Peter Acts 2.17.) --
Zach. 12.10. -- Ezec. 36.26. Telling them that John baptized only with water;
but that they, not many days thence, should be baptized with the fire, see
Mat. 3.11. or flame of the Holy Ghost: for so in the likeness of a flame at
Pentecost it descended, and was poured forth upon them; and so charging them
that they should remove no more from Jerusalem till this thing was accomplished.

Act. 1.3. as also before in Galilee, that all power was given to him in Heaven
and Earth, of their receiving power also from on high, and a charge not to
depart as yet from the Royal City, joined perhaps with what he had formerly
said unto them of their sitting on twelve Thrones, etc; things not then
understood so spiritually by them as they ought, but they, imagining some
temporal dominion of the Jews now to be restored in our Lord to the race of
David, over all other Nations, like to that of Solomon (the quite contrary to
which followed shortly after* namely, their, utter ruin): A thing that ran in
the mind of these two Disciples also that, went to Emaus; Luk, 24.21.)
presently asked our Lord, whether now the time was come of his restoring the
Kingdom to Israel? This they inquired, notwithstanding our Lord had so often
told them the contrary, and informed them, that his Kingdom was not of this
world; and that, as it had treated him their Master, so should it them, the
servants; that they should be persecuted, banished, killed, for his name sake,
and for the Gospel preached by them. Our Lord therefore, not too much to
contristate them, and knowing them not well prepared as yet for the
communicating of such secrets, in which by the Descent of the Holy Spirit, he
more fully instructed them afterward; and at how great a distance his Kingdom
was in such a sense as they meant it, when the Twelve were to sit upon twelve
thrones, did with great prudence and as much meekness and supporting of their
infirmities, return them only this Answer: That it was not for them to know the
times or the seasons, which his Father had put in his own power; much what so
as he had answered to the Mother of James and John, concerning who should sit
at his right hand, -- Dabitur illis, quibus paratum est a Patre meo Mat. 20.23.
and to Peter, inquisitive concerning John, -- Si eum volo manner etc, quid ad
te? [And indeed there are many futurities with which it is better that our
human weakness be not preacquainted: as perhaps fit, here, that hope deferred
might not too much contristate them, for the Disciples as yet to be ignorant of
such a long revolution of many ages as was to be before the day of Doom; and
our Lords return to take possession of the kingdom; or before that prosperous
and flourishing condition of his Church, which was at last to precede his
Kingdom. Which coming of his in Glory, many, as appears by St. Paul 2 These.
2.1, 2. 2 Pet. 3.4, 9. (perhaps by understanding Mat. 24.34. -- and 1 These.
4.17.) expected even in the Apostles days; and the great terror in those, that
heard St. Peter's first Sermon in the Acts, shows, that they then apprehended it
not far off]. But (says he) ye shall receive power after this Holy Ghost
promised is come upon you, and shall be witnesses unto me, and preach this my
kingdom boldly to all the Nations of the world.

Caenaculum at Jerusalem, the time of his return to his Father being fully
come, he led them first out of the City, through the plain, about a mile in
breadth, as far as Bethany, that was at the foot of the Mount of Olives; his
Friends of that place making also part of his Train, and so ascended to the top
of the Mount of Olives. But we may imagine this their procession out of the
city was by his miraculous power in such a manner ordered, as that neither
himself was seen by others, save them, at least in a known shape, nor so great
a company, perhaps by dividing themselves, much noted.

Arrived at the top of the Hill, he lift up his hands (which showed in the
midst of them the dear marks of his suffering for them,) toward heaven (from
whence all Blessing comes, and therefore this an usual gesture in all
Invocation and Prayer) and gave them his Benediction, after his redemption of
man, as God the Father also did after his Creation. Genesis 1.28. And, as Aaron,
the former legal High Priest, according to the Divine command Numb. 6.23. is
said Levit. 9.22. to have lift up his hands toward the people, and blessed
them, before his going into the Sanctuary; when also the fire, descending
afterward from the Lord upon the Sacrifice, typified the Descent of the Holy
Ghost. And so, says the Evangelist, he was parted from them, and ascended
slowly and by degrees, so as they might keep their eyes upon him, and discern
his Motion, till at some height a Cloud received him out of their sight, to put
an End to their further gazing after him. Thus our Lord, who was clothed with
so much Splendour and glory at his Transfiguration, and who had Moses and Elias
waiting upon him, and a bright Cloud of rays compassing himself and his
Disciples, and who, Acts 22.6.
when he was afterward seen by St. Paul Acts 22.6, 11. appeared in such a
glory at Noonday transcending that of the Sun, that the light thereof struck
him blind; yet now, entering upon the real possession of this glory, admitted no
alteration at all in his external appearance, or in any visible attendance of
Angels or Saints, or fiery charet and horses to conduct him, as Elias, or
Cloud, till elevated to some considerable distance: perhaps to remove from his
Disciples and the world, to whom they were to testify it, any scruple of the
reality of this Ascent, without having their eyes dazzled with light, or that
such elevation might seem to have bin performed by the assistance of others,
and not by his own power and virtue; as also to detain them for the present
rather in the meditation of his Passion, than of his Glory; which was not fully
to be revealed to Mortals till his return.

Jo. 17.4, 5? Concerning which he had a little before his Passion besought his
Father; that, now he had with all fidelity glorified him on Earth, and finished
the work here on Earth He had appointed him to do, He would glorify him, i.e.
his Humanity also, in which he had finished it, though extremely difficult to
flesh and blood, with that Glory which in his Divinity he also always had had
with him before the world was; which Petition was also then ratifyed by God the
Father with a voice from Heaven Jo. 12.8. And now was the time come of
accomplishing it; and the time of his taking possession of those Joys, which
being set before him (says the Apostle Heb. 12.2.) be endured the Cross, and
despised the shame, and is now set down of the right hand of the Throne of God.

and cum voce tubae, as the Psalmist; with which Humanity the Earth only had
hitherto bin beatified, (bona si sua nosset) and the Father had received all
his praise, and worship, and service from it at a great distance from the place
of his residence. And, if (as the Apostle Heb. 1.) when his Son came into this
lower world, and appeared in all the infirmities of our flesh, God said, let
all the Angels worship him; much more did he now command it at this his Exit,
after so many sufferings passed through, and victories obtained, and exact
obedience in all things performed, and the most severe prophecies fulfilled!
How overjoyed must those Citizens above be, and with them all the Spirits of
the Patriarchs and Prophets, and the Church of the firstborn, and of just men
consummated, that, in those Celestial habitations, now they should for ever
possess their dear Lord, the Author of all their happiness, and behold for ever
his infinite Majesty and beauty! And amongst these especially those predignified
Souls, who ever they were; that were selected by him, and revested with the
robes of their glorified Bodies, to accompany and wait upon him; as the
first fruits of the Resurrection, and of his conquess over death. With what Joy
and Triumph (to exprese it in those ravishments, with which the Apostle speaks
of him) was this only Son, and the brightness of Gods glory; and express [and
visible] Image of the Person of the Invisible God, Heb. 1.3. compared with Col.
1.15. the first born of every Creature, and the firstborn again (...) the
Dead, that in an things he might have the preeminency who was appointed by God
Heir of all things, and by whom all things were created, that are in Heaven and
in Earth, visible and invisible; whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, be
Principalities, or Powers, [viz. all the Angels, as well as men*] All things
created by him and for him, and by the word of whose Power all things
[afterward also do still] consist and are upheld, Col. 1.17, compared Heb. 1.3.
after he had by himself purged our sins, and made peace through the blood of
his Cross Col. 1.20. Heb. 1.30. and God had by him reconciled all things unto
himself, and by him collected all things in one; by him, whether things in
Heaven, or things on Earth Col. 1.20. [those persons already received into
glory there, and those yet in their warfare here; here, both of the Jew and the
Gentile, all united in him the Head of all. Ephesians. 1.10, 22. With what Joy and
Triumph, I say, was this most Sacred person, Gods only Son, bearing in thither
his, our, humanity; this day first received into his Arms, and welcomed by God
the Father! With what solemnity did this Eternal High Priest, when he had first
through the Eternal Spirit offered himself without fault to God ( Heb. 9.14.)
Enter into the Heavenly Sanctuary, the Gates there of set open, whereof the
Earthly was a Pattern, there to appear in the presence of God his Father for us
his Brethren; and with what solemnity did he with the precious blood of his
Sacrifice, dedicate and purify the heavenly things themselves ( Heb. 9.23.) and
so set himself down on the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty in these
Heavens, far above all Principalities, and Power, and Might, and Dominion, and
every name that is named not only in this world, but in that also which is to
come! made Head over all things to his Church; and expecting there till his
Enemies [wicked men and unbelievers, Antichrist, Satan, Death] be made his
Footstool ( Ephesians. 1.21.23. etc. Heb. 10.12.12.9.)

Luke 24.52. with their eyes fixed upon him as he ascended: when two men
appeared standing by them in glorious and shining Vestments; two of our Lords
Train, whom he left behind (as also he had done before at his Resurrection Luke
24.5. John 20.12.) to entertain them with a new Message; and divert them from
this partly joyful, partly sorrowful sight, as they thought of our Lords
honor, or of their own loss; who asked them why they looked so intently and
wishfully after him, for that they should not be deprived for ever of this
their Lord; but (as he had often told them) the same Jesus, that was now thus
taken up from them into Heaven, should thence descend again in the same manner
as he ascended: thus the Angels briefly, for their present consolation. But
this his second appearance and return to this world is described elsewhere much
more particularly, and that it shall be in the greatest Majesty and glory: cum
nubibus, as this his ascent, but with a shout, and the voice of the Archangel,
and sound of Trumpet; and his brightness shining from the East unto the West;
with all his mighty Angels attending on him, and he bringing all the Saints
that were in foretimes deceased with him, and those then living also meeting
him in the Air; and that he then sitting on the Throne of his Majesty, all the
Nations of the Earth, that are then or ever were, shall appear before him; and
that then in flaming fire he shall take revenge on all those, who have not
obeyed him, who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from his
presence, and from the glory of his power; and them also that he shall be
glorified in [and together with] all his Saints; whom, after having made their
peace with his Father; and by this preascent prepared a place for them, at this
his second coming (according to his promise Jo. 14.3.) he will receive unto
himself, that where he is there may they be also, and remain with him Partakers
of his glory for ever. For thus the Scriptures have described his coming again,
see Mat. 24.27, 30, 31. -- 25.31. -- 2 These. 1.8, 9, 10. -- 1 These. 4.16. etc:
of which majes and coming of his to judgment he charitably had told the High
Priest and his other Judges; and forewarned them of what would follow when he
was arraigned before, and so cruelly treated by, them, Mat. 26.6.4. --
Hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of Power, and
coming in the Clouds of Heaven.

shall then behold him, whom they pierced. Apoc. 1.7, Again, than this place
which is the very Navel or middle of the great Continent of the inhabited
world? This place is conjectured to be spoken of in the last chapter of Joel;
where it is said, that the Lord will come down with his mighty ones verse 11.
answerable to Zachar. 14.5. and will gather all Nations, and bring them down
into the Valley of Jehosaphat verse 2. and there he will fit to judge all the
Heathen round about. This Valley between Jerusalem and Mount Olivet (which was
the common Caemitery of the Hierosolimites, and where also was Gehenna and
Topheth) is said to be called by this name, because there was erected a
Triumphal Arch and Pyramid after Jehosaphats wonderful victory over the
Ammonites etc. but perhaps called also by this name here in the Prophet,
because Jehosaphat signifies Judicium Domini, named also here the Valley of
Concision or Decision verse 14. and seeming to allude to the valley of Berachah
or Benediction 2 Chronicles. 20.26. where Jehosaphat and the People assembled to
give thanks to God for his miraculous victory, without fights, over all the
Nations round about. But God's being said also to roar of Sion, verse 16. shows
this valley to be near to it. Such a Descent of our Lord also is spoken of in
the last chapter of Zechariah; where, verse 3.4.5. it is said, the Lord shall
come and all his Saints [i. e. holy Angels] with him; and shall fight against
the Nations; and that his feet shall stand in that day upon the Mount of
Olives, which is before Jerusalem, and before the foresaid Valley of Jehosaphat
on the East. Which Mountain, it is said, shall be cleft with a terrible
Earthquake compared to that in the time of Uzziah, to make then through it as it
were a plain and level way for the concourse of the multitudes thither. See
Zachar. 14.4, 5. -- Joel 3.11, 12, 14. which chapters in Zachary and Joel,
though they do seem primarily to relate to Apoc. 19.11. etc. compared with
Apoc. 16.14, 16. and -- 14.16, 19. our Lord's coming to judgment upon the
Beast, and false Prophet, and their numerous Army, which was followed with a
Thousand years reign of the Saints, or prosperous and flourishing condition of
the Church, see Joel 3.17, 18, 20, 21. -- Zach. 14.9, 10, 11. etc. yet may they
have a second completion in the coming of our Lord to the Judgment also of Gog
and Magog, Apoc. 20.9. agreeable to Ezechiel chap. 39. and a third in the final
Judgment of the whole world.

Acts 1.12. Joy, as well for his incomparable Glory conferred by God the Father
on this his only Son, who was crucified through weakness 2. Cor. 13.4. but was
now exalted by the Power of God; as also for his promised Return to take them
for ever unto himself; Jo. 14.3. Perhaps apprehending also this his return much
more speedy than indeed it was to be. So, leaving the Mount, they return to
Jerusalem; where first having chosen by lot another Apostle to complete the
number of twelve Witnesses, the Apostles, with the Mother of our Lord, and the
women that accompanied her, and our Lord's Brethren, and many others (for their
number was about one hundred and twenty see Acts 1.13, 14, 15.) continued with
one accord in the large upper room, mentioned before, in prayer and
supplication till Pentecost, the time appointed and expected, for the Descent
of the Holy Ghost upon them; which our Lord promised to procure of his Father
upon his arrival into his presence; where now he is our Precursor, Jo. 15, 13.
Heb. 6, 20. 1 J^. 2 2. Romans 8, 33.
our Eternal High Priest, our Advocate and Intercessor: and where may he reign
in Glory at Gods right hand, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, till all his
Enemies be made his Footstool. Amen. Tu autem Domine Jesu, Qui seeds ad
dexteram Dei Patris, miserere Nobis.

FINIS.
SUPPLENDA.

Page 122. line 32. not above twenty miles. page 125. lin. 15. see Part. II.
Sect. 136. page 214 lin. 14. see below Sect. 9.


