AMICUS NATURAE.
AN ADVERTISEMENT Of the Virtues of Woodward's Cordial Pills, AND ELIXIR
SALUTIS.
Prepared and fitted for the Cure of most Diseases curable, incident to the
Bodies of Men, Women and Children: whose Operations are so wonderful and
effectual, that they have not their equal, in Rooting out and Curing Chronical
and the most difficult Distempers; for which these Medicines may be termed
Universal, being suited to all Ages, Humors, Sexes and Constitutions, and may
be with safety exhibited to all Persons where Purgation is required. Never thus
published before.

Whereunto are added Directions how to take them.

By DANIEL WOODWARD, Student in Physic and Astrology, at the Sign of the Globe
in Arundel-Street by St. Clement's Church in the Strand, London.
Omnipotentiam suam and infinitum Amorem
Humano generi Creatio Dei narrat.

NOW seeing the Scurvy is so common a Disease in these Northern Parts, (that
his Countrymen may the better know when they are afflicted with that
Distemper) he thought it requisite in this place to unfold the usual Symptoms
attending that Protaean Malady. It Is the Scurvy undoubtedly causes so many to
linger out their Days so deplorably; few in England but have a smatch thereof,
and in process of time it brings many incurable Diseases, at the best it is hard
to be cured, because the Melancholy Humor (through Obstructions or Weakness of
the Spleen) is so far predominant and malignant: Therefore it highly concerns
those People, that are afflicted with that terrible Distemper, to use means in
time, especially if they discover any of the following Symptoms about them,
viz. Pains in the Head, Nose, Shoulders, Legs, Bones, with other Pains all over
the Body, Dullness and Heaviness, reddish or bluish Spots in the Skin, Weakness
in the Back and Loins, ill Stomach, loss of Appetite, Looseness and Soreness of
the Teeth, Throat, Mouth and Gums, Hoarsness, stinking Breath, Vomiting,
Toothache, Giddiness in the Head, Risings, Vapors, Cloggings, Stuffings,
Gnawings, or Illness at Stomach, faint Sweat, Spittings, Costiveness, Loss of
Complexion, Pains in the Bladder, bad Sleep, frightful Dreams, Itching and
Pricking in the Blood, Knots in the Flesh, and the like. Certainly this
insinuating Man-destroyer appears with and in the shape of most Diseases, as
has been evident to those Physicians, that have scrutiniz'd into its various
Forms; and when grown to a height, many suppose it to be a more scandalous
Disease. Whoever languishes under any of the preceding Symptoms, may conclude
himself infected with that Disease: No Man has all the Symptoms at once, it is
ill enough to have some. One Box of his Cordial Pills at the beginning of this,
or most infirmities, under God, will be a means to save many a Pound; besides
they may prevent the Sick of being tortured with violent Vomits, dangerous
Purges, salivating with Mercury, Blisters, Issues, Cuppings, excessive
Blooding, and the like: For really the exact preserving of Health consists not
in such practice; but by such a Medicine that is able by its purity to pacify
the enraged Parts of Man: Ergo, kind Countrymen, embrace these Pills as
Jewels, they will be found of more worth than ten thousand Carduus-Possets.
Several Gentlemen in London buy of these Pills, purposely to give their
Neighbors that are in want, and he hopes those in the Country are no less
charitable. But, as his Room is little, he cannot expatiate; yet let him speak
of their Medicinal Properties, and so draw to a Conclusion, which are many and
excellent, useful and precious.

1. His Cordial Pills are known to be as excellent a Medicine as any ever yet
published, to assist and fortify decaying Nature: for no destructive matter can
lurk in the Body of Man, but these Pills will soon drive it out, and in its
place render the Body healthful, having been effectual in curing the Dropsy,
Griping in the Guts, extreme Pains of the Gout, Green Sickness, bad Digestions,
Exulceration of the Kidneys, all manner of Surfeits, Pestilence, Headaches,
Pimples or Flushings in the Face, sore Eyes, Convulsion-fits, Pain,
Inflammation and Obstructions of the Spleen, Obstructions of the Liver, Fevers,
Leprosy, French Pox, Running of the Reins, Trembling, Palpitation of the Heart,
difficulty of breathing, Stoppage of the Stomach, Coughs, Consumption, Stone
and Gravel in the Kidneys, Stone in the Bladder, Agues, Pain in the Stomach,
all Obstructions whatsoever, resist all Fullness and Infection in the Act of
Generation, mundifie and cleanse both Blood and Skin, restore and increase
Beauty, make Old Age comely, and the Complexions of all Persons cheerful and
sanguine. They are also excellent for Pains and Weakness in the Limbs,
cleansing the Body after the Measles and Small Pox, or other Fits of Sickness,
carrying off the Sottishness of excessive Drinkers; and for the SCVRVY they are
the best of Pills; nay, they are an Antidote against any Infectious Disease.
Scarce a Malady from Head to Foot, but these Pills (with God's permission) will
be found very assisting: They have caused the Deaf to hear, the Blind to see,
and those that have been like Criples in their Limbs, to walk. Besides, the
Pills will not corrupt (if you keep them from Moisture) tho kept an hundred
Years, and that no Drug-Medicine will do: Wherefore they are serviceable for
those that sail to the East or West Indies; for some that go such long Voyages
miserably perish for want of so universal a Helper. These Pills are the
cheapest, considering their goodness, that ever Man used, standing Sentinel in
the Body, not admitting Nature's Enemy to enter: For as they are extracted from
the best of Minerals, they cannot be but an excellent Medicine. Now since these
Pills are so beneficial for those that go to Sea, the like for those that live
in the Country remote from able Physicians: Therefore he advises such not to be
wanting of some of these Pills in their Houses, being in a manner Physic upon
all Occasions, and for that reason (God willing) he will be well furnished
therewith. Price of the biggest Box half a Crown, and of the least Box Eighteen
Pence; Sealed with his Coat of Arms.

Directions how to take them. They are so highly prepared you may safely
administer them to Young or Old, Strong or Weak. But you must be sure to use
discretion in the Dose, and take as the Body can bear, or Disease require, then
you shall not (God willing) fail of your desire. They may be taken any Season
of the Year, but best at Spring and Fall, upon necessity any time of the day or
night, as in Surfeits, two hours before the Fit of an Ague, and the like. But
Men and Women afflicted with Chronical Distempers, or Diseases of long standing
usually take them thus; that is, if your Body be costive, strong, or stubborn,
let the first Dose be four Pills, take them in the Morning fasting, and three
or four hours after (unless the Pills work sooner) drink a draught or two of
warm Posset Drink, for that is best; indeed a draught or two of any other warm
Liquor will serve, tho but small Beer; and at Noon, or when the Pills have done
working, eat what you most desire, so it be not too hard of Digestion. But if
your Body be weak or laxative, take not above two or three Pills at the first,
you may increase or diminish the number as occasion requires, and in that you will
be a Physician to your self. Therefore (till you know what number of Pills
agree best with your Body) remember to begin with the least Dose (which, if
your Body be strong and costive, is 4 Pills, if weak or laxative, but two or
three) you had better take ten times too little, than once too much; if the
first Dose does not work to your Mind, increase it afterward by taking 5, 6,
or 7 Pills the next time; but in the taking do not covet too many Stools or
Vomits, for that offers Violence to Nature, and does the Body much Injury, by
sweeping away both good and bad together. Five or six motions in a day are
sufficient, and every second, third, or fourth day is often enough to take
them; it is best to use some Intermission; old Diseases cannot be removed on a
sudden. Yet he has known these Pills have removed very rebellious Diseases in a
short time: Three Doses sometimes will do as much good as ten of others. The
Pills are very sweet and pleasant to take, and may be swallowed whole, or held,
or chewed in your Mouth with Sugar till they dissolve, after which, wash your
Mouth with 2 or 3 Spoonfuls of Drink, or bruise the Pill and infuse it into 2
or 3 Spoonfuls of Sack or White Wind till its dissolved, and then drink it; or
mix the bruised Pills with some Codling, Honey, or roasted Apple, and take it
that way. But the Pills will work most when they are dissolved, and strengthen
most when they are not dissolved.

For Children the usual Dose is one Pill, one and a half, or two Pills at most;
for weak or young Children, half, or a quarter of one, or less, will be
sufficient. Dissolve what you give to your weak or young Children in a little
Sack or Breast-milk. Follow these Directions and you need not fear
Miscarriages; for thousands have found benefit, but no Person harm; withal keep
your self warm till you know the nature of their Operation, and you will find them
the best and safest Pills ever thus published to the World.

But in truth the Pills are so various in their Operation, he cannot exactly
promise their manner of working, for they operate as Nature pleases, sometimes
by Vomit, sometimes by Stool, and sometimes both ways at once, but constantly
without Violence; nay he assures you they have conquered many Diseases, and
have never wrought to outward appearance, even as tho they were Natures Medium
to equalize her Extremes, acting more like Rational than Natural Agents:
Therefore whenever you take of these Pills, and they operate neither by Stool
nor Vomit, they certainly work by expelling Wind, Water, or by Sweat; and if
there be cause in due time by Stool or Vomit, for under God, in those Bodies
where their Operation is not so visible, yet it will not be over in two or
three days after, for which he advises the Continuation of the Pills, with
God's leave they will soon overcome your Malady, being good for any Disease
curable by Physic, and so safe, that Women with Child often take them, for
they strengthen both Mother and Infant.

II. His Elixir Salutis has been experienced many Years an excellent,
inoffensive, successful Cordial Drink, and so analogous to the Human Frame,
that it effects all its Operations even as Nature is disposed for Action. And
to oblige those Persons that cannot conveniently take Pills, he publishes this
his inestimable Elixir. Possibly some Persons may approve of this far beyond
the Pills, and on other Persons Bodies the Elixir may work as great Effects,
and that in most Distempers without the least hinderance of Business, either at
home or abroad, if the Person that takes thereof is able to walk or follow any
Employ; for the more you exercise and stir your Body, the better this Elixir
Salutis, or Quintessence of Life, performs its Office, gently evacuating
whatsoever offends the noble Parts. This great Preserver has been administered
to Men, Women, and Children, and proved it self wonderfully successful in the
Cure of the following Distempers; Namely, the Cholick, Griping in the Guts,
Shortness of Breath, Green Sickness, Ptisick, Coughs, Surfeits, Consumptions,
Agues, Exulceration of the Kidneys, Gout, Stone in the Bladder, Scurvy,
Jaundies, Stone and Gravel in the Kidneys, Dropsy, bad Digestions, Wheesings,
Fits of the Mother, and Vapors from the Spleen, Worms, Rickets, King's Evil,
etc. Likewise this Cordial-Drink revives Drooping, Melancholy Spirits, removes
Pains from the Heart and Stomach, Wind and Crudities, causes a good Appetite,
opens Obstructions of both Liver and Spl^en, clears the Passage between the
Head and Heart, not admitting any noxious Humors to offend those noble Parts,
helps hot Rheums in the Eyes, burning Heat of the Feet and Palms of the Hands.
It Is also excellent to cleanse the Body after the Measles or Small Pox, or
other Sickness, and after the drinking of the Waters, for this Elixir leaves
the Body in a perfect healthful settled Condition. Besides, it is exceeding
beneficial for wet Nurses, because it cleanses their Blood, and makes their
Milk wholesome and nourishing; and a most salutiferous Medicament for Women in
general, powerfully opening the Obstructions of the Womb, and helping them to
the benefit of Nature (whether the Obstructions proceed from catching of Cold
or otherwise) rendering Virgins their Maiden Blush, sweet Breath, strong, lusty
Body, together with a delicate Complexion. It also exalts the Procreative
Virtue, restores Radical Moisture, the Magazine of Life; cleanses and
strengthens the Spermatick Vessels in both Sexes, preparing the Body for
Conception. In short, as his Cordial-Pills, so his Elixir may be given to all
Persons as a universal Remedy against many Diseases and Distempers incident to
Mankind. It Is often taken by Women with Child (two Months after Conception) to
carry off Distempers of the Mother, which causes the Child to thrive the
better. 'Twill retain its full Virtues several Years, sealed up in half Pint
Bottles; the Price of each Bottle is half a Crown.

General Directions how to take it. No Man living excruciated with either
Stone, Dropsy, Gout, Cholick, Ptysick, or any Disease or Distemper of long
standing (which by the tract of time is seated, and as it were riveted in the
Body) can rationally expect immediate Cure, or the recovery of Health on a
sudden (whether by this Elixir, or the Pills, or indeed, by any means
prescribed by the most learned Physicians under Heaven.) Possibly one Bottle
may chance to answer your Expectation, if not, pray take three or four before
you desist, by which time without doubt (under God) if you have not a real
Cure, you will find much Benefit, provided you avoid Melancholy, and keep a good
moderate Diet: for as Diseases gradually come on, so gradually Nature must be
restored to her Power and Pristine Regularity again. Rome was not built in a
day. Therefore when you intend to use this Cordial-Drink, have a due regard to
your Age, Strength, and Condition of Body, and earnestly desire the Almighty's
Blessing on your Endeavor. If your Body be costive, strong, and lusty, let the
first Dose at Night going to Bed, be three Spoonfuls, and let the like Dose be
taken in the Morning fasting: But if your Body be laxative, begin with one
Spoonful at Night, and another in the Morning fasting, as before; after which,
if there be occasion, increase the Dose till it comes to three Spoonfuls, which
usually is the highest Dose, unless your Body be very strong. Withal, this
Elixir is so innocent in its Operation, that it may be safely taken at any time
and season of the Year, and if your Strength permits, he desires you to
exercise your Body; the more you stir, the better this Physic operates on the
Distemper. In some Persons Bodies 'twill operate soon, but in other Persons
Bodies it may be 6, 8, or 12 hours before it begins to work, and when it does
work, in most Distempers it hinders no business (keeping your self warm) either
at home or abroad, only an hour after the Morning's Dose, take a mess of Broth,
or something warm, and if it gives you 2 or 3 Stools in a day, it is enough; too
many Stools injures the Body, because it offers Violence to Nature. If you love
your Health, take a Bottle or two every Spring and Fall; for this Elixir does
not only cure Diseases, but also fortifies the Body against them, and helps the
Blood in its Circulation.

Directions how to give it to Children. To a Child of a Month old, give about a
quarter of a Spoonful mixed with double its quantity of small Ale; of half a
year old, near half a Spoonful with twice as much small Ale; of a year old, one
Spoonful mixed with a Spoonful of small Ale; of four years old, one Spoonful
and better alone; of 7 years old, one Spoonful and half, or two Spoonfuls; of
12 years, two Spoonfuls, or two Spoonfuls and half, and be sure not to repeat
the Dose oftener than once a day, except it be in the Gripes, for which you may
give it twice or thrice in a day, if there be occasion, but let Discretion be
your Guide.

Some strong bodied Persons have taken his Cordial-Pills with his Elixir, viz.
The Pills one day, and rested the day following, then the Elixir two days,
omitting the third; then the Pills again, rested the next day; then the Elixir
two days, omitting the third, and so on as occasion required, by which means
they were the surer cured of their Maladies.

III. His Unguent for the Worms, which destroys all sorts of them in the Bodies
of Men, Women and Children. It Is the Opinion of Physicians, that those Vermin
shorten more Peoples Lives, than the Sword or Plague; for they cause many
Diseases, as the Vertigo, Megrim, Falling Sickness, Consumption, Rickets,
Convulsion-fits, Stranguries, etc. Many are afflicted with the Worms, and yet
not know it; some are tormented with them from the Cradle to the Grave.
However, those that are afflicted may know it by some of the following
Symptoms, viz. a stinking or sowrish Breath, the Mouth fuller of Spittle* and
Water than usual, vomiting, or a motion thereunto, Dryness of the Lips and
Tongue, very thirsty, loathing of Meat, starting and trembling in sleep,
itching of the Nose, Pains, Stoppage, or gnawing in the Stomach and Bowels,
Gripings in the Guts, shortness of Breath, dry Cough, Looseness, the Belly
swelled like one in a Dropsy, Heat, itching and smarting in the Fundament,
thick white Urine, etc. Besides destroying of the Worms, the Ointment opens
Obstructions of the Stomach, causes a good Appetite, and strengthens the Brain,
and has been instrumental (sub Deo) to preserve thousands: Wherefore he
concludes that it is the only thing in the World for People that have Children,
to have of it always in readiness to defend them from those devouring
Creatures. You may have of it from one Shilling's worth to what quantity you
please.

Directions how to use it. Put the Ointment you have into a Pewter Saucer, and
let it be gently melted; which done, kneel before the Fire, and from the pit of
your Stomach to your Navel bathe in with your warm Hand as much of the melted
Ointment as your Stomach will take; then take a double Linen Cloth warm, and
spread it on your Stomach to keep the Ointment from your Shift, which Cloth you
may wear a Fortnight or three weeks before you leave it off. This method of
anointing you must follow three or four Mornings and Evenings together before
and after the Full and Change of the Moon, afterward you ought to cleanse your
Body of those Vermin which the Ointment has destroyed and brought to a Jelly,
(either with some of the Cordial Pills, or Elixir Salutis, or with what other
Cathartick Medicament you please) for by Purgation (after anointing) your Body
will be freed of those devouring Vermin. In like manner apply the Ointment to
Children, and to those that are not able to kneel before the Fire; but when you
apply it to those that are weak, you may do it with a Chafing Dish of Coals in
their Beds.

He could have inserted many difficult Cures performed by his Cordial-Pills and
Elixir Salutis, with the Names and Dwelling-places of those Persons the ^ures
were wrought upon, and also of the wonderful Effects of his Worm-Ointment, but
that he holds it needless, because their Operations have forced their kind
acceptance to the World, and will do the same for the future.

Dxa THe.
See his Almanac yearly published.

FINIS.

