Two Discourses CONCERNING the ADORATION OF OUR B. SAVIOR IN THE H. EUCHARIST.

The FIRST: ANIMADVERSIONS upon the Alterations of the RVBRICK in the
Communion-Service, in the Common Prayer Book of the CHURCH of ENGLAND.

The SECOND: The Catholics DEFENSE for their Adoration of our LORD, as
believed Really and Substantially present in the Holy Sacrament of the
EUCHARIST.

At OXFORD Printed, Anno 1687.

ANIMADVERSIONS UPON THE ALTERATIONS of the RUBRIC in the COMMVNION-SERVICE,
etc.
CONTENTS.
A Brief Narration of the Alterations made in the English Reformed Service of
the Eucharist by K. Edw. VI. and Qu. Elizabeth. 1, 2, 3. Three Observables
concerning K. Edward's Declaration.. 4, 5, 6. 1. Contrary to the first
Observable the Presence of our Lord's Natural Body and Blood in the Eucharist
maintained by Calvin, Beza, and English Divines.. 8, 9, 10, etc. to. 18. 2.
Contrary to the second Observable, the Reason given of our Lord's not being
present; namely, because a Body cannot be in two places at once, discussed.
Where; 1. Protestants are shown confessing the Presence of our Lord an
ineffable Mystery. 2. That any one seeming contradiction can no more be
effected by Divine Power, than another, or than many other the like may; and
therefore this, of the same Bodies being at the same time in several places,
cannot by these Writers be denied a possibility of being by the Divine power so
verified.. 21. 3. That these Writers must hold this seeming contradiction true,
or some other equivalent thereto, so long as holding a real substantial
Presence of the very Body of Christ to the worthy Communicant here on Earth,
contradistinct to any such other Real Presence as implies only a presence
thereof in its virtue, efficacy, benefits, spirit.. 23. The difference of
Schoolmen concerning the Mode of Presence in the Eucharist.. 24.
4. This Proposition, of a Bodies not being in several places at once, by the
more judicious Protestants formerly not allowed to regulate their Faith, but
only Divine Revelation.. 28.
3. Contrary to the third Observable, That no Adoration is intended, or due to
any Corporal Presence, shown. 1. That, all granting Kneeling and Adoration due
to God the Father and the Son; not likely, that the Clergy will deny, That were
there a Corporal Presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, then such Kneeling
and Adoration to be due.. 39. 2. Corporal Presence denied (that is with the
ordinary properties of a Body) yet if any other Presence (whatever name be
given it) as Real as one Corporal, be assigned from Divine Revelation,
Adoration, thus, no less due.. 40. 3. That the Church of England has
heretofore believed, and maintained such Presence, as they allowed, adorable..
41.
Some Replies that may be returned to this Discourse, considered. 1. That not
the Essence of the Body of our Lord is denied in the Eucharist, but its
corporal manner of Essence.. 48. This granted by all. 2. That, naturally,
Christ's Body cannot be at once in many places, though supernaturally it may; and
therefore is here denied to be in the Eucharist. 1. The truth of such Exception
is denied; since, if God can make the Essence, or Substance of a Body to be in
more places or ubi's than one at once; he can make all the properties or
qualities thereof to be so too.. 51. 2. Admitting this Exception for true, as
also the first, yet hence no foundation of denying Adoration due to Christ's
natural Body as being in the Eucharist: which being granted by these Replies to
be there, though not after a natural manner, can be no less, for this an object
of Adoration.. 52.
3. That, Adoration to Christ's Body as really present in the Eucharist is not
denied, but only to any corporal Presence there. 1. If so; the Adoration ought
to have been expressed how due, as well as a Presence denied.. 54.

Opposite Protestant Testimonies produced from the same Authors afford us no
relief: since to free them from contradicting, either these here cited for Real
Presence must stand; or, those alleged for Zuinglianism in opposition to the
general Tradition and Doctrine of the Fathers.. 55.

Concerning the RUBRIC of the English LITVRGY.
CHAP. I. A brief Narration of the Alterations made in the English Reformed
Service of the Eucharist.
King Edward's former Liturgy had been censured by many, especially foreign
Divines, as not sufficiently purged, and removed to a right distance from the
former errors, and superstitions of Popery, in the Fifth year of that King's
Reign it suffered a Review and a new Reformation; and then, amongst other
things, this following Declaration in the Administration of the Lord's Supper,
for the explaining of the Intention of the Church of England, enjoining
kneeling at the receiving of the Communion, was de novo inserted into it.

Whereas it is ordained in this Office of the Administration of the Lord's
Supper, that the Communicants should receive the same kneeling, (which Order is
well meant for a signification of our humble and grateful acknowledgment of the
benefits of Christ therein given to all worthy Receivers, and for the avoiding
of such profanation and disorder in the Holy Communion, as might otherwise
ensue,) yet, lest the same kneeling should by any persons, either out of
Ignorance and Infirmity, or out of Malice and Obstinacy, be misconstrued and
depraved; it is here declared, that no Adoration is intended or ought to be
done unto any Real and Essential Presence of Christ's natural Flesh and Blood.
For the Sacramental Bread and Wine remain still in their very natural
Substances, and therefore may not be adored, (for that were Idolatry to be
abhorred by all faithful Christians.) And the natural Body and Blood of our
Savior Christ are in Heaven, and not here; it being against the truth of
Christ's natural Body, to be at one time in more places than one.

There were also certain Articles of Religion composed under King Edward, about
the same time as the second Common Prayer Book was. In one of which (the
Article concerning the Lord's Supper) is found this explicatory Paragraph. --
For as much as the truth of Man's Nature requires, that the Body of one and
the self same Man cannot be at one time in diverse places, but must needs be in
one certain place; therefore the Body of Christ cannot be present at one time
in many and diverse places: and because, as Holy Scripture does teach, Christ
was taken up into Heaven, and there shall continue unto the end of the World; a
faithful Man ought not either to believe, or to confess, the Real and Bodily
Presence, as they term it, of Christ's Flesh and Blood in the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper.

But in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's Reign (who is observed by Dr. Heylin
Hist. of Q. Eliz. p. 124.
, and others, to have been a zealous Propugner of the Real Presence) upon a
second Review by her Divines of the same Common Prayer Book it was thought
meet, that this Declaration should be thrown out again, and so the
Common Prayer Books ever since have been cleared of it till the alterations
therein made after the King's return in A. D. 1661. at which time it was
reinserted.

The same Q. Elizabeth's Divines, in their Review of these Articles also, as
they cast the Declaration out of the Liturgy, so did they expunge this passage
likewise, being of the same temper as the Declaration, out of the Article;
which has been omitted ever since.

Edward's former Common Prayer Book uses these words, (as they have descended
from Antiquity) in delivering the Eucharist, [The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ
preserve thy Body and Soul to everlasting life,] the Composers of the second in
the fifth year of that King's Reign, suitable to their Declaration, which
denies any Real or Essential Presence of this Body in the Eucharist, thought
fit to remove this Form, and put instead thereof only these words, [ Take and
eat this (left without any substantive) in remembrance that Christ died for
thee, and feed on him in thy heart with Faith and Thanksgiving,] leaving out
these words also of the former Consecration-Prayer, [And with thy Holy Spirit
and Word vouchsafe to bless and sanctify these thy Gifts and Creatures of
Bread and Wine, that they may be unto us the Body and Blood of thy most dearly
beloved Son Jesus Christ.]

They omit also the Priest's touching or handling the Patin or Chalice in the
Prayer of Consecration, required in the former Book, done according to Bucer's
directions in his Censura p. 468. whereby seems to be avoided the acknowledging
of any Presence of Christ's Body and Blood with the Symbols: of which also
Bucer says Censura p. 476.
, Antichristianum est affirmare quidquam his elementis adesse Christi,
extrausum praebitionis and receptionis. For the same reason it seems to be,
that the Glory be to God on high, etc. and the Benedictus qui venit in nomine
Domini, after the Sursum corda, the one is transferred till after the
Communion; and the other omitted, differently from King Edward's first Form:
likewise whereas it is said in the former Liturgy in the Prayer of Humble
access, -- Grant us so to eat the Flesh of thy dear Son Jesus Christ, and to
drink his Blood in these holy mysteries; the 2d omits these words [ in these
holy mysteries.]

But the Divines of Qu. Elizabeth in their Review,. 3. n. 1.
as they nulled the Declaration in the Common Prayer Book, and purged the 28th
Article of the forementioned explication; so they thought fit to restore the
former ejected Form in the administering of the Sacrament. [ The Body of our
Lord, etc. preserve thy body and soul,] putting after it the later Form, -- [
Take and eat this in remembrance, etc. and feed on him in thy heart with Faith
and Thanksgiving.] But then, the new Liturgy prepared for Scotland, and
published A. D. 1637. rectifies and reduces many of the former things again to
the first mode; first restores those words in the Consecration [ with thy Holy
Spirit and Word vouchsafe to bless, etc. that They may be unto us the Body,
etc.] ordering (again) the Presbyter that officiates, to take the Patin and
Chalice in his hands; and then takes quite away the words added in King
Edward's second Form in the delivering of the Mysteries [ Take and eat this,
etc.] and instead thereof adds after the former words [ The Body of our Lord,
etc.] the People's Response [Amen,] according to the custom of Antiquity. (See
Dionys. Alexandr. apud Eusebius. Hist. 7. l. 8. c. -- Leo Sermon. 6. de jejunio 7mi
mensis. -- Augustine. ad Orosium quaest. 49.) spoken as a Confession of their
Faith, that they acknowledged that, which they received, to be Corpus Domini.
[Of all which Laudensium Autocatacrisis heavily complains; observing -- That in
the Consecration-Prayer are restored the words of the Mass, whereby God is
besought by his Omnipotent Spirit so to Sanctify the oblation of Bread and
Wine, that they may become to us Christ's Body and Blood. From which words
(says he) all Papists use to draw the truth of their Transubstantiation.
Wherefore the English Reformers [ i. e. the latter in King Edward's days]
scraped them out of their Books; but our Men put them fairly in. And good
reason have they so to do. For long ago they professed that, about the Presence
of Christ's Body and Blood in the Sacrament after Consecration, they are fully
agreed with Lutherans and Papists, except only about the formality and mode of
Presence, [here quoting Montague's Appeal, p. 289.]

Lastly; when the late Clergy A. D. 1661. being upon I know not what
inducements,. 3. n. 2.
solicited to receive the forementioned Declaration rejeded in Q. Elizabeth's
days, came to examine it, they judged meet not to publish it entire, as it ran
before, but these words [It is here declared, that no Adoration is intended or
ought to be done unto any Real and Essential Presence of Christ's natural Flesh
and Blood] they cancelled; and instead of them inserted these, [It is here
declared, that no Adoration is intended or ought to be done unto any Corporal
Presence of Christ's natural f^^sh and Blood,] as we find them in the present
Rubric.

Declaration about Adoration. In which are contained these three Observables.

1. That here the present Clergy do profess expressly, 1. Observe.
that the natural Body and Blood of our Savior Christ, are not in the blessed
Sacrament of the Eucharist.

2. Observe.
That it is against the truth of a Natural body, to be in more places than one
at one time; here seeming to found their Faith in this matter on the truth of
this position in Nature.

for a signification of our humble and grateful acknowledgment of the benefits
of Christ therein given to all worthy receivers, 3. Observe.
and for the avoiding of such profanation and disorder in the Holy Communion,
as might otherwise ensue, but that hereby no adoration is intended, or ought to
be done unto any corporal presence of Christ's natural flesh and blood; where
they either leave this undetermined, whether there be not another presence of
Christ's flesh and blood, as real and true as is the corporal to which an
adoration is at this time due: or else do determine as seems concludable from
their former Proposition, [viz. That the natural Body of Christ is not there]
that there is not any such real presence of the Body at all, and so no
adoration due in any such respect.

CHAP. II. Considerations on the first observable; The Natural Body and Blood
of our Lord not present in the Eucharist.
NOW to represent to you, as clearly as I can, the doubts and difficulties,
concerning all these three Observables in their order. As to the first of
these; the Learned Protestant Writers seem to me, at least in their most usual
expressions, to have heretofore delivered the contrary; viz. That the very
substance of Christ's Body, that his natural Body, that that very body that was
born of the B. Virgin, and crucified on the Cross, etc. is present, as in
Heaven, so here in this Holy Sacrament, either to the worthy Receiver, or to
the Symbols.

For which, First see Calvin, whose Doctrine amongst all the rest ( the Roman,
Lutheran, or Zuinglian) the Church of England seems rather to have embraced and
agreed with, especially since the beginning of the Reformation of Q. Elizabeth.
Thus therefore He, in 1 Cor. 11.24. [Take eat, this is my Body.] Neque enim
mortis tantum and resurrectionis suae beneficium nobis offert Christus, sed
corpus ipsum in quo passus est and resurrexit, [Corpus ipsum in quo passus est,
that is surely his natural Body.] -- Again. Instit. 4. l. 17. c. 11.. -- Facti
participes substantiae ejus, virtutem quoque ejus sentimus in bonorum omnium
commnnicatione. [Facti participes substantiae ejus, i. e. of his natural
substance, for no other humane substance he had, spiritual or corporal, than
that only, which was born of the B. Virgin, and that is his natural substance.]
-- and Ib.. 19. -- His absurditatibus sublatis, quicquid ad exprimendam veram
substantialemque Corporis ac sanguinis Domini Communicationem, quae sub sacris
coenae symbolis fidelibus exhibetur, facere potest, libenter recipio. -- Ibid..
16. -- Of the Lutherans he says: -- Si ita sensum suum explicarent, dum panis
porrigitur, annexam esse exhibitionem corporis, quia inseparabilis est a signo
suo veritas, non valde pugnarem.

And, to strengthen further this assertion of Calvin, may be added the
Confession of Beza, and others of the same sect, related by Hospinian, hist.
Sacram. part altera, p. 251. -- Fatemur in Coena Domini non modo omnia Christi
beneficia, sed ipsam etiam Filii hominis substantiam, ipsam, inquam, veram
carnem, and verum illum sanguinem, quem fudit pro nobis, non significari
duntaxat, aut symbolice, typice, vel figurate proponi, tanquam absentis
memoriam: sed vere ac certo repraesentari, exhiberi, and applicanda offerri,
adjunctis symbolis minime nudis, sed quae (quod ad Deum ipsum promittentem and
offerentem attinet) semper rem ipsam vere ac certo conjunctam habeant, sive
fidelibus, sive insidelibus proponantur. Jam vero modum illum quo res ipsa i.
e. verum corpus, and verus sanguis Domini, cum symbolis copulatur, dicimus esse
Symbolicum, sive Sacramentalem: Sacramentalem autem modum vocamus, non qui sit
figurativus duntaxat, sed qui vere and certo sub specie rerum visibilium
repraesentet, quod Deus cum symbolis exhibet and offert, nempe (quod paulo ante
diximus) verum corpus and sanguinem Christi; ut appareat, nos ipsius corporis
and sanguinis Christi praesentiam in Coena retinere and defendere; and si quid
nobis cum vere piis and doctis fratribus controversiae est, non de re ipsa, sed
de praesentiae modo duntaxat, qui soli Deo cognitus est, and a nobis creditur,
disceptari. [ Here they say, rem ipsam, i. e. verum corpus and verum sanguinem
Domini cum symbolis copulari in Coena Domini, modum vero esse symbolicum, etc.]

Next to come to our English Divines. -- First -- Thus Mr. Hooker, Eccl. Polit.
5. l. 67.. p. 357. -- Wherefore should the world continue still distracted and
rent with so manifold contentions, when there remains now no controversy,
saving only about the subject, where Christ is: -- nor does any thing rest
doubtful in this; but whether, when the Sacrament is Administered, Christ be
whole within Man only, or else his body and blood be also externally seated in
the very consecrated elements themselves.

[ This therefore was no doubt amongst the divided parties in Mr. Hooker 's
Judgment; Whether Christ's natural body was only in Heaven, or both in Heaven
and also in the Eucharist. (for if otherwise) this so main a doubt that he
ought not to have dissembled it.]

-- Again p. 360. -- All three Opinions do thus far accord in one, -- That
these holy Mysteries, received in due manner, do instrumentally both make us
partakers of the grace of that body and blood, which were given for the Life of
the World; and besides also impart unto us, even in true and real, though
mystical, manner, the very person of our Lord himself, whole, perfect, and
entire. -- and p. 359. -- His body and his blood are in that very subject,
whereunto they administer Life, not only by effect, or operation, even as the
influence of the Heavens is in Plants, Beasts, Men, and in every thing which
they quicken; but also by a far more divine and mystical kind of Union, which
makes us one with him, even as he and the Father are one.

2. Thus Bishop Andrews in that much noted passage,. 11. n. 1.
Resp. ad Apoll. Bell. 1. c. p. 11. -- Quod Cardinalem non latet, nisi volentem
and ultro, dixit Christus, Hoc est corpus meum; non, Hoc modo hoc est corpus
meum. Nobis autem vobiscum de objecto convenit, de modo lis omnis est. De hoc
est, fide firma tenemus, quod sit: de, hoc modo est (nempe transubstantiato in
corpus pane) de modo, quo fiat, ut sit Per, sive In, sive Cum, sive Sub, sive
Trans, nullum inibi verbum est. Et quia verbum nullum, merito a fide ablegamus
procul: inter scita Scholae fortasse, inter Fidei articalos non, ponimus. Quod
dixisse olim fertur Durandus, neutiquam nobis displicet, Verbum audimus, motum
sentimus, modum nescimus, praesentiam credimus. Praesentiam, inquam, credimus,
nec minus, quam vos, veram, De modo praesentiae nihil temere definimus, addo,
nec anxie inquiramus; non magis quam in baptismo nostro, quomodo abluat nos
sanguis Christi: non magis quam in Christi incarnatione, quomodo naturae
divinae humana in eandem hypostasin uniatur. Inter mysteria ducimus (and quidem
mysterium est Eucharistia ipsa) cujus quod reliquum est debet igne absumi, id
est, ut eleganter in primis Patres, fide adorari, non ratione discuti. --
Again, Ib. 8. c. p. 194. speaking of the Conjunction of Christ's Body with the
symbols, he says, -- Ea nempe conjunctio est inter Sacramentum visibile, and
rem Sacramenti invisibilem; quae inter humanitatem and divinitatem Christi, ubi
nisi Eutychen s^pere vultis, humanitas in divinitatem non transubstantiatur. --
And a little farther, -- Rex Christum in Eucharistia vere praesentem, (...) and
adorandum statuit. And -- Nos vero in mysteriis carrem Christi adoramus, cum
Ambrosio, etc. [ Here is such a presence of Christ's flesh in the Eucharist
acknowledged, as is to be adored; and this it seems no less the Bishop's
Religion, than King James 's.]

Add to this, that passage in Is. Causabon 's Letter,. 11. n. 2.
written by the King's command to Card. Perron; who, when the Cardinal would
have joined issue with the King, for trying the verity of the Real Presence of
Christ's Body in the Eucharist, in the King's name declines any such
Controversy, and saying that the contest was not about rei veritatem, but only
modum, returns this reply p. 50. -- Miratur vero serenisimus Rex, cum fateatur
tua illustris Dignitas, non (...) quaerere vos, ut credatur Transubstantiatio,
sed ut de praesentiae veritate ne dubitetur, Ecclesiam Anglicanam, quae toties
id se credere publicis scriptis est testata, nec dum vobis fecisse satis: and
then, for explication of the Doctrine of the English Church in this matter,
recites the forementioned words of Bishop Andrews, -- Quod Cardinalem non
latet, etc.

3. Thus Bishop Hall in his Treatise De pace Ecclesiastica for reconciling the
Calvinist and Lutheran ( which Lutherans undoubtedly hold the same natural body
of Christ that is in Heaven to be also in the Eucharist,) p. 78. -- Res apud
utrosque eadem, rei tantum ratio diversa. Tantulum dissidium falemur quidem non
esse nullius momenti; tanti esse, ut tam necessariam orbi Christiano fratrum
gratiam tam mirabiliter planeque divinitus coeuntem abrumpere debeat; id vero
est, quod constantissime negamus. Neque nos soli sumus in ea sententia, Mitto
Fratres Polonos, Germanos, nostrarum partium, etc. Then at last he brings in
the decree of the Synod of the French Protestants at Charenton, in which the
Lutherans are received to their communion, as agreeing with them in omnibus
verae religionis principiis, articulisque fundamentalibus.

4. Thus Bishop Montague, Appeal p. 289. -- Concerning this point of Real
Presence, I say, that, if Men were disposed as they ought, to peace, there need
be no difference: for the disagreement is only de modo praesentiae: the thing
is yielded-to on either side, that there is in the Holy Eucharist a Real
Presence. God forbid, says Bishop Bilson, we should deny that the flesh and
blood of Christ are truly present, and truly received of the faithful at the
Lord's Table. It is the Doctrine that we teach others, and comfort our selves
withal. p. 779. Of true Subject: And the Reverend and Learned Answerer unto
Bellarmine 's Apology, comes home to the Faith (or Popery if you will)
condemned in Mr. Montague, who learned it of him, and such as he is. Nobis
vobis-cum de objecto convenit, etc. -- [ He, you see, represents the difference
between parties in the same manner as Mr. Hooker; i. e. none as to the point of
the presence of the same body here in the Eucharist, as it is at the same time
above in Heaven.]

5. Thus Archbishop Lawd, Confer. with Fisher,. 35. n. 3. -- The worthy
Receiver is, by his Faith, made spiritually partaker of the true and real body
and blood of Christ, truly and really, and of all the benefits of his Passion.
Yon Roman Catholics add a manner of this his presence (Transubstantiation)
which many deny; and the Lutherans a manner (Consubstantiation) which more
deny. -- And upon [truly and really] he notes in the Margin Calvin 's saying in
1 Cor. 11.24. Neque enim mortis tantum and resurrectionis suae beneficium nobis
offert Christus, sed corpus, ipsum, in quo passus est and resurrexit.

Ib. n. 7. Punct. 3. I hope A. C. dare not say, that to believe the true
substantial presence of Christ is either known, or damnable Schism or Heresy.
Now as many and as Learned Protestants believe and maintain this, as do believe
possibility of salvation in the Roman Church, etc. and Ib. n. 3. upon Bellarmin
's words -- Conversionem Paris and Vini in corpus and sanguinem Christi esse
substantialem, sed arcanam and ineffabilem, he says; That if the Cardinal had
left out Conversion, and affirmed only Christ's Real [ by this he means
Substantial, as also is affirmed by the Cardinal] presence there, after a
mysterious and indeed an ineffable manner, no Man could have spoken better. And
--. 35.6. n. Punct. 4. quotes also Bishop Ridley 's Confession set down in Fox,
p. 1598.) whose words are these: -- You [ the Transubstantialists] and I agree
in this, that in the Sacrament is the very true and natural Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ, even that which was born of the Virgin Mary, which ascended into
Heaven, which sits on the right hand of God the Father, etc. only we differ in
modo, in the way and manner of being there.

6. Thus Dr. Tailor, one of the last who has written a just Treatise on this
subject, 1.. 11. n. p. 18. It is enquired whether, when we say we believe
Christ's Body to be really in the Sacrament, we mean that body, that flesh,
that was born of the Virgin Mary, that was crucified, dead and buried? I
answer: I know none else that he had, or has; there is but one body of Christ
natural and glorified: but he that says that body is glorified, which was
crucified, says it is the same body, but not after the same manner; and so it
is in the Sacrament, we eat and drink the body and blood of Christ that was
broken and poured forth; for there is no other body, no other blood of Christ:
but though it is the same we eat and drink, yet it is in another manner. And
therefore when any of the Protestant Divines, or any of the Fathers deny, that
body which was born of the Virgin Mary, that was crucified, to be eaten in the
Sacrament, as Bertram, as S. Hierom, as Clemens Alexandrinus expressly affirm;
the meaning is easy, they intend that it is not eaten in a natural sense: and
then calling Corpus spirituale, the word spirituale is not a substantial
predication, but is an affirmation of the manner; though in disputation it be
made the Predicate of a Proposition, and the opposite member of a Distinction.
That Body which was crucified is not that body that is eaten in the Sacrament,
if the intention of the Proposition be to speak of the eating it in the same
manner of being; but that body which was crucified, the same body we do eat, if
the intention be to speak of the same thing in several manners of being and
operating; and this I noted, that we may not be prejudiced by words, when the
notion is certain and easy. And thus far is the sense of our Doctrine in this
Article. [ Here we see this Doctor becomes such a zealous advocate of this
Cause, as to frame an answer to all such sayings in the Fathers, as may seem by
the expression to import; as if the same body that was crucified were not eaten
here by us in the Sacrament; and defends the contrary.] -- Again. 12. p. 288.
They that do not confess the Eucharist to be the flesh of our Savior, which
flesh suffered for us, let them be Anathema. But quo modo is the question, etc.
See p. 5. where he will have spiritual presence [his Book bearing this Title
The Real Presence and Spiritual of Christ, etc.] understood to be particular in
nothing, but that it excludes the corporal and natural manner, [not spiritual
presence therefore, so as to exclude Corpus Domini, but only the corporal or
natural manner of that body:] now by exclusion of the natural manner is not
meant (surely) the exclusion of nature, or of the thing it self, (for, then, to
say a thing is there, after a natural manner, were as much as to say, the thing
is not there:) but the exclusion of those properties which usually accompany
nature, or the thing. -- See p. 12. where he allows of the term
substantialiter; and of that expression of Conc. Trid. Sacramentaliter praesens
Salvator noster substantia sua nobis adest. -- and in the same page he says,
when the word Real presence is denied by some Protestants, it is taken for
natural, and not for in rei veritate.

7. Thus Bishop Forbes de Eucharistia, 2. l. 2. c. 9.. -- An Christus in
Eucharistia sit adorandus, Protestants saniores non dubitant. In sumptione
enim Eucharistiae (ut utar verbis Archiepiscopi Spalatensis) adorandus est
Christus vera latria, siquidem corpus ejus vivum and gloriosum miraculo quodam
ineffabili digne sumenti praesens adest, and haec adoratio non pani, non vino,
non sumptioni, non comestioni, sed ipsi corpori Christi immediate per
sumptionem Eucharistiae exhibito, debetur and perfcitur. -- And Ib.. 8. --
Immanis est rigidorum Protestantium error, qui negant Christum in Eucharistia
esse adorandum, nisi adoratione interna and mentali, non autem externa aliquo
ritu adorativo, ut in geniculatione aut aliquo alio consimili corporis situ; hi
fere omnes male de praesentia Christi Domini in Sacramento, miro sed vero modo
praesentis, sentiunt. -- Again 3. l. 1. c.. 10. -- Dicunt etiam saepissime
sancti Patres in Euharistia offerri and sacrificari ipsum Christi Corpus, ut ex
innumeris pene locis constat, sed non proprie and realiter omnibus sacrificii
proprietatibus servatis; sed per commemorationem and repraesentationem ejus
quod semel in unico illo sacrificio Crucis, quo alia omnia sacrifcia
consummavit Christus summus Sacerdos noster, est peractum; and per piam
supplicationem, qua Ecclesia ministri propter unici illius sacrificii perpetuam
victimam, in Coelis ad dextram Patris assistentem, and in sacra mensa modo
ineffabili praesentem, Deum Patrem humillime rogant, ut virtutem and gratiam
hujus perennis victimae, Ecclesiae suae, ad omnes cerporis and animae
necessitates efficacem and salutarem esse velit. [Here is acknowledged, 1.
Christi corpus in sacra mensa modo ineffabili praesens. 2. Hoc corpus oblatum
in Eucharistia ut sacrificium Deo Patri. 3. Ipsi corpori Christi ut praesenti
in Eucharistia miraculo quodam ineffabili, immediate debita adoratio varae
Latriae.]

8. Thus the Archbishop of Spalato much-what to the same purpose, de Rep. Eccl.
7. l. 11. c. 7.. Si secundum veritatem qui digne sumit sacramenta corporis and
sanguinis Christi, ille vere and realiter corpus and sanguinem Christi, in se
corporaliter, modo tamen quodam spirituali, miraculoso and impereeptibili
sumit; omnis digne communicans adorare potest and debet corpus Christi quod
recipit; non quod lateat corporaliter in pane, aut sub pane, aut sub speciebus
and accidentibus panis; sed quod quando digne sumitur panis Sacramentalis, tunc
etiam sumitur cum pane Christi corpus reale illi communioni realiter praesens.

8. And thus Mr. Thorndyke in his Epilogue to the Tragedy, 3. l. 3. c. p. 17.
-- That which I have already said is enough to evidence the mystical and
spiritual presence of the Flesh and Blood of Christ in the Elements, as the
Sacrament of the same, before any Man can suppose that spiritual presence of
them to the Soul, which the eating and drinking Christ's Flesh and Blood
spiritually by living Faith imports. -- and Ib. 2. c. p. 10. when it follows,
He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to
himself, not discerning the Lord's Body; unless a Man discern the Lord's Body
where it is not, of necessity it must there be where it is discerned to be,
etc. and 3. l. 23. c. p. 225. he says, -- That anciently there was a
reservation from Communion to Communion: and -- that he who carried away the
Body of our Lord to eat it at home, drinking the Blood at present, might
reasonably be said to communicate in both kinds. Neither can (faith he) that
Sacramental change which the Consecration works in the Elements be limited to
the Instant of the Assembly: though it take effect only in order to that
Communion, unto which the Church designeth that which it consecrateth. -- and
3. l. 5. c. p. 44. -- Having maintained that the Elements are really changed,
from ordinary Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ mystically
present as in a Sacrament, and that in virtue of the Consecration, not by the
Faith of him that receives; I am to admit and maintain whatsoever appears duly
consequent to this truth: namely, that the Elements so consecrated are truly
the sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, in as much as the Body and Blood of
Christ are contained in them, etc. -- and then p. 46. he farther collecteth
thus. -- And the Sacrifice of the Cross being necessarily propitiatory and
impetratory both, it cannot be denied that the Sacrament of the Eucharist, in
as much as it is the same sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, -- is also both
propitiatory and impetratory. -- and 3. l. 30. c. p. 350. -- I suppose (says
he) that the Body and Blood of Christ may be adored wheresoever they are, and
must be adored by a good Christian, where the custom of the Church, which a
Christian is obliged to communicate with, requires it. -- And p. 351. -- Not to
balk the freedom which has carried me to publish all this; I do believe, that
it was practiced and done [i.e. our Lord Christ really worshipped in the
Eucharist] in the ancient Church, which I maintain from the beginning to have
been the true Church of Christ, obliging all to conform to it in all things
within the power of it: I know the consequence to be this, That there is no
just cause why it should not be done at present, but that cause which justifies
the reforming of some part of the Church without the whole. [ Here is
acknowledged, 1. Presently upon Consecration a presence of Christ's Body and
Blood with, or in, the Elements, before any presence of them to the Soul by a
living Faith; of which body becoming here present, the unworthy Receivers are
said to be guilty, 1 Cor. 11.22. 2. A permanency of this Body and Blood with
these Symbols in the reservation of them, after the assembly had communicated.
3. The Elements consecrated, in as much as the Body and Blood of Christ is
contained in them, affirmed to be truly the sacrifice on the Cross. 4.
Adoration of this Body and Blood as so present, to be a duty, and anciently
practiced.]

CHAP. III. Considerations on the second Observable, That a natural Body cannot
be in many places at once.
That the natural Body and Blood of Christ are not in the Holy Sacrament of the
Eucharist. It were an easy task here to back the testimony of these Writers
with those of the Fathers to the same purpose; but I conceive it needless,
since the same Protestant Writers here cited urge the authority of Antiquity,
as a chief inducement and motive of this their Assertion. Now then to consider
the second, the urging for such Non-presence, this reason; because it is
against the truth of a natural Body to be, or because a natural Body cannot
truly be, in more places than one, at one time.

1. Here also, first, I find Protestants,. 20. n. 1.
and especially our English Divines generally to confess the presence of our
Savior in the Eucharist to be an ineffable mystery, (which I conceive is said
to be so in respect of something in it opposite and contradictory to, and
therefore incomprehensible and ineffable by, humane reason.) For this thus
Calvin himself long ago, in the beginning of the Reformation, Inst. 4. l. 17.
c. 24.. Ego hoc mysterium minime rationis humanae modo metior, vel naturae
legibus subjicio. -- Humanae rationi minime placebit [that which he affirms]
penetrare ad nos Christi carnem, ut nobis sit alimentum. -- Dicimus Christumtam
externo symbolo, quam spiritu suo ad nos descendere, ut vere substantia carnis
suae animas nostras vivificet. -- In his paucis verbis qui non sentit multa
subesse miracula, plusquam stupidus est: quando nihil magis incredibile, quam
res toto coeli and terrae spatio dissitas ac remotas, in tanta locorum
distantia, non tantum conjungi, sed uniri; ut alimentum percipiant animae ex
carne Christi: [Nihil magis incredibile; therefore not this more incredible,
that Idem Corpus potest esse in diversis locis simul.] -- And.31. -- Porro de
modo siquis me interroget, fateri non pudebit, sublimius esse arcanum, quam ut
vel meo ingenio comprehendi, vel enarrari verbis queat. -- And. 25. Captivas
tenemus mentes nostras ne verbulo duntaxat obstrepere, ac humiliamus ne
insurgere, audeant. -- Nec vero nefas nobis esse ducimus, sanctae Virginis
exemplo, in re ardua sciscitari, quomodo ^^ri possit? See more Ibid.. 7.
[Naturae legibus non subjicio, -- humanae rationi minime placet, -- quomodo
fieri potest] -- Surely these argue something in it seemingly contradictory to
nature and humane reason.

Thus King James of the Eucharist in his answer to Cardinal Perron by
Causabon.. 20. n. 2.
-- Mysterium istud magnum esse humano ingenio incomprehensibile, ac multo
magis inenarrabile, Eccl. sia Anglicana fatetur and docet.

And thus speaks Dr. Tailor in Real presence,. 20. n. 3.
. 11 n. 28. after that he had numbered up many apparent contradictions, not only
in respect of a natural, but, as he faiths of an alsolute, possibility of
Transubstantiation, (from p. 207. to p. 337.) Tet (says he) let it appear that
God has affirmed Transubstantiation, and I for my part will burn all my
arguments against it, and wake public amends: [all my arguments, i. e. of
apparent Contradictions and absolute Impossibilities.] And n. 28. To this
objection. That we believe the doctrine of the Trinity, and of the Incarnation,
of our Savior's being born of a pure Virgin, etc. clauso utero, and of the
Resurrection with identity of bodies ( in which the Socinians find absurdities
and contradictions) notwithstanding seeming impossibilities; and therefore why
not Transubstantiation? He answers, That if there were as plain Revelation of
Transubstantiation, as of the other, then this Argument were good: and if it
were possible for ten thousand times more arguments to be brought against
Transubstantiation, [of which ten thousand then suppose that this be one, That
Idem corpus non potest esse simul in duobus locis] yet we are to believe the
Revelation in despite of them all. [Now none can believe a thing true, upon
what motive soever, which he first knows certainly to be false, or, which is
all one, certainly to contradict. For these, we say, are not verifiable by
divine power, and ergo here, I may say, should Divine Power declare a truth, it
would transcend it self.] -- Again, in Liberty of Prophecy, 20.. 16. n. he
says, Those who believe the Trinity in all those niceties of explication which
are in the School, and which now adays pass for the Doctrine of the Church,
believe them with as much violence to the principles of natural and
supernatural Philosophy, as can be imagined to be in the point of
Transubstantiation. Yet I suppose himself denies no such doctrine about the
Trinity, that is commonly delivered in the Schools.

ineffable mystery; I see not why they should deny, that this particular
seeming contradiction, among the rest, of the same body being at the same time
in several al places, yet by the divine power (I say not is, for the knowledge
of this depends on Revelation, but) may be, so verified.

real and substantial presence of the very Body of Christ to the worthy
communicant here on earth, contradistinct to any such other real presence, as
implies only a presence of Christ's Body in its virtue, efficacy, benefits,
spirit, etc. which is the Zuinglian real presence. For suppose our Savitour's
Body to be (as they will have it) only naturally or locally in heaven; yet if
the substance, the essence, the reality of this Body (however stripped of its
natural properties, all such as being not the very essence of it, are
removeable from it per potentiam divinam) be here on earth in the Eucharist,
when it is also in Heaven, (be it here present to the symbols, or to the
receiver, or to any thing else, it matters not:) we must affirm that this
essence or substance of the same body at least is at the same time in diverse
places; or (if we will have this essence to be in heaven only, as in a place)
in diverse ubi's, which is every whit as seeming contradictory as the other. And
whoever will grant, that an Angel by divine power may be at the same time in
two several ubi's, cannot reasonably deny, that a body may be so, in several
places; or in one place, and in another ubi. I say then, that this Proposition,
[That the same Body is at the same time in diverse places,] or another
equivalent to it, must be conceded to be true, so long as we affirm the essence
of our Savior's body to be here on Earth in the Eucharist at the same time, as
it is also in Heaven; unless we defend one of these two things; either,

That this Body is both here and there by an incomprehensible continuation, as
it were, thereof, (which sounds somewhat like the ubiquity of some Lutherans)
for which see the words of Calvin quoted before,. 8. Res toto coeli and terrae
spatio dissitas ac remotas conjungi and uniri, etc. words ushered in by him
with a nihil magis incredibile. [But then, as some seem thus to make Christ's
Body that is in Heaven, by a certain prolonging or continuation
incomprehensible (as their expressions seem to import) to be joined, upon an
act of faith, to the Soul of the worthy Receiver here on Earthy, whilst yet the
same body is still only in Heaven, and there no way at all enlarged in its
dimensions; so why may mot others as probably make the same body that is in
Heaven, by a certain discontinuation ineffable, to be present here on Earth,
upon the act of Consecration, to the symbols or receiver, though it be in both
these places only the same body still, and not multiplied in its essence? As
the same Soul is totally in the Head and the Foot; yet this Soul not continued
in these two places or Vbi's, neither by its parts, since it has none; nor by
two totals, since in both it is but one: and suppose one foot of this body does
stand in the water, the other on the land; the same Soul being totally in both
these feet, consequently, will be totally in the water, and totally not in the
water, but on the land. And suppose again the two feet cut off from the body,
and yet preserved still alive, i. e. the soul, that did before, still informing
them per potentiam divinam, (which we see naturally done in many Insects:) the
same Soul will be now, totally in the water, and totally on the land, without
continuation (if I may so say) of it self. And suppose again this body, which
it informs, to increase to a much greater bulk; and the same Soul will be now
in many more places than formerly without any augmentation of it self. And why
the same things may not be said of Bodies, when stripped of quantitative
dimensions; or how far some properties of Spirits may be communicated to them,
(salva essentia corporis) who can say? What our Savior said to the Sadduces
relucting to believe a revelation concerning the resurrection of the same
numerical body, Matthew. 22.29.
because involving in it very many seeming contradictions, Erratis, nescientes
Scripturas, neque virtutem Dei, may as well be said in this great mystery of
the Eucharist.]

Or 2ly,. 24. n. 1.
unless we will explain our selves, that, by the essential, real, substantial
presence of Christ's Body in the Eucharist, me mean only the presence of the
true and real effect, blessing, virtues, of this Body, (as Dr. Tailor sometimes
seems to do,) but this is, after professing with the highest in our words, a
relapsing into Zuinglianism in our sense. [I will set you down the Doctor's
words, ( Real Presence. 11. n. 17.) where, after he has said, That there is
not in all School Divinity, nor in the old Philosophy, nor in nature, any more
than three natural proper ways of being in a place, circumscriptive,
definitive, repletive, and that the Body of Christ is not in the Sacrament any
of these three ways, (quoting Turrecremata for it) he replies thus to those
Schoolmen, that rejecting these three ways, do say, that Christ's Body is in a
fourth way, viz. Sacramentally in more places than one. -- This, says he, is
very true; that is, that the Sacrament of Christ's body is [in more places than
one]; and so is his Body [in more places than one] figuratively, tropically,
representatively in being [ or essence,] and really in effect and blessing. But
this is not a natural real being in a place, but a relation to a person. Thus
he. But if thus Christ's Body be held by us, as to its essence, only
figuratively, tropically, and representatively in more places than one; and
really in those places only in its effect and blessing, what will become of our
-- praesentiam non minus quam illi veram, (see before,. 11.) if others hold the
presence of Christ's very essence and substance in the Eucharist, we only the
presence thereof its effect and blessing?

Now as to the proper mode (which the Dr. here agitates) of Christ's Body being
substantially in the Sacrament, whether it is circumscriptive, definitive, or
some other way; it is true, that the Schoolmen do not all agree on one and the
same. S. Thomas, Durand, and several others, deny the Body of Christ to be
either circumscriptive, or definitive in this Sacrament, and proceed to affirm,
That Idem Corpus non potest, per miraculum, or potentiam divinam, esse in
pluribus locis simul, i. e. localiter, or, in the forementioned ways,
Circumscriptively or Definitively.

But you may note, 1. That they take circumscriptive,. 24. n. 2.
and definitive, in such a sense, as that these two do exclude, not only such a
bodies being, ubique, every where; but absolutely its being alibi, any where
else; and that these modes of Presence would infer, That the same individual is
divided from it self, (contrary to the nature of individuum, or unum,) if such
body should at that time be any where else. See S. Thom. Suppl. q. 83. Art. 5.
ad 4um -- and 3a q. 76. Art. 5. where he says, That that is circumscriptive in
loco, quod nec excedit, nec exceditur. -- And see Durand, his follower, in 4.
sent. 44. d. q. 6. where he argues very clearly thus: -- Existentia unius
corporis simul in pluribus locis implitat express contradictionem; quia illud
quod est circumscriptive in distantibus locis, oporter quod sit distinctum
distinctione locorum; quia quicquid est circumscriptive in loco aliquo, totum
continetur ab ipso, it a quod nihil contenti est circumscriptive extra
continentem. Propter quod illa quae sunt in distinctis locis circumscriptive,
necessario distincla sunt; and, quia est contra rationem unius quod sit
distinctum, ideo si unum corpus esset in pluribus locis circumscriptive, esset
unum and non unum seu indistinctum; quod implicat contradictionem.

2. That they put a third way of presence of Christ's Body in the Eucharist,
real and true, and though not per modum quantitatis dimensive,. 24. n. 3.
yet per modum substantiae Aqui. n. 3.76. q. 3. art.
, which they say is a mode proper to this Sacrament, and such as hinders not
the same body at the same time to be alibi, elsewhere, and yet to remain, though
it be elsewhere, indivisum in se: which the other Presences, in their acception
of them, do hinder. Of which thing thus Durand contends In 4 sent. 11. d. q. 1.
, That Christ's Body is present in the Sacrament ratione solius praesentiae ad
locum, not ratione continentiae either circumscriptive or definitive; -- and
that Quod est praesens loco hoc modo, potest esse simul praesens in pluribus
locis; sicut Angelus, says he, est praesens omnibus corporibus quae potest
movere.

. 24. n. 4.
Meanwhile other Schoolmen and Controvertists take liberty to dissent from
these. See Scotus in 4. sent. did. 10. q. 2. and Bellarm. de Euchar. 3. l. 3.
c. and it seems not without reason. For, why should this their Substantial or
Sacramental way (as real and true as any of the other) of Christ's Body being
at the same time in Heaven and in the Eucharist, consist with this Body's
remaining indivisum in se; more than the circumscriptive or definitive way,
rightly understood, and freed of their limitations; or, why impose they such a
notion on these two ways, that they must imply an exact adequation of the place
and the placed, or exclude it from being at all any where else; any more than
the other Substantial or Sacramental way (which they maintain) does?

Thus far I have stepped aside, to show, that the Doctor receive^ (...) advantage
here, for the denying the Essential or Substantial p^^sence of Christ's Body in
the Eucharist, from the difference in the Schools concerning the Mode thereof,
whilst all of them agree both in such Substantial presence, and also in
Transubstantiation.

praesentia corporalis, or praesentia naturalis in such a sense as they imply
the presence of some corporal or natural accidents or properties by divine
power separable (as some are, the essence still preserved, and who knows
exactly how many: in which respect Christ's Body is denied, as by the English,
so by the Roman and Lutheran Churches, to be in the Eucharist modo corporeo, or
naturali:) but take them as they imply the corporal or natural presence of the
essence or substance of this Body; thus will Real or Essential Presence be the
same with corporal and natural. And therefore these words [Real and essential
presence] seem as truly denied to be in the Eucharist, by the first composers
of the foresaid Declaration in the latter end of K. Edward's days, as the words
[ Corporal and Natural presence] are in this 2d. Edition thereof in A. D. 1661.
I say the one, the essential or substantial, denied to be there, as much as the
other, the natural: whenever this reason in both is added for it, viz. because,
Idem corpus non potest esse simul in diversis locis. For this reason seems
necessarily to exclude the one, as well as the other, the real and essential
presence, as well as corporal and natural.

[That no adoration ought to be done unto any corporal presence of Christ's
natural flesh and blood,] whereas that in King Edward's time has these, [ That
no adoration ought to be done unto any real and essential presence of Christ's
natural flesh and blood,] the words Real and essential then, being now changed
into Corporal; and this seems to be done with some caution for the present
Church her maintaining still a real and essential presence of Christ's body in
the Eucharist; whereas those in the later time of King Edward seem to have
denied it. [For as the first days of this Prince seem to have been more
addicted to Lutheranism, so the latter days to Zuinglianism; as appears in
several expressions of Bishop Ridley, (see his last examination in Fox p. 1598.
and his stating the first Question disputed at Oxford about the Real Presence,)
and of Peter Martyr. See Disput. Oxon. 1549. fol. 18, 67, and 88.
When also this Question, An Corpus Christi realiter vel substantialiter adsit
in Eucharistia, in Oxford, was held negatively; and when all those alterations
were made in the Form of the Service of our Lord's Supper (mentioned before in
the beginning of this Discourse) that might seem to favor any presence of
Christ's Body in relation to the Symbols.] But here I say, if the words of the
former Rubric, real and essential, were by the late Clergy changed into
corporal on any such design, that so the real and essential presence might be
still by them maintained; then I ask here, how can the same reason be still
retained in their opinion thus altered? For, this reason, [that the same body
cannot be at one in several places] as I have said, combats as well a real and
essential presence, which they now would seem to allow, as a corporal, which
they reject.

Mystica, Spiritualis, Symbolica, Sacramentalis, or the like; yet if the
presence of the Essence or Substance be still retained, they are eased no more
thus, from maintaining, that Idem corpus potest esse in duobus locis (or ubi)
simul, than any other party, which hold any grosser presence there. And
therefore suppose, if you will, a body clothed with all its usual accidents of
quantity and dimensions, and of quality (except you will number also this
amongst them, to possess but one place, and except you will annex to
circumscriptive or definitive the restrictions mentioned before. 24. n. 2.) and
it may no less (when such is the divine pleasure) be, thus, at the same time in
many places, than when stripped of them: for the same seeming absurdities and
contradictions follow, from an Angel's, or Soul's being at the same time in two
distinct definitive ubi's; without any continuation (if I may so say) of its
essence between these ubi's; as do follow from a body so qualified being in two
circumscriptive places, without the like continuation; as you may see in
perusing the common objections that are made against plurality of places.

For as Cardinal Bellarmin presses well to this purpose: De Euchar. l. 3. c. 3.
-- Si quis objiciat aliam esse rationem corporum, aliam spirituum, is facile
refelli potest. Nam ratio cur corpora non videantur posse esse in pluribus
locis non tam est moles quam unitas. -- Ideo autem non videtur posse esse, quia
non potest divilli a seipso: and videtur necessario debere divilli ac distrahi
a se, si ponatur in variis locis. Porro ista repugnantia quae sumitur ab
unitate rei non minus invenitur in spiritu quam in corpore: utrumque enim est
unum, and a se dividi non potest. Quare perinde est in hac quaestione sive de
Corpore sive de Spiritu probetur, [and I add, sive de corpore essentiali, sive
de naturali.] The like things he says of a Sacramental presence, and not per
occupationem loci; so this presence be real. Quae realis praesentia, says he,
in tot Altaribus and non in locis intermediis non minus tollere videtur
indivisionem rei, quam repletio plurium locorum.

English Divines must affirm this Proposition of one body at the same time
being in more places than one, or some other equivalent to it, to be true; or
must cease to assert any real, essential, or substantial presence of Christ's
body in the Eucharist, contradistinct to the Sense of the Zuinglians.

4. In seems to me, that some of the more judicious amongst them heretofore
have not laid so great weight on this Philosophical position, as wholly to
support and regulate their faith in this matter by it, as it stands in
opposition not only to nature's, but the divine power: because they pretend not
any such certainly thereof; but that, if any divine revelation of the contrary
can be showed, they profess a readiness to believe it.

Tailor before 20. n. 3. And thus Bishop White against Fisher p. 179. much-what
to the same purpose. -- We cannot grant (says he) that one Individual body may
be in many distant places at one and the same instant, until the Papist
demonstrate the possibility hereof by testimony of Sacred Scripture, or the
ancient Tradition of the Primitive Church, or by apparent reason. And p. 446.
-- We dispute not what God is able to effect by his absolute power, neither is
this question of any use in the matter non in hand. -- That God changes the
Ordinance which himself has fixed, no divine testimony or revelation affirms
or teaches. There is a Twofold power in God, ordinata, and absoluta. One
according to the order which himself has fixed by his Word and Will, the other
according to the infiniteness of his essence. Now according to the power
measured and regulated by his Word and Will, all things are impossible which
God will not have to be. -- and p. 182. -- Except God himself had expressly
revealed and testified in his Word, that the contrary [ i. e. to the common
ordinance of the Creator] should be found in the humane body of Christ, etc. a
Christian cannot be compelled to believe this Doctrine as an Article of his
Creed upon the sole voice and authority of the Lateran or Tridentine Council.
[But if they were certain of such contradiction, then are they certain that
there neither is nor can be such contrary revelation; and when any revelation,
though never so plain, is brought, they are bound to interpret it so, as not to
affirm a certainly known impossibility.]

Forbes de Euchar. 1. l. 2. c. 1.. censures those other Protestants, who
peremptorily maintain that there is such a real certain contradiction. --
Admodum periculose and nimis audacter negant multi Protestants, Deum posse
panem substantialiter in corpus Domini convertere, [which conversion involves
the putting idem corpus simul in diversis locis.] Multa enim potest Deus
omnipotens facere supra captum omnium hominum, imo and Angelorum. Id quidem
quod implicet contradictionem non posse fieri concedunt omnes: sed quia in
particulari nemini evidenter constat, quae sit uniuscujusque rei essentia, ac
proinde quid implicet, and quid non implicet contradictionem; magnae profecto
temeritatis est, propter caecae mentis nostrae imbecillitatem, Deo limits
praescribere, and praefracte negare omnipotentia sua illum hoc vel illud facere
posse: Placet nobis judicium Theologorum Wirtenbergicorum in Confessione sua,
Anno 1552. Concilio Tridentino proposita, cap. de Eucharistia, ( vide Harmon.
Confess.) Credimus, inquiunt, omnipotentiam Dei tantam esse, ut possit in
Eucharistia substantiam panis and vini vel annihilare, vel in corpus and
sanguinem Christi mutare. Sed quod Deus hanc suam absolutam omnipotentiam in
Eucharistia exerceat, non videtur esse certo verbo Dei traditum, and apparet
veteri Ecclesiae fuisse ignotum. After which the same Bishop goes on to show
the moderation also of some foreign reformed Divines herein, though much opposing
the Lutheran and Roman opinion. Zuinglius and Oecolampadius, (says he)
aliquoties, ut constat, concesserunt Luthero and illius sequacibus, ac proinde
Romanensibus, (ut qui idem non minore contentione urgent in Transubstantiatione
sua defendenda, quam illi in Consubstantiatione sua) Deum quidem hoc posse
efficere, ut unum corpus sit indiversis locis; sed quod idem in Eucharistia
fieret, and quod Deus id fieri vellet, id vero sibi probari postularunt. Vtinam
hic pedem fixissent, nec ulterius progressi fuissent discipuli. In Coll.
Malbrunnensi action 8. Jacobo Andreae Lutherano objicienti Calvinistas negare
Christi corpus coelesti modo pluribus in locis esse posse, ita respondet Zach.
Ursinus Theol. Heidelburgensis: Non negamus eum ex Dei omnipotentia pluribus in
locis esse posse; hoc in controversiam non venit, sed an hoc velle Christum ex
verbis ejus probari possit? Itaque hoc te velle existimavimus Christi corpus
non tantum posse, sed etiam reipsa oportere in S. Coena praesens esse, etc. v.
Vrs. etc. p. 155. Idem Vrsinus Action. ead. p. 153. Conaberis etiam ostendere
(alloquitur Jacobum Andream) elevari and imminui a nobis omnipotentiam Dei, cum
dicamus Deum non posse facere, ut corpus in pluribus sit locis, aut ut Christi
corpus per lapidem penetret [the like contradictions seeming to Vrsin to urge,
both plurality of places to one Body, and plurality of Bodies to one place:] De
quo responsum est, non semel nunquam quaesitum esse aut disputatum, an possit.
Deus hoc aut illud efficere; sed hoc tantum, an ita velit. -- See more in the
Author. To which I may add S. Austin's saying, Cura pro mortuis, c. 16. Ista
Quaestio vires intelligentiae meae vincit, quemadmodum opitulentur Martyrs
iis, quos per eos certum est adjuvari: utrum ipsi per seipso adsint uno tempore
tam diversis locis and tanta inter se longinquitate discretis, etc. or whether
this was done per Angelica ministeria usquequaque diffusa, show this Father
believed no impossibility of a Martyrs being uno tempore in diversis locis.

divine power, it seems to be, that the Convocation of the Clergy in the
beginning of Q. Elizabeth's days, both cast out of the 28 of the former
Articles of Religion, made in the end of King Edward's Reign, these words
following: [ -- Cum naturae humanae veritas requirat, ut unius ejusdemque
hominis corpus in multis locis simul esse non possit, sed in uno aliquo and
definito loco esse oporteat; idcirco Christi corpus in multis and diversis
locis eodem tempore praesens esse non potest. Et quoniam, ut tradunt sacrae
literae, Christus in coelum fuit sublatus, and ibi usque ad finem saeculi est
permansurus, non debet quisquam fidelium carnis ejus and sanguinis realem
praesentiam and corporalem (ut loquuntur) praesentiam in Eucharistia vel
credere vel profiteri.] And also cast out this very Rubric or Declaration out
of the then Common Prayer book; and also restored again the former Form in
administering the Communion; [ The Body of our Lord, etc. preserve thy body and
soul,] and all this (says Dr. Heylin) Hist. Reform. Q. Eliz. p. 11.
lest under color of rejecting a Carnal, they might be though also to deny
such a Real presence, as was defended in the writings of the ancient Fathers.

Declaration wherein they reject the words of the former, [real and essential
presence,] as is said before,. 3. n. 4. seem to disallow the opinion of K.
Edward's latter Clergy, and to vindicate still the real presence: but then,
they retaining still unchanged the last expressions of the former Rubric,
which affirm Christ's natural Body not to be in the Eucharist, and that upon
such a ground as is there given, seem again to disclaim it; unless they will
justify as seeming a contradiction as that is of idem in pluribus locis simul;
which they condemn. A contradiction, I say; for I cannot discern, how this
[Christ's natural body is here, and is in Heaven, and yet but one body,] can be
pronounced a contradiction: and this [Christ's natural body is not here, but
only in Heaven, and yet this natural body is here most certainly received] can
be pronounced none. For if this can be justified to be part of their Faith,
that the natural body of Christ is not here in the Eucharist, but only in
Heaven; yet this is another part thereof, (see the former Testimonies. 8. etc.)
that the natural body of Christ is here in the Eucharist received. It, the body
that was born of the B. Virgin, not a grace only, not a spirit only, but it it
self, for both Hoc est corpus meum, and the general Tradition of the ancient
Church, seems to have necessitated these Divines to this expression, and --
facti participes substantiae ejus virtutem quoque ejus sentimus in bonorum
omnium communicatione, says Calvin, quoted before,. 8. -- Now if these things
be so, then this expressing only is one part of their faith in this Rubric,
viz. that the natural body is not here, and the not mentioning the other part
with it, viz. that the naturul body notwithstanding is here received by every
worthy Communicant, (it matters not after what manner received, so this manner
deny not the presence of this body) seems at least to betray their Faith to a
dangerous misconstruction, and to precipitate him, who hears such a confession,
into Zuinglianism. But if we would express our whole and entire Faith here
concerning this matter, it cannot be, but that he, who hears it, (observing
that both Christ's body is here, for he really receives it; and not here, for
it is only in Heaven; in that it is both within him, and at the same time many
millions of miles from him, and yet cannot possibly be at two places at one;)
will presently say with Calvin, See before. 20.
S. Virginis exemplo, Quomodo fieri possit? -- and -- Nihil magis incredibile,
-- and then I see not what they have to answer him, but -- Mysterium, --
Arcanum, -- Miraculum, -- Ineffabile. And then how can they urge others (as
they do here) with contradictions and impossibilities, who go about to explain
this ineffable mystery by Idem corpus in pluribus locis; and mean while
maintain the like contradictions themselves, desiring to have their
contradiction passed and current; the others supporessed?

Zuinglianism) from those difficulties themselves, with which here they press
others. If they say, that Christ's Body is really or essentially present in the
Eucharist, but they mean not to the Elements, but to the Receiver; and that not
to his Body, but to his Soul; yet if they affirm it as much, or as far present
to the Soul, as others do to the sings, (as Mr. Hooker says, they differ only
about the subject, not the presence:) do not the same objections, absurdities,
etc. (concerning Christ's being both really and essentially in Heaven, and in
the place where the Communion is celebrated) with which they afflict others for
making it present with the signs, return upon themselves, for making it present
with the Receiver? For if it be possible, that the Body of Christ, now sitting
at the right hand of God in Heaven, can, notwithstanding this, be present in
our Soul, or in our Heart in such a place on Earth; so may it under, with, or
instead of Bread in the same place; unless we say that they affirm not the real
presence to the Soul, which the others do to the Bread. But the these writers
must not say, that they differ only about the manner, or the subject of his
Presence; but the Presence it self also.

spiritually, not naturally, or not corporally; so say others, both Romainst
and Lutheran; i. e. not with the usual accidents or qualities accompanying
(where is no supernatural effect) the nature or essence of a Body: but if they
will extend spiritually so far as that it shall imply Christ's Body to be there
really and essentially; yet not to be there quoad naturam or essentiam suam; or
Christ's Body to be there, not quoad corpus; this is, by a distinction to
destroy the thesis.

really and essentially there present, but not locally; so say the Lutheran,
and Roman Doctors, i. e. circumscriptive, or by such commensuration to place,
as bodies use to have in their natural condition: but if they will extend
locally so far, as that they understand Christ's Body to be there by no manner
of ubi at all, not so much as ubi definitive, or so that they may truly say
it is hic, so, as not ubique, or not alibi, where no Communion is celebrated;
what is this, but to affirm, it is there so, as that it is not at all there?

really and essentially present, by reason of the same Spirit uniting us here
on Earth, as members to it in Heaven: besides that thus Christ's Body is no
more present in the Eucharist, that in any other Ordinance or Sacrament,
wherein the Spirit is conferred; such presence is properly of the Spirit, not
of the Body; and advances us not beyond Zuinglianism.

real and essential presence, by Christ's being present (in corporal absence)
to the worthy Receiver in all the benefits and effects thereof; Thus also they
slide back into Zuinglianism. Concerning which opinion the Remonstrants well
discerning the difficulties, into which the affirming of a Real presence does
cast other Protestant parties, in the Apol. pro Confessione sua, p. 256. said;
the Zuinglian opinion was, simplicissima, and ad idololatriam omnem evitandam
in hac materia in primis necessaria, -- and quae a Calvino and illius
sequacibus dicuntur, manifestam in se continere tum vanitatem, tum
absurditatem; and ex isto font emanasse ingentem illam idololatriam, etc. And
upon the same terms the Socinians reject Calvin's Doctrine; See Volkelius 4. l.
22. c. p. 316. -- Tertius error eorum est, qui Christi corpus sanguinemque
re-vera quidem in sacra coena a nobis comedi bibique existimant: verum non
corporali, sed spirituali ratione hoc a nobis fieri affirmant. Cujus quidem
opinionis falsitas vel hoc uno convincitur, quod non solum Christi verbis
nequaquam continetur; sed etiam cum sanae mentis ratione pugnat: quae dictat,
fieri non posse, ut Christi corpus tanto intervallo a nobis disjunctum in coena
re-vera comedamus. Idcirco and ille ipse [Calvinus] qui sententiae istius
author est, fatetur, se hoc mysterium nec mente percipere, nec lingua explicare
posse.

W. H. urging, Roman Tradition examined, p. 12.
-- That some of the Learned of the English Clergy confess the Holly
Eucharist, after Consecration, to be really and truly our Savior's Body; and
therefore adore it; and for this cause disown the New Rubric, which says, Our
Lord's Body is in Heaven, and not on the Altar; telling us, that they
acknowledge the Thing, only dare not be so bold as the Romanists to determine
the Manner, [a thing said by Bishop Andrews and others, in the former
Testimonies.] I find him, I say, returning this answer, 1. To the Rubric. --
That this new Rubric is but the old one restored; [where he might have done
well to have considered by whom in was also ejected, before its late
restorement in A. D. 1661. viz. by the English Clergy; and that within a year
or two after it first appeared a New Additional in King Edward's second
Common Prayer Book.] 2. To the Persons. -- If (says he) you speak true of
them, what regard should we have of the judgment of such Clergymen, as declare
their assent and consent to all things contained in, and prescribed by, the
Book of Common-Brayer, Prayer, and Articles of Religion; and yet disown the
Rubric, and believe Transubstantiation, and adore the Eucharist as Christ's
Body? Why do not you call such the Roman Clergy rather than the English, if
they differ from you but only in a want of boldness to determine the Manner,
whilst they acknowledge the Thing? What if a Bishop Bramhall will have the Pope
to be Principium Unitatis, and take Grotius to be of the mind of the Church of
England; ( who would have Rome to be the Mistress-Church, and the Pope to be
the Universal Governor, according to the Canons of Councils, even the Council
of Trent;) must we therefore stoop to such men's judgments? Or might you not as
well tell us, That Cassander or Militier, yea or Bellarmine, were of your mind?
Thus he. But if the acknowledging an essential or substantial presence of
Christ's Body, or of his Flesh and Blood that was born of the Virgin Mary, in
the Eucharist, and with the Symbols, though the manner not prescribed, does
Romanize this Clergy; Bishop Cousins is one of those number. See the former
Discourse concerning the Eucharist. 5. n. 2. etc.
And it is much, that this person, having read his Book, (who also, which I
much wonder at, makes this his own opinion of an Essential presence that of all
Protestants) did not discern this; but has in his Postscript recommended for
the satisfaction of others, one so much differing from his own Judgment; who
speaks of this presence of our Lord much otherwise than the Bishop, in this
manner. p. 14. -- That the Eucharist is Christ's Body and Blood representative;
and not of such a Body as he has now glorified, [which he denies to be flesh
and blood,] but such as was truly flesh and blood, which he once offered; the
Benefits of which Sacrifice and really given us in, and by, the Eucharist. And
p. 15. -- That our Lord at his last Supper speaks of a Representative Body
and Blood, [ i. e. in the words, Hoc est Corpus meum,] when his real Body was
not broken nor slain; nor his bloodshed, till after. And -- I can scarce
believe (says he) that man, that says he believes, that they [the Apostles]
believed, that then they did eat Christ's very Flesh and Blood. p. 57.
, to St. Cyril's words, [ Do not look on it as bare bread, and bare wine, for
it is the Body and Blood of Christ. For though thy sense suggects this to thee,
yet let Faith confirm thee.] he answers, The Bread and Wine are not bare or
mere Bread and Wine, but Christ's Body and Blood; as the King's Statue in Brass
is not bare brass. In all which we hear of the benefits of our Lord's Body and
Blood, and of his Sacrifice on the Cross, really given to us in the Eucharist;
but nothing of his very Flesh and Blood really and essentially present there; a
thing professed abundantly by Bishop Cousins.

CHAP. IV. Considerations on the third Observation: No Adoration intended or
due to any Corporal presence.
THis from. 19. I had to present concerning the second Observable in this
Declaration; the reason given there, Why the Natural Body of Christ is not in
the Eucharist. I now proceed to the third Observable, where it is declared,
That no Adoration is intended, or ought, to be done unto any Corporal presence
of Christ's natural Flesh and Blood.

Where First, as I think, that all grant a kneeling and adoration both of soul
and body due to God the Father and Son, for a signification of our humble and
grateful acknowledgment of the benefits of Christ, given in this sacred
Solemnity to all worthy receivers, as the Declaration has it: so I suppose the
present Clergy will grant, that if there were a Corporal presence of Christ's
natural Body in this Holy Sacrament, then Kneeling and Adoration would be here
due also upon such an account.

2. Though the Corporal presence of Christ's Body, i. e. of its being there ad
modum Corporis, English Divines, but by the Lutheran and Roman (see below. 48.)
yet let there be any other manner of Presence (known from divine Revelation) of
the very same body and blood, and this is as real and essential (let it be
called Spiritual, Mystical, or by what name you please) as if corporal; and
then I do not see, but that Adoration will be no less due to it, thus, than so,
present.

3. And thirdly to show that the Church of England has heretofore believed and
affirmed such a Presence to which they thought Adoration due;

Of this then first thus Bishop Andrews in answer to Bellarmine; James's
alleging the Adoration of the Sacrament in the Church of Rome for a Novelty,
that the King disallowed adorationem Christi Domini in Sacramento miro, sed
vero modo praesentis, the learned Bishop ( Resp. ad Apol. 8. c. p. 195.) goes
on thus, Apage vero, Quis ei hoc dederit? Sacramenti, id est, Christi in
Sacramento. Imo Christus ipse Sacramenti res, in, and cum Sacramento, extra and
sine Sacramento, ubi ubi est, adorandus est: Rex autem Christum in Eucharistia
vere praesentem, vere and adorandum statuit; rem scilicet Sacramenti, at non
Sacramentum; terrenam scilicet partem, ut Iraeneus; visibilem, ut Augustinus.
[Which Father the Bishop had quoted a little before, saying, Sacrificium
Eucharistiae duobus confici, visibili elementorum specie, and invisibili
Christi carne and sanguine; sicut Christi persona constat ex Deo and homine,
cum ipse verus sit Deus, and verus homo.] Nos vero and in mysteriis carnem
Christi adoramus, cum Ambrosio; and non id, sed eum qui super altar colitur.
Male enim, quid ibi colatur, quaerit Cardinalis, cum quis, debuit; cum
Nazianzenus eum dicat, non id. Nec carnem manducamus, quin adoremus prius, cum
Augustino: and Sacramentum tamens nulli adoramus.

Tailor in answer to that saying of Ambrose, [Adorate scabellum, etc. per
scabellum, terra intelligitur, per terram caro Christi, quam hodie quoque in
mysteriis, ( i. e. the Eucharist or Symbols) adoramus; and quam Apostoli in
Domino Jesu adorarunt.] We worship, etc. (says the Doctor) for we receive the
mysteries, as representing and exhibiting to our souls the flesh and blood of
Christ; so that we worship [he means the body or the flesh of Christ] in the
sumption and venerable usages of the signs of his body, but we give no divine
honor to the signs.

Forbes, quoted before, de Euchar. 2. l. 2. c. 9.. -- An Christus in
Eucharistia sit adorandus, Protestants saniores non dubitant. In sumptione
enim Eucharistiae (ut utar verbis Archiepiscopi Spalatensis) adorandus est
Christus vera latria; siquidem corpus ejus vivum and gloriosum miraculo quodam
ineffabili digne sumenti praesens adest: and haec adoratio non pani, non vino,
non sumptioni, non comestioni; sed ipsi corpori Christi immediate, per
sumptionem Eucharistiae exhibita, debetur and perficitur.

Spalato, 7. l. 11. c. 7.. -- Si secundum veritatem qui digne sumit Sacrementa
corporis and sanguinis Christi, ille vere and realiter corpus and sanguinem
Christi, in se corporaliter, modo tamen quodam spirituali, miraculoso, and
imperceptibili, sumit; omnis digne communicans adorare potest and debet corpus
Christi quod recipit: non quod lateat corporaliter in pane, aut sub pane, aut
sub speciebus and accidentibus panis; sed quod quando digne sumitur panis
sacramentalis, tunc etiam sumitur cum pane Christi corpus reale illi communioni
realiter praesens.

Thorndyke argues for it, Epil. 3. l. 30. c. p. 350. -- I suppose (says he)
that the body and blood of Christ may be adored wheresoever they are, and must
be adored by a good Christian, where the custom of the Church, which a
Christian is obliged to communicate with, requires it. -- This honor [i. e. of
worshipping the body and blood of Christ] being the duty of an affirmative
precept, (which according to the received rule, ties always, though it cannot tie
a Man to do the duty always; because he then should do nothing else:) what
remains but a just occasion to make it requisite, and presently to take hold
and oblige? And is not the presence thereof in the Sacrament of the Eucharist a
just occasion presently to express, by that bodily act of Adoration, that
inward honor, which we always carry toward our Lord Christ as God?

Now notwithstanding this, Declaration first says, That adoration ought not to
be done to any corporal presence of our Lord's natural Body, as in the
Eucharist; and 2ly, That upon this reason, because the natural Body of our Lord
is not in the Eucharist; and 3ly, That again upon this reason, because this
Body being in Heaven cannot also be in the Eucharist; i. e. in more places than
one at the same time: therefore it seems clearly to deny Adoration due to
Christ's Body as any way present in the Eucharist; contrary to the forecited
Doctrine, and contrary to the Religion of King James and Bishop Andrews
published to the world abroad. Or at least, in thus denying adoration due to a
corporal presence, and then not declaring any other presence of Christ's Body
in the Sacrament that is adorable, when as such a presence they believe: it
seems to betray the communicants to a greater miscarriage in their behavior,
as to such our Savior's presence at the receiving of these dreadful Mysteries;
and to abridg this duty of that extent in which it had formerly been
recommended by this Church. This briefly on the third Observable.

CHAP. V. Some Replies to the former Discourse.
TO conclude. Some Replies I can imagine to this former Discourse. Such as
these. 1. To the first Observable abovesaid, The First Limitation; The Natural
Body of our Lord not in the Eucharist modo naturali.
. 4. viz. That the natural Body of our Lord is not in the Eucharist, that the
meaning is, not, that it is not there in its essence, or substance at all; but
only that the natural body, etc. is not there modo naturali, or ad modum
corporis naturalis, not there after a natural manner. And if the Declaration
means only this, (for which see Dr. Tailor before. 15. and in the following
Discourse concerning the Eucharist. 6.) I grant it a truth; but find all other
parties, the Lutherans, Calvinists, the Roman as well as the English Church,
agreeing in it. [For, for the Roman thus speaks the Council of Trent, Sess. 13.
1. c. -- Neque enim haec inter se pugnant, juxta modum existendi naturalem
Salvatorem nostrum in coelis assidere ad dextra^^ Patris, and nobis substantia
sua adesse praesentem Sacramentaliter, ea existendi ratione; quam, etsi verbis
exprimere vix possumus, possibilem tamen esse Deo cogitatione per sidem
illustrata assequi possumus, etc. Thus Bellarmine de Euchar. 1 l. 2. c. -- 3,
5. c. 10. c. and elsewhere in that Treatise. -- Christum non esse in
Eucharistia ut in loco, vel ut in vase, aut sub aliquo velo, sed eo modo ut
panis prius; sed non ita, ut accidentia panis inhaereant Christi substantiae;
non coexistere aut commensurari loco; non esse, ita ut habeat ordinem ullum ad
corpora circumstantia; non esse sensibile, visibile, tangibile, extensum; non
adesse mobiliter, extensive, corporaliter, [as well understand this word to
exclude not naturam, but modum corporis.]

And thus Dr. Holden, p. 316. -- Verum and reale corpus Christi profitemur esse
in hoc Sacramento; non more corporeo and passibili, sed spirituali and
invisibili, nobis-omnino incognito. Spirituali, i. e. as opposed to corporali,
but by no means as opposed to reali. And as for the Lutheran I find this in the
pacifick Discourses of Bishop Morton, Bishop Hall, and Bishop Davenant (see the
11th. Chapter of his adhort. ad pacem Ecclesiae) sufficiently taken notice of,
and urged for lessening the difference between the several parties of the
Reformed. -- Christum adesse signis, but invisibiliter, intangibiliter,
spiritualiter, ineffabiliter, sacramentaliter, modo supernaturali, rationi
humanae incomprehensibili, coelesti, Deo soli noto. -- Again, (about oral
manducation in this his presence with the signs) -- Recipi quidem ore, sed
participari modo divino, admirabili, inscrutabili; non atteri dentibus, non
dividi, partiri, frangi: per substantialiter, corporaliter, oraliter, nihil
aliud significari nisi veram manducationem; non physicum, non esse cibum
corruptibilem, sed spiritualem; manducari a fidelibus, non ad corpus
nutriendum, [i. e. materially,] sed ad animam sustentandam, etc. Therefore do
they, as others, detest the Capernaitan error.

To these I may add what Bishop Forbes says, de Euchar. l. 1. c. 1. 28.. --
Nemo sanae mentis Christum de coelo, vel de dextra Patris descendere
visibiliter aut invisibiliter, ut in coena vel signis localiter, (i. e. per
modum corporis) adsit, existimat. Fideles omnes unanimi consensu, and uno ore
profitentur, se firmiter retinere articulos sidei sentiae credere se non esse
naturalem, corporalem, carnalem, localem, per se, etc. sed absque ulla coelorum
desertione, sed supernaturalem, etc.

But then, besides that the Proposition, carrying such a meaning, the natural
body is not here, and the natural body is here, but not after a natural mode:)
the Reason which follows, and is given to confirm it, hinders me from
thinking, that the present Clergy so understands it, viz. this Reason gives,
That Christ's natural Body is not there, because it is against the truth of
Christ natural Body to be (which seems all one as if it said, Christ's natural
Body cannot be) at one time in more places than one. But if they hold the
natural Body to be there, as well as in Heaven; this its being there (though
there modo non naturali) overthrows this Reason, by its being still in two
places, the same time, in one, modo naturali; in the other, modo non naturali.

To the 2d. Observable, the Reason given. It may be said also, The 2d.
Limitation; A natural Body not in many places at one modo naturali.
That it is against the truth of Christ's natural Body to be modo naturali, or
ad modum corporis naturalis, in more places than one at once; but yet that,
modo non naturali, it might by the divine power be rendered in diverse places at
once: and therefore that this natural Body ( absolutely speaking) is not denied
to be also in the Eucharist, and not only in Heaven.

1. But here also first, I do not see any truth in such a gloss, essence or
substance of a Body to be in more places or ubi's than one at once; he can make
all the same properties or qualities thereof to be so too. For I see not how
there can be more difficulty or contradiction, to make one and the same
quantity or quality to be in two places at once, than to make one and the same
natural substance; nor why more, to make the same natural substance of a body
to be circumscri^^^ (...) two places, than the same Angel definitive; both of
these being finite, and having certain limits of their essence, out of which
there essence naturally is not.

2. Admitting this Gloss for true, Declaration (. 45.) if they be thus
understood, can afford any foundation for the 3d. assertion for which they are
urged, viz. That no Adoration is due to Christ's natural Body as being in the
Eucharist: which natural Body being granted by these glosses to be there, though
not after a natural manner, yet can be no less, for this, an object of
Adoration.

Adoration, it may be said; That Adoration to Christ's Body, The Third
Limitation; Adoration not denied to Chapter Body as really and essentially, but
only as corporally present.
as really and essentially present in the Eucharist, is not denied; but only as
to any corporal presence of it there, (which seems also to be the cause, that
the Revivers of this Rubric changed here the words of the former) [No
Adoration ought to be done to the real and essential] into [No Adoration ought
to be done to the corporal presence.]

1. Yet methinks here also first, they should have more clearly expressed this,
to prevent such a misapprehension. 2. Adoration being granted due in one way,
as not due in another; Declaration have been changed thus, according to the
true meaning of those who received it; viz. That Adoration is intended and
ought to be done, though not to the Sacramental Bread and Wine there bodily
received, because the Sacramental Bread and Wine remain still in their very
natural substances, and therefore may not be adored; yet ought to be done to
the real and essential presence of Christ's natural Flesh and Blood: because
the natural Body and Blood of our Savior Christ are not only in Heaven, but
also truly in the Eucharist; it being not against the truth of Christ's natural
Body, ( if not after a natural manner, yet) in its true reality and essence,
after some other manner effected supernaturally by divine power, to be at one
time in more places than one.

Protestant Testimonies here produced, perhaps some other may be collected out
of the same Authors that seem to qualify these here set down, and better to
suit with the expressions of this Declaration. But neither will this afford any
relief. For to free them from a real contradiction, the sense of the others
reduced to those here cited with leave all things in the same state; or else
the sense of these accommodated to others will appear to abett no more than
bare Zuinglianism, [i. e. an absolute non-presence of Christ's Body in the
Eucharist, save only in its virtue, and effects, and the presence of his
Spirit, etc.] and to oppose and destroy the general Tradition and Doctrine of
the Fathers.

FINIS.
THE CATHOLICS DEFENSE, FOR THEIR ADORATION OF THE Body and Blood OF OUR LORD,
As believed Really and Substantially present IN THE Holy SACRAMENT OF THE
EUCHARIST.

At OXFORD Printed, Anno 1687.

THESES of Adoration of the EVCHARIST.
CONTENTS.
1. PRotestant-Concessions.. 1. 2. Catholick-Assertions. 1. Presuppositions. 1.
1. Of a Precept of giving Divine Worship to our Lord. 1. 2. Of our Lord's whole
Person its being where his Body is.. 2. 3. Of this Divine Person being
supremely adorable wherever his Body is: Granted by Protestants.. 3. Not only
in Virtue, but Substance. 5.
4. That this Presence of our Lord's Body and Blood is by Protestants affirmed
in the Eucharist; and that this Body is then to be worshipped with supreme
Adoration.. 5. 5. Further affirmed; That Christ's Body and Blood are present
not only to the worthy Communicant, but to the Symbols; and whilst present are
to be adored.. 7. 6. Granted by Daille, That though he and his believe not
Christ's Body present in the signs, yet they, for this, break not Communion
with those that hold it.. 8.
Catholic Assertions. 1. A Sign or Symbol to remain after Consecoration
distinct from the thing signified.. 9. This external Sign to be all, that which
is perceptible by the senses. of the Bread and Wine; though not their Substance..
10.
2. The word Sacrament to be taken not always in the same sense, but sometimes
for the Sign or Symbol; sometimes for the thing signified.. 11. 3. Catholics
ground Adoration, not on Transubstantiation, (which, as also
Consubstantiantion, involves it) but on Real Presence with the Symbols:
maintaining Adoration due, though Christ's Body were present, neither under the
Accidents of Bread (as Catholics say); nor under the Substance of Bread (as
Lutherans say); but after some other unknown manner distinct from both.. ^7. 4.
Supposing (not grant^^g ^bstantiation an error, yet if Corporal or Real Pres^^^
(...) by the Lutherans be true, Catholics plead their Adoration warrantable..
18. 5. Supposing Real Presence an Error, and the Lutheran and Roman Church both
mistaken; yet these latter, in such Adoration, as excusable from Idolatry, as
the other.. 19. 6. Supposing both the former Opinions Errors, and (indeed) no
Presence of Christ's Body with the Symbols at all; yet such Adoration by the
one, or the other of Christ (who is a true object of supreme Adoration, and
only mistaken by them to be where he is not) cannot be termed such Idolatry, as
is the professed worshipping of an Object not at all adorable.. 21. 7. Whatever
Idolatry it is called in a Manichean worshipping Christ in the Sun, or in an
Israelite worshipping God in the Calves at Dan and Bethel, because adoring a
fancy of their own, (and a good intention grounded on a culpable ignorance
excuses none from Idolatry;) yet since Daille, and perhaps others, allows a
reasonable (though mistaken) ground of Adoration sufficient for avoiding the just
imputation of Idolatry; hence if Catholics can produce a rational ground of
their apprehending Christ present in the Eucharist, though possibly mistaken in
it, they are to be excused from Idolatry, on the same terms.. 22. Catholics
Grounds for their Belief. 1. Divine Revelation.. 24. 2. The Declaration thereof
by the supremest Church Authority in Councils.. 25. 3. The Testimony of
Primitive Times.. 26. 4. The Universal Doctrine and Practice of the later, both
Eastern and Western Churches.. 27. 5. Protestant Concessions.. 28.

8. For these Grounds given by Catholics, Idolatry by many Protestants of late
but faintly charged upon the Church of Rome*. 30. 9. Catholics grant, That to
adore what is believed to be Bread, or perform the external signs of Adoration
to our Lord as present there, where the Worshipper believes he is not, is
unlawful to be done by any whilst so persuaded.. 33.


CATHOLIC Theses, Concerning the ADORATION of Christ's Body and Blood IN THE
EUCHARIST.
what in reason is or must be conceded by Protestants. 2. Examine what
Catholics maintain.

1. I suppose a general precept of giving supreme and divine adoration to our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: And, Suppositions.
that as Affirmative precepts (such as this is) do not oblige to every time,
and place; so, if they are unlimited and general, they warrant the lawfulness
of our practice of them in any time or place; nor is there any need of any
particular divine command in respect of these (i. e. places and times,) without
which command we may not obey them. [For, what absurdities would follow hence?
For, Was our Savior, when on Earth, never lawfully worshipped, but in place,
or time, first commanded? Nor then, when he showed and presented himself to
them for some other purpose, than for adoration? as to teach them, to suffer
for them, etc. Might not the Magi worship him lying in the Cratch, divested of
all appearance of Majesty, without a special command from God?] But it is
sufficient to warrant our practice of them; if, in respect of such time, and
place, there be no express prohibition.

wherever the Body of our Lord is, there is his whole person; it being no
more since his Resurrection to be a dead body, (for Christ dies no more, Romans
6.9.); but having the Soul joined with it: as likewise, ever since the
Incarnation, having also its hypostasis or subsistence from the Divinity joined
with it; even when it was in the Grave, and the Soul severed from it.

where ever this Body of our Lord is present, there this Divine Person is
supremely adorable: As the Divinity every where present is every where
adorable, and may be so adored in the presence or before any of his Creatures;
if such adoration be directed to him, not it, (as, when I see the Sun rising, I
may lawfully fall down on my knees, and bless the Omnipotent Creator of it; and
see 1 Cor. 14.24, 25.) may be, I say, but not, must: for where there is only
such a general presence of the Divinity; as is in every time, place, and thing;
here our Adoration may and must be dispensed with, as to some times, and places.

None likewise can deny, That the Humanity of our Lord also, in a notion
abstractive from the Divinity personally united to it, is truly adorable; though
this with a worship not exceeding that due to a Creature.

Andrews, Resp. ad Apol. p. 195. Christus ipse Sacramenti res [sive] in and cum
Sacramento, sive extra and sine Sacramento, ubi-ubi est, adorandus est.

Thus also Daily, Apol. des ^glis. Reform. c. 10.
Apol. des Eglis. Reform. c. 10. who, in pitching especially on this point,
Adoration of the Eucharist, as hindering the Protestants longer stay in the
Roman Communion, has in this Discourse, and in two Replies to Chaumont made
afterward in defense of it, discussed it more particularly than many others) in
answer to S. Ambrose and S. Austin their adoring the flesh of Christ in the
Mysteries. -- The Humanity of Jesus Christ (says he) personally united to the
Divinity, is by consequence truly and properly adorable. And again: They only
adored Jesus Christ in the Sacrament; which is the thing we agree to. And ibid.
p. 29. We do willingly adore Jesus Christ, who is present in the Sacrament,
namely by Faith in the heart of the Communicants, etc. And see Dr.
Stillingfleet in his Roman. Idol. c. 2. p. 114. -- The Question (says he)
between us, is not whether the person of Christ is to be worshipped with Divine
worship, for that we freely acknowledge. And although the humane nature of
Christ, of it self, can yield us no sufficient reason for adoration [he must
mean, Divine]: yet being considered as united to the Divine Nature, that cannot
hinder, the same Divine worship being given to his Person, which belongs to his
Divine Nature; any more than the Robes of a Prince can take off from the honor
due unto him. Though how well that which he says before, ibid.. 2. (as it seems
against worshipping Christ supposed present in the Eucharist, without a special
command to do it) consists with what he says here, and with what follows, let
him look to it.]

4. It is affirmed by many Protestants,. 5. n. 1.
especially those of the Church of England, that this Body and Blood of our
Lord is really present, not only in virtue, but in substance in the Eucharist,
either with the Symbols immediately upon the Consecration; or at least so, as
to be received in the Eucharist, together with the Symbols, by every worthy
Communicant: and that this Body and Blood of our Lord, which is not severed
from his Person, is then to be worshipped with supreme Adoration.

[See 1. for a substantial presence of Christ's body in the Eucharist, (I mean
at least to the worthy Receiver, contradistinct to a Presence by effect only,
Influence, Virtue, Grace, or the Holy Spirit, uniting us to Christ's Body in
Heaven) Dr. Tailor of Real Presence, p. 12. When the word Real (says he) is
denied [ i. e. by Protestants, as it was in King Edward's time] the word Real
is taken for Natural, [ i. e. as he explains it p. 5. including not only the
nature of the Body, for that is the substance; but the corporal and natural
manner of its existence: he goes on,] But the word substantialiter is also used
by Protestants in this question, which I suppose may be the same with that
which is in the Article of Trent; Sacramentaliter praesens Salvator substantia
sua nobis adest; in substance, but after a Sacramental manner. See the
Confession of Beza, and the French Protestants (related by Hosp. Hist. Sacram.
part. ult. p. 251..) Fatemur in coena Domini non modo omnia Christi beneficia,
sed ipsam etiam Filii hominis substantiam, ipsam, inquam, veram carnem and
verum illum sanguinem, quem fudit pro nobis, non significari duntaxat, aut
symbolice, typice, vel figurate proponi tanquam absentis memoriam; sed vere ac
certo repraesentari, exhiberi, and applicanda offerri, adjunctis symbolis
minime nudis, sed quae (quod ad Deum ipsum promittentem and offerentem attinet)
semper rem ipsam vere ac certo conjunctam habeant; sive fidelibus, sive
infidelibus proponantur.

Again, Beza Epist 68. speaking against Alemannus, and some others, who opposed
a substantial presence; Volunt (says he) ex-Gallica Confessione [Art. 36.] and
Liturgia [Catech. Din. 53.] ex pungi substantiae vocem, idcirco de industria
passim a Calvino and a me usurpatam, ut eorum calumniae occarreremus, qui nos
clamitant pro re Sacramenti non ipsum Christum, sed ejus duntaxat dona and
energiam, ponere. And Epist. 5. he argues thus against the same Alemannus. --
Velim igitur te imprimis intueri Christi verba; Hoc est corpus meum, quod pro
vobis traditur, and Hic est sanguis meus qui pro vobis funditur. -- Age pro his
vocibus Corpus and Sanguis, dicamus, Hoc est efficacia mortis meae, quae pro
vobis traditur; Hic est Spiritus meus qui pro vobis effunditur: Quid ineptius
est hac oratione? Nam certe verba illa, Quod pro vobis traditur, and Qui pro
vobis funditur, necessario huc te adigunt, ut de ipsamet Corporis and Sanguinis
substantia hoc intelligere cogaris.

See Hooker, Eccles. Pol. 5. l. 67.. p. 357. Wherefore should the world
continue still distracted and rent with so manifold contentions* when there
remains now no Controversy, saving only about the subject where Christ is? --
Nor does any thing rest doubtful in this, but whether, when the Sacrament is
administered, Christ be whole within Man only; or else his Body and Blood be
also externally seated in the very consecrated Elements themselves? [But a
great Controversy surely there would be beside this, if the one party held
Christ's Body substantially, and the other virtually present.] Again, p. 360.
-- All three opinions do thus far accord in one, etc. That these holy
mysteries, received in due manner, do instrumentally both make us partakers of
that body, and blood, which were given for the life of the World; and besides
also impart unto us, even in true and real, though mystical, manner, the very
Person of our Lord himself, whole, perfect, and entire.

Thus also Bishop Andrews, Resp. ad Apol. Bell, 1. cap. p. 11. Nobis vobiscum
de Objecto convenit, de modo lis omnis est. [But there would be a lis
concerning the Object, if one affirmed the substance of the body there, the
other only the virtue, or efficacy.]

See Bishop Cosins his late Historia Transubstantiationis,. 5. n. 2.
tit. cap. 2. Protestantium omnium consensus de reali, id est, vera, ( sed non
carnali) Praesentia Christi in Eucharistia manifest constat. And in proof of
this p. 10. he quotes Poinet Bishop of Winchester, his Dialacticon de veritate,
natura, atque substantia Corporis and Sanguinis Christi in Eucharistia; Quod
(says he) non alio consilio edidit, quam ut fidem and doctrinam Ecclesiae
Anglicanae illustraret. Et primo ostendit Eucharistiam non solum figuram esse
Corporis Domini; sed etiam ipsam veritatem, naturam, atque substantiam in se
comprehendere; idcirco nec has voces Naturae and Substantiae fugiendas esse;
Veteres enim de hoc Sacramento disserentes ita locutos fuisse. Secundo quaerit,
an voces illae, Veritas, Natura, and Substantia, communi more in hoc mysterio a
veteribus intelligebantur; an peculiari and Sacramentis magis accommodata
ratione? Neque enim observandum esse solum, quibus verbis olim Patres usi sunt,
sed quid istis significare ac docere voluerint. Et licet discrimen ipse cum
Patribus agnoscat, inter Corpus Christi formam humani corporis naturalem
habens, and quod in Sacramento est Corpus mysticum; maluit tamen discrimen
illud ad modum praesentiae and exhibitionis, quam ad ipsam rem, hoc est, Corpus
Christi verum accommodari; cum certissimum sit, non aliud Corpus in Sacramento
fidelibus dari, nisi quod a Christo pro sidelium salute in mortem traditum
fuit. Thus he, justifying Poinet's expressions speaking in the language of the
Fathers. p. 43. -- Non dicimus (says he) in hac sacra Coena nos tantum esse
participes fructus mortis, and passionis Christi; sed fundum ipsum cum
fructibus, qui ab ipso ad nos redeant, conjungimus; asserentes cum Apostolo, 1
Cor. 10.16. Panem quam frangimus esse sCorporis Christi, and Poculum Sanguinis
ejus communicationem; imo in eadem illa substantia, quam accepit in utero
Virginis, and quam sursum in coelos invexit; in hoc tantum a Pontificiis
dissidentes, quod illi manducationem hanc and conjunctionem, corporaliter fieri
credunt; nos non naturali aliqua ratione, aut modo corporali; sed tamen tam
vere, quam si naturaliter aut corporaliter Christo conjungeremur. [Here I
understand his non modo corporali not to exclude Corpus Domini, or non ratione
naturali to excude natura rei, or the thing it self; but only to signify, that
the Body is present, not after a corporal manner, or with the dimensions and
other common qualities of a Body; which thing indeed Catholics also affirm.]

He seems also to grant,. 5. n. 3.
this substantial Presence to be with the Symbols, after Consecration, on the
Table, and before communicating. For p. 65. for this he quotes the Conc.
Nicaen. Sublata in altum mente per fidem consideremus, proponi in sacra illa
mensa Agnum Dei tollentem peccata mundi. And p. 43. -- Quoniam (says he) res
significata nobis offertur and exhibetur tam vere quam signa ipsa: ea ratione
signorum cum Corpore and Sanguine Domini conjunctionem agnoscimus; and mutata
esse elementa dicimus in usum alium ab eo quem prius habuerunt. [ i. e. to be
now conjoined with, and to exhibit to us this Body of our Lord: which
conjunction, he says p. 45. is made per omnipotentiam Dei.] So he says ibid.
-- Non quaeritur, An Corpus Christi a Sacramento suo, juxta mandatum ejus
instituto ac usurpato, absit; quod nos Protestants and Reformati nequaquam
dicimus aut credimus. Nam cum ibi detur and sumatur, omnino oportet ut adsit;
licet Sacramento suo quasi contectum sit, and ibi, ut in se est, conspici
nequeat. And p. 125. -- Fieri enim (says he) de Elemento Sacramentum [which
surely is done in the Consecration] nec consistere Sacramentum sine Re
Sacramenti, firmiter tenent. And this conjunctio Corporis Christi, p. 35. he
affirms to be made in receiving the Sacrament, not only cum anima, sedetiam cum
corpore nostro.

Lastly,. 5. n. 4.
the modus of this true Presence of the Body of our Lord with the Signs or
Symbols in the Sacrament, when as it remains in Heaven till our Lord's second
coming, he makes, as others, to be ineffabilis, imperscrutabilis, non ratione
inquirendus aut indagandus. p. 36. -- Nos vero hunc modum [praesentiae Christi
in Eucharistia] fatemur cum Patribus esse ineffabilem, atque imperscrutabilem,
hoc est, non ratione inquirendum, aut indagandum; sed sola fide credendum. Etsi
enim videtur incredibile in tanta locorum distantiapenetrare ad nos Christi
carnem, ut nobis sit in cibum; meminisse tamen oportet, quantum supra sensus
nostros emineat Spiritus Sancti virtus, and quam stultum sit ejus immensitatem
modo nostro metiri velle. Quod ergo men's nostra non comprehendit, concipiat
fides. [The like to which esse ineffabilem, and supra sensus, Catholics say of
the same presence of our Lord in the Eucharist in tanta locorum distantia,
whilst also at the very same time it is in Heaven.] And thus Lanfrank long ago
in his answer to Berengarius, (who contended that Christi Corpus coelo devocari
non poterit,) quoting the words of St. Andrew a little before his Passion: --
Cum vero in terris carnes ejus sunt comestae, and vere sanguis ejus sit
bibitus; ipse tamen usque in tempora restitutionis omnium in coelestibus ad
dextram Patris integer semper perseverat and vivat. Si quaeris (says he) modum
quo id fieri possit; breviter ad praesens respondeo, Mysterium est fidei: credi
salubriter potest, vestigari utiliter non potest. See also the Gallican
Confession, produced by this Bishop, p. 23. where they say, Christus in coelis
mansurus donec veniat; and yet nutriens and vivifica^s nos Corporis and
Sanguinis sui substantia, [ i. e. in the Sacrament:] that Hoc mysterium nostr^e
cum Christo coalitionis tam sublime est, ut omnes nostros sensus, totumque adeo
ordinem naturae superat. In all these then does not the incomprehensibility and
supernaturality of this Mystery lie in this, that the one Body of our Lord
should be at once in two places, viz. present at the same time in Heaven, and
to us here in the Sacrament? And yet this Bishop seems to find some trouble in
it, to make any other unexplicable or unintelligible mystery in the Catholics
Transubstantiation, save only this. See p. 122. For the ceasing of the
substance of the Elements by God's Omnipotency he allows very feisible; and
then the Adduction of Christ's Body (pre-existent) in the place of their
substance, labors under no other difficulty, save this, this Body its being at
once in two places, here and in Heaven: nor, having twice p. 122. and p. 125.
mentioned such a Sacramental Presence of our Lord, has he replied any thing
against it, but that thus the term of Transubstantiation is not rightly applied
to such an Adduction; which is a Logomachy. But this seems the difficulty and
incomprehensibility that Protestants also confess in their Sacramental Presence
of our Lord in tanta locorum distantia pascentis nos in Eucharistia vera
Corporis sui praesentia and substantia.

Lastly, after this Bishop, with others,. 5. n. 5.
has so far conformed to the Expressions and Language of the Fathers, as to
allow an Essential or Substantial presence of Christ's Body, it seems he finds
some of these Expressions also so far to advance toward a Substantial
transmutation of the Elements, as that he says, p. 113. -- Non abnuimus,
nonnulla apud Chrysostomum aliosque Patres inveniri, quae emphatice, immo vero
Hyperbolice de Eucharistia prolata sunt* Et quae, nisi dextre capiantur,
incautos homines facile in errores abducent. And below: Sanctissimi Patres quo
haec auditorum animis vehementius and efficacies imprimerent, de Typis, tanquam
si essent ipsa Antitypa, Oratorum more multa enunciant. And again, p. 117. Si
verba [i. e. of some of the Fathers] nimis rigide urgeantur absque intellectu
Sacramentali; nihil aliud ex iis colligi potest, quam Panem and Vinum proprie
and realiter ipsum Christi Corpus and Sanguinem esse; quod ne ipsi quidem
Transubstantiatores admittunt. Where he granting the expressions of some of the
Fathers so high as to transcend the Assertions of Catholics, or
Transubstantiators; whose Assertions again transcend those of Protestants in
this Mystery: it seems not reasonable, that he should after this depress and
extenuate their meanings, to counteance and comply rather with that Opinion
that is farther distant from their expressions. Neither will the same Fathers
calling, in other places, the Elements Symbols and Signs of Christ's Body, (as
he pleads p. 116.) afford him that relief he seeks for from it. For since the
Catholics, as well as Protestants, do firmly maintain and profess an external
Symbol, as well as the thing signified in the Eucharist, viz. all that is
perceived by our senses, and that is visible, gustable, or tangible, of the
Elements; as the Protestants contend this Symbol to be not only these, but the
very Substance and nature of the Elements also: here it will be found that
these sentences of the Fathers do suffer much less force and torture, if
understood according to the Symbol supposed by Catholics, than that by
Protestants. For example, the Bishop p. 120.
has mentioned that passage of the ancient Author de Coena Domini in S.
Cyprian's Works: the words are these; -- Panis iste quem Dominus discip^lis
porrigebat, non effigy sed natura mutatus, Omnipotentia Verbi factus est caro:
and sicut in persona Christi Humanitas apparebat, and latebat Divinitas; ita
Sacramento visibili ineffabiliter divina se effudit essentia. Here, I say, if
the Sacramentum visibile, and the external Symbol be taken in this Bishops way,
for substantia or natura panis, all is extremely forced, and confounded; and so
he is driven to expound it, that by mutatio naturae panis is meant only mutatio
usus p. 120.
the change of which use of the Bread also seems no object of God's
Omnipotence. But the Symbol or Sacrament being taken for such as the Catholics
make it, viz. for the external Effigies or Sensibles of the Bread, all is good
sense and coherent, and nothing strained: and the Omnipotentia Verbi rightly
applied to the mutatio naturae panis: as God's Omnipotency may be observed in
the Fathers to be frequently urged, not only in relation to the presence of our
Lords Body and Blood there, but also to the transmutation of the Elements
there, whilst the exteriors of them still remain. But now in the last place,
supposing the natura panis to remain, which the Father says is changed, yet so
long as these Divines maintain according to the Doctrine of the Fathers a
substantial presence of our Lord's Body in the Eucharist, and that with the
Symbols (as he says p. 45. Sacramento suo quasi contectum); though they will not
admit such a Symbol as the Catholics, and a Transubstantiation of the
Elements: yet they must (if complying with the Fathers) at least confess some
kind of Consubstantiation or conjunction of the substances of Christ's Body and
of the Elements in the Eucharist; to which opinion the sayings of the Fathers
constrained Luther, as he often professes. Mean while if it be asked, why such
a Consubstantiation is declined by Catholics? their answer is ready; viz.
because the greatest Councils that have been held successively in the
Church-Catholick, upon and since the agitation of this controversy, have
frequently and constantly stated and delivered, That the Scriptures, as
understood and expounded by the Fathers and Church-Tradition, declare a
Transubstantiation; in the Judgments of which Councils Catholics hold it their
Duty to acquiesce. This of a Substantial Presence asserted by Protestants.

2. Next,. 6. n. 1.
for Adoration too of this Body, as there present either with the Symbols upon
their Consecration, or at least to all worthy receivers, see the same Bishop
Andrews, ib. c. 8. p. 195; where to what Bellarmin has said, Inter novitia and
nupera dogmata ponit Adorationem Sacramenti Eucharistae, i. e. adorationem
Christi Domini in Sacramento, miro, sed vero modo praesentis, he answers thus:
Sacramenti ait, id est, Christi Domini in Sacramento. Rex autem Christum in
Eucharistia vere praesentem, vere and adorandum statuit, rem scil. Sacramenti;
at non Sacramentum. And -- Nos vero and in mysteriis carnem Christi adoramus,
cum Ambrosio; and non id [ i. e. Sacramentum] sed eum, qui super altar
colitur, [ i. e. Christum rem Sacramenti.] And is not this res Sacramenti
worshipped as upon the Altar too with the Symbols there?

Since him, Bishop Bramhal to the Bishop of Chalcedon, Rep. to Chalced. 2. c.
p. 57.
asking, how the Protestants could profess to agree in all essentials of
Religion with the Roman Church, which they held to be an idolatrous Church, i.
e. in worshipping the Sacrament as their God? thus replies: The Sacrament is to
be adored, said the Council of Trent: The Sacrament, i. e. formally the Body
and Blood of Christ, say some of your Authors, [where he quotes Bellarmin de
Sacramento, 4. l. 29. c.] we say the same. [So Cardinal Bellarmin and Bishop
Bramhal are agreed about this Adoration of our Lord in the Eucharist.] The
Sacrament, i. e. the species of Bread and Wine, say others: that we deny, and
esteem it to be idolatrous. Should we charge the whole Church with Idolatry for
the Error of a party?

The same concession with the same distinction makes the French-Protestant
Divine Daille,. 6. n. 2.
in his second Reply to Chaumont, p. 29. There is a vast difference between to
adore the Sacrament, and to adore Jesus Christ in the Sacrament, or in the
Mysteries. -- The later of these we freely do, since we believe him God blessed
for ever together with the Father. And afterward, in answer to the Fathers:
They speak (says he) of the Flesh of Jesus Christ in the Mysteries, (of which
we do not contest the Adoration) and not of the Eucharist. And again: They only
adored Jesus Christ in the Sacrament, which is the thing we agree to. And in
his Apology, Ch -- p -- he says concerning the Body of Christ if in the
Sacrament, That it is evident, that one may, and that one ought to worship it;
seeing that the Body of Christ is a subject adoreable. And Chap. 10. he grants
upon Adorate scabellum, -- That the faithful cast down themselves before the
Ark to adore the Lord there, where the Divine Service was particularly joined
to the place where the Ark was. Dr. Tailor says Real presence. 13. n. 5.
, -- Concerning the action of Adoration, it is a fit address in the day of
Solemnity with a sursum corda, with our hearts lift up to Heaven, where Christ
sits (we are sure) at the right hand of the Father. For, nemo digne manducat,
nisi prius adoraverit, etc. [which, rightly understood, means illud quod
manducat.] Here the Doctor allows adoring in the the Sacrament Christ as in
Heaven. But if Christ's Body (and so himself in a special manner) be
substantially present in the Eucharist, here on Earth; why not adore him, not
only as in Heaven, but as present here? See elsewhere, Real Pres. p. 144. where
he says, We worship the flesh of Christ in the Mysteries exhibiting it to our
Souls.

See Spalatensis de rep. Eccles. l. 7. c. 11.. 7. etc. -- Si secundum veritatem
qui digne sumit sacramenta corporis and sanguinis Christi,. 6. n. 3.
ille vere and realiter corpus and sanguinem Christi, in se corporaliter, modo
tamen quodam spirituali, miraculoso, and imperceptibili, sumit; omnis digne
communicans adorare potest and debet corpus Christi quod recipit. [Is then the
worthy Communicant to worship, but not the unworthy; because Christ's Body is
there present to the one, but not to the other?] Non quod lateat corporaliter
in pane, aut sub pane, aut sub speciebus and accidentibus panis; sed quod
quando digne sumitur panis sacramentalis, tuncetiam sumitur cum pane Christi
corpus reale, illi communioni realiter praes^ns. Thus Spalatensis.

And so Bishop Forbes, de Euchar. 2. l. 2. c. 9.. -- An Christus in Eucharistia
sit adorandus, Protestants saniores non dubitant. In sumptione enim
Eucharistiae ( ut utar verbis Archiepiscopi Spalatensis) adorandus est Christus
vera latria, siquidem corpus ejus vivum, ac gloriosum, miraculo quodam
ineffabili digne sumenti praesens adest; and haec adoratio non pani, non vino,
non sumptioni, non comestioni, sed ipsi Corpori immediate, per sumptionem
Eucharistiae exhibito, debetur, and perficitur. [Thus then Protestants allow
Adoration to Christ's Body and Blood, as substantially present in the
Eucharist, if not to the Symbols, yet to die worthy receiver.]

Lutherans, more expressly, that Christ's body and blood are present, not only
to the worthy Communicant, but to the consecrated Symbols; and whilst so
present, which is during the action of the Lord's Supper, ( i. e. as I conceive
them, from the Consecration till the end of the Communion) are to be adored.

[Of which thus Chemnitius, Exam. Conc. Trid. part. 2. sess. 13. c. 5. Deum and
Hominem in Divina and humana natura, in action Coenae Dominicae, vere and
substantialiter praesentem, in spiritu and veritate adorandum, nemo negat; nisi
qui cum Sacramentariis vel negat, vel dubitat de praesentia Christi in coena.
Ibid. -- Et quidem humanam etiam ejus naturam, propter unionem cum Divinitate,
esse adorandam, nemo nisi Nestorianus in dubium vocat. -- Ita Jacob Genesis 28.
Moses Exodus 34. Elias 3 Reg. 19. non habebant sane peculiare mandatum, ut in
illis locis Deum adorarent: sed quia habebant generale mandatum ut Deum ubique
adorarent, and certi erant Deum sub externis and visibilibus illis symbolis
vere adesse, and peculiari modo gratiae se ibi patefacere; certe Deum ipsum,
quem ibi presentem esse credebant, adorabant. Nec vero Deum illi procul in
coelo Empyraeo a se remotum and absentem, sed vere praesentem, and quidem
peculiari modo gratiae praesentem, adorarunt. -- Thus he. Nor do I know, that
the Calvinists have at any time accused their brethren the Lutherans of
Idolatry in such a practice. I find also Mr. Thorndike in the like manner
clearly maintaining, 1. A presence of Christ's Body with the symbols,
immediately upon Consecration: and, 2. An Adoration due to it. See the former,
in Epilog. l. 3. c. 2. and, 3. where p. 17. I have said enough (says he) to
evidence the mystical and spiritual presence of the flesh and blood of Christ
in the Elements, as the Sacrament of the same, before any Man can suppose that
spiritual presence of them to the soul, which the eating and drinking Christ's
flesh and blood spiritually by living Faith imports. And see the latter, ib.
c. 30. p. 350. -- I suppose (says he) that the Body and Blood of Christ may be
adored wherever they are; and must be adored by a good Christian, where the
custom of the Church, which a Christian is obliged to communicate with,
requires it. -- This honor [ i. e. of worshipping the Body and Blood of
Christ] being the duty of an affirmative precept, (which, according to the
received rule, ties always; though it cannot tie a Man to do the duty always,
because he then should do nothing else:) what remains but a just occasion to
make it requisite, and presently to take hold and oblige? And is not the
presence thereof in the Sacrament of the Eucharist a just occasion presently to
express by the bodily act of Adoration, that inward honor, which we always
carry toward our Lord Christ as God? -- Again p. 351. Not to balk that freedom
(says he) which has carried me to publish all this: I do believe that it was
so practiced and done [ i. e. our Lord Christ really worshipped in the
Eucharist] in the ancient Church, and in the symbols before receiving; which I
maintain from the beginning to have been the true Church of Christ, obliging
all to conform to it in all things within the power of it. I know the
consequence to be this, That there is no just cause why it should not be done
at present, but that cause which justifies the reforming of some part of the
Church without the whole: which, were it taken away, that it [this adoration]
might be done again, and ought not to be, of it self alone, any cause of
Distance [ i. e. between the Churches of Christ.]

6. It is granted by Daille in his Apology, c. 11. and in his defense of it
against Chaumont, 1. That although the Reformed of his party, do not believe the
presence of Christ's body in the Signs, yet they esteem not the belief of it so
criminal, that it obliges them to break off communion with all those that hold
it. So that, had the Roman Church no other error, save this, they freely
confess, it had given them no sufficient cause of separating from it: as (says
he) appears in this, that we tolerate and bear with it in the Lutherans. And
again, Reply to Chaumont, p. 63.
for the adoration of this Body as so present with the signs, (when indeed it
is not so,) he says, -- That it is only vain and unprofitable, and that, as
one may say, falls to nothing; being deceived not in this, that it makes its
addresses to an object not adorable; but in this only, that mistaking it, it
seeks it, and thinks to embrace it there where it is not. And c. 12. he also
freely confesses, That had the Church of Rome only obliged them to worship
Jesus Christ in the Sacrament, and not used this expression, that the service
of Latria ought to be rendered to the Holy Sacrament: Conc. Trid. sess. 13.5.
she had not obliged them by this to adore any Creature. Thus he, as it were
constrained thereto by the Lutherans Protestants Opinion and Practice, for his
retaining their Communion, and freeing them from Idolatry. 2. It is granted
also, Apol. c. 11. -- That when our Lord was on Earth, a Disciple's giving
divine honors, upon mistake, to another person much resembling him, would be
no Idolatry. So, supposing the Consecrated Host were truly adorable, granted,
that should any one see one on the Altar, that happened not to be Consecrated,
and Worship it, neither would such a person be guilty of Idolatry. So he
pronounces him blameless, that should give the Honor and Service due to his
true Prince to a Subject, whom, very like, he took for his Prince. Yet that a
Manichean worshipping the Sun, mistaken to be the very substance of Christ,
(see S. Austin contra Faustum l. 12. c. 22. l. 20. c. 9.) for Christ; or (to
represent the opinion more refined) worshipping with divine honors not the
Sun, but only Christ in the Sun, he could not in this be excused from Idolatry.
And, that that which distinguishes these cases, and renders them so different,
is, not a good intention to worship only him that is truly God, or Christ; nor
the opinion and belief Men have, that the Object they worship is truly such;
for this good intention (as he in that Chapter, and other Reformed Writers, and
among others Dr. Stillingfleet, copiously press) is common to the worst of
Idolaters, as to the rest: but the error or ignorance of the Judgment, from
which flows this mistaking practice; as that is perversely affected and
culpable, or innocent and excusable. Of which thus he, Ibid. -- I maintain,
that ignorance excuses here when it is involuntary; when the subject [I add,
or the presence of it] we mistake in, is so concealed, that whatever desire we
have, or pains we take, to find out the truth, it is not possible for us to
discover it. -- But there, where the ignorance of the Object [or of its
presence] proceeds not from the obscurity or difficulty of the thing, but from
the malice or negligence of the person; this is so far from excusing, that it
aggravates our fault. Thus he excuses one that should have adored a person much
resembling our Lord, or an unconsecrated Host, -- because no passion or
negligence of his caused such a mistake: -- but not those who worshipped the
Sun for Christ, [ or Christ in the Sun;] -- because (says he) the ignorance of
such people is visibly affected and voluntary, arising from their fault only,
and not from the obscurity of the things they are ignorant in. Nor so Roman
Catholics in their worshipping the Sacrament for Christ; because (says he)
the error proceeds entirely from their passion, and not any thing from abroad.
[Thus he, clearing such actions from Idolatry, where the error of the judgment
is no way perverse, voluntary, and culpable.]

Having hitherto showed you several Concessions of Protestants, and having
urged none here from any of them, but such as I think all will, or in reason
ought, to admit; next I proceed to examine, what it is that in this matter
Catholics do maintain.

Catholics affirm in the Eucharist, Assertions.
after the Consecration, a sign or symbol to remain still distinct; and having
a diverse existence from that of the thing signified, or from Christ's Body
contained in, or under it. [See Conc. Trident. sess. 13. c. 3. Hoc esse commune
Eucharistiae cum aliis Sacramentis, ut sit symbolum rei sacrae, and visibilis
forma invisibilis gratiae. By which forma visibilis (as Bellarmin expounds it,
de Eucharist. 4. l. 6. c.) is meant the species of the Elements, not the Body
of Christ. -- So Bellarmin, Euchar. 2. l. 15. c. Etiam post consecrationem
species panis and vini sunt signa corporis and sanguinis Christi ibi revera
existentium. -- And 3. l. 21. c. Accidentia remanent; quia si etiam accidentia
abessent, nullum esset in Eucharistia signum sensibile; proinde nullum esset
Sacramentum. So Estius in 4. sent. 1. did. 3.. Eucharistia constat ex pane,
tanquam materia quadam partim transeunte, partim remanente; transeunte quidem
secundum substantiam; remanente vero secundum accidentia, in quibus tota
substantiae vis and operatio nihilominus perseverat. Hence they allow of that
expression of Irenaeus, 4. l. 34. c. where he says, -- Eucharistiam ex duabus
rebus, terrena and coelesti, compositam esse. And of S. Gregory, dial. 4. l.
58. c. In hoc mysterio summa imis sociari: terrena exlestibus jungi: unum ex
visibilibus ac invisibiltbus fieri.] So that though these symbols and Christ's
Body may be said to make unum aggregatum; yet, if this be only the species or
accidents of die Bread and Wine that remains, these cannot be said to have any
inherence in this Body of Christ, (though it is true on the other side that,
being accidents only, they cannot be said to make a distinct suppositum from
it;) or, if a substance remain, this cannot be said to have any hypostatical
union (or to make one suppositum) with our Lord's Divinity or Humanity, as our
Lord's Humanity has such an union with his Divinity. From which it is observed
by Dr. Tailor ( Real Presence, p. 336.) That therefore still there is the less
reason for Romanists to give any Divine worship (as he says they do) to the
symbols. Far therefore are Catholics from granting (what a late Author
Stilligst Romans Idol. P. 128.
pretends they do, but that which he alleges no way shows it) as great an
hypostatical union between Christ and the Sacrament, as between the Divine and
Humane Nature.

all that of the Bread and Wine that is perceived by any sense. And though after
such Consecration the substance of the Bread and Wine is denied to remain yet
is substance here taken in such a sense, as that neither the hardness nor
softness, nor the frangibility, nor the savor, nor the odor, nor the
nutritive virtue of the Bread, nor nothing visible, nor tangible, or otherwise
perceptible by any sense, are involved in it. Of which signs also they
predicate many things, which they will by no means allow to be properly said
of, or at least to be received in, or effected by, or upon Christ's Body, now
immortal and utterly impassible. So sapere, digeri, nutrire, confortare,
corporaliter; and again, frangi dentibus, comburi, rodi a brutis, animalibus,
and whatever other things may be named (excepting only those attributes, which
in general are necessary to indicate the presence of Christ's Body to us with
the species whilst integrae; as the local positions, elevari, recondi, ore
recipi, etc.) they apply to these symbols that remain; not to Christ's Body
which is indivisibly there. -- Christus vere in sacramento existens nullo modo
laedi potest; non cadit in terram, [id enim proprie cadit (says he) quod
corporaliter movetur; so also, anima non cadit,] non teritur, non roditur, non
putrescit, non crematur: illa enim (says Bellarmin De Eucharist. 3. l. 10. c.
) in speciebus istis recipiuntur, sed Christum non afficiunt.

Sacrament, not to be taken always in the same sense; but sometimes to be used
to signify only the external signs or symbols; sometimes only the res
Sacramenti, or the thing contained under them, which is the much more principal
part thereof. And, as Protestants much press, so Catholics willingly
acknowledge, a great difference between these two, the worshipping of the
Sacrament, as this word is taken for the symbols, and the worshipping of
Christ's Body in the Sacrament. Now as the word Sacrament is taken for the
Symbols, they acknowledge a certain inferior cult and veneration due thereto,
as to other holy things, the holy Chalices, the holy Gospels, the holy Cross,
etc. of which Veneration much has been spoken in the Discourse of Images,. 42.
etc. but they acknowledge no supreme or divine Adoration due to the Sacrament,
as taken in this sense for the Symbols; but only to our Lord's Body and Blood,
and so to our Lord himself as present in this Sacrament, or with these Symbols.
[So that be these Symbols of what latitude you will, either larger, as the
Lutheran believes; or straiter, as the Catholics say they are; or be they not
only these, but the substance of bread also under them, as Catholics believe
it is not: yet neither those species, nor this substance, have any divine
Adoration given or acknowledged due to them at all; no more than this substance
of bread, believed there by the Lutherans, yet has from them any such
Adoration given to it.]

Latria only understand that of the res Sacramenti, the Adoration of Christ's
Body and Blood in the Sacrament, see Conc. Trid. sess. 13. c. 5. Omnes Christi
fideles, pro more in Catholica Ecclesia semper recepto, latriae cultum, qui
vero Deo debetur, huic sanctissimo Sacramento in venerations exhibeant. Neque
enim ideo minus est adorandum, quod fuerit a Christo Domino, ut sumatur,
institutum; nam illum eundem Deum praesentem in eo adesse credimus, quem Pater
aeternus introducens in orbem terrarum dicit, Et adorent eum omnes Angeli Dei:
quem Magi procidentes adoraverunt. Where, though the Council uses the expression
of exhibiting latriae cultum Sacramento; yet that this cultus latriae is not
applied to the Sacrament, as it implies the Sign or Symbol, but only the thing
signified, both the words joined to it, qui vero Deo debetur, (which signifies
the Council maintains that to be God they gave this cultus latriae to) and the
explication annexed, Nam illum eundem Deum, etc. may sufficiently convince to
any not obstinately opposite. Neither do those words interposed, -- Neque enim
ideo [Sacramentum] minus est adorandum, quod fuerit a Christo Domino, ut
sumatur, institutum, any way cross such a sense, as a late Author
Stillingfleet, Romans Idol. c. 2.. 2. p. 117.
too confidently presses, saying, -- That by Sacrament here the Council must
understand the Elements or Accidents as the immediate term of that divine
worship, or else the latter words [ i. e. quod fuerit a Domino institutum ut
sumatur] signify nothing at all. For what (says he) was that, which was
instituted by the Lord as a Sacrament? was it not the external and visible
Signs, or Elements? why do thy urge, That the Sacrament ought not the less to
be adored, because it was to be taken, but to take of the common objection,
That we ought not to give divine worship to that which we eat? And what can
this have respect to, but the Elements? Thus argues he. When as he might know,
that the Fathers of Trent, who said this, do hold, the chief thing instituted
and exhibited in the Sacrament to be, not the Elements, but Christ's Body; and
ipsum corpus Domini to be also orally both taken and eaten, (though not modo
naturali carnis or corporis) as well as the Elements, according to our Lord's
express words, Accipite, Manducate, Hoc est Corpus meum, [i. e. quod
manducatis:] and when as he might know also, that the occasion of adding this
clause was in opposition to a party of Luther's followers, who, granting
Christ's Body present with the Symbols, and yet denying Adoration, said for it,
that our Lord's Body [not the Symbol] was present there, non ut adoretur, sed
ut sumatur. And Calvin also says some such thing, Institut. l. 4. c. 17.. 35.
urging, there was no such mandate for Adoration, i. e. of Christ's Body, of
which he was formerly speaking; but that our Lord commanded only, accipite,
manducate, bibite, -- quo (says he) accipi [or sumi, if you will Sacramentum,
non adorarijubet: meaning Sacramentum in relation to Corpus Domini; else he
said nothing to the purpose of his former Discourse. And it may be considered
here also, that not only the Council of Trent, but no Schoolman at all (some of
which are thought uncautious in their expressions about Adoration of Images,
and consequently of the holy Symbols in the Eucharist; nor is any Catholic
accountable for them) takes the boldness to give cultus latriae ( qui vero Deo
debetur, as the Council says here) to the Elements, without annexing some
qualification of a coadoratio, per accidens, improprie, sicut vestes Regis
adorantur cum Rege, or ut Rex vestitus adoratur, yet without our mental notion
at such a time stripping him of his Garments. Therefore neither can the Council
here be rationally presumed to speak of the Symbols, when it uses no such
qualifications.

Canon (more than which is not required to be professed by any Son of the Roman
Church) is this: -- Si quis dixerit in sancto Eucharistae Sacramento Christum
unigenitum Dei Filium non esse cultu latriae etiam externo adorandum, -- and
ejus Adoratores esse Idololatras, Anathema sit. Concerning which, and some
other passages in this Council, in comparing the Chapters with the Canons,
Franciscus a sancta Clara, Enchiridion of Faith Dial. 3.. 18. judiciously
observes, -- That although Catholic faith, as to the substance, is declared in
the Chapters, (as indeed it is,) yet according to this we are obliged only sub
anathemate to that form of expression which is defined in the Canons. 1.
Because the Chapters are not framed in the style of Conciliary Definitions,
with Anathema 's, and the like. 2. Because the Canons (where the very form is
exceeding exact) sometimes differ from the manner of expression in the
Chapters, in order to the same matter: As sess. 6. of Justification; Canon 11.
and Chapter 7. also sess. 13. of the Sacrament of the Eucharist; Canon 6.
Chapter 5. and elsewhere: yet sub anathemate all must stand to the Canons; and
therefore must expound the Chapters by them. See more in the Author.

Soave also, l. 4. p. 343. in his censure of this 13th. Session, though he says
magisterially enough in opposition to a Council, -- That the manner of speech
used in the 5th. point of Doctrine, saying, That divine worship was due to the
Sacrament, was noted also for improper; since it is certain, that the thing
signified or contained is not meant by the Sacrament, but the thing signifying
or containing. [But what Catholic will grant him this, that Sacrament includes
not both; or, of the two, not more principally the thing contained in, or
joined with the Symbols?] Yet he observes, -- That it was well corrected in the
6th. Canon, which said, That the Son of God ought to be worshipped in the
Sacrament. See the same observed also by Grotius in Apolog. Rivet Discuss. p.
79. where also he notes Bellarmin's forequoted passage: That the Controversy
between Catholics and Lutherans in their saying, The Sacrament, or Christ in
the Sacrament, was to be worshipped, was only in modo loquendi: To which
nothing is replied by Rivet in Dialysi Discussionis, but the matter there, as
also in his Apologetic, passed over in silence. Add to Grotius what Mr.
Thorndike discourses in defense of the expression of worshipping the
Sacrament, Epilog. 3. l. 30. c. p. 352. I confess it is not (necessarily) the
same thing to worship Christ in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, as to worship
the Sacrament of the Eucharist. Yet in that sense, which reason of it self
justifies, it is. For the Sacrament of the Eucharist, by reason of the nature
thereof, is neither the visible species, nor the invisible Grace of Christ's
body and blood; but the union of both by virtue of the promise; in regard
whereof -- both concur to that which we call the Sacrament of the Eucharist, --
by the promise which the Institution thereof contains. If this be rightly
understood, then to worship the Sacrament of the Eucharist, is to worship
Christ in the Sacrament of the Eucharist. Thus he.

Bellarmine explains himself in the same manner as the Council, in his Apology
to King James, Inter nupera dogmata ponit [Rex] adorationem Sacramenti
Eucharistiae, i. e. [as Catholics understand and explain it] adorationem
Christi Domini miro, sed vero, modo praesentis. To which Bishop Andrews
replies: -- Quis ei hoc dederit? Sacramento i. e. Christi in Sacramento. Imo
Christus ipse Sacramenti res in Sacramento adorandus est. Rex autem Christum in
Eucharistia vere praesentem, vere and adorandum statuit. [Thus far then the
King, Bishop, and Cardinal are agreed] Again, de Eucharistia l. 4. c. 29. --
Quicquid sit de modo loquendi, status Quaestionis non est, nist, An Christus in
Eucharistia sit adorandus cultu latriae? And, as it were to avoid offense, when
he comes to treat on this subject, de Euchar. 4. l. c. 29. he prefixeth the
Title to it, not De adoratione, but De veneratione hujus Sacramenti: And in it
says that -- Nullus Catholicus est qui doceat, Ipsa symbola externa per se and
proprie esse adoranda cultu latriae, sed solum veneranda cultu quodam minore.

Of this Doctrine of Catholics Bishop Forbes gives this testimony, l. 2. c.
2.9.. In Eucharistia mente discernendum esse Christum a visibili signo docent
Romanenses; and Christum quidem adorandum esse non tamen Sacramentum: quia
species illae sunt res creatae, etc. neque satis est [i. e. to give them divine
worship] quod Christus sub illis sit: quia etiam Deus est in Anima tanquam in
Templo suo; and tamen adoratur Deus, non Anima; ut ait Suares 3. Tom. 79.
quaest. 8. art. disp. 65.. 1. And so Spalatensis l. 7. c. 11. n. 7. Nam neque
nostri [i. e. Catholicks] dicunt species panis and vini, hoc est, accidentia
illa esse adoranda: sed dicunt corpus Christi verum and reale, quod sub illis
speciebus latet, debere adorari. When then the Roman Church, speaking of
supreme Adoration, explains her language of adoring the Sacrament, to mean only
adoring Christ's Body, and so Christ as present there; and not adoring any
other thing whatever (substance, or accident) that is present there, or that is
also included in the word Sacrament: that accusation, which her using such
language of adoring the Sacrament can seemingly expose her to, is at the most,
not of an error, but an improper expression. But the propriety of language
dutiful Sons ought to learn from, not teach, their Mother; who also speaks that
which has descended to her from former times. Neither will it follow from
Catholics using the word Sacrament precisely in this sense, exclusively to any
other matter save Christ's Body, that therefore one may use the word Sacrament
promiscuously for Christ's Body, in what respect soever we speak of it; and, as
well or as properly say, that the Sacrament, meaning Christ's Body, is in the
Heavens at God's right hand, or was on the Cross, or the like. For though
[Sacrament] thus applied involves no other subject or thing at all but Christ's
Body; yet it connotes, besides it, the place or manner of its presence;
signifying this Body only as present in the Mysteries; not as a term adequate
to, and convertible with it, being in whatever time and place.

Trent, and other Catholic Authors, and also out of Protestants confessing so
much of them, do show sufficiently the great extravagancy of those Protestant
Authors who tell their Readers, that the state of this controversy is not,
Whether Christ's Body, and so Christ in the Sacrament be adorable with supreme
Honors? but whether the Sacrament, and then by Sacrament are pleased to
understand the Symbols? and then, to confute the Doctrine of Rome, argue, that
no Creature, as the Symbols are, is capable of Divine Honor. The state of the
Controversy (says a late Writer of theirs Stillingfleet Romans Idol p. 117.
) is, Whether proper Divine Worship in the time of receiving the Eucharist may
be given to the Elements on the account of a Corporal Presence of Christ under
them? And against it he affirms, -- That supposing the divine Nature present in
any thing gives no ground upon that account to give the same worship to the
thing wherein he is present, as I do to Christ himself. So Bishop Andrews, Rex
Christum in Eucharistia vere adorandum statuit, -- at non Sacramentum, terrenam
scilicet partem. And -- Nos in mysteriis carnem Christi adoramus, Sacramentum
[i. e. the Symbols] nulli adoramus. So Dr. Tailor, (Real Presence p. 335.) The
Commandment to Worship God alone is so express; the distance between God and
Bread dedicated to the service is sovast, -- that, if it had been intended that
we should have Worshipped the H. Sacrament, the H. Scriptures would have called
it God, or Jesus Christ. And Disswasive. 5. p. 76. he affirms the Church of
Rome to give Divine Honor to the Symbols or Elements, and so to a Creature the
due and incommunicable propriety of God. So they vainly also undertake to show,
that the Primitive Church did not terminate their Adoration upon the Elements;
that the Fathers, when they speak of worship, speak of worshipping the Flesh of
Christ in the Mysteries, or Symbols; not of worshipping the Mysteries or
Symbols. These, I say, are great extravagances: whilst the Roman Church owns or
imposes no such Doctrine of Divine Adoration due to the Elements, and the true
Controversy on their side is only this; 1. Whether the Body and Blood of
Christ, prescinding from whatever Symbol is or may be there, is adoreable, as
being present in the Sacrament with these symbols? (This is affirmed by
Catholics: more than this needs not be so;) And, 2. Whether the Adoration of
Christ's Body, and so of Christ as present, if it should not be so, will amount
to Idolatry?

Jesus, and other Holy things. Omnes (says Vasquez, in 3. Thom. tom. 1. disp.
108. c. 12.) eodem modo de speciebus Sacramenti, quo de Imaginibus,
philosophari debent. And then of Images we know the Definition of the Second
Council of Nice referred to by Trent -- non latria. And for what they say of
Images I refer you to the preceding Discourse on them,. 42, etc. It is true,
that some of the later Schoolmen (to defend the expressions of some of the
former) have endeavored to show how a latrical, qualified, secondary
co-adoration may improprie or per accidens be said to be given to the symbols
also, as sacramentally joined with our Lord's Body, and as this body is as it
were vested with them; such as, say they, when Christ was adored here on Earth,
was given also to his Garments, i. e. without making in the act of worship a
mental separation of his Person from his Cloths; as Bellarmin explains it, de
Euchar. l. 4. c. 29. -- Neque enim (says he) jubebant Christum vestibus nudari
antequam adorarent; aut animo and cogitatione separabant a vestibus cum
adorarent; sed simpliciter Christum, ut tunc se habebat, adorabant: tametsi
ratio adorandi non erant vestes, imo nec ipsa Humanitas, sed sola Divinitas. Or
do allow the giving of the external sign of Latria to them: as Bowing to,
Kissing, Embracing them; but this without any the least internal act of latria,
or any other honor or submission directed to them, which such inanimate things
are incapable of; as Vasquez explains it; who is so prodigal of this external
sign of honor, after he has stripped it of any internal latria, or other
worship whatever that may accompany it; that he allows this external sign not
only to all Holy things, but to any Creature whatever, (in our inward adoration
meanwhile only of God,) upon the general relation they have to him. But indeed
such an abstraction of the external sign, from an internal honor or respect
(as other Catholics censure his opinion) makes these outward gestures, without
any mental intention attending them as to such object, like those of a Puppet
or Engine, utterly insignificant: and so Vasquez, instead of communicating the
latria, to Images, to the Symbols, to other Holy things, seems, in the judgment
of others, to allow them no honor or veneration at all; and so, in seeming to
say too much, to say too little; which has been more largely discoursed
before, Of Images. 42. etc. And a late Author Stillingfleet Romans Idol. p. 129.
might have done well, in mentioning this Author's Opinion, to have given also
a true relation of it, affirming only an external sign of honor given to the
creature void of any internal the least respect to them; Ita ut tota mentis
intentio in Exemplar, non in Imaginem [or, Deum, non Creaturam] feratur: which
would easily have taken away all that malignity he fastens upon it. This for
Vasquez. And as for Bellarmin's adoration improprie and per accidens, Bishop
Forbes tells us l. 2. c. 2.. 11. Sententia ista Bellarmini plurimis Doctoribus
Romanensibus displicet. And Bellarmin himself, as appears by the former
citations, waving these School disputes, tells us, -- Status Quaestionis non
est nisi, An Christus in Eucharistia sit adorandus? i. e. no more is defined,
decided, imposed on Christians faith by the Church, than this: nor more needs
be desputed with, or maintained against, Protestants, than this. [This in the
2d. place from. 11. Of Catholics professing their Adoration with divine
worship of Christ, only present in the Sacrament with the Symbols, not of the
Symbols; or, not, of the Sacrament, if taken for the Symbols.]

3ly. Therefore also Catholics ground their Adoration (a thing Cardinal Perron
much insists upon in his Reply to King James) not on Transubstantiation, (though
both Transubstantiation and Consubstantiation involve it; so that, either of
these maintained, Adoration necessarily follows) as if, Transubstantiation
defeated, Adoration is so too; but on a Real Presence with the Symbols; which
in general is agreed on by the Lutheran together with them. Which Adoration
they affirm due, with all the same circumstances wherewith it is now performed,
though Christ's Body were present with the Symbols, neither as under the
accidents of Bread, as they say; nor under the substance of Bread, as the
Lutheran says; but, though after some other unknown manner, distinct from both:
and if they were convinced of the error of Transubstantiation, and of the truth
of the presence of the substance of the Bread unchanged; yet as long as not
confuted in the point of Real Presence, they would never the less for this
continue to adore the self same Object, as now, in the self same place, namely,
the Body of Christ still present there with the Symbols, and therefore there
adorable; though present after another manner than they imagined. See the
argument of Barnesius a Roman Writer apud Forbes. l. 2. c. 2.. 12. Corpus
Christi est cum pane vel permanente, vel transeunte, uno vel alio modo, and per
consequens non est idololatria adorare Christum ibi in Euchristia realiter
praesentem. See in Conc. Trid. 13.. c. 5. the reason immediately following the
requiring of Adoration, -- Nam illum eundem Deum praesentem in eo [i. e.
Sacramento] adesse credimus, quem Pater introducens in orbem terrarum dicit, Et
adorent eum, etc.

If therefore the Roman Church enjoins these three: 1. To believe Christ's
Corporal presence in the Sacrament. 2. To believe such presence by way of
Transubstantiation. 3. To adore Christ as being there present: It follows not
that she enjoins the third in order to the second: but may only, in order to
the first; as the first being (without the second) a sufficient ground thereof.
Neither can I, disbelieving the second, yet believing the first, refuse
obedience to the third, that is, to worship the same object in the same place,
as those do who also believe the second; and in my believing both the first and
the second, yet may I nevertheless ground the third only on that, which is by
Christians more generally agreed on; and still worship out of no other
intention, after Transubstantiation believed, than I did before I believed it
(when only I held in general a corporal presence) or than others do; who,
believing a Real presence, do not yet believe Transubstantiation.

Lutherans, or others) be true, Catholics plead, their Adoration is no way
frustrated, but still warrantable, and to be continued.

5ly. Suppose not only Transubstantiation, but Real presence an error, and the
Lutheran and the Roman Catholic both mistaken; yet there can be no pretense
why these later, in such Adoration, (grounded by both on Real presence with the
Symbols) will not be as excusable from Idolatry as the other. For, thus far
these two Parties agree: 1. That Christ is corporally present: 2. That he may
be worshipped: 3. That no other there but He may be worshipped; not Bread, nor
any other mere creature: 4. That nothing visible in the Sacrament is He, or his
Body; which is present only invisibly, without any thing visible, inhering, or
appertaining to it, as the subject thereof. They differ only about the manner
of the presence of this invisible Substance. The one says, it is there
together with the Bread; the other says there, instead of the Bread, and the
Bread away; a thing also to God possible, for any thing we know. The one says,
he is there both under the substance and accidents of Bread; the other, there
under the accidents only of the bread. Now, whilst both worship the same Object
in the same place, and veiled with the same sensible accidents, if the one
adoring him as being under the substance of bread, (he not being there) are
freed from any Idolatry in such worship; the other adoring him as being under
the accidents of bread, (he not being there) cannot be made hereby Idolaters:
since they say, and freely profess, that, if his body be not there, under those
appearances, but the same substance still under them which was formerly; then
they confess it a creature, and renounce all adoration of it.

Whereas therefore it is objected, That the substance of bread only being in
that place, where they suppose Christ's Body, and not any Bread, to be,
therefore in worshipping the thing in that place, they worship bread; this were
a right charge, if they affirmed, that they worshipped the substance that is in
that place under such accidents whatever it be: but this none say; but, that
they worship it only upon supposition that it is Christ's Body, and not bread,
and that for this supposition they have a rational ground, (of which by and
by.) Now, saying they worship it, because it is so, is saying, if it be not so,
they intend no worship to it. He that says, I give divine Adoration to that
which is under the species of Bread, because believed by me, or, if you will,
certainly known by me (but he, indeed, mistaking) to be Christ's Body, and so
Christ present, is yet far from saying, I worship whatever is under the species
of Bread, whether it be Christ's Body or no. And he that says the later of
these, if bread happen to be there, is willingly granted an (...); but not so
the former.

Daille, as it much concerns him, excuses a Lutheran adoring upon a falsely
supposed real or corporal presence of our Lord, from any Idolatry, for this
reason: Because, says he, 1. Reply to Chaumont, p. 63.
such adoration is mistaken not in this, -- that it addresseth it self to an
Object not adorable, but only that by error it seeks and thinks to enjoy it in
a place where it is not, and so he says it becomes only vain and unprofitable,
etc. as is said before. 8. The same therefore must he allow to Catholics, if
meaning nothing more by their Language of Adoratio Sacramenti than Christi in
Sacramento; as has been showed before. 12. etc. that they do not: and that the
contention about this is a mere Logomachy; and that they also, as the others,
ground their Adoration not on Transubstantiation, but Corporal Presence.

Costerus, or perhaps some other Roman Writers, that say, if Transubstantiation
[ where also they must mean, or a Corporal Presence, some other way] were not
true, the Idolatry of Heathens is much more excusable, than of Christians, that
worship a bit of bread: they do not, or at least are not necessitated to grant
the consequence necessary, that, if Transubstantiation or Corporal Presence
fail, then they must adore the bread; which bread mean while they deny also to
be there: no more than Protestants do or think themselves necessitated to grant
this consequence, That if Consubstantiation or Corporal Presence fail, then the
Lutherans do adore the Bread; which bread also though the Lutherans affirm to be
there, yet do other Protestants deny that the Lutherans worship. But Costerus,
and others, only maintain this: That, supposing that which is imposed upon
them, viz. that Catholics, if there be no Transubstantiation, do worship a bit
of bread; the Heathen Idolatry, in their worshipping a golden or silver Image,
or some living creature, etc. would be far more tolerable, and more noble.
Showing by this (as Dr. Tailor expresses it, Liberty of 'Prophesying, p. 258.)
That they are so far from worshipping the bread in such case, that themselves
profess it to be Idolatry to do so; and intending, by advancing this fault the
higher, the more to make appear the impossibility of such an error, its for so
many hundred years possessing the Universal Church of Christ, assisted by our
Savior to the end of the World, and the Pillar of Truth: and thinking the
greatness of this crime a good argument of the Churches innocence therein;
whilst perhaps, in some smaller matters, she might be liable to a mistake. I do
believe (says Mr. Thorndike, Epilog. 3. l. 30. c. p. 353.) that it has been
said by great Doctors of the Church of Rome, that they must needs think
themselves flat Idolaters, if they could think that the Elements are not
abolished: That shows with what confidence they would have the World apprehend,
that they hold their opinion; but not, that the consequence is true; unless
that which I have said be reprovable. And again, in Just weights c. 19. -- When
they say they must be flat Idolaters, if the Elements be there, zeal to their
opinion makes them say more than they should say. -- Lastly, If Costerus says,
that Transubstantiation failing, Catholics do worship the bread, Bellarmin de
Eucha. l. 4. c. 30. and others, say just the contrary, arguing thus concerning
a Catholick's worshipping an unconsecrated Host, which is nothing but bread, --
Adoratio ex intention [i. e. such as is rationally grounded] potissimum
pendet. Quare qui [talem] panem adorat, quod certo credat non esse panem sed
Christum, is proprie and formaliter Christum adorat, non panem. Which may as
well be said of an Host consecrated, that is not Transubstantiated (when the
adorer upon probable grounds believes it to be so,) but remains still bread, --
Qui hunt panem adorat, quod certo credat non esse panem, sed Christum, is
proprie and formaliter Christum adorat, non panem. And the same, much-what, as
by Bellarmin, is said by Dr. Hammond, Disc. of Idolatry,. 64. That, supposing
their error be grounded on an honest and blameless misunderstanding of
Scripture, it is, though material, yet perhaps in them not formal Idolatry;
because, if they were not verily persuaded that it were God, they profess they
would never think of worshipping it. Thus he.

This in the 5th. place of not only Transubstantiation, but Real Presence being
supposed an error, yet that the Roman practice, or error, compared with the
Lutheran, the first is no more peccant than the later; and therefore that the
Lutheran by Protestants being excused from Idolatry, so ought the Roman
Catholic too.

such Adoration, by the one or the other, of Christ, who is a true object of
supreme Adoration, and only by them mistaken to be in some place where he is
not, cannot be termed any such Idolatry, as is the worshipping of an object not
at all adorable. So, for example, If we suppose a Heathen worshipping a
Heathen-God, as having some particular residence in an Image; or an Israelite
worshipping the true God of Israel, as having a special residence in the Calf
at Sinai; or in Jeroboam's Calves, called also by him Cherubims; or lastly, a
Manichean, mistaking nothing in the Nature or Attributes of our Lord Christ,
save that he thinks him to have some particular residence in the Sun, and so
worshipping him as present there: None of these would be any such Idolatry, or
parallel to it, as that of another Heathen worshipping the very Molten Image;
or Israelite worshipping the very Calf for his God; or Manichean worshipping
the Sun it self for Christ. Again; neither can any of these that adore only God
or Christ as specially present where indeed he is not, ( e. g. as fancied God
so present in the Calf, or Christ in the Sun,) if we suppose something else
invisibly and undiscerned by him to be there present, as if we imagine an Angel
in the Sun, or a Serpent within the Calf, therefore be said to adore such
Angel, or Serpent: and whatever fault may be in such worship, yet it would be
great injustice to accuse such Israelite or Manichean, of adoring such Angel or
Serpent upon this indefinite Proposition, that he professes to worship that
which he believes to be present there; especially if such person do also
declare against the adoration of any such particular things, if, contrary to
his belief, there present. Neither then can it be justly deduced from a
Lutheran's or Catholic.'s adoring Christ as under the substance or species of
Bread, that therefore these adore the thing it self that is present under them.

Manichean that worships Christ in the Sun, or in an Israelite that worships
God as specially present or resident in the Calves of Dan and Bethel or that at
Sinai, because it is adoring a fancy of their own, without any rational ground
or pretense thereof; and however merely a good intention grounded upon a
culpable ignorance can excuse none from Idolatry, or any other fault, (which as
it is often pressed by Protestants, is freely granted by Catholics.) Yet since
Daille (and, I suppose, other Protestants with him) does allow, not an
absolutely certain, but a reasonable, though mistaken ground or motive of
Adoration, sufficient for avoiding the just imputation of Idolatry, [upon which
account a Disciple adoring with divine worship a person very much resembling
our Savior, when he was upon Earth; or, supposing a consecrated Host truly
adorable, one, who adores an Host placed on the Altar, and by some deficiency
in the Priest, not truly consecrated, is freely absolved by them herein from
committing any Idolatry. See before. 8.] Hence therefore if Catholics can
produce a rational ground of their apprehending Christ present in the
Eucharist, though possibly mistaken in it, they are to be excused from Idolatry,
upon the same terms.

Lutherans being allowed to have such a plausible ground or motive for their
Adoration, whereby they become by other Protestants absolved from Idolatry in
adoring our Lord as present there, (only their Adoration inutile (says Daille)
and tombent en neant,) I see not why the ground of Roman Catholics should be
any whit less valued than theirs. For, if we compare the one's Con -- with the
other's Trans -- substantiation, the later seems more agreeable to our Lord's
words, Hoc est Corpus meum; and to the most plain literal obvious sense
thereof, Hoc est Corpus meum, by a change of the Bread, rather than, Hoc est
Corpus meum, by a conjunction with the Bread; and therefore is the Roman
equalled with, or else preferred before, the Lutheran sense by many
Protestants, that are neutral and dissent from both. [ Longius
Consubstantiatorum (says Bishop Forbes, de Euchar. l. 1. c. 4. 5.) quam
Transubstantiatorum sententiam a Christi verbis recedere, sive litera
spectetur, sive sensus, affirmat R. Hospinianus and caeteri Calviniani
communiter. And Hospinian. Histor. Sacram. 2. part. fol. 6. says of Luther, --
Errorem errore commutavit, nec videns suam opinionem non habere plus, imo etiam
minus coloris, quam Scholasticorum and Papae. And see the same judgment of the
Helvetian Ministers, and Calvin, apud Hospinian. f. 212.] But next; Catholics
founding their Adoration not on Transubstantiation, but on Corporal Presence,
the same common ground of this they have with Lutherans, viz. our Lord's words
implying; and so it must excuse both, or neither.

rational ground Catholics exhibit of this their belief of a Corporal Presence
in the Eucharist, and so of Adoration.

I. This their Ground then of such a Corporal Presence in the Eucharist (after
a possibility thereof, granted also by sober Protestants See Guide in
Controversy, Disc. 1.. 62.
) is pretended to be Divine Revelation, and if it be so as pretended, then no
argument from our senses, and against it, valid:) and that (as was said but
now) taken in its most plain, literal, natural, and grammatical sense, in the
words, Hoc est Corpus meum; so often iterated in the Gospel, and again by S.
Paul, without any variation or change, or explication of that which yet is
pretended by Calvinists to be a metaphorical expression; and such, if we will
believe them, as this, that the Church is his Body, Ephesians. 1.23. or, He the true
Vine, Joh. 15.1. A great argument this, (the Apostles punctual retaining still,
in their expressing the Institution thereof, the same language and words) that
our Lord intended it literally, as he spoke it. Pretended also to be Divine
Revelation from many other Scriptures, (the citing and pressing of which takes
up all Bellarmin's first Book de Eucharistia, to which I refer the inquisitive
Reader:) but especially from the Discourse Jo. 6. Which Apostle writing his
Gospel so late, when the Communion of our Lord's Body and Blood was so much
frequented and celebrated in the Church, seems therefore to have omitted the
mention of it at all in his story of the Passion, and the time of its first
Institution: because he had dilated so much upon it before in relating a Sermon
of our Lord's made in Gallilee about the time of the yearly Feast of eating the
Paschal Lamb, Jo. 6.4, etc. -- The literal and grammatical sense of which
Divine Revelation (says Dr. Tailor, Liberty of Prophesying,. 20. p. 258.) if
that sense were intended, would warrant Catholics to do violence to all the
Sciences in the circle, And that Transubstantiation is openly and violently
against natural Reason, would be no argument to make them disbelieve, who
believe the mystery of the Trinity in all those niceties of explication which
are in the Schools, (and which now adays pass for the Doctrine of the Church,)
[or he might have said, which are in the Athanasian Creed,] with as much
violence to the principles of natural and supernatural Philosophy, as can be
imagined to be in the point of Transubstantiation. And elsewhere ( Real
Presence, p. 240.) says, as who will not say? -- That if it appear, that God
has affirmed Transubstantiation, he for his part will burn all his Arguments
against it, and make public Amends.

Catholics have for their Rational ground of following this sense, in
opposition to any other given by Sectaries, the Declaration of it by the most
Supreme and Universal Church Authority that has been assembled in former times
for the decision of this controversy long before the birth of Protestantism; a
brief account of which Councils, to the number of seven or eight (if the 2d.
Nicene [ Act. 6. tom. 3.] be reckoned with the rest) before that of Trent, all
agreeing in the same sentence, see concerning the Guide in Controversy, Disc.
1.. 57, etc. [Out of the number of which Councils said to establish such a
Doctrine, as Bishop Cosins, Hist. Transub. c. 7. p. 149. after many others,
has much labored to subduct the great Lateran Council under Innocent 3. upon
pretense of the reputed Canons thereof their being proposed therein only by the
Pope, Mr. Dodwel Considerations of present concerument. 31. p. 165.
but not passed or confirmed by the Council; so another late Protestant Writer
upon another Protestant interest, viz. out of the 3d. Canon of the same
Council, charging not only the Pope but the Councils themselves, and the
Catholic Religion, as invading the Rights of Princes, has with much diligence
very well vindicated these Canons against the others, as the true Acts of this
Great Assembly, and not only the designs of the Pope; and copiously showed them
(as in truth they were) owned as such, both in the same, and the following
times. And thus the Doctrine of Transubstantiation in this Council is firmly
established, whilst Catholics contend, in the other Canon concerning Secular
Powers, the Sense of the Council is by Protestants mistaken.

Now upon this, I ask what more reasonable or secure course in matters of
Religion, (whether as to Faith or Practice) can a private and truly humble
Christian take, than, where the sense of a Divine Revelation is disputed, to
submit to that interpretation thereof, which the Supremest Authority in the
Church, that has been heretofore convened about such matters, has so often
and always in the same manner decided to him; and so to act according to its
Injunctions?

i. e. not held before some controversy happened in the Church touching the point
they decided, Catholics still have another very Rational ground of such a
sense of the Divine Writ, viz. the evident testimony of the more Primitive
times. Which that they have conveyed the Tradition of such a sense to the
present Church, and to these former Councils, (to repeat what has been said
already in Considerations on the Council of Trent,. 321. n. 1. because perhaps
by scarcity of copies that Book may come to few hands) I think will be clear to
any one, not much interessed, that shall at his leisure spend a few hours in a
public Library to read, entire, and not by quoted parcels, the discourses on
this Subject; Of St. Ambros. de Myster. init. cap. 9. -- the Author de
Sacramentis, ascribed to the same Father, 4. l. 4, and 5. Chapters. -- Cyril.
Hierosol. Cateches. Mystagog. 4, and 5. -- Chrysostom in Matt. Hom. 83. -- In
Act. Hom. 21. -- In 1 Cor. Hom. 24. -- Greg. Nissen. Orat. Catechet. chapter 36,
37. -- Eusebius. Emissen. or Caesarius Arelatensis de Paschate, Sermon. 5. --
Hilarious Pictav. de Trinitate, the former part of the 8th. Book. -- Cyril.
Alexand. in Evangel. Joan. l. 10. c. 13. Concerning the authenticalness of
which pieces enough also has been said elsewhere.

Rational ground of his Faith, and practice, the universal doctrine and
practice of the later both Eastern and Western Churches till Luther's time, and
at the present also, excepting his followers. For the Eastern Churches
(disputed by some Protestants) both their belief of a corporal presence with
the Symbols, and practice of Adoration, see what has been said at large in the
Guide in Controversy, disc. 3. c. 8. (where also are exhibited the testimonies
of many learned Protestants freely conceding it) and again, in Considerations
on the Council of Trent,. 321. n. 22. p. 313. and n. 9. p. 294. See also the
late eminent evidences of the Faith and Practice of these Eastern Churches at
this day, collected by Monsieur Arnaud, in his two replies to Claude; a brief
account whereof also is given in the Guide, Disc. 3.. 81. n. 2, etc. In which
matter (whereas one of the chiefest and commonest Pleas of Protestants is the
Greek and Eastern Churches their according with them, whereby they seem to
out-number the Roman) if any will but take the courage, notwithstanding his
secular Interest, heartily to examine it, I doubt not he will receive a full
Satisfaction.

Lastly, see D. Blondel (one much esteemed by Protestants, for his knowledge in
ancient Church History) granting an alteration in the Doctrine concerning our
Lord's Presence in the Eucharist (an Alteration he means from that which is now
maintained by Protestants, and was by the former Antiquity) begun in the Greek
Church after A. D. 754. Esclaireissements sur L' Eucharistie c. 15.
i. e. begun so soon as any dispute happened in the Eastern Church concerning
this Presence; which dispute was first occasioned there upon an Argument which
was taken from the Eucharist, and urged against Images by the Council of
Constantinople, under Constantius Copronymus, and was contradicted by Damascen,
and shortly by the 2d. Nicene Council. In which opinion of the 2d. Nicene
Council and Damascen, Blondel freely acknowledges the Greek Churches to have
continued to this day. See c. 16. p. 399. Again, granting an Alteration in the
same Doctrine (as is said before) begun in the Western Church A. D. 818. See
Ibid. c. 18.
i. e. as soon as the like dispute happened about this Point in the Western
Parts: which dispute there was occasioned by the Council held at Frankfort
under Charles the Great, opposing the expressions of the foresaid
Constantinopolitan Council in like manner as the 2d. Nicene Council had done
before. Lastly, if we ask him, what this Alteration in the East first, and
afterward in the West, was; 1. He makes it much-what the same in both. And
then he explains it to be a kind of Impanation, or Consubstantiation, or
Assumption of the Bread by our Lord Christ. His words, c. 19. are these Des l'
An. 818. etc. -- Some among the Latins did ( as it were in imitation of the
Greek) conceive a kind of Consubstantiation, partly like, partly unlike, to
what many Germains [he means Lutherans] now maintain; which, to speak properly,
ought to be called Impanation, or Assumption of the Bread by the Word of God.
And c. 20. he goes on, -- The opinion of Paschasius, [whom he makes Leader in
the Western, as Damascen in the Greek Church] had advanced before A. D. 900. an
Impanation of the Word, fortified and getting credit by degrees; the
establishment of which (says he p. 440.) both Damascen and Paschasius
designed. Wherein (he says p. 441.) they supposed a kind of Identity between
the Sacrament and the Natural Body of Christ, founded upon the inhabitation of
the Deity in them; which at last produced, he says, the establishment of
Transubstantiation, under Pope Innocent the Third.

Here then 1. We see granted, both of the Greek and Latin Church, the same
Tenent. 2. We may observe, that this Tenent of Impanation he imposes on them,
when well examined, is found much more gross and absurd than that of
Transubstantiation: For which see what is said in Bellarmin, de Euchar. l. 3.
c. 13. and 15. Or in Suarez, de Sacrament. Disp. 49. But 3. see in
Considerations on the Council of Trent. 321. n. 13. and n. 16. etc. that this
Doctrine of Damascen and the Greek Church, and afterward of Paschasius and the
Latin, before Innocent the Third's time, was plain Transubstantiation; and is
misrepresented by Blondel for Impanation; and therefore never has the Greek
Church hitherto had any contest or clashing with the Roman concerning this
point. And see the concessions also of other Protestants very frequent and more
candid, of Transubstantiation held by the Greek Churches of later times, as
well as by the Roman, produced in the Rational Account concerning the Guide in
Controversies, Disc. 3. c. 8. 4ly. Lastly, these Churches, in which, he says,
such an Alteration was made from the former Doctrine of Antiquity, deny it at
all so to be; and affirm, that, when some new opinions appeared, they
maintained and vindicated it as the Doctrine of the Fathers; their Proofs of it
being also extracted out of the Fathers Testimonies. Now then to stand against
such a strong stream of both East and West running constantly in this course,
seems to Catholics, with S. Austin very unreasonable. -- Similiter etiam
(says he, Epist. 118. Januario) siquid horum tota per orbem frequentat
Ecclesia: nam and hinc, quin ita faciendum sit, disputare, insolentissimae
insaniae est. And, -- Graeci omnes (says Bishop Forbes, de Euchar. l. 2. c.
2.) [as well as the Roman Church] adorant Christum in Eucharistia: Et quis
ausit omnes hos Christianos Idololatriae arcessere and damnare?

Luther's time, in the Reformation, no small number of Protestants, I mean such
as are the genuine Sons of the Church of England, proceeding thus far, as to
confess both a Real Presence of our Lord's Body and Blood in the Eucharist, and
Adoration of it as present there; a real presence of it to each worthy
Receiver, though not to the Elements. And Hooker, if he mistook not the Doctrine
of the Church of England in his time, says, Eccles. Pol. l. 5.. 67. --
Wherefore should the world continue still distracted, and rent with so many
manifold Contentions, when there remains now no Controversy, saving only
about the subject where Christ is? -- Nor does any thing rest doubtful in this,
but whether, when the Sacrament is administered, Christ be whole within Man
only, or else his Body and Blood be also externally seated in the very
consecrated Elements themselves. So that, if Hooker and his party are in the
right, Catholics do not mistake Christ's Body as present in a place where it
is not; but only in thinking it in that present to one thing, the Elements,
when it is so only to another, the Receiver of them. But then the same
Catholics have another half of the Reformation, viz. all the Lutheran
Protestants, that affirm, with the Roman Church, Christ's Body present also to
the Elements, or Symbols. And see Mr. Thorndike also, Epilog. l. 3. c. 3. much
for this presence of Christ's Body to be in, with, or under the Elements,
immediately upon, and by the consecration of them, (which consecration also he
places ( l. 3.4. c. p. 24.) in the blessing of the Elements before the
breaking, etc. mentioned before. 7.). Look back now upon all these Pleas of
Catholics, and see if they will not make up at least a reasonable ground or
motive of their Adoration. A reasonable ground; I say not here (what I might)
sufficient to secure their faith from all suspicion of error, but (which serves
my purpose) to secure them from Idolatry in their Adoration, though they should
be mistaken;. when as other persons, because proceeding on like reasonable
motives, are by Protestants, in their Adoration of a mistaken Presence, or
Object, excused from it; (See before. 8.) As, for example, the Lutheran; the
Adorer of one much resembling our Lord here on Earth; the Adorer of an
unconsecrated Host, or Wafer placed on the Altar, etc. especially when
Catholics in crediting such divine Revelation of Christ's Presence, and so for
their Adoration, receive no contradiction (as it is pretended they do) from
their senses: because they adore, I mean with divine Adoration, nothing
visible, or sensible at all, nor any substance invisible wherein any thing that
occurs to their senses inheres; but only understand Christ's Body present
there, where their senses can no way certainly, and against any pretended
divine Revelation, inform them, either when it is present, or not; since salvis
omnibus phaenomenis, all appearances granted most true, such a Presence is
possible.

Catholics for Adoration, which we expected should have been most strictly
examined by those who conclude the Roman practice herein Idolatry, are slightly
passed over by Daille, in pronouncing that this error of Catholics vient toute
entiere de leur passion, Apolog. des Eglis Reform. c. 11. p. 90. And after in
reducing all their ground thereof to a -- la seule authorite du Pape and de son
Concile: and by Dr. Tailor, Real Pres.. 13. p. 346. in calling them -- some
trifling pretenses made out of some sayings of the Fathers. Elsewhere indeed,
when he was in a more charitable temper ( Liberty of Prophes. p. 258.) he
says, That for a motive to such an opinion, Roman Catholics have a divine
Revelation, whose literal and grammatical Sense, if that Sense was intended,
would warrant them to do violence to all the Sciences in the Circle: but
prudently there omits their Plea of Catholic Tradition, securing to them such
a literal sense of the Text. Dr. Stilling-fleet ( Rom: Idol. c. 2.. 7.) says
first, -- That, if a mistake in this case will excuse the Romanist, it would
excuse the grossest Idolatry in the World. And in comparing two persons, one
worshipping Christ as really present in the Sun, another, Christ as really
present in the Sacrament, he says, as inconsiderately as magisterially, --
That supposing a mistake in both, we are not to enquire into the reasons of the
mistake, [i. e. as he says before, concerning the probability of the one
mistake, more than of the other] but the influence it has upon our actions. So
he. But, what is more manifest, than that the influence which a mistake has
upon our actions, as to making them culpable or innocent, is not always the
same, but very various, and often contrary; rendering them sometimes blameless,
sometimes faulty, according as the mistake is ex- ^r in-excusable? Next, he
grants Ibid.. 5. a Catholic Tradition of Transubstantiation to be a sufficient
ground for Adoration: But the Cacholick Tradition that is pleaded here
necessary for Adoration, is only that of a corporal Presence. Now, for a
sufficient evidence of such a Tradition, I refer the conscientious Reader to
what has been said before, waving that of Transubstantiation as to this
Controversy, though the same Catholic Tradition authorizeth both; namely, a
corporal Presence by a mutation of the Elements into our Lord's Body. This
from. 24. Of the Rational grounds Catholics have for their Adoration.

8ly. For such Rational grounds therefore of their worship as are here given
(and not from any excess of Charity, or from the singular Fancies of some few,
though learned men, as Dr. Stillingfleet, in his Preface to Roman Idolatry would
insinuate) Idolatry is by many Protestants of late, either not at all, or but
faintly charged on the Church of Rome. For first, see Mr. Thorndike in his
Epilogue, 3. l. 30. c. p. 350. -- I say first (says he) that the Adoration of
the Eucharist, which the Church of Rome prescribes, is not necessarily
Idolatry. I say not, what it may be accidentally by that intention which some
men may conceal, and may make it Idolatry as to God: but I speak upon
supposition of that intention, which the profession of the Church forms. And
in his Just Weights, c. 19. p. 125. -- They who give the honor proper to God
to his Creature, are Idolaters; they that worship the Host give the honor due
to God to his Creature: this is taken for a Demonstration, that the worship of
the Host is Idolatry. But will any Papist acknowledge, that he honors the
Elements of the Eucharist, or, as he thinks, the Accidents of them for God?
Will common Reason charge him to honor that, which he believes not to be
there? If they were there, they would not take them for God; and therefore they
would not honor them for God: And that is it ( not saying that they should be
Idolaters if the Elements did remain) that must make them Idolaters. And
Epilogue p. 357. in general he says; -- Whosoever admits Idolatry, [i. e. in any
point whatever] to be taught by the Roman Church, can by no means grant it to
be a Church; the very being whereof supposes the worship of one God, exclusive
to any thing else. The Roman Church, then, must either be freed from the
imputation of commanding any thing that is Idolatry, ( i. e. adoration of a
creature for God): or we must affirm, there to be, and to have been, no true
Church of Christ, never since such command of that which they say is Idolatry
went forth, (which no judicious Protestant, I think, has or dare say of the
Roman Church, since the beginning of the Adoration of the Eucharist:) For what
Church or Sect of Religion can be Apostate at all, if not a Church committing,
and commanding Idolatry; even the worshipping of a piece of Bread, which
themselves made, for that God which made them and Heaven and Earth.

And thus Bishop Forbes, de Euchar. l. 2. c. 2. Perperam (...) Romanensibus a
plerisque Protestantibus objicitur, and illi Idololatriae crassissimae and
gravissimae ab his insimulantur and damnantur; cum plerique Romanenses, ut and
alii fideles, credant panem consecratum non esse amplius panem, sed corpus
Christi; unde illi non panem adorant: sed tantum ex suppositione, licet falsa,
non-tamen haeretica, aut impia, vel cum fide direct pugnante, ut superiore
libro ostensum est, Christi corpus, quod vere adorandum est, adorant. In
Eucharistia enim mente discernendum esse Christum a visibili signo decent ipsi;
and Christum quidem adorandum esse, non tamen Sacramentum, quia species illae
sunt res creatae and inanimes, and consequenter incapaces adorationis. And
Ibid. showing the Greek and Eastern Church, as well as the Roman, to use it, he
concludes, Quis ausit omnes hos Christianos Idololatriae arcessere and damnare?
After the same manner the Archbishop of Spalato, de Repub. Eccles. 7. l. 11. c.
n. 6. -- Respondeo (says he) me nullum idololatricum crimen in adoratione
Eucharistiae, si recte dirigatur intentio, agnoscere. Qui enim docent, panem
non esse amplius panem, sed corpus Christi, illi profecto panem non adorant:
sed solum ex suppositione, licet falsa, Christi corpus vere adorabile adorant.
Non enim nostri dicunt species panis and vini, hoc est, accidentia illa, esse
adoranda.

Bishop Bramhal, cited before,. 6. -- The Sacrament is to be adored, said the
Council of Trent. The Sacrament, i. e. formally the Body and Blood of Christ
say some of your Authors: we say the same. -- The Sacrament, i. e. the species
of Bread and Wine say others: that we deny. Thus he.

D. Tailor, in his Liberty of Prophesying, p. 258. confesses the Subjects of
the Church of Rome no Idolaters in this kind; at least so as to worship Bread
or any creature with Divine Worship, and as God: For, -- It is evident, says
he, that the Object of their Adoration (that which is represented to them in
their minds, their thoughts, and purposes, and by which God principally, if not
solely, takes estimate of humane actions) in the Blessed Sacrament, is the only
true and eternal God, hypostatically joined with his holy Humanity; which
Humanity they believe actually under the veil of the Sacramental signs. And if
they thought Him not present, they are so far from worshipping the Bread in
this case, that themselves profess it to be Idolatry to do so; which is a
demonstration that their soul has nothing in it that is idololatrical, [ i. e.
as to the directing this their divine worship to an undue object.]

Tailor is faulty in his charge in Real Presence, p. 334. Faulty I say, in
charging on the Church of Rome, not their worship of a right Object in a
some-way unlawful and prohibited manner, this we are not here examining; but
their worship of an undue Object of Adoration, of a creature instead of God:
for so he charge them there. If (says he there) they be deceived in their
own strict Article, [he means of Transubstantiation,] then it is certain, they
commit an act of Idolatry in giving divine honor to a mere creature, the
image, the Sacrament and representment of the Body of Christ. Thus he. When it
is evident that the Object, etc. is the only true and eternal God, etc. as he
said before in the place cited, and must say if he will say truth. So, faulty
is also Daille, ( Reply to Chaumont, p. 63.) in his charging the Church of Rome
to worship Bread, upon this arguing: Catholics adore that substance that is
veiled with the accidents of Bread and Wine; but this substance is Bread: Ergo
they adore Bread. By which arguing he may as well prove the Lutherans in the
Eucharist to adore a Worm or a Mite, thus: The Lutherans adore that substance
which is joined with the Bread; but that substance is a Worm or Mite: (for such
thing may be there with the Bread at such time of Adoration) Ergo, they adore a
Worm. Whereas both the Catholic and Lutheran explain the indefinite term [that
which,] used in the major Proposition, restrictively to the Body of Christ, and
exclusively to any other substance whatever, that is, or may be, there, either
with the Bread, or under its accidents. Faulty also is Dr. Stillingfleet, Romans
Idol. c. 2. in saying the Protestants controversy with Catholics is; Whether
proper Divine Worship, in the time of receiving the Eucharist, may be given to
the Elements on the account of a corporal Presence under them, p. 117. And, as
for the passage in the Council of Trent, sess. 13. c. 5. urged by him there for
it, his mistake is showed before,. 12. And so, faulty, in his concluding, p.
118. -- That the immediate term of that Divine Worship given by Catholics, is
the external and visible signs or elements. And again, p. 124. That, upon the
principles of the Roman Church, no Man can be satisfied that he worships not a
mere creature with divine honor, when he gives Adoration to the Host: [whenas
Catholics expound themselves to mean by Host in their Adoration, not the
Symbols, or Sacramentum, but rem Sacramenti.] Again, p. 125, 127, 129. -- That,
supposing the Divine Nature present in any thing, gives no ground upon that
account to give the same worship to the thing wherein it is present.]
[Catholicks grant this as much as he: and does not himself say several times,
That Catholics condemn the worshipping of a mere creature for Idolatry?] See.
4. p. 120. -- If (says he) it should be but a mere creature [that I adore,]
all the World cannot excuse me from Idolatry, and my own Church [he means the
Roman] condemns me; all agreeing that this is gross Idolatry. Again; p. 119. It
is (says he) a principle indisputable among them, [ i. e. Catholics,] that to
give proper divine honor to a creature is Idolatry. Again; p. 126. he says,
-- he finds it generally agreed by the Doctors of the Roman Church, that the
Humane Nature of Christ considered alone, [ i. e. without an Hypostatical union
to the Divinity,] ought not to have divine honor given to it: [and therefore
neither any other creature whatever, that is not Hypostatically united, as none
besides It is.] All these, I say, faulty and mistaken in charging the Church of
Rome with this species of Idolatry, of worshipping a creature [the Bread]
instead of Christ; from which the other Protestants clear it.

Hammond, in his Treatise of Idolatry,. 64. upon supposition that the ignorance
or error of Catholics is grounded on misunderstanding of Scripture, [I add, so
expounded to them by the supreme Church Authority,] seems to charge them rather
with a material than a formal Idolatry; which material Idolatry in many cases
is or may be committed without sin; as also material Adultery, and the like.
His words are; -- That if it be demanded, Whether in this case, that their
ignorance or error be grounded on misunderstanding of Scripture, this so simple
and not gross ignorance may serve for a sufficient antidote to allay the poison
of such a sin of material, though perhaps in them not formal, Idolatry, etc.
because if they were not verily persuaded that it were God, they profess they
would never think of worshipping it? -- he had no necessity to define and
satisfy it, being only to consider what Idolatry is; and not how excusable
ignorance or mistake can make it. And indeed Protestant Writers, that will have
it to be Idolatry, are concerned to make it such a gentle one, as that the
practice thereof, died in, and it neither particularly confessed, nor repented
of, yet excludes not from Salvation; or else they must damn all those who lived
in the visible communion of the Church Catholic for five or six hundred years,
by their own confession.

Daille's Apology of the Reformed Churches, c. 2. p. 98. much contendeth in
their behalf: That to Adore that which the Adorer believes not to be our Lord,
but Bread; or to perform the external signs of Adoration to our Lord as present
there, where the worshipper believes he is not, is unlawful to be done by any,
so long as the person continues so persuaded: For, Conscientia erronea obligat.
But then, if we suppose the Church justly requiring such Adoration upon such a
true Presence of our Lord; neither will the same person be free from sinning
greatly in his following such his conscience, and in his not adoring:
disobedience to the Churches just commands being no light offense. Neither for
the yielding such obedience in general is it necessary that the Churches
Subjects be absolutely certain of the rightness or lawfulness of the Churches
Decrees or Commands: For, thus, the more ignorant in spiritual matters and the
things commanded that any person is, the more free and released should he be
from all obedience; the contrary of which is true. But sufficient it is even in
the stating of judicious Protestant Divines, when writing against Puritans,
(see Considerations on the Council of Trent,. 295. n. 3, 4.) that such persons
be not absolutely certain that the Churches commands are unjust, and that they
do in something demonstratively contradict God's Law: which plain
contradiction, if a private person can see it, it is strange the Church should
not. And as to this particular matter, after the Churches motives of Adoration,
that are delivered before,. 24, etc. well considered, I leave the Reader to
judge, whether such a pretended certainty can have any solid ground. It is
better indeed to forbear an action, when we are not certain of the lawfulness
thereof, provided that we are certain, that in such forbearance we do not sin.
But thus certain of our not sinning in such forbearance we cannot be,
concerning any thing that is enjoined us by our lawful and Canonical Superiors;
whom we are obliged to obey: unless (as has been said) we are first certain
that such their command is unlawful.

And hitherto of this Controversy; where the Two main things that seem worthy
to be examined, by any Christian, who in this point seeks satisfaction, are, 1.
Whether the Roman Catholick's grounds of believing Christ's Corporal Presence
in the Eucharist, with the Symbols, are solid and true. 2. And next; Whether
this Church, for any ones enjoying her Communion, exacts more of him, than the
confessing that Christ as present there is also there to be adored: whilst
meanwhile such person renounceth and declares against any adoration, or, if
you will, co-adoration of the species, or any other thing whatever there
present, with any Latria or supreme worship, proper or improper, or with any
other honor or reverence, save only such an inferior veneration as is
exhibited by us to other Holy Things.

FINIS.

