WONDERS From the Deep OR A True and Exact Account and Description OF THE
Monstrous Whale, Lately taken near COLECHESTER, Being two and forty Foot in
Length, and of Bigness Proportionable.

With the manner of its coming, and being Killed on Thursday the 9th. of April.

Being so rare and strange a sight that multitudes of People from all parts
daily go to see it as thick as to a Market or Fair.

depiction of fish

London Printed for E. W. in the Year 1677.

Wonders from the Deep, or a true and exact Account, and Description of the
Monstrous Whale, lately taken near Colchester, and.
WHen the Breath of Omnipotency gave by his Divine word a being to the universe
as he beautified the Chambers of the Firmament, with glittering Stars, the
Earth with Beasts, Herbs, and Flowers, so he also endued the Waters with a
prolifick quallity, and Stocks the Sea with such a Strange Variety of its own
preductions, that it is affirmed by some of the Learned, that the Land cannot
boast any sort of Animal, but the Ocean can show somewhat Analogous or
resemblant.

But amongst all the wonders of the Deep, that which most Summons our
Admiration, Is the Whale, that floating Castle, or Natural ship, of so vast a
Bulk as would make an Ignorant martinet mistake it for an Island; True it is
these Princes of the Watery Realm, but I know not what kind of instinct, delight
chiefly to keep their Court near the North Pole, and rarely Wonder far from the
Artick Circle; very seldom, scarce once in diverse Ages have one of them been
known in our Seas, whence some superstitious People would make it a Prodigy,
but since neighther Scripture nor Philosophy, Reason nor Sense Countenance such
a Conceit, I must (with their pardon) call all their pretended Experiences,
Dotages of Melancholy, and abuses, Non causa Pro causa, no more to be heeded
than the Salts falling or a Hares Crossing out of the way, and the like
reverend observations of my Grannum; but waving this, perhaps to some
disrelishing discourse that our British Channel has lately been honored with
one of these stranger guests, for on Thursday the 19. of this Instant April,
between Tuese^ and Wotton, two small places about four miles from each other
in the County of Essex, and about a dozen or fourteen miles from Colchester,
the winds having blown hard for several days before, A VVhale was brought in
with the Tide, but being got into a kind of Narrow Creek when the Water fell,
he could not get out again, but remained there upon the shallows, beating
himself all that Ebb and till the next full Sea, but had before so weakened and
disabled himself that he could not then neither get off, in this time being
just on the shore he was seen by diverse Country people with no small
Admiration, having never before seen a Creature of so vast a Bulk, on the
second day it was alive, being driven near a Rock or at least a stony Bank, the
violence of its Agitation and striving in short time Killed it, and prevented
the Triumph, some Fishermen thereabout promised themselves, who immagined no
less Glory by murdering of it, then St. George did by the destruction of the
Dragon.

After it was dead the Tide being out, the Dimensions of it were taken, and it is
Certainly found to be in length two and forty foot, and in Bigness evry way
answerable, with fastening Ropes to it, and with several Teems the Countrymen
hald it to shore, where it now remains the grand wonder and discourse of all
those parts, People coming every day to see it in multitudes as if they were
going to a Market or Fair.

Near twenty Years ago about the same place was discovered and taken an
Extroardinary Fish, not only for its bigness but also its shape, which was so
prodigious and unusual that none though never so much accustomed to the Seas,
could tell its name or remember to have seen the like.

Those that would see a description of this wonderful Creature called a Whale
and its nature, may find it incomparably drawn by a Divine pencill in the one
and fortieth Chapter of Job. under the Name of Leviathan, to which I refer the
pious Reader and their with conclude with this Relation, of the truth whereof
if any be dissatisfied, the Colchester Carriers at the Kings Arms in
Leaden-Hall-street, and the Cross-Keys in Gracious street, can and will be
ready fully to inform them.

FINIS.

