THE Greeks Opinion TOUCHING THE EUCHARIST, MISREPRESENTED.

BY Monsieur CLAVDE, IN HIS ANSWER TO Mr. ARNOLD.

Printed in the Year, MDCLXXXVI.

A DIGRESSION.
Reflecting on the Opinion of the Greek, and other Oriental Churches, holding a
Real Presence of our Lord's Body and Blood ( whether by Transubstantiation* or
not): much misrepresented by Mr. Claude, a French Minister, 321. Whose various
Artifices are detected, in,

* Insinuating the Greek's Ignorance, Poverty, Imbecility; the Latin's Power,
Missions, Industry, to gain them, n. 1, 2, 3, 4.

* Wresting the Greek's sayings to the Protestant's sense, contrary to their
plain expressions.

* Affirming the Greeks to retain their former Church-Doctrine as high as
Damascen, or Gregory Nyssen; yet not freely declaring the ancient and modern
Greeks to differ from, or agree with, the Protestant opinion, n. 5.

* Waving the main point, viz. Real Presence ( which infers a Sovereign
Adoration); contending about Transubstantiation, and that as an Article of
Faith, n. 6.

* Barring all Testimonies, save such as press Transubstantiation.

* Using the term Virtue unreasonably, (as excluding Substance); and thereby
making the Greek opinion contradictory, absurd and indefensible, and then
leaving them to make it good: whereas he ought to have confessed their holding
a Presence as well in Substance, as in Virtue, n. 7, 8.

* Shifting all Testimonies against him by disingenuously requiring testimony
upon testimony, or by personal exceptions taken against them, n. 9.

The Greek Opinion concerning Transubstantiation, if made good, how prejudicial
to the Protestant's Cause, n. 10.

1. Concerning Transubstantiation.

M. Claude, in receding from the Latins, makes the Greeks fall short of their
own Similitude and usual Expressions, in three Particulars, n. 13, etc.

That Virtue may be taken as well augmentatively, adding to Substance, as
diminutively, excluding it, n, 14.

The Common Doctrine of the Greeks carrying further than their Simile, to a
total Transubstantiation, Proved,

1. From their holding the same numerical Body of our Lord, born and crucified,
to be exhibited in the Eucharist: present, not by descending from Heaven, but
by a conversion of the Elements, and by a multiplication of its local existence
in more places, than before, n. 15, 16.

2. From holding the Body thus present by Consecration to be Incorruptible, and
its Incorruption to depend on its Resurrection, and so to relat^ to that
numerical Body crucified and raised again. Now, the Bread, remaining entire for
its substance, or its matter and qualities, cannot be such a Body of our Lord
as suffers no digestion, or corruption. Yet something in the Sacrament suffers
this. For the Greeks then ( whilst holding the Substance of Bread to remain) to
lay these changes only on the Accidents, not the Substance (eating bread, fed
only by the accidents) were without a Transubstantiation to espouse the
difficulties of it; and therefore their opinion implies an entire change of the
Bread, as well its matter, as form. n. 17.

3. From holding this Body in the Eucharist, whenever broken whole and entire
in each piece, -- to all distributed, no way diminished. -- The Lamb broken,
not impaired, ever eaten, yet not consumed. Which things cannot be said of our
Lords Body, if the matter of bread still remain. n. 18.

Whereas Greeks and Latins, former and later times may be accorded, this
Author, to maintain the variance, seems to fasten on the Greeks an opinion less
eligible than Transubstantiation, and to offer violence to the natural sense of
their words; leaving the Greeks to stand apart by themselves from Protestants
as well as other Catholics. n. 20.

The Greeks confessed by him not to have opposed the Latins for holding
Transubstantiation; the Latins never to have accused the Greeks as not holding
it. n. 21.

2. Concerning Adoration of the Eucharist. 1. As to their Doctrine. Granted, 1.
That the Greeks allow and pay to the Mysteries in the Eucharist an inferior
relative Adoration. 2. A Supreme Adoration lawful and due to our Lords
Humanity, wherever present; and given by Protestants in their Communion. 3.
No sovereign Adoration pretended by Greeks or Latins to be given to the Symbols
(venerable only with an inferior cult) but to the Body and Blood of our Lord.
4. Real Presence not being contested, but only Transubstantiation; From such
Presence (granting its true consequences) follows a lawfulness of Adoration.
n. 22.

2. As to their Practice. 5. The Greeks adore after their mode, by inclining
the head and body. Whether this be only relative or sovereign Adoration, is
understood from their Doctrine and Belief. For, not to allow the extent of
their Adoration, as far as their belief of the Presence of the Person adored;
and their Worship the same latitude with their Faith seems unjust and
groundless: as also to pretend only an inferior adoration given, where the same
Communicants hold a supreme due to the Person there present. n. 22.

More Devotions performed in the Western Churches than in the East, from the
Berengarian Errors here. n. 23.

M. Claude 's Concessions and their Consequences sufficient.. 1. To diswade
from a Communion opposed both by Greeks and Latins concerning the Eucharist. 2.
To persuade rather to the Roman Communion. n. 24.

For trying our Obedience, God permits Evil with many Allurements; Error with
many Verisimilities; yet has always left evidence enough to clear all
necessary Truth to the humble and obedient, not to force the self-confident and
interessed. n. 25.

In a Search, by comparing Scriptures and Councils, what endless labor and
distraction; in Obedience to Councils, what peace and vacancy for better
employments! Besides, that the rude and illiterate (the most of men) cannot
search. Must these believe a former Church now? or submit to an inferior
Church Authority against a Superior? But this is Schism in them both: and he
justly ruined by believing an Authority usurped, that denies to believe one
whereto he is bound. n. 25.

The Issue of Scripture-Trial (long since) was a double sense of Scripture:
that Sense was declared by one, nay several, Councils. The Party condemned
appealed to Fathers and Primitive Church, whose sense ( as formerly that of
Scripture) being double, was decided again by Councils; but their Authority
rejected. And now it is desired that the Controversy begin anew, and return to
the Scriptures; or that the Question determine the Controversy; and, whilst
Protestants are the weaker party, that all have liberty; for, when the
stronger, they too well discern the necessity of Synods for ending differences
among themselves, which (tho not held infallible, yet) upon the Evangelical
Promises of our Lord's assistance, require on pain of Suspension, subscription
to their Decrees, and excommunicate persons teaching the contrary. Witness the
Dort Synod. n. 26.

M. Claude's strange Method for exempting from Obedience to the Church, those
that pretend not to a Certainty of their new Opinions, considered.

That, if it prove valid, it serves as well Catholics against Protestants upon
the same pretensions; and affords both sides the same plea one against the
other, in any controversy arising amongst Protestants. Ibid.

If searching the Scripture be so necessary, search there first this main
point, that decides all others, and saves endless searches, viz. our Lord's
establishing a just Church Authority for ending Controversies. Ibid.

Monsieur Claude in his last Reply to Dr. Arnauld. For the showing of which a
little more at large, because I am speaking here of the Eucharist, and what I
shall say, may serve for a pre-advertisement to some, less experienced in this
Controversy, that may light on his Book, and are in danger of receiving some
impressions from it, prejudicial to the Catholic Faith; I beg leave of the
Reader to make a step, though somewhat out of my way, yet not much beside my
purpose; Remitting those, who think this Foreign Author less concerns them, to
the prosecution of the former Discourse, resumed below.

The Controversy concerning the Real or Corporal Presence of our Lord's Body
in the Eucharist, which for several precedent Ages had exercised the Pens of
diverse learned Persons, who successfully maintained the truth of the Article,
and happily secured the Churches Peace, against their numerous new-risen
Opponents, became of late years the matter of Contest in France betwixt two
able and eminent Disputants, Monsieur Arnauld, a Sorbon Doctor, and Monsieur
Claude an Huguenot Minister. A Combat not only sharp and long, but through the
Manager's skill carried on with specious new Arguments (on the one side) and in
a way formerly untrod.

The new Doctrine opposing Real Presence had boldly (but as it proved
unsuccessfully) demanded an hearing and obtained it, being by several Western
Councils publicly silenced and coerced; whereupon it seemed to some a fit
expedient, for encouraging a cause disgraced, to sound the inclination of the
then persecuted (and therefore likelier to join with so thriving a Sect, as the
Protestants then appeared) Eastern Churches herein, and (if possible) unite
their interests, in case they could find them consenting in this main Article.

To this end the Lutherans (whose Sentiments approached much nearer the truth,
than those of Zuinglius and the later Calvinists) addressed themselves to the
Patriarch of Constantinople, See Acta Theolog. Wittenburg.
Jeremy, but so unprosperously, that instead of obtaining the so much desired
Union, they got only a severe check and reprehension from him tired with their
importunity, and offended at the extravagant liberty taken by them, of
differing not only in this, but several other points, from the sense of the
whole Catholic Church.

But of late years, by the more frequent Negotiations and Embassies into those
parts, the Opinion of the Orientals has been in this matter more fully
discovered, by the industry and exact Collection exhibited in the learned
Writings of Monsieur Arnauld, one of the Antagonists in this Dispute: wherein
his Adversary, much pressed by many plain and evident Testimonies produced
against him, is forced to summon up all his Arts and Skill in his defense, to
support an undertaking he found too difficult to maintain, and too
disadvantageous for him to quit, after so much defiance of a just Authority
opposing, and such pretensions that the Orientals consented with him and his
adherents in the Point.

1st. This Author busies himself l. 2. c. 1.
to accumulate many Testimonies concerning the miserable ignorance, and decay
of Learning, in the modern Greek, and other Oriental, Churches, as also that of
the Moscovites l. 5. c. 1.
, even amongst their Monasticks, Priests, and Bishops, which industrious
disparaging of their Science shows, he has no mind to stand to their Judgment.
He relates their many Superstitious and ridiculous Rites, and Ceremonies in
Religion; their extreme Poverty; and so, how easily they are to be gained to
say, or do, any thing, with the Money, or, (to speak in better Language,) with
the Charities, which the Latins frequently bestow on them. Hence these Nations
being so ignorant, their sentiments in Religion are less to be valued; and so
poor, their testimony more easily corrupted.

l. 2. c. 2, etc.
to tell us the many opportunities, the Latins have had, of introducing
Innovations, and propagating the Roman Faith in those Countries. 1. By so many
Western Armies that have passed thither, for the Conquest of the Holy Land; and
have settled there, to maintain their Victories; and so kept the Orientals in
Subjection for near two hundred years. 2. By the inability of the later Grecian
Emperors to defend their Dominions; and so, their often endeavoring to
accommodate Religion, after the best way for their Secular advantages; and that
was, by a Conformity in it with the West. 3. By the continual Missions of
Priests, and Religious of all Orders, (each of them striving to have some
plantation in the East;) especially, the Missions of Jesuits, thither; who by
their manifold diligence, in instructing their children, educating their youth,
distributing many charities to the necessitous, playing the Physicians,
teaching the Mathematics, etc. insinuate also into them their Religion, having
corrupted also several of their Bishops. Hence we may imagine, these Missions
of the Latins, having thus overspread the whole face of the East, and
practicing so many Arts to change its Faith, it will seem a hard task to prove,
concerning any particular Testimony procured from thence, that the persons
subscribing it are no way Latiniz'd, no way tainted in their judgment; and,
that they are not already circumvented, and won over in some Points, though
perhaps they may still stand out in some others. [All this he does, to show the
great industry of these Missions to pervert the Truth there: But, indeed,
manifests their indefatigable zeal and courage, through infinite hazards, to
advance it: negociating the Conversion of Infidels, as well as the instruction
of ignorant Christians: And Roman Catholics are much indebted to M. Claude for
his great pains, in giving so exact an account of their Piety].

Greeks. 3ly. He declares, that he does not undertake at all to show, that the
Greeks concur with Protestants in their Opinion concerning our Lord's presence
in the Eucharist; and much complains of his Adversary, for imposing such an
attempt upon him. L. 3. c. 1. -- It is not our business here (says he) to
show; whether the Greeks have the same Faith which we [Protestants.] have, on
the subject of the Holy Sacra^^^ts: This is a perpetual Illusion that M.
Arnauld puts upon his Readers; but, whether the Greeks believe of the Sacrament
that, which the Church of Rome believes. And l. 3. c. 13. He says, -- He would
have none imagine, that he pretends no difference between the Opinion of the
Greeks, and Protestants: and he thinks that none of the Protestant Doctors have
pretended it. And, Ibid. after his stating of the Greek Opinion; To the
censure, that he makes it peu raisonnable, he says, P. 336.
That to this he has nothing to answer; save, that Protestants are not obliged
to defend the Sentiment of the Greeks: and, that his business is to enquire
what it is; not, how maintainable. And says elsewhere, P 337.
That both the Greeks and Latins are far departed from the Evangelical
simplicity, and the main and natural explication, the Ancients have given to
the Mystery of the Eucharist.

Here then; 1. as to the later ages of the Church, Protestants stand by
themselves; and the Reformation was made, as Calvin confessed it, Epist. P.
Melancthoni.
a toto mundo. 2. After such a Confession, M. Claude seems not to deal
sincerely, in that, with force enough, he draws so frequently in both his
Replies, the sayings of the Greek writers of later times, to the Protestant
sense; and puts his Adversary to the trouble of confuting him; And, from the
many absurdities, that he pretends would follow upon the Greek Opinion, taken
according to their plain expressions, says; these intend only, * a Presence of
Christ's Body in the Eucharist, as to its Virtue and Efficacy, opposite to its
Reality and Substance; and * an Union of the Bread there to the Divinity only
so far, as the Divinity to bestow on it the Salvifical Virtue or Efficacy of
Christ's Body: and * a conjunction of the Bread, there, to Christ's natural
Body, born of the Blessed Virgin, but to it, as in Heaven, not here; to it, as
a Mystery may be said to be an Appendix, or Accessory, to the thing, of which
it is a Mystery. But all this is the Protestant Opinion. 3. Again, seems not to
deal sincerely, in that, whilst he affirms the modern Greeks to retain the
former Doctrine of their Church as high as Damascen, and the 2d. Council of
Nice l. 3. c. 13. p. 315.
; and again l. 3. c. 13. p. 326. -- and l. 4. c. 9 p. 488.
Damascen not to have been the first, that had such thoughts ( viz. of an
Augmentation of Christ's Body in the Eucharist by the Sanctified Elements; as it
was augmented, when he here on earth, by his nourishment,) but to have borrowed
them from some Ancient Greek Fathers; naming Greg. Nyssen. Orat. Catechet. c.
37. (See this Father's words below,. 321. n. 14.) and Anastasius Sinait, who
explained their Doctrine by the same comparison, as Damascen, and the Greeks
following him, did, yet does not freely declare both these, the Ancient Greeks,
as well as the later, either to differ from, or to agree with, the Protestant
Opinion.

Greek Opinion varies from the Protestants, it concerns him not; Next, he
declares: That what ever the Greeks may be proved to have held, concerning some
transmutation of the Bread, and Wine into Christ's Body and Blood; or,
concerning a Real, or Corporal presence, and their understanding, Hoc est
Corpus meum, in a literal sense, neither does this concern his cause: who
undertakes only to maintain, that these Churches assert not Transubstantiation:
at least, assert it not so, as to make it a positive Article of their Faith.
His words, upon D. Arnauld's resenting it; That whereas he contented himself
^nly to show, that the Real presence was received by the Oriental Schismatical
Churches, M. Claude diverted the Controversy to Transubstantiation; His words,
I say, are these, l. c. 1. p. 157.
In the Dispute concerning the Greeks, our business is only about
Transubstantiation; and not at all, about Real presence. For it was to this
only, and Adoration, that I formerly limited my self in my last Answer. But
then, as if this might do him some prejudice, he, as it were cautiously,
adds: -- Yet I would have none draw a Consequence from hence, that I
acknowledge a Real presence established in the Greek Church, [But here to make
his words true, he adds again,] in that sense, as the Roman Church understands
it. And, what sense is that? surely, by the way of Transubstantiation. And so,
you see, he pares his words, till they say no more, than just what he said
before: That he acknowledges no Real presence, (viz.) by way of
Transubstantiation, established in the Greek Church. And, this is to say only,
that he acknowledges them not to hold Transubstantiation. Next; concerning the
Greek, their receiving, or opposing Transubstantiation, he has one Hold more,
Ibid. -- It is not (says he) our business, to know; whether the Greeks
formally reject Transubstantiation; Or, whether they have made It an Article of
Controversy between them and the Latins; but only, whether they comprehend it
amongst their points of Faith, or no: Our Dispute is only concerning this
matter. One would think, that he had been chaced very much, and driven up to
the wall, that to preserve himself safe, he makes so many outworks; and
contracts the Subject of his Disputation within so narrow a Compass. But does
he not here, for the Greek Church also, thus decline, and tacitly as it were
yield up that to the Catholics, which they have always professed to be the
main Controversy with Protestants on this Subject; (viz.) The Real and
Corporal presence of our Lord; and the perpetuity of the Christian Faith, as
well East as West, in the constant Belief of this, for all the later times of
the Church Catholic; which consent found in the later times, is the truest
proof, from which we may collect also the true sense of the former? And, from
this Corporal presence once established, whether a Transubstantiation be, or be
not, necessarily follows also the lawfulness of a Sovereign Adoration: which
renders the Dispute concerning one of the two Points he contesteth needless;
and decideth it against him: since, an Adoration of the Mysteries practiced
among the Greeks he is content to allow, but not, Sovereign; Now Real presence
makes it out a Sovereign one.

Greeks have a different Sentiment of the Eucharist from Protestants; Nor, that
they take, Hoc est Corpus meum, as also the Latins, in a literal sense, and
hold a Real presence: Nor, that they do not reject the Roman
Transubstantiation; Or make any Controversy with the Latins about it: And, so
all Authorities, save those that press Transubstantiation, being removed from
giving him any trouble: Next; For the Greeks asserting a Transubstantiation,
the alleging such Testimonies as these which follow, and frequently occur in
their Authors, will not be admitted by him as good, or to the purpose. -- That,
by the Consecration, the Bread is changed, and converted into the very, the
proper, the True, ( or in veritate, in reipsa,) Body of Christ, which, Body
also is the same with that born of the Blessed Virgin, and that suffered on the
Cross. -- That the Eucharist is not a Figure, or Image only, of this Body, but
the very Body of our Lord, united to his Divinity, as the Body born of the
Blessed Virgin was; Neither are these now two, but one. -- Unum corpus, and
unus Sanguis cum eo, quod sumpsit in utero Virginis; and, quod dedit Apostolis.
And -- Calix, quem Sacerdos sacrificat, non est alius, nisi ipse, quem Dominus
Apostolis tradidit. -- That the Bread, that is offered in the Mysteries, is the
very same Flesh of Jesus Christ, that was Sacrificed at the time of his
Passion, and buried in the Sepulcher, and which St. Thomas handled, and which
is at the Right Hand of the Father. -- That, after the Consecration, Though it
appears Bread, yet, in verity, it is the Body of Christ. Or, -- Licet Panis
nobis videatur, revera Caro est. Or, -- Non manet Panis; sed pro Pane factum
est Corpus Christi. I say, such expressions as these (very usual in the
Greeks,) are not current with him for proving a Substantial change of the
Bread; Or, That the Substance of it, after Consecration, does not still remain
so entire as before. For, as for Ipsum, propium, verum, etc. he can produce
places in the Fathers, where they are applied to a Metaphor; where the Poor,
the Faithful, the Church, are said to be Ipsum, or Verum, Corpus Christi. The
Bread is changed into the Body of Christ [ i. e. he says, not in Substance,
but in Vertue] The Eucharist is not a Figure, or Image of this Body [ i. e.
without all Virtue or Efficacy,] but the very Body it self: [ i. e. in being
such an Image, or Figure, as retains the Supernatural Virtue of it.] But, still
I say; This Supernatural Virtue is not the Body. And, if the Greek's arguing
from our Lord's Dixit, Hoc est Corpus meum be good, viz. That whatever is not
our Lord's Body, the Eucharist is not it; It holds as well against Virtus, if
taken exclusively to Substance, (for such Substance is [Body] here, or else,
why not Imago a Body?) as against Imago, or Figura; as well against Imago cum
Efficacia, as sine, etc. For -- Non dixit, Hoc est Virtus, or continens
virtutem Corporis ^ei, but Hoc est Corpus meum. And, this being urged by his
Adversary, the best answer that I see M. Claude makes to it l. 4. c. 7.
is; That the Protestants are no engagers for the verity of the Greek's
Opinions, i. e. He imposes such a sense on the Greeks, as makes a
Contradiction in their Opinion, or arguing; and then leaves them to make it
good. Again: Though it appears Bread, it is truly Flesh: [ i. e. says he; The
Greeks hold it indeed still Bread in Substance, and not Flesh at all: But they
mean here; that, though it appears or seems, yet it is not, [simple] Bread: but
it is truly Flesh [in as much as it now has the true Virtue of Christ's Flesh:]
making them say, It is, in truth, that, which yet they hold it is not; save
only in Virtue, or Efficacy: And again, that it only appears that, which yet
they hold, that in Substance, and, in truth, it is. And, to render this his
Exposition more current, in Part 3. c. 2.
his 2d. Answer, he says, -- We must not press too much such manner of
expressions as these, licet appareat Panis, tamen in veritate Corpus Christi
est, lest we make the Fathers speak many absurdities; And so urges a place in
St. Chrysostom, where the Father says, -- That we are not to think of our
selves, that we are upon the Earth; because we see the Earth under our feet:
for we are translated into Heaven, and placed among the Angels. Where, says
he, the Father denies not absolutely, that we are upon Earth: and so, he thinks
himself as safely guarded here against the Panis apparet by this; as before,
against the Eucharist being pretended to be Ipsum Corpus Christi in a literal
or a proper sense, by his showing, that the poor were said to be ipsum, or
Verum, Corpus Christi too.

Such Evidences therefore rejected by M. Claude, he requires, for the verifying
of Transubstantiation, that we produce a Testimony, such as this; That the
Bread is Transubstantiated; or, the Substance of Bread is changed into the
Substance of Christ's Body. So that, according to him, The Bread, [but, not a
Substance,] is said by them to be changed into Christ's Body, [but, not into a
Substance]. And, by the same reason, we may say; That our Lord's Nourishment,
when he lived here on Earth, being changed into our Lord's Body, proves not,
that it was changed into the Substance of his Body; But suppose then the
Expression running, as he would have it, -- That the Bread is changed into the
Substance of Christ's Body; and, that though it seems the Substance of Bread;
Yet, in truth, it is the Substance of Christ's Body, or Flesh, are we ever a
whit now the abler to silence him? Or, will not his answers still fit as well
as before, viz. That, though it seems, yet it is not the simple, or naked,
Substance of Bread. -- That it is, in truth, also the Substance of Christ's
Body: i. e. containing in it the whole Virtue (or, if I may so say, the
Substance) of this Substance? For so, it may be showed, sometimes, that
Substance is used for Virtue.

He Grants l. 3. c. 10. p. 263.
; the Greeks cannot think, Christ's Flesh, or Body, to be the Subject of those
accidents, which are perceived, by our Senses, to remain in the Eucharist; and
then, the Greeks also to say: Videtur Panis, and Vinum, in veritate Corpus
Christi and Sanguis est; and yet will not yield, that they hold the Existence
of these Appearances or Accidents in the Eucharist without a Subject. He grants
the Greeks to hold, our Lord's Body, that is distributed in the Eucharist, to
be invisible, impartible, impassible; and then affirms them (though it is not
so) to say; that no other Substance is this Body, than the Bread; and yet not
to hold, the accidents only of the Bread to be passible, partible, etc. The
Greeks say, that the Body of our Lord, which is consecrated and offered in many
places at once, and at many times successively, yet in all these, is but one,
and the same, Body: and, that, though it is in all these places broken,
divided, and eaten by many Communicants, yet it is received by each of them,
not in a piece of it, but whole, and entire: and, after this, remains still,
perfect, unconsum'd, alive, immortal. And yet he says l. 3. c. 13.
, the Greeks do not hold or affirm; Idem Corpus in pluribus locis: do not
maintain a Concomitancy of our Lord's Flesh and Blood; nor the existence of his
Body in the Eucharist, after a non-natural manner. And, that the same Greeks do
hold, the Substance of that which is offered and distributed in one place, as
to one person, to be really and numerically diverse from that offered, or
distributed, in another: But, that their meaning only is; that the Virtue of
this Body is in all places one, and the same; and to all persons, whole and
entire; and must he not say also, that this Virtue is incorrupted and alive? --
I yield [saith he, 2 Resp. p. 514.
in Answer to D. Arnauld 's Objections touching Remigius] that, if the Bread
were made the body of Christ in its Substance, it would follow, that our Lord
would have so many Bodies, as he is united, [i.e. in his Divinity,] to
different Breads [this he grants, notwithstanding Remigius his arguing; all
these Breads but one, and the same Body, from the same Divinity replenishing
them; of which more below]: But, the Bread not being made Christ's Body save
only in Virtue, and in Efficacy, this consequence is null; because this Virtue,
through the whole world, is one and the same. -- For this is indivisible, and
is all of it entire, wherever it is. Thus he. And, that such are his Answers
and Explications, of these expressions of the Greeks, as I have here
represented, You may see in his 2d. Answer part 3. c. 2. and 4. -- His last
Answer, l. 3. c. 9, 10. -- l. 4. c. 7. -- l. 5. c. 7. -- l. 6. c. 10. and
frequently elsewhere.

Greeks are concerning the presence of Christ's very Body, yet he expounds them
only of the Virtue, exclusive to the Substance, of Christ's Body. And yet this
person confesses that the Greeks hold, l. 4. c. 7.
-- That the Bread is made the proper Body of Christ [opposed to figure] by the
way of Augmentation of his Natural Body; so, as our Nourishment is made our
Body. And yet, elsewhere, more fully -- l. 6. c. 10.
That [upon the Consecration] they held an Union of the Bread with the Divinity
of our Lord; and, by the Divinity, [an Vnion] to his natural Body; and that
they understood, that by the means of this Union, or of this Conjunction, the
Bread becomes the Body of Christ, and is made the same Body with it. [I add, as
our nourishment, by its union to the same Soul, is made the same Body with
ours.] Now then; when we say, that our nourishment, upon such an operation
passing upon it, is, or is changed into, or is made, our Body or Flesh, did he
heartily here interpret our meaning, who should say, that we affirm only; that
this nourishment is our Body, or Flesh, in Virtue, or changed into the Virtue
of it, exclusively to its being also made the Substance of it? So; does this
person deal heartily, for instance, when Euthymius a Greek Author, that held
this opinion, expresses himself thus Comment. in Mat. c. 64.
-- Quemad-modum Jesus Christus, supernaturaliter, assumptam carnem deificavit;
Etiam Haec [the Bread and Wine] ineffabiliter transmutat [ i. e. by his united
Deity] in ipsum vivificum Corpus, and in ipsum pretiosum sanguinem suum, and in
gratiam ipsorum. (Which Grace he explains presently after by this Body
strengthening us, as Bread does; and this Blood exhilarating, and encouraging
us, as Wine See Psalm. 103.15.
;) I say, does he deal ingenuously, to expound the [and] here by a [C' est a
dire] or, [id est] -- Transmutat ineff^biliter in ipsum Corpus, and in ipsum
Sanguinem, id est, in gratiam ipsorum? Making the Body a Synonyma with its
Virtue; Such a Synonymon, says he, as that of St. Paul, in 1 Timothy 4.3. They
who believe and know the Truth. Or 1 Timothy 6.3. Wholesome words, and Doctrine of
Godliness. But might he not have said, more aptly, such a Synonymon as that in
Psalm 32. -- Verbo Domini Caeli firmati sunt, and omnis virtus eorum; firmati
sunt Caeli, id est, virtus eorum? Or Psalm 147. -- Magnus Dominus and magna
virtus ejus. Dominus, id est, virtus Domini? -- But, if the Greeks mean, as, he
says, indeed they do, -- That the Bread, by Consecration, is made our Lord's
proper Body, though not that Numerical one born of the Virgin, yet another,
added to it by way of Augmentation; and so, in some sense, made the same with
it, ( viz. so, as our nourishment is with ours) by the Union, and inhabitation
of our Lord's Divinity to, and in, them both; and lastly, that, by its being
thus made our Lords Body, it has also the vivificating virtue of his natural
Body, inherent in it; then I say; in plain dealing, this Person, expounding the
Expressions of the Greeks, ought to have confessed their maintaining the
presence, in the Eucharist, of this Substance of Christ's Body, as well as of
its Virtue; this Substance, I say, of which they affirm, that it is the same
with the other crucified so far as, to be united to the same Divinity, and in
the same person, of our Lord; and; from this, to receive the same vivificating
Virtue; though indeed this new Substance from that crucified numerically
distinct. Nor, consequently, ought he to impose upon the Greeks, as every where
he does, their holding the Bread, after Consecration, to remain still so
entirely Bread, as it was before; but only, the matter of it so to remain, as
the matter of our Nourishment does, when yet that, which was Bread, is now
truly our Flesh, and no more Bread; our Flesh, not by I know not what Mystical
Relation to it, but by a most interior Reception, and Incorporation into it,
and dispersion through that our Substance, or Flesh, which was existent before.
Nor, lastly, using the same integrity, ought he to have said, this new
Substance to have been held by the Greeks augmentative of Christ's Natural
Body, or also to be the same with it, (as the Greeks always say it is) by
reason of a supernatural virtue of Christ's Natural Body communicated to it,
(as he usually explains them); for one thing may have the Virtue of another,
without being an augmentative part of it, or contracting any Identity with it:
But, that this new Substance is held by the Greeks an accruit to our Lord's
Natural Body, and the same also with it, from its Union to the Divinity, and so
its change into Christ's Flesh; and so its partaking also the (...), Graces, or
Virtues of it; which the Greeks speak of, with much reason, as well as of the
substance, because in these we are most concerned.

Thus, perhaps with much less labor, might this ingenious Person have
comprehended, in his Answers and explications of the Greek's opinion more
Truth, and gained from his Readers more belief. And for this, I appeal to any
other sober Person, when he shall have considered M. Claude's concessions set
down below,. 9. and the necessary consequences of them,. 10. But this Person
well saw the great prejudice he should do to his Cause, in explaining these
Authors in such a manner (which would have made a fair way at least toward a
Total Transubstantiation,) and therefore judged it safest to hold fast to a
vertual presence. Now, in this way he takes, many of these Expressions seem so
clearly to say the contrary to what he would have them, as a proof can hardly
be brought against such answers, that will not have as little, or perhaps less,
evidence in it, than the thing that is proved. And, in such manifest wresting
of an Authors clear sense, it is Conscience only must confute such gainsayers,
not an Argument. And, in such cases it concerns the Reader, not easily to
resign his Reason to another engagements; nor suffer his Judgment to be
figured with the impressions of every man's fancy, (especially when opposing
Church Authority) nor to apprehend difficulty in every thing so long, as he
sees it to be contested.] This of M. Claude's Art in evading of such, as seem
very evident, and indisputable Testimonies.

them, then, especially out of the 1st. and 2d. Observations precedent, he has
some at least against the Person. Urge against him the Testimonies of the
Modern Greek Writers, such as will admit none of his Qualifications, He tells
us, many of them are Greeks Latiniz'd, and won over to Rome: Or, the writing
quoted wants another testimony, that it is not forged; such as lived in the
same times having in their writings not mentioned such a Piece; thus he throws
off Samonas, and Agapius l. 4. c. 3.
. Proceed, in adding to these the testimonies of several Dignified persons of
the present Greek Clergy; and that in several Countries, and Churches of the
East, distinct, and averse, from the Roman Communion, (By a diligent Collection
of which, his prudent Adversary, has done the Church Catholic great service,
* in manifesting, that the doctrine, and practice of the Greeks, not only
touching Real Presence and Transubstantiation; but most of the other
Controversies agitated in the West, consents and agrees with the Church of
Rome, and * in representing to the more ingenuous amongst Protestants; how
singular they stand, and divided, in their Faith, from the whole Christian
world, he tells us: They are the Declarations only of Greeks Latiniz'd, and
corrupted by the Roman Missions: Though the same persons, still, maintain their
dissent from the Latins, as to those Points formerly in Controversy between
the two Churches: and there is much less cause, considering the repugnance to
natural Reason, for their corruption in this point of a Corporal Presence,
wherein they are made so easily to be won, than in any other of those, wherein
they still stand out against Rome, and cannot at all be tainted: Lastly, though
the Testimony they give, is not so much concerning their own particular
persuasion; as, what is the Common Tenent, and Profession of the Greek, [ i. e.
those no way reconciled to the Roman Communion,] or other Oriental, Churches; A
matter, wherein a false testimony, as it would carry a greater guilt, so lies
too open to discovery. Urge to him the testimony of the Orientals, especially
persons dignified in the Clergy, that have traveled, about some negotiations,
into the West: He says, l. 5. c. 5. p. 594. There is little credit to be given
to this kind of People, who come not usually into the West, but for their own
Interest; and who fail not to speak in such a manner, as one would have them.
Urge to him the testimony of those of the Greek Communion, inhabiting in the
West, and here indulged their own Service, and Rites, easily enquired into; as
for example, the Greek Church in Venice. See ( Respon. 2. part 2. c. 8.) his
answer to what was urged out of Gabriel Archbishop of Philadelphia the Prelate
there. -- That we are not to think it strange, if one, who had lived some forty
years in that place, suffered himself, [and so those under his charge,] to be
wrought upon by the ordinary commerce they had with the Latins. Urge the
Oriental Liturgies, which though, not denied to be different in several
Regions, or perhaps several also used in the same, (as both S. Basil's and 9.
Chrysostom's are by the Greeks,) yet have a great congruity and harmony both
amongst themselves, and with the Greek and Roman, as to the Service, and
Ceremonies, of the Eucharist. His answer is His last Answer, l. 5. c. 5.606,
and 608.
, -- That we have not any certainty, that these Pieces are sincere, or
faithfully translated; or, some of them not corrected by the Missions.

As for the Liturgies and other witnesses, produced for the Faith of the
Jacobites of Syria; the Armenians; Cophtites, or Egyptians; Ethiopians, or
Abyssines; agreeing in this Point with the Roman, he thinks them all
sufficiently confuted, from Eutychianism being held by these Eastern, and
Southern, Church. For, says he l. 5. c. 6. p. 604.
, -- What can one find more directly opposite; than, to maintain on one side,
that Jesus Christ has no true Body; that there is nothing in him save only the
Divine Nature; that all that which has appeared, of his Conversation in the
World, of his Birth, Death, Resurrection, were nothing but simple appearances
without Reality: and, on the other side, to believe, that the substance of the
Bread is really changed into the proper substance of his Body, the same he took
of the Virgin? Thus he; for his advantage, applying the extremities of that
Heresy to all these Nations, contrary to the Evidence of their public
Liturgies. But Eutychianism, taken in the lower sense, as Eutyches (upon the
mistake of some expressions of former Fathers, Athanasius, and Cyrill,
Patriarchs of Alexandria, which perhaps also induced the engagement of
Dioscorus their Successor on his side) maintained, and the Ephesin Council, i.
e. above 90. Bishops, under Dioscorus, allowed, it, affirms no more, than --
that the two Natures of our Lord, the one Divine, the other Humane,
Consubstantial with us, and received of the Blessed Virgin, after their
conjunction, become one, yet this without any confusion, or mixture, or
conversion of the two Natures into one another. Now, that these Nations adhere
to Eutychianism only in this latter sense, (they not well distinguishing
between Nature, and Personality;) I refer him that desires further
satisfaction, to the Relations of Thomas a Jesu, l. 7. c. 13, 14, 17. -- and
Brerewoods Enquiries, c. 21, 22, 23. -- and Dr. Field on the Church, l. 3. c.
1. p. 64, etc. and of the several Authors cited by them: and to the testimony
of Tecla Mariae a Learned Abyssin Priest cited by M. Claude, l. 5. c. 6.
who says: They hold, after the Union, only Vnam Naturam; sine tamen mixtione,
and sine confusione. [ i. e. of those two Natures, of which the One, afterward,
is compounded]. Which Testimony may serve either to expound, or to confront,
one, or two, of the other he brings, that seem to say otherwise.

Urge to him the Confession of Protestants, Grotius, Bishop Forbes, and others,
(though themselves of a contrary persuasion,) that the Modern Greek Church
believes Transubstantiation: for which they cite their late Writers; the
Reading of whom convinced them in this, though it cannot Mr. Claude. Of these
two Grotius and Forbes, he replies, l. 4. c. 4.
-- That they are persons, who admitted themselves to be pre-possessed with
Chimerical fancies and designs, upon the matter of the Differences between the
two Communions, Catholic and Protestant; which they pretend to accommodate,
and reconcile. So he Censures Casaubon out of Spondanus, -- Levitatem animi
Vacillantem eum perpetuo tenuisse; cum and his, and illis placere cuperet, and
nulli satisfecisset. Where indeed, whose judgment ought sooner to be credited,
than theirs, who appear more indifferent between the two contending parties?
So, To Archbishop Lanfrank's words to Berengarius. -- Interroga Graecos,
Armenios, seu cujus libet Nationis quoscunque homines, uno ore hanc fidem [i.
e. Transubstantiationis] se testabuntur hahere, cited by Dr. Arnauld. He
answers; -- p. 361.
That Pre-occupation renders his Testimony nothing worth.

Urge the Socinians, because the Fathers oppose so manifestly their own
opinions, therefore more apt to speak the truth of them, in their opposing also
those of other Protestants, and particularly in their differing from them in
this point of the Eucharist; He tells us, they are not creditable in their
Testimony, because so much interested to decry the Doctrine of the Fathers in
their own regard; and thus they imagine, Protestants will have less countenance
to press them with an Authority, that themselves cannot stand to. Urge the
Centurists, confessing Transubstantiation, found in some of the Fathers; and,
in magnifying their new-begun Reformation, more free plainly to acknowledge
those they thought errors of former times: He l. 1. c. 5.
denies them fit witnesses in this Controversy, because, themselves holding a
Real Presence, they had rather admit a Transubstantiation in the Fathers, than
a Presence only Mystical. And suppose such excuses should fail him; yet how
easy is it to find some other, whereby a person may be represented never to
stand in an exact indifferency, as to whatever Subject of his Discourse?

With such personal exceptions M. Claude frequently seeks to relieve his Cause,
where nothing else will do it. Whereas indeed such a common Veracity is to be
supposed amongst men, especially as to these matters of Fact, that, where a
multitude, though of a party concerned, concur in their Testimony, they cannot
reasonably be rejected on such an account, either, that their being deceived,
or purpose to deceive, and to relate a lie, is possible; or, that, what they
say can be showed a thing well-pleasing, and agreeable, to their own
inclinations. For as it is true, that ones own interest, if, as to his own
particular, very considerable, renders a Testimony less credible; So, on the
other side, almost no Testimony would be valid, and current, if it is to be
decried, where can be showed some favor, or engagement of affection, to the
thing, which the person witnesses, and cannot be manifested an equal poise to
all parties: and so, for Example, in the Narration of another Country's
Religion, (often made by all Parties,) none here can be believed, save in what
he testifies of them, against his own. Such things therefore are to be decided
according to the multitude, and paucity, and the Reputation of the Witnesses
rather, than their (only some way general) interest; and the Credibility of
such things is to be left to the equal Reader's Judgment.

Greek's, from the eleventh or the eighth to the present, age, their holding
Transubstantiation be, undeniably, made good; and, all the Testimonies
concerning it, exactly true: Yet he says l. 2. c. 1.
-- It will not follow, that a change [of the Church's former Faith in this
Point] is impossible: or, has not actually happened: and consequently, that
all M. Arnauld 's long dispute, about it, is vain, and unprofitable. I add; and
then, so his Replies. But here, since the true sense, and meaning of Antiquity,
on what side this stands, is the thing chiefly questioned, and debated between
the Roman Church, and Protestants, (unless he will throw off this too, and
retreat, only to sense of Scripture,) I suppose to wise men it will seem little
less, than the loss of the Protestant cause, and too great a prejudice to it,
to be so slightly yielded up; if that, not the Roman only, but the whole
visible Catholic, Church (besides themselves,) from the eleventh to the
present age, does defend a Corporal Presence, and a literal sense, of Hoc est
Corpus meum; or also Transubstantiation; and so, consequently, does concur, and
Vote against them, touching the sense of former Antiquity; for this, each side,
in their present Doctrine; and Practice, pretend to follow. And I can hardly
think M. Claude, would seem to spend so great a part of his Book to defend a
Post, the loss of which he thought no way harmed him. Again; thus it is
manifest, that in an Ecumenical Council, if now assembled, the Protestants
would remain the Party Condemned.

l. 3. c. 13. thus to declare the true opinion of the Modern Greeks on this
Subject, which I will give you in his own words, p. 310. -- They believe (says
he) That by the Sanctification [or Consecration] is made a Composition of the
Bread and Wine, and of the Holy Ghost: That these Symboles, keeping their own
Nature, are joined to the Divinity, and, That by the impression of the Holy
Ghost, they are changed, for the Faithful alone, [the Body of our Lord being
supposed either to be not present at all, or to cease to be so; in the
particles of the Symbol received by the unworthy] into the virtue of the Body
and Blood of Jesus Christ: being, by this means, made not a Figure, but the
proper and true Body of Jesus Christ; and this, by the way of Augmentation of
the same natural Body of Jesus Christ. To which they apply the comparison of
the nourishment, which is made our own Body by Assimilation, and Augmentation.
Again, p. 237. more briefly -- The Doctrine of the Greek Church is: That the
substance of Bread, conserving its proper Being, is added to the Natural Body
of Jesus Christ; that it is rendered like unto it: That it augments, and by this
means becomes the same Body with, it. By this also (he says, p. 334. and see
the same in his 4th. l. c. 7.) the Greeks would observe in some sort the
literal sense of the words, Hoc est Corpus meum, which (says He) we do not; we
understand them in this sense: This Bread is the sacred sign, or Sacrament of
my Body. Or, which comes to the same pass, The Bread signifies my Body. They,
on the contrary, taking the word [is,] in some sort according to the letter,
would have, that the same subject which is the Bread is also the Body of
Christ. From preserving this pretended literal sense it is also; That they
would have it; That the Bread is made one with the Body, by its Union to the
Divinity, by the Impression of the Holy Ghost, and by a change of virtue. Or,
as he has it in his 6th. l. c. 10. -- That there is an Union of the Bread to
the Divinity of our Lord; and by the Divinity, to his natural Body: by means of
which Union, or Conjunction, the Bread becomes the Body of Christ, and made the
same Body with it. [with his natural Body.] Again, for preserving the literal
sense, That they bring the comparison of Nourishment made One with our Body;
and that they have invented this way of Augmentation of the natural Body [of
Christ.] It seems also, That the Modern Greeks understand some real or Physical
impression of the Holy Ghost, and of the vivificating virtue of Jesus Christ,
upon the Bread, with some kind of inherence, [ i. e. of the virtue:] Although I
will not (says he) ascertain positively, that this is the General Belief of
their Church, though the expressions seem to sway on this side. But however it
be, this is not our opinion. We believe, that the Grace of the Holy Ghost, and
virtue of Christ's Body, accompanies the lawful use of the Sacrament; and, that
we partake the Body of Jesus Christ by Faith, as much or more really, than if
we received it in the mouth of our Body. But we do not understand there this
Real impression, or inherence, [ i. e. of the Supernatural Virtue of the Body
of Christ, See p. 338.
viz. that born of the Virgin,] of the Greeks. Whence it is, that our
Expressions are not so high, as theirs. And this Opinion of theirs he makes to
be as ancient as l. 3. c. 13. p. 315.
Damascen. -- This Opinion [of the Modern Greeks, says he,] seems to be taken
from Damascen: some of whose expressions I think fit to produce. For it is
certain, that, to make a good Judgment of the Opinion of the Modern Greeks, we
must ascend as high as him. -- And M. Arnauld himself has observed; That John
Damascen is as it were the S. Thomas of the Greeks. Thus He.

Greek Church as they will not own, nor others easily believe, they maintain;
(for he confesses, that it has something in it, that appears little
reasonable; and especially, as to the Augmentation of Christ's natural Body, to
be assez bizarre p. 336.
;) and lest he should make it liable to so many odious absurdities, as that a
Transubstantiation, which he endeavors to avoid, may seem much the more
plausible, and eligible of the two, perhaps; I say, for these considerations,
he undertakes to qualify, and render a credible and likely sense to, it on
this manner: In saying, 1. That they hold indeed an Union of the Divinity to
the Bread, and that in an higher manner, than to any other Sacred Sign, or
Ceremony; but yet not Hypostatical. 2. That they hold the Bread changed into an
augmentative part of Christ's natural Body; but, it remaining still entire
Bread as before, and altered only in a Supernatural Virtue, added to it. 3.
Hold it to be joined to Christ's Body, and augmenting it; but so, as to be not
individually the same, but numerically distinct from it, as also those new
parts we receive by nourishment, are distinct from all the former parts of our
Body. 4. To be joined to this natural Body of Christ, not locally, or to it as
present in the Eucharist; but, as in Heaven. How this? As, says he, a Mystery
may be said to be an Appendix, or Accessory, to the thing, of which it is a
Mystery. And, to these four Qualifications this Author seems necessitated;
because, otherwise, Adoration, and Transubstantiation, in some part, though not
a total; Existence of the Accidents without a Subject; The same Body at once in
many places; and several other Consequents, thus appearing also in the Greek's
Opinion, would have given too much countenance to the Roman.

Greeks, to render it more remote from the Latins, falls short of that, which,
according to the Comparison, and the expressions, they use, he is justly
obliged to maintain. 1. The first, That the Union of the Divinity to the
Consecrated Bread, is Hypostatical, or Personal. For such an Union had our
Lord's Divinity to the Nourishment, (to which this is compared) received by
him, and added to his natural Body, born of the Blessed Virgin: See M. Claude
2d. Answ. part. 2. c. 2. p. 249.
And no less Union than this will serve to make the Eucharistical Bread one,
and the same, with it (a thing constantly affirmed by the Greeks,) at least as
to the Suppositum; or to make both these the Body of the same Person. The
difference of the Union, (says M. Claude l. 6. c. 10. p. 867.
) is discerned by the difference of the effect it produces in the things. Now
what thing more is requisite to style it an Union Hypostatical ( Hypostasis,
and Subsistentia, or Persona, with the Greeks, importing the same thing,) than
this effect, that it renders this Body, to which it unites it self, and that
Body born of the Blessed Virgin, the same Body of one Person: and this Union
gives to this new Body, the self-same vivificating virtue, Physically inherent,
as it does to the other Natural? And then, such an Hypostatical Union, if
granted, will infer the same Dignity of this breaden body with the other: the
same Ceremonies of Honor and Adoration due: Things, which this Person is
unwilling to hear of; and that would ruin his Cause.

i. e. of the substantial form of Bread at least; in that this Bread is truly
made the Flesh, and Blood, and animated with the humane soul, of our Lord, as
well as, united to his Divinity: For so the Nourishment received by our Lord on
Earth, and added to his Body born of the Virgin, remained not, still, Bread;
but was truly changed into his Flesh; and so also is ours. And the Expressions
of the Greeks are suitable, and cannot, without an unjust force and straining,
be otherwise explicated.

To instance in one or two. Such is that of Theophilact, in Matt. 26. -- Non
enim dixit: Haec est figura; sed Hoc est Corpus meum. Ineffabili enim
operatione transformatur, etiamsi nobis videatur Panis, quoniam infirmi sumus
and abhorremus crudas carnes comedere, maxim hominis carnem: and ideo Panis
quidem apparet, sed revera Caro est. And in Marc. 14. -- Et quomodo, inquis
Caro non videtur? Sanguinem propositum, and carnem videntes, non ferremus, sed
abhorremus. Idcirco misericors Deus, nostrae infirmitati condescendens, speciem
quidem Panis and Vini servat, in virtutem autem carnis and sanguinis
transelementat. Where, if Theophylact had meant by [Caro vere est.] Caro tantum
in virtute est, he would never have given this reason, in his comment on Matt.
-- Panis apparet, quod vere est Caro, quoniam infirmi sumus, and abhorremus
crudas carnes: but rather would have removed all difficulty here, and prevented
such a Question; Cur Caro non videtur? by telling them: Vt apparet, ita est,
Panis: Caro autem est, non vere, aut in substantia, sed tantum in Virtute. This
had been plain dealing: but then he had overthrown his Text: Hoc est Corpus
meum, non figura Corporis mei; and made it only, (as M. Claude does,) at the
most, Hoc est Efficax figura Corporis mei, non ipsum Corpus. As for the pains
M. Claude has taken l. 4. c. 7. p. 448.
to qualify this Panis apparet, Caro vere est, in mingling together
Theophilact's Comments on Matthew, Mark, and John; and in taking Speciem Panis
in S. Mark, not for the show, or appearance; but Substance, of Bread (by which
it should run, not vere Caro, but vere Panis, in his Comment on S. Matt.) and
in understanding Vertus Carnis in S. Mark, with a tantum; (so as this excludes
vere Caro, in S. Matt.) I am confident, that the ingenious Reader will find
therein only great industry used to obscure clear Truth.

For Virtue may be used as well augmentatively, as diminutively, in respect of
Substance; as including Substance, and adding something to it, and as opposing
an outward show only without Reality, or a Substance without efficacy; as D.
Arnauld l. 2. c. 9. p. 186.
has judiciously observed; and, for clearing it, instanced in that of St. Paul
2 Timothy 3.5. -- Habentes speciem quidem pietatis, virtutem ejus abnegantes: and
that of S. Gregory Nyssen. Orat. Catechet. c. 37. -- Igitur unde in illo
corpore [of our Lord, when here on Earth] transmutatus Panis transit in Divinam
virtutem; per idem [Verbum] nunc fit similiter; Nam and illic Gratia Verbi
Corpus, cui ex Pane erat substantia and quodammodo ipsum erat Panis, sanctum
fecit: and hic [in the Eucharist] similiter, Panis, sicut dicit Apostolus,
sanctificatur per Verbum Dei, and orationem, non eo quidem, quod, per
comestionem and bibitionem in Verbi Corpus evadat; sed quod, statim, per Verbum
in Corpus transmutetur, sicut dictum est a Verbo: Hoc est Corpus meum. And
afterward he says, -- In illud [Corpus immortale Christi, mentioned before]
transelementata eorum, quae apparent, Natura. Which place, because D. Arnauld
much pressed as thoroughly clearing that of Theophilact, our Lords Nourishment
being changed, as into the virtue, so doubless also into the Substance of his
Body; and because it is that place, from which first Source M. Claude, l. 3. c.
13.
derives the Modern Greek Opinion, I was curious to search what M. Claude would
say to it; but I found him, as to speak to that of S. Paul, and other passages,
so, prudently, to pass over this, the most insisted on by his Adversary, in
silence. But who pleases may see in another place 2 Resp. part 2. c. 2.
(where it is urged against Protestants for Transubstantiation) how miserably
this plain passage of this Father suffers under his Exposition of it: Whilst
this Expression ( due and irregulier, as he calls it) represents nothing else,
but Damascen's and the Modern Greek Opinion to any one, that has not shut his
eyes, and shows the Modern and Ancient Greek Church to be all of one Faith.
Here then you see, in Greg. Nyssen, Virtus includes Substance; Now see it in
that place of Euthymius cited before. 6.
, added to Substance, as being indeed the main thing to be insisted on. -- Haec
ineffabiliter (says he) transmutat in ipsum vivificum Corpus, and in ipsum
pretiosum sanguinem suum, and in Gratiam [ or virtutem, or vim] eorum: which
Grace he explains presently after, by this Body strengthening us as Bread does;
and this Blood exhilarating us, as Wine See Psalm. 103.15.
And see in Theophylact's Comment on John 6. the like addition. -- Panis,
(says he, speaking of our Lords nourishment,) in Corpus ejus mutabatur [there
is the change of the Substance]. -- Et in augmentum and sustentamentum
conferebat, [there is the Vertue]. Again, -- Ita and nunc Panis in Carnem
Domini mutatur [there is the Substance;] Nec nudi hominis Caro est, sed Dei,
and quae deificare valet [there is the Vertue]. Now, Virtus taken thus in
Theophylact, all things in him agree well together: Thus, is suits well with,
vere Caro est: -- with, Ineffabilis Operatio; Language not so usual for a
change of virtue only; -- With the Question, Cur non videtur Caro? weakly
asked, if Theophylact spoke only of a change of Virtue, and not Substance too;
and if this then the known common Doctrine; -- With this Answer to the
Question; which as I have showed, in case he held a presence of Virtue only,
ought to have been quite another; and such as a Protestant now would give.
Lastly, it suits well with his former arguing. -- Non enim Dixit; Hoc est
Figura Corporis, sed, Hoc est Corpus, (which, if good, must hold as well of
virtus, or of any thing else, that is not ipsum Corpus). But Virtue taken so
exclusively, overturns all; and makes Theophylact contradict himself, that he
may not, M. Claude. Thus much in vindication of the true sense of Virtue, when
used by the Greek Authors.]

A like passage to this in Theophylact, see in Remigius Antisidor: in Expos.
Missae, a follower, as M. Claude grants l. 6. c. 10. p. 862.
of the Opinion of Damascen, and the Greeks. -- Cum Mysterium sit (says he)
quod aliud significat, Si [Eucharistia] in veritate Corpus Christi est, quare
appellatur mysterium? Propterea utique; quia post Consecrationem aliud est,
aliud videtur. Videtur siquidem Panis and Vinum; sed in veritate Corpus Christi
est and Sanguis. Consulens ergo omnipotens Deus infirmitati nostrae, qui usum
non habemus comedere Carnem crudam and Sanguinem bibere, facit, ut in pristina
remaneant forma illa duo munera, etsi, in veritate, Corpus Christi and Sanguis,
sicut ipse dixit, etc. Where Pristina forma cannot be extended to the internal
substantial Form or Essence of Bread still remaining, as M. Claude p. 869.
would divert the sense; For this internal Form or Essence, either in the
Bread, or Flesh, since not seen, neither causes, nor removes Horror; and the
maintaining of this Form suits not with the In veritate Christi Corpus est; and
vere Caro est, in these Authors; which expressions do imply, In veritate, not
Panis; but is to be understood only of the external form, and other qualities
thereof, occuring to sense, the sight, taste, etc. For, so that the Eucharist
has all these exterior qualities of Bread, where we do not see, or taste, we
dread not, crude Flesh; and the horror, we have, is from its appearing, not
from its being, Flesh. Now this, [Panis quidem apparet: Caro vere est,] of the
Greeks, what is it, but saying the same thing with that of the Latins. --
Substantia Panis mutatur in Carnem, licet remaneant adhus accidentia Panis,
quae sub sensum cadunt. And hence, when, upon an unusual expression happening
in the Council at Constantinople under Constantinus Copronymus, [ that the only
Image adorable, was the (...) Corporis Christi in the Holy Sacrament] the Real
and corporal presence from a jealousy, (though causless as this Council
explained it self) that this expression might vary, or derogate something from
it, began now to be more particularly insisted upon and explicated, a curious
Question arose among the Greeks, as well as Latins: Whether, upon the Bread
being thus changed, and becoming our Lord's Body, the Body of our Lord were
digestible, and corruptible? which caused to some, affirming it, the imputation
of Stercoranism. But such odious name, surely, these could never have incurred,
no more than now Protestants do, had they held, (at least, as the opposite
party understood them) only a vivificating virtue of our Lords Body to reside
in the Bread, and not the very Substance of his Body to be present instead of
it, according to the then common Opinion.

This of the 2d. thing, wherein M. Claude's explication is deficient; the
change the Greeks held of the Bread, into the Substance of our. Lord's Body, at
least so far, as our Nourishment is, into the Substance of ours, the principal
reason of their using this similitude; Yet, wherein M. Claude deserts it,
though, in some other things, more advantageous to him, (as in the matter of
the nourishment still remaining, and that numerically distinct from the Body
nourished,) he presses it too far. Now this 2d. thing, [the Bread in the
Eucharist its receiving such a change, as our Nourishment,] once granted, will
be at least an half-Transubstantiation of it; the Substantial Form of Bread
being gone; the former Qualities of Bread gone, viz. from their any longer
inherence in the Bread; So that the Substance, not of Bread, but of Flesh, is
also under the former Accidents of the Bread; The name also gone with the
thing; it being in truth now no more to be called Bread, but the Flesh of our
Lord. And so, when the Bread is said by S. Damascen, to be united to the
Divinity, it must be understood so, as that, in the Union, it becomes another
thing; though still it remains a diverse thing from the Divinity. Hence also
the pretense of the Bread its being made our Lord's Body only in Virtue, not in
Substance, gone; and all M. Claude's quest after this word Virtue in the Greek
Authors useless, and his Descants upon it unsound: of which enough has been
said already,. 6.

similitude of nourishment to its utmost extent.) That there is a local Union
of the Bread and Body of our Lord; not, by way of Accumulation, and Addition:
or of Continuation only; as a Leg and an Arm are joined in the same Body; but
by way of an interior reception one into the other, and the most intimate
commixtion and confusion of them, as to the least natural parts, that are
divinble; and capable of digestion, one within the other: So as the least part
of one cannot be severed from the other, or communicated without the other;
and, as to any actual separation of them, (a thing not fecible,) they may be
said to be numerically the same; which comes also the nearest to a total
transition, even of its matter also, into another Substance; though, as to this
total Conversion, we must permit the operation of Gods Omnipotency (out of his
infinite kindness to us) in the Holy Eucharist to stand singular, and
unparalled by any work of Nature.

All these three therefore the Author, in dealing ingenuously with the Greeks
Comparison, and their Expressions, as it seems to me, ought to have allowed.
But this, probably, he much dreaded; as seeing he might as well, nay in some
respects better, have admitted a total Transubstantiation of Matter as well as
Form; which would have avoided those many prejudices and indignities, which an
Impanation labors under. But yet thus the Sentiment of the Greeks, supposing
no total Conversion, is advanced far beyond not only M. Claude's, and the
Calvinists, vertual presence, but also the Lutherans Consubstantiation. For,
whereas these hold only Bread, and Christ's natural Body joined in the
Eucharist, so that the Body and the Bread are two several things still, this
Opinion holds the one changed into the other so, as that, as Jeremy the
Patriarch of Constantinople, replied upon the Lutherans in his second Answer c.
4.
(and as Damascen also said long before. De Fid. Orthod. l. 4. c. 14.
) -- Non duo jam sunt [ i. e. as the Lutherans said, Panis, and Corpus Christi,
joined,] sed unum, and idem, [ i. e. Corpus Christi only]. The Bread made his
natural Flesh; animated with his Soul; Hypostatically united to his Divinity:
in fine, the same with his Body, as much at least as our Nourishment,
interiorly received, and digested is with ours.

Greeks usual Simile carries us. But their Common Doctrine farther, even to a
total Transubstantiation, as I think will appear from what follows.

1. For, 1st. They hold; that the same Numerical Body of our Lord, 1.
that was born of the Virgin, and Crucified, is exhibited to us in the
Eucharist: Present, not by his descending from Heaven; but, by the Conversion
of the Consecrated Elements into the self-same Body, and by the multiplication
of its local Existence in more places, than before.

1. Which appears; 1st. From this; That the Identity of the Body Consecrated,
and that Crucified, quoad suppositum, or as both united to, and filled with,
the same Divinity, (which well consists with a Real, Substantial, Numerical,
diversity between themselves,) is not sufficient, that the one of them,
therefore, may be denominated of the other; or this said to be that; nor yet
sufficient, that all the same things may be said of them both. Some general
things indeed may be predicated of them, wherein both agree; but their
Properties individual, as local presence, Motion, any particular Qualities or
applications of them cannot: (Yet which Individual properties are usually
applied by the Greeks to the Body Crucified, and to that distributed in the
Eucharist, as one, and the same.). Any Individual Properties of the one or the
other, I grant, may always be truly denominated of our Lord's Body in general,
as we will; But cannot be truly said of both, or either of these, the
Consecrated, and the Crucified, as we please, if these not numerically the
same. So we cannot say, That ones Soul is his Body; or a Leg, an Arm; or, the
one in the same place, or motion, or every way affected, as the other is,
because that both are parts of one and the same Person, or Body, and both
animated with one and the same Soul. And, for a Grecian Priest to tell his
Communicants, that he delivers them the same Body that was Crucified and
offered for their Salvation, and Redemption, (when he gives them neither it,
nor any part of it,) because he gives them another Augmentative Breaden part,
belonging to the same Person, which Person indeed was Crucified for them, seems
too bold an Equivocation to be, by this Person, so confidently imposed on the
Greck Church, and their ordinary expressions. The Truth therefore of that,
which the Greeks, or other Latins, embracing their Opinion, do affirm; viz.
that the Eucharist, Consecrated in never so many places, are all the self-same
Body, one with another; and all, with the Crucified; because replenished every
where with the same Divinity, must be understood to proceed, not from the mere
Union, or Conjunction, how intimate soever, of these two (as is showed but
now:) but to proceed from the effect (as M. Claude, pressed with his
Adversary's Arguments, confesses p. 867.
) from the effect, I say, which this Divinity, first uniting, or conjoining it
self to the Elements upon the words of Consecration, works in them to make
them, by a total Transmutation of their Substance, (for nothing less can do it)
individually all one, and the same, with one another, and with that Crucified;
after which follows another, an Hypostatical Union of the same Divinity to
them, as made our Lord's Body.

2. Again: Their holding a Numerical Identity every where of this Body of our
Lord appears from this; that they explain its being, in all places, but one;
and in every place, and in every Particle whole and entire, by the Divinity's
being so; and the Divinity is so, numerically. See that passage of Remigius,
and Alcuin, (cited by M. Claude, l. 6. c. 10.) concerning the effect of this
repletion of the Consecrated Elements by the Divinity. -- Sicut Divinitas Verbi
Dei una est, [una numer] quae totum implet mundum; Ita licet multis locis, and
innumerabilibus diebus, illud Corpus consecretur, non sunt tamen multa corpora
Christi, neque multi Calices; sed unum Corpus Christi, and unus Sanguis cum eo
quod sumpsit in utero Virginis and quod dedit Apostolis. Divinitas enim verbi
replet illus quod ubique est, [the Bread] and conjungit, ac facit [by a
transmutation of this Bread by the Divinity joined to it,] ut, sicut ipsa
[Divinitas, quae totum implet mundum, tamen] una est, ita [quod ubique est, or
Panis] conjungatur [ i. e. by such a transmutation of it] Corpori Christi, and
unum corpus ejus sit in veritate. [ i. e. one not only as to the Person, but
one in Reality and Essence, as the Divinity is one; and otherwise, that, which
follows, and which he collects from this Unity, cannot be true]. Vnde
animadvertendum est, quod sive plus sive minus quis inde percipiat, omnes
aequaliter Corpus Christi integerrime sumunt, and generaliter omnes, and
specialiter unusquisque. Certainly, where the whole is in every part, and every
part (if I may so say) contains in it the whole, here is supposed a numerical
Identity, and a sicut Divinitas una est. Nor has M. Claude, in his holding the
Substance of the Eucharist, in several places, really diverse, and so, to each
Communicant, any way to relieve himself in answer to such expressions,
necessarily inferring a total Transubstantiation, but by inducing his vertual
presence only, which Virtue he says is every where numerically the same; and
whole, and entire, to every Receiver. This for Remigius.

And here also, if we may make use of a Negative Argument (which is sometimes
very weak, sometimes very strong, and convincing, according to the
circumstances, which must be left to the prudent to consider,) whereas the
Greek Doctors, had they declared the Body of our Lord, that is distributed in
the Eucharist, to be really diverse from that on the Cross; and when
Consecrated in several places diverse one from another, (a necessary
consequent, as M. Claude says, of their Tenent,) might have rendered this
Mystery much more easy, and intelligible; Yet they have never mentioned any
such diversity; but still, as it were to prevent and strangle any such fancy,
cautiously added, and it is one and the same with that which was born, and dyed
for us; And, for this numerical Identity, urge our Lords own words Mat. 26.28.
Luke 22.19.
, -- Hoc est illud, quod tradetur, that Flesh of his, that was to be Crucified;
and so for his Blood, qui effundetur, that was to be shed on the Cross. As if
our Lord would make this for ever a firm Article of our Faith, and prevent all
such Equivocation, as eadem caro quoad suppositum, or personam. And, upon this
supposition of the same numerical Body here present, the Greeks (mistaking the
sense of it) censure the expression of the Latins in their Canon. -- Jube haec
preferri per manus sancti Angeli tui in supercoeleste Altar tuum, etc. as
incongruous, if pronounced after the Consecration once ended. For so, says
Cabasilas Liturg. expos. c. 30.
, Quomodo fuerit, si nondum est, supercaeleste ipsum Corpus Christi, quod est
supercaeleste? Quomodo sursum ferretur in manu Angeli, quod supra omnem
Principatum? etc. [that is above already]. But this Quomodo might soon have
been answered by himself, if he held this Consecrated here a new body, really
distinct from that above. This, of the 1st. proof of a Total
Transubstantiation, the Greeks holding the Eucharist the same numerical body
with that Crucified; which, according to M. Claude, necessarily infers a Total
Transubstantiation of the Bread, as well for its Matter, as Form.

Body, that is thus present by Consecration, to be incorruptible; and this
Incorruption of it to depend on its Resurrection, and so, to relate, only, to
that numerical Body that was Crucified, and Raised from Death. -- Quod nec
laeditur, nec corrumpitur, nec in secessum abit: Hoc avertat Deus, says
Damascen: and therefore the Greeks, who are said generally to follow his
Opinion, must, in Justice, be freed from Stercoranism. Now the Bread, remaining
entire for its whole Substance, or for its Matter and Qualities at least, as
before Consecration, cannot be held such a Body of our Lord, as suffers no
digestion, or corruption. For, something there is in the Sacrament, that
suffers this: And we cannot imagine, that the Greeks, whilst holding the
Substance of Bread to remain, will lay these changes only upon the Species, or
Accidents of it; and not the Substance at all; so that, though they eat the
Bread, they taste, and are fed only by the Accidents; and so, without a
Transubstantiation, will espouse the difficulties of it. Their holding, then,
the Body, that is present, and participated in the Eucharist, to be
incorruptible, excludes the Substance, or matter, of Bread from this Body. And,
-- Panis quidem videtur, or, apparet, sed revera Caro est: as Theophilact. --
Corpus Christi non particulatim diducitur, etc. -- Partitio est accidentium,
sub sensum cadentium; as Samenas: In Mat. 26.
-- Non Panis, sed Corpus Domini sacrificatur: -- and -- Si Panis manens,
Dialog. cum Saraceno.
sacrificatus fuisset, Panis esset Sacrificium, non Agni Dei: as Cabasilas:
Liturg. expositio. c. 32.
must all be understood of an entire change of the Bread, as well its Matter as
Form.

quoties frangitur, totum, and integrum in unoquoque frusto: And, -- Omnibus
distributum, minime diminutum. -- Frangitur Agnus Dei, and non comminuitur;
semper comeditur, and non consumitur; says their Liturgy Missa. Chrysostom.
. Not a several piece, or part of our Lord's Body received in the several
Particles, but all: Nor, those receiving more of this Body, that receive more
of the Symbol: In infinite places offered only the same Sacrifice viz. that
one which was offered on the Cross to several Communicants distributed the self
same Body; and: It to each entire; A Tenent flowing from the former, Its
incorruptibility (and by all the same persons maintained). For, what is so, is
no more capable of being parted, or divided, etc. Now these things cannot suit
to our Lord's Body, if the matter of Bread be said, still to remain, and to
make up an augmentative part of our Lord's natural Body, but this numerically
and really distinct from it. For so, in several places will be offered
Sacrifices, but these really different from one another, as also from that of
the Cross: Nor will the Communicants receive our Lord's Body entire, but each
apart; and this part numerically differing from that Corpus, quod traditum est
(which Communion of a parcel was a thing objected to the Stercoranists; and
those, who held our Lord's Body corruptible.) See M. Claude's Concessions
concerning this, 2d. Answer part 3. c. 2. and so his retreat to a Virtual
presence, to verify these expressions of the Greeks, of this Body every where
the same, and received by every one entire.

Greeks, in making application of their Similitudes, (none of which can exactly
fit so high a Mystery,) that seem not to accord so well with a Total
Transubstantiation. -- The Bread said by them to be assumed by, or united to,
the Divinity of our Lord: -- The Bread, and his Body by the Divinity, to be
made One: -- An Augmentation of Christ's Body to be made by the Bread
consecrated, as, here on Earth, by his Nourishment, etc. I see no Reason, why
this Person should not be contented with the former Explications given of them;
Such, as 1. both free these Authors from contradicting themselves; and 2. do
render the sense of the Fathers unanimous, and the Christian Doctrine to run
all in one common Stream; [viz. the Real Presence, and Exhibition, in the
Eucharist, of that numerical Body that suffered for us on the Cross;] 3. and
whereby also may be avoided those many gross absurdities concerning new
Contracts, and Unions, and new Bodies of our Lord, which, being so unworthy
these high Mysteries, and very injurious to our Lord's Incarnation, are all
avoided by a total Transubstantiation. See, if you please, these absurdities
mentioned by Bellarmine De Euchar. l. 3. c. 13. and 15. and by Suarez. De
Sacrament. Disp. 49.. 3. The Divinity of our Lord, then, may be said to assume,
or unite it self unto the Bread; or, to make the Bread one with his Body, not
by a mere joining it to Himself, or to his Body, whilst it remains still Bread;
but, by this first converting and changing of it, by his Divine Omnipotency,
into his Body, and then, his uniting, Hypostatically, his Divinity to it. And,
his Body may be said in some sort to receive daily an Augmentation from these
iterated Consecrations of Bread to be made his Body, in as much as there is a
daily multiplication of his Body, as to its local Existence in more places than
before, according to the frequency of Communions; whilst his Body, in Heaven,
does not descend, but keeps its constant former residence there.

Greeks and Latins, former and latter times, will be at some accord. Whereas
this Author, to maintain a variance between the two Churches, seems
necessitated to fasten on the Greeks an Opinion, which being taken in its just
extent, Transubstantiation seems much the more eligible; and which he is forced
many times also to pare, and qualify so, that it may have some Conformity to
the Doctrine of Protestants, and keep a greater distance from the Roman, as
offers extreme violence to the natural sense of their words. For Example. He
allows, * an Union of the Divinity to our Lord's Body in the Eucharist, as the
Greeks say; But no such Union Hypostatical. * Christ's body in the Eucharist
the same with that born of the Blessed Virgin, as they say; but in such a sense
as meanwhile to remain really, essentially, numerically, diverse from it. *
The Bread, the same body with that born of the Virgin; but, It not changed into
Christ's Flesh, but remaining still Bread. * Bread still, not only for the
matter; as it was in our Lord's, or is in our, nourishment; but, for the same
Substantial Form, and Qualities, still inhering in it, as before. * The Bread
made the very, and true, body, as they say; But virtually only, in having
infused into it, and inherent in it, the vivificating virtue of Christ's natural
Body: (Where the Protestants leave the Greeks to stand by themselves; allowing
this Virtue communicated to the Believer only, not to the Symboles.) * The
Eucharistical body conjoined (as our nourishment is to ours,) to Christ's
natural body, as they say, but the one only in Heaven, the other on Earth. *
Our Lord's Body in the Eucharist, by the same Divinity inhabiting in both, made
one and the same with that born of the Virgin, as they say; but Mystically and
Sacramentally only. For, the same Divinity, replenishing both, does not,
therefore, render them really the same one with another. * The same body thus
with that; but no Sovereign Adoration due, or by the Greeks given, to this, as
to that. * This the same Body with that; and this also, as indivisible,
received entire by every Communicant, as the Greeks say; but this Body entire,
in virtue only, not in Substance. * The same Body of our Lord in all places,
where this Sacrament is celebrated; but only in the former sense; i. e. the
virtue and the efficacy of it, the same. If such be their sense, the Reader
cannot but think the Greeks very unfortunate in their Expressions; or, if not
their sense, this person presuming, he should meet with very credulous Readers.
This (from n. 11.) of the 8th. Observation, M. Claude's explication of the true
Opinion of the Modern Greeks; and the necessary consequents of it.

Greeks have made any Opposition to the Roman Church about Transubstantiation,
l. 4. c. 5. p. 390. -- In a word, says he, the Greeks neither believe, nor
impugn, Transubstantiation. They believe it not; for it has no place in the
Doctrine of their Church. It is neither in the Confessions of their Faith; nor
Decisions of Councils, nor Liturgies; [ i. e. in such Language, as he exacts.
Surely, this main Point, the Manner of our Lords Presence, is not omitted in
all these: the Constantinopolitan, the second Nicene, Council, the Liturgies
speak of it; Nor is Transubstantiation impugned in them, according to him: is
clearly maintained by them, according to Catholics.] They do not impugn it;
For, as far as appears, they have not argued with the Latins, nor formally
debated it with them in their former Disputes. Thus He. And, as he grants the
Greeks not to have quarrelled with the Latins, because they held
Transubstantiation, So the Latins never to have accused the Greeks, p. 375.
as if they held it not. There seems therefore no great need of Missions,
distributing charities, teaching Schools there, etc. to induce these Orientals
to approve a Tenent, which they never formerly contested; and of an error in
which, though the main Point, these two Churches never accused one another:
Nay, the Greeks, in some of their Confessions, as in that of the Venetian
Greeks to the Cardinal of Guise, seem to have outdone the Latins; and to go
beyond Transubstantiation.

Meanwhile; the great quarrels the same Greeks make with the Latins, about
smaller matters in this principal part of the Christian Service, and the chief
Substance of its Liturgies, the Eucharist, as about the manner of the
Consecration; and about Azymes; and on the other side, the great Storms, that
have been raised between Catholics and Protestants, from the very beginning of
the Reformation, about this very Point of Transubstantiation, do show, that, if
the difference between the Greeks and Latins were considerable and real herein,
there could not have been, on both sides such a constant silence; Though in
some other matters, of little consequence, or, at least, of little evidence,
such as M. Claude instanceth in, there can be showed a silent toleration of the
different Judgments, as well of Churches, as of private Persons.

Claude's Explication of the Greeks Opinion concerning Transubstantiation. Now
to view the other Point, Adoration. Here 1st. He denies not an inferior and
Relative Adoration to be allowed to be due, and paid by the Greeks, to the Holy
Mysteries in the Eucharist; such as is given to the Holy Gospel, and to other
Sacred things. Of which we find in S. Chrysostom's Mass, that, before his
reading the Gospel, -- Diaconus respondet. Amen. and reverentiam Sancto
Evangelio exhibet. See M. Claude's last Answer, l. 3. c. 7. p. 219. where he
grants; That the Greeks have much Devotion for Pictures; for the Evangile, and
for the pain benit; and for the Bread of the Eucharist, before the
Consecration. 2ly. A Supreme Adoration he grants lawful, and due to our Lord's
Humanity wherever present; and allows such an Adoration actually given, even
by Protestants, at the time of their receiving the Eucharist, to our Lord
Christ, and to his Sacred Humanity, as in Heaven. And, to his Adversary urging
some places of the Fathers for the practice of Adoration in the Communion, he
replies. -- 2 Resp. part. 2. c. 8. p. 416.
The Author deceives us, in proving what is not controverted. For the Question
is, not: whether in the Communion we ought to adore Jesus Christ our Redeemer,
and his Flesh personally united to the Word, represented by the Sacrament: We
practice it with an ardent, and humble Devotion, when we approach to the Holy
Table. And afterward, -- Who doubts, but that the Body of Jesus Christ is
Soveraignly Adorable. 3ly. He cannot but know, or else has been very careless
to inform himself; that no Sovereign Adoration, is pretended either by the
Roman, or Greek Church to be given to the external Species, or Symbols, of the
Eucharist, (which they hold Venerable only with an inferior cult, such as is
due to all other Holy things,) but only to the Body and Blood of Christ
contained under them; as the Council of Trent, allowing the Expression of
adoring the Sacrament, cultu Latriae, yet explains it in their Canon thus.
Sess. 13. c. 6
-- Si quis dixerit in Sancto Eucharistiae Sacramento Christum, unigenitum Dei
Filium, non esse cultu Latriae etiam externo adorandum, Anathema sit: And, as
Bellarmin De Eucha. l. 4. c. 29.
also resolves the state of the Controversy. -- Quicquid sit de modo loquendi;
status quaestionis non est, nisi An Christus in Eucharistia sit adorandus cultu
Latriae. 4ly. In the Fourth Observation precedent, M. Claude says he will not
contest the Greek's holding a Real Presence of our Lord in the Eucharist,
Though, he contends, it is not by the Roman way of Transubstantiation. Now from
this Real Presence held by the Greeks even after that way he allows, at least,
if he will but grant the true consequences thereof, mentioned before,. 11. viz.
An Hypostatical, or other, Union to this Body offered and distributed in the
Eucharist, such as converts it into the Flesh of our Lord, and renders it the
Body of the same Person, with that born of the Blessed Virgin; non aliud ab eo,
quod sumpsit in utero Virginis; (by which the People seem sufficiently
instructed not to distinguish, in their Mode of Adoration, between these two,
that they are taught to be personally the same.) I say from such a Real
Presence held by the Greeks a lawfulness of adoring Christ's Body, as there
present, must be held by them. And then; if it can be showed by M. Claude they
do not actually adore, it must be reckoned a matter of neglect; not, of
Conscience, or denying such thing due.

5ly. But, now, to consider their Practice. He denies not the Greeks to adore,
in their Mode of Adoration, (which is by inclining the Head and Body; seldom,
kneeling;) when they receive the Communion; their Liturgies have it, often
repeated; and, surely, he will allow them, herein, as much Devotion as he does
to the Protestants: and also them, to give at least an external Relative
Devotion to the Mysteries, for such they give to the Evangiles: and, methinks,
the witnesses he produces. p. 216. should not, in general, deny simply, any
Adoration of the Greeks at all. The Question, then, only is; granting already
an external Adoration given by the Greeks, when they approach to the Communion;
whether this, in their intention, be a sovereign Adoration exhibited to
Christ's Sacred Divinity and Humanity, as there present, Now; the Greeks
holding this Humanity there really present, conceded before, seems sufficient
to determine this, without more-ado. And, for one to pretend, that this
Adoration of the Greeks is given only to God; or to Christ's Divinity as every
where present; or, to the Humanity united to it, but only to this as in Heaven;
and, not to it also as present in the Eucharist, when the same Greeks confess
it to be so; and, when the Eucharistical presence is the occasion of such their
Adoration; here I say, not to allow the extent of their Adoration, so far as
they believe the presence of the Person adored; and their worship the same
latitude, as their Faith, would be an unjust and groundless abridgment of their
Devotions: as also this, to pretend an inferior, or relative, Adoration given
by them only to the Mysteries, where the same Communicants hold a supreme due
to the Person present with them.

To view a little the Form of their Liturgy. We read in S. Chrysostom's Mass:
That the Priest, after Consecration and before he takes the Holy Bread to
communicate himself with it, adores: and says, -- Attend, Domine Jesu
Christ, de sancto habitaculo tuo: veni ad sanctificandum nos qui in excelsis
cum Patre simul resides, and hic una nobiscum invisibiliter versaris; and
dignare potenti manu tua nobis impertiri immaculatum Corpus tuum, and pretiosum
sanguinem; and per nos, toti Populo. Corpus tuum, I add, never severed from thy
Divinity, and thy self. To whom also the Priest had said before in the
beginning of the Service. -- Tu enim es, qui offers and offerris; assumis, and
distribueris, Christ Deus noster. Then the Priest adores again, and says
thrice to himself, -- Deus propitius esto mihi Peccatori; An Act of Humiliation
used here by him, before he takes the Sancta into his hands for the Communion,
as it was once before, at the beginning of the Oblation. And so, says the
Rubric, all the People adore with him. -- Populus similiter cunctus cum
devotione adorat. Then he takes the Holy Bread, and makes the Elevation of it,
yet whole and entire; saying, Sancta Sanctis; And the Quire answers, it seems,
with relation to It, yet one, and entire, -- Vnus Sanctus, Vnus Dominus, Jesus
Christus. Then the Priest, breaking it into four Pieces, says, -- Frangitur
Agnus Dei; qui frangitur, at non comminuitur: qui semper comeditur, and non
consumitur; [which shows, what Agnus Dei, whether this in Heaven, or present
here, is now spoken of, and thus adored.] Sed eos, qui. sunt participes,
sanctificat. So taking a piece thereof in his hand, and preparing himself to
receive it, he says, -- Credo Domine and confiteor, Quod Tu es Christus, etc.
-- Dignare in praesepe animae meae (...), and in coinquinatum meum Corpus
ingredi, -- and dignare me participem effici sanctissimi tui Corporis and
Sanguinis. [I add, never severed from thy Divinity, and thy self.] Also, when
he calls the Deacon, to communicate him with the Holy Bread: it is said, --
Accedens Diaconus Reverentiam exhibet. And so also before receiving the
Chalice. It is said again, -- Diaconus venit, et adorat semel, dicens: Ecce
ve^nio ad immortalem Regem, etc. Where it must be remembered, that the Greeks
also held, the Body of our Lord that is received in the Eucharist, to be
immortal, and incorruptible. This we find in their Liturgy. And, suitable to
this, we read, in Cabasilas c. 39.
(expounding the Ligurgy,) concerning the People before their communicating. --
Ipsi autem (says he) fidem attendentes, et adorant, et benedicunt, et Jesum,
qui in eis [donis Sanctificatis] intelligitur, [opposed to videtur] ut Deum,
celebrant; Where M. Claude's note is l. 3. c. 7. p. 222.
1. that -- Non adorant dona, sed Jesum. But who says, that a Sovereign
Adoration is due, or given, to the Dona? Again, 2. Jesum, (says he) qui
intelligitur, i. e. only, qui repraesentatur in Donis. But all the former
Expressions, implying our Lord's presence, show their belief to be contrary. Tu
es, (says the Priest before) qui offers, et offerris: assumis et distribueris,
Christ Deus noster. And the People, after this adoring, in their receiving,
say, -- Benedictus, qui venit in nomine Domini; of which, the same Cabasilas,
-- Tanquam nunc ad eos venientem, et apparentem, Christum benedicunt. Who also
before ( c. 24.) intimates the custom of the Greeks, in the Service adorare, et
alloqui corpus et sanguinem Domini. Now I say, All these Passages in the Greek
Liturgy well considered; Here for one to grant, the Real and Corporal Presence
of our Lord in his whole person in the Holy Mysteries to be believed by this
Priest, Deacon, and other Communicants, and yet to say, their Adoration, and
other Addresses and Allocutions are not given and made to him, as there
present; but to him, only as in Heaven; or only to his Divinity as there, and
every where present, abstracted from his Humanity, is such a Comment upon this
Liturgy, as nothing but a strong pre-ingagement can force upon any ones
judgment.

l. 3. c. 7. p. 216.
do accuse the Greeks of some neglect in this Duty, but do not show them to
justify it; and these very Persons, that censure such neglect toward the Holy
Mysteries after Consecrated, accuse them almost of committing Idolatry toward
them before. So that it seems rather some defect, of knowledge, in such,
concerning the Ceremonies of Consecration, than want of Devotion. Cabasilas c.
24.
, long ago, observed the same in some ignorant People, and blamed it: but yet,
in the same place, allows the Adoration of, and Allocations made to, the Body
and Blood of our Lord, when the Offerings, are Sacrificed, and perfected. The
Consecration also of the Greeks being longer extended, and the Adoration not so
unitedly performed presently upon the pronouncing of our Lords words of
Institution, as amongst the Latins; but, disjunctively, at their communicating,
might occasion some mistake in those Latins, who accused them of a
Non-Adoration. So, the other irreverences and indecencies, objected, are to be
esteemed only negligences in private practice; not, consequences of the public
Doctrine; nor countenanced by their Liturgies. Which Liturgies use as much
Ceremony toward the Holy Mysteries, as the Roman does; Where also, first, the
Remains of the Holy Bread are carefully put into the Chalice, for the People to
be communicated therewith; and then, for the Remains, after the Communion
consummated. -- Sacerdos (says the Rubric) quod residuum est Communionis in
Sancto Calice, cum attentione, et devotione consumit, et ter Sanctam Calicem
abluit, et attendit, ne remaneat particula, Margarita vocata [not the least
crumb of the intinct Host].

As for several Devotions and Honors performed to the Blessed Sacrament, here
in the West, (which this person diligently reckons up, much to its praise,) not
so in the East; (frequently urged by M. Claude, as good Arguments of the Greek
Church not believing Transubstantiation, or such a Real Presence, as the
Roman;) and, in latter times here more, than in the former, 1st. They are held
no such necessary circumstances, or consequences, without the which a Real
Presence may not be believed, and a due Adoration, (in some convenient manner
or other,) practiced. 2ly. The occasion of them is well known to have been the
Berengarian, and many other, Errors concerning the Eucharist: which appeared
here in the West, but disturbed not the East. Which Errors, inferring many
Indignities and affronts to this richest, and dearest Legacy of our departing
Lord, caused the Church to multiply also the external testifications of her
Devotion, Gratitude, and Reverence, to it; and God's wisdom, as usually, out of
such vilifyings, and disrespects, extracted a greater Honor, as to External
Ceremony, to these High Mysteries So also the many subtle Questions, that have
been discussed and stated among the Latins, not so much thought on by the
Greeks, but all shut in a Quo modo novit Deus, (another frequent Argument with
this Author, of the Greeks not believing Transubstantiation) acknowledge the
same Original, viz. the Provocations, Objections, contrary false-positions, of
the Heterodox, which forced the Church to descend to the same particulars with
them: Nor could she censure these as Errors, without establishing their
Contradictories, as Truth. This of Adoration.

Claude, and the Consequences of them, forementioned, seem to me sufficient,
1st. To dissuade any sober and modest person, who relies not on his own
judgment for the controverted sense of Holy Scriptures, but holds it a safer
way to conform to that of Church Authority; to dissuade him, I say, from any
such Communion, as he sees, by the former Account, opposed both by the Latins
and the Greeks; Greeks, present, or past, as high as Damascen; in the eighth
age; and may not I say as high as Gregory Nyssen, See before. 12.
in the fourth, whilst both these Latins and Greeks hold a Real, or Corporal
presence of our Lord in the Eucharist, and agree in a literal sense of Hoc est
Corpus meum. Nor will M. Claude enter with his Adversary into this
Controversy. 2. Next; to persuade him, of the two, rather to the Roman
Communion: as whose Transubstantiation, besides that it has been established
by so many Councils See the Guide in Controversy Disc. 1.
, is of it self much more credible, and more accommodated to the
Scripture-expressions, then I know not what fancied Augmentation of Christ's
natural Body, born of the Blessed Virgin, by a new Breaden one assumed in the
Eucharist, numerically distinct from the other; yet, by the like assumption,
and Union to our Lord's Divinity, rendered personally one and the same Body with
it.. 57, 58.
But how much more will he be confirmed in the same Resolution, if by what has
been said above,. 14, etc.
he discerns M. Claude's Relation of the Modern Greek opinion unsound; and that
the main Body of them (except perhaps some few Impanatists, that have been
there, as also in the Western Church) in holding a total substantial change of
the Bread, have accorded with the Roman Church.

. 321 n. 1.
That (notwithstanding whatever evidence of Truth,) Answers, and Replies, from
Persons ingenious, and pre-engaged, find no end; and that, when Controversies
are, by one of the contending parties, denied any Decisive Judge, though error
may easily be overcome, yet it can hardly be silenced. For as God, for the
greater trial of our obedience, has permitted in the world not only Evil, but
very many allurements also, and enticements, to it; so, not only Errors, but
many verisimilities, and appearances of Reason, ever ready to support it, with
those that do not by Humility attain the illuminations of his Grace. Evidence
sufficient God has left always to clear, and manifest all necessary Truth to
those, who are of an obedient Spirit, and willing to learn it: But not
sufficient to force (like the Mathematics) the Understanding of the
self-confident, and interested to gainsay it; but that they may have some fair
color or other, to oppose to it, and catch the credulous.

All which still more infers the great necessity of Church Authority, and a
conformity to it, and the reasonableness of Monsieur Maimbourg's Method for
reducing Protestants to the true Faith, viz.. 8.
That matters, once decided by this Authority, should be no longer disputed; A
Rule, the Protestants, i. e. the more potent Party of them, for preserving
their own peace, would have to be observed in the Differences among themselves,
(showed in the proceedings of the Synod at Dort, of which see before,. 254. n.
2.) but not, in those between them and Roman Catholics, because here they are
the weaker. To whom M. Claude's answer in the Preface of his last Reply to D.
Arnauld, is this. -- It is unjust (says he) that he will have the Decisions of
Councils to be Prescriptions against us [the Protestants;] not remembering that
nothing can prescribe against Truth, especially when it concerns our Salvation.
And, the Determinations of Councils not being with us of any Consideration; but
as they do conform to the Holy Scriptures, and to the Principles of Christian
Religion, we cannot have from hence any reasonable or profitable way, to end
the particular differences that divide us, but only this, to examine the matter
to the bottom, to discern whether such conformity [ i. e. of the Councils to
the Scriptures,] which we suppose necessary, is; or, is not.

To which he adds there, as also frequently elsewhere: That the shortest, and
surest, and only right, way for settling the Conscience in repose, (which must
rest its Faith immediately on God's Word and Divine Revelation,) is, for both
Parties to proceed to the Trial of their cause, all other Authority and Methods
laid aside, by the Holy Scriptures. And, when he is pressed by his Adversary;
That, in these Controversies, at least all persons doubting, i. e. what is the
true sense, of the Scriptures controverted, and of Antiquity expounding them,
and not certain of the contrary of what the Church teaches concerning them,
(as all unlearned Protestants must be,) ought, herein, to conform, and adhere
rather to the Church, than to Separatists, he seeks to decline it thus: That
the simplest person may receive sufficient certainty from the clearness of
Scripture, in all matters necessary; that, from these Scriptures learning what
he ought to believe, he may easily know also, whether the society, he lives in,
be a true Church, and such as will conduct him to Salvation, that hence he
needs not trouble himself with Controversy, touching what the former Church
has believed; Yet that, our Lord promising to be with true Believers to the
end of the World, so as they shall not fall into damnable error, Charity
obliges him, (without his reading them,) to believe, that the Fathers are of
this number; and so, that they believed, as they ought; and so, were of his
Faith. To give you his own words, l. 1. c. 4. -- The word of God, (says he)
contains purely, and clearly, all that, which is necessary to form our Faith,
to regulate our Worship, and Manners. And, God assisting us with his Grace, it
is easy for the most simple to judge, whether the Ministry, under which we
live, can conduct us to salvation: and consequently, whether our society is a
true Church. For, for this, he needs only examine It as to these two
Characters. One, if they teach all the things clearly contained in God's word;
and the other, if they teach nothing, besides, that is contrary to those
things, or does corrupt the efficacy, and force of them. And afterward, -- This
Examen, (says he) is short, easy, and proportioned to the capacity of all the
world: and, it forms a judgment as certain, as if one had discussed all the
Controversies one after another. Again, l. 1. c. 5. -- There are two Questions:
One, touching what we ought to believe on the matter of the Eucharist. The
other, touching what has been believed by the ancient Church; The first of
these cleared, we need not trouble our selves about the second. Now, as for
those of our Communion, the first Question is cleared by the Word of God. And
for the second, he resolves it thus, l. 1. c. 6. -- That the Promises of Jesus
Christ assure us, that he will be with true Believers to the end of the world.
Whence he concludes, -- that there has always been a number of true Believers,
whose Faith has never been corrupted by damnable Errors. Then, -- that charity
obliges us to believe, that the Fathers were of this number. And then lastly,
We knowing from Scripture what we ought to believe in this Point, we also are
confirmed, without studying them, that the Father believed the same.

Now to reflect briefly on what he has said in the order it lies here. A
Council (says he) cannot prescribe against Truth. True; But the Council is
brought in for a Judge, where a Dispute and Question is, what, or, on what
side, is the Truth. The determinations of Councils are not with us of any
consideration, but as they do conform to the Holy Scriptures. Right; But, the
Council, is called in for a Judge, where a doubt, and dispute is; what, or on
what side, is the true sense of such, and such, Scriptures. Where, if he
means; that they refuse to submit to a Council unless conforming to
Scripture, as the sense of Scripture is given by the Council, that is it we
desire: for the Council will still profess its following the sense of
Scripture, if, as this sense is understood by the Protestants, what is this,
but to say they will submit to the Judgment, or Decision, of a Council, so
often as it shall agree with their own? The only reasonable and profitable way
to end differences, is this, to examine the matter to the bottom; i. e. whether
the Decisions of the Council conform with Holy Scripture. But, when this is
done, How will the Difference end? Will not the Controversy, as the Replies
multiply, swell rather still bigger; as his, and D. Arnauld's does? Search to
the bottom; Suppose a Socinian should say this, against the former
Church-decisions, concerning the Trinity, the supreme Deity of the Son, and
Holy Ghost; Gods essential Omnipresence, his absolute prescience of future
Contingents, etc. will Protestants say, he makes a rational motion? Then, how
can any Protestant rest his Faith in these Points upon the Authority of the
Councils, and their Creeds? will you say, he does not? but, on the Scriptures.
Have they ten searched all these Points to the bottom there; compared the
particular Scriptures urged by the Socinian, and those urged against him; and
weighed them in the Balance? If, yet, they have not, ought they? If they
ought; what a task here for young Protestant-students? what an Eternal
Distraction in this, [a search!] what heavenly peace, in the other [ obedience
to the judgments of former Councils;] and Vacancy for better employments!
Again, If they ought: what, all Protestants? the most of them, as of all
Christians, are illiterate Men, not having either leisure, or ability, to
search, etc. Must these adhere, therefore, to former Councils, and their
Creeds, in these Points? Then so must they in others; and in this of Real
Presence, or Transubstantiation; and so they remain no longer on M. Claude's
party. Or will he bind them to submit their judgment to some inferior
Ecclesiastical Authority, or Ministry, standing in opposition to a superior?
But this is Schism in them both: and justly is such person ruined in his
credulity to one authority usurped, for his denying it to another, to whom it
is due; Nor would M. Claude be well pleased, if any one should follow some few
reformed Ministers, divided from the rest of their Consistory, Class, or Synod.

Trial, he motions, to be made by Holy Scriptures. This is a thing that has
been by the Two Parties already done, first; as it ought. And the issue of it
was; That one Party understood these Scriptures in one sense, the other in
another; For Example. The one understood, Hoc est Corpus meum, liberally; the
other in a Metaphor, and so differently understood also all the other Texts of
Scripture produced in this Cause. Here, the true sense of Scripture, became the
Question, and their Controversy. For the Judge and Decider of this
Controversy between them, when time was, they took a Council: For, since
Scripture they could no more take, the sense of that being their Question, to
whom should they repair, but the Church? and of the Church a Council is the
Representative. Councils, several, to a great number, in several ages See Guide
in Controver. Disc. 1.. 57, 58.
, decided this matter, and declared the sense of the Scriptures; but so, as it
liked not one Party. These therefore thought fit to remove the Trial from
thence to the more Venerable Sentence of the Fathers, and Primitive Church, i.
e. of their Writings. Again, the sense of these Writings as, before, that of
Scriptures, is understood diversely by the Contesters; and now the true sense of
the writings of the Fathers is the Question, and Controversy. Nor, here will
Disputes end it; Witness so many Replies made on either side. Former Councils,
as they have given their Judgment of the Sense of the Writings of Holy
Scriptures, so they have of those of the Fathers, but their Authority is
rejected, in both; And, a new Council, were it now convened, besides that M.
Claude's Party, being the fewer, and so, easily over-voted, would never submit
to it, we may, from M. Claude's Confession l. 3. c. 13. p. 337.
, -- That both Greeks and Latins are far departed from the Evangelical
simplicity, and the natural explication that the Ancients have given to the
Mystery of the Eucharist, rationally conjecture that Protestants, in such
Councils, would remain the party condemned. What, then, would this person have?
He would have the Controversy begin again, and return to the Scriptures. Which
is, in plain Language: That, the Question should decide the Controversy: and,
till this can do it, That, so long as the Protestants are the weaker Party, all
should have their Liberty. For, when they are the stronger; they do well
discern the necessity of Synods for ending such Differences; and, though not
professing themselves infallible, yet, upon the Evangelical promises of our
Lord's assistance to such Councils, think fit to require all the Clergy under
their jurisdiction, upon pain of Suspension from their Function, to receive and
subscribe their Decrees, for God's Truth; and to teach them to the People, as
such; and think fit to Excommunicate those teaching the contrary, till they
shall recant their Error. Of which see before,. 200. Witness such carriage of
the Synod of Dort toward the Remonstrants, who challenged the same exemption
from their Tribunal, as they had done from that of Trent; but could not be
heard.

As for that which follows, in Answer to D. Arnauld's most rational challenging
a submission, and Conformity, of so many Protestants, as have no certainty of
their new Opinions, rather to the Church, than to Innovators, to me it sounds
thus. That every plain, and simple Protestant, 1st. Thinks his Exposition or
sense of Scripture, in this Point of the Eucharist, and so in others, any way
necessary, to be clear, and without dispute, [and the more simple he is; the
sooner he may think so; because he is not able to compare all other Texts, nor
to examine the contrary senses given by others, or the reasonable grounds
thereof.] 2ly. Next, that every one, who thinks his Exposition, or Sense of
Scripture clear in such Point, is by this sufficiently assured, that he has a
right Faith; or, from this sense of his, knows what he ought to believe, and
forms a Judgment herein as certain, as if one had discussed all the
Controversies, one after another: [a strange proposition; but I see nothing
else, from which such person collects his faith to be right; if any does,
produce it]. 3ly. That every such simple person now easily knows, whether the
Society, wherein he lives, be a true Church, or otherwise, viz. as they agree
with, or dissent from, that right Faith of his, already supposed; or as he
finds them to teach the things clearly contained in God's word, i. e. in his
clear Sense thereof. 4ly. Knowing thus, from this his clear exposition, or
sense of Scripture, what he ought to believe, he needs not trouble himself,
what the Ancient Church has believed; [which is very true:] nay, he knows,
without reading them, or M. Arnauld's and M. Claude's discourses upon them,
that the Fathers, if of the number of the Faithful, were of his Opinion, by M.
Claude's arguing forementioned. I desire the Reader to review his words, or,
the 5th. and 6th. Chapters of his 1st. Book, and see if he can make any better
construction of them. Now, if there be any Sense in this, he says; How can he
hinder, but that a simple Catholic may use the self-same Plea (
Church Authority being laid aside for a certainty of his Faith upon the same
pretentions; viz. his clear sense of Scripture, quite contrary to the
Protestants clear sense? And, in any Controversy amongst Protestants: (Suppose
that of the Remonstrants and Anti-Remonstrants,) here both sides have the same
Plea, one against another; namely, the certainty of their Faith from their own
Sense of the Scripture controverted between them. And, why does not this
certainty void their Synods? For M. Claude says, -- The word of God contains
nettement and clairement, all that which is necessary to form our Faith, and
that the most simple are capable to judge of it, etc. Unless the Protestant
Controversies be never about any thing necessary. This is the way M. Claude
thought on to leave no Doubters, though never so unlearned, among Protestants,
as to the Eucharist, or other Points of their Faith. But meanwhile, if, after
such Speculations of his, any such Doubters there be, I do not find, but that
he leaves so many wholly to D. Arnauld's disposal, viz. that they return to,
and remain in, the bosom of the former Church so long, till they become
certain of its errors; and not follow strangers that have not entered, by the
door, into Christ's Fold; and I hope, they will consider it. As for the
settling of our Conscience this person speaks of, by resting our Faith
immediately on God's Word, I see not, where the sense of the Scriptures is
supposed the thing controverted, how any one rests his Faith more immediately
on God's Word, by following his own Exposition or Sense thereof, or the
Exposition of a Minister, etc. (for some persons exposition he must follow,)
than he, that follows that of the Church.

If we are, then, for a total application to the Scriptures, and for searching
things to the bottom; Let us search there first this main Point, (that decides
all other) concerning our Lord's establishing a just Church Authority for
ending contentions. Where we shall find also; that he is not a God of
dissension, or Confusion, in his House, 1 Cor. 14.33 Ephesians. 4.11.14 1 Cor. 12.28
the Church; but of Peace. And, -- That he has given his Clergy in a certain
Subordination, that We should not be carried about with every wind of Doctrine;
as we must be, when ever these disagree in expounding Scripture to us, if we
have no Rule, which of them to follow. The truth of this, once found out by our
search, will save many other searches; of which, without it, I see no end. In
vain do we endeavor, with whatever pains, to discern God's Truth without the
illumination of his Holy Spirit and Grace; and since revelat parvulis, in vain
expect this, without great Humility, and self-dis-esteem, and a reverent
preference of, and pious Credulity toward our just, and lawful Spiritual
Superiors. -- Credendo, first, [i. e. Ecclesiae] says S. Austin in his Tract
De utilitate Credendi c. 1.
, praemunimur, and illuminaturo praparamur Deo.

FINIS.

