A SERMON Preached at SALTERS-HALL, TO THE SOCIETIES FOR Reformation of
Manners, MAY 31. 1697.

By JOHN WOODHOVSE.

LONDON: Printed for John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultry, over against
the Compter. 1697.

TO THE Worthy MEMBERS OF THE SOCIETIES FOR THE Reformation of Manners, In the
CITIES of London and Westminster.
GENTLEMEN,
SHould I tell you. with what Difficulty I was prevailed upon to Preach the
ensuing Sermon before you; and with what greater to Print it, though at your
Desire; I should take up the trite Apology commonly used in this Case; and
cannot reasonably hope to make it pass for better.

The Aversions I overcame, in coming to this Town, to Settle here, cross to all
the pleasing Designs I had formed of a more agreeable Serviceableness in a
lower Sphere were not much greater* than those I ha^ justly conceived against
appearing before you, on so Particular and so Public a^ Occasion. This Sermon
was One of the Thre^ I Preached in less than Thirty Hours, On^ of the Seven
hard Services put upon me, i^ Eight Days, in a Time when the Public, and mine
own Private Affairs, allowed me not One whole uninterrupted Day for all of
them. And by this time you wi^ cease to wonder, why your Desires, and others,
to Print it, were so grievous to me did so break my Sleep, and disorder the in^
firm State of my Body and Mind. I thank fully own, the great Humanity of some
o^ you; who, when you heard the true Stat^ of my Case, that I neither write,
nor us^ any Notes in Preaching, nor have done for many Years, and having my
Thoughts so many Days after, taken up with fresh and various Discourses. on
Subjects I had never (to my knowledge) Preached on before; and had not been
Master of any time considerable, to write, or reflect upon, and refresh my
Memory (not the most faithful) were pleased to interpose for my Excuse.

But when I was told, several Copies were transcribed, by Persons that wrote
after me; and that if I would not, others would Print, whose Copies I could not
procure so much as a Sight of, nor had Hopes of, otherwise than Sheet by Sheet,
as Printed off, and past Alteration; my most Intelligent Friends told me, I
must submit to do it, as one imperfect Copy would enable me, notwithstanding my
(long indulged) Aversion to be seen in Print.

Had those of you that know me, known me, as well as I know my self, you would
have had less Reason to solicit this Trouble to me, your selves, and others;
but since you say you differ from me, I have at last submitted to you. And, no^
to mention the Deference I have to those of you, that are of my own Persuasion;
^ must add, that the Veneration I have for such valuable and useful Members of
the Church of England ( as others of you are known to be), is so agreeable to
the Temper and Affection, I have long had toward the Reverend and Pious Clergy
o^ that Communion (with whom I have al^ along held some Communion, and
Brotherly Conversation) that it would have bee^ some force upon my self, to
deny you any thing I could do, toward the Encouragement of others, to aid you
in so good ^ Work, as that wherein you are so happily united.

In a word, it is not without great Satisfaction that I find (since I was
before you) that the many Officers, who joyne^ together, to inspect the
Markets, to find out Drunkards, Swearers, and Cursers, tha^ formerly swarmed
there, returned without the Discovery of any Criminal of thos^ kinds.

And I am well pleased with the Hopes I have, of seeing in Public, a short
Scheme of those excellent Models; of the Laws you execute, of the Rules that
direct and govern your selves, and Officers, in this successful Undertaking;
which may be of greatest Use, to direct and animate those in Places distant
from you; to attempt there, what you have more than begun here.

May our Love, and Union, grow up the better, by that of GOD, and true
Good-ness, we see in one another! And may your Converse together (though under
different Persuasions in lesser Matters) tell you, you are none of you, the
Men, which some of both sides have represented you. May the Exemplary Piety of
your Families, tell the World, that Divine Service is not confined to
Consecrated Places!

That GOD would further unite you, keep your Hand to the Plough, and enable you
to perfect, what you have begun, is, and shall be the Hearty Prayer of,

GENTLEMEN, Your true Honourer, and Faithful Servant, J. WOODHOUSE.

HAGGAI ii. 4. Yet now be strong, O Zerubbabel, says the Lord; and be strong,
O Joshua, Son of Josedech, the High Priest; and be strong all ye People of the
Land, says the Lord, and work: For I am with you, says the Lord of Hosts.
THE Business of this Day, is not only to afflict our Souls for our Sins, and
the crying Sins of our Land, and to stand in the Gap to appease an angry GOD,
that seems upon his Way to ruin us; but, if it may be, to stir up a Spirit for
Reformation of the Lives and Manners of the Generation wherein we live; without
which we ca^ have small Expectation, either of the removal of the Judgments we
feel, or the preventing those which we foresee, an^ fear may be coming upon us.
In orde^ to the more effectual furtherance of so excellent, so useful, so
beneficial a Work, let your Thoughts be attentive to the Counsels in the Text,
Yet now be strong O Zerubbabel, etc.

That you may see the tendency the Words have, to promote the Work o^ the Day,
look a little back upon the former part of this Prophecy, and the History of
the Times immediately foregoing. You will find in short, when Go^ had delivered
his People out of their long and doleful Captivity, and stirred up the King,
under whom they were Captive^ to give them leave to build their Temple and to
set up his Worship there; to purge out Corruptions, and make a General
Reformation; this Blessed Work, so needful and excellent in itself, and so much
to be desired by all; yet met with many Checks, and Stops.

It was encouraged, at first, by the famed Cyrus; but afterward obstructed by
Cambyses, whilst Viceroy to his Father, and whilst King himself; and neglected
near two Years, in the time of Darius Hystaspes: As may be learned from the
Sacred Chronology of Ezra, and Nehemiah, and others; (which I cannot now turn
you to.) But at the time of this Prophet's appearing, it was again revived, and
a fresh encouraged; Leave was granted to set about it, and excellent Men
Authorized to Conduct it: And yet it met with great Opposition from the
Cowardice of many, and the Coldness, and Covetousness of others; who were more
bent upon their own private Affairs, their Pomp and Luxury, than what concerned
the Public Weal; who would do their own Business first, and God's afterward:
As appears from Chapter the First, Verse the Second: This People say, The time
is not come, the time that the Lord's House should be built: We must wait for a
more favorable Juncture; the Minds of Men are not disposed to it. Whereupon
the Prophet reasons the Case with them, Verse the Fourth, Is it tim^ for you to
dwell in your Cieled Houses, (say he) and this House lie waste? qu^d By the
Lord you have been preserved in, an^ brought out of Babylon: You think it a
good time to Build; nay, to C^el ( i. e. to Arch, with costly Wainscot,
curiously carved, richly adorned, and fairly beautified) your own Houses;
(perhaps more than one a piece, a City-House, and a Country House) for your
Pleasure and Diversion (for the Word is plural); you lavish out your Treasure,
in Pomp, and Sensuality; (for no doubt their Ways o^ Living were answerable to
their costly Cielings) and yet can spare nothing toward my House, that lies
waste: You can live without a Temple, an Altar, a Sacrifice, so you may but
enjoy your Worldly Ease and Grandeur, your Animal, Sensual Satisfactions: What
do you owe so much to your selves, and so little to your God, who has but now
delivered you? What, lavish out so much upon your Bodies, and spare nothing for
your own, and others Souls? Must my Worship be neglected, and Men left un
reformed, whilst Wickedness is connived at, and everywhere perpetrated?

What shall be done in such a Juncture? The wise God, under this discouraging
State of Things, raises up, and sends out, two Prophets, in the same Year, upon
much the same Errand, to stir up, and invigorate the Hearts of these Men in
this Affair, that they, and their Brethren, had so little Heart to: They were
Haggai, and Zechariah. And what does Haggai do, but address to all Sorts, in a
very particular, and pungent Manner, to stir them up to this needful, but
neglected Work.

And how vigorously he addressed himself to this Undertaking, let the Text tell.

Yet now be strong, O Zerubbabel, etc.

The Words are a vehement Excitation, with particular Application to the
Governors, Civil, and Ecclesiastical, and all the People of the Land. How
forcible, and pungent, are such Personal Addresses? The good Prophet speaks
like one in Earnest; that he might (as he did) engage them to be so too. May I
be able to do likewise.

Not to trouble you with any Logica^ Analysis of the Words, which would (in
this Case) only furnish you with Terms harder than the Text; I shall endeavor
plainly to Paraphrase them to you; propose their Sense to a clear View; observe
some Things from them; and make some Improvement thereof, in favor of the Work
of the Day; and do what I can toward the furtherance of so desirable a Work,
as is the Reformation of the Lives and Manners, of the dissolute Age we live in.

Let us take the Words as they lie (...): And now; nevertheless, now yet now;
i. e. under, and against all these discouraging Difficulties, (...) Be strong;
be stout: As Mal. 2. 13. So as to prevail. Non tantum fortis sed prevaluit* The
Septuagint renders it by Words of like Importance, (...), and (...) Both
Hebrew, and Greek, import the putting out the Vigor we have, and the
Corroboration of that Strength; yea to wax strong, and prevail in our Under
taking: It denotes that true Fortitude by which we pursue, without dastardly
Fear, what is most difficult to obtain, maugre all the Opposition to the
contrary; according to that, Be strong, and of good Courage, fear not, nor be
afraid, Deuteronomy. 31. 6, 7.

If you ask, Who he addressed thus to? the Text tells you, to Zerubbabel first;
he was their Governor; not Supreme, but Subordinate: For what he did, was
under the Authority and License of the King, which renders our Text less
Foreign to the Occasion. I need not tell you, my Errand is to Magistrates, not
Supreme, but Subordinate; so was our Prophets also. It was, Secondly, to
Joshua, the LORD' s High Priest: A good Man, no doubt; for Satan was got to his
Right Hand, [his Working-hand] to resist him, Zech. 3. 1. The Governors in
Civil Matters, the Governors in Sacred Matters, they must both be strong, get
and stir up such a Spirit, as will encounter and bear down all Difficulties.

Thirdly, His Errand was to the People: What to some of the People? Yea, to all
of them. Reformation-Work, is a Work that needs many Hands; therefore, says he,
All ye People of the Land be strong He does not so much as distinguish between
the Sexes, or Sects among them; all yo^ People of the Land, whatever else they
differed in, whether in Opinions, or Practices, or Religious Rites, they must
all unite in this, all join in this. His Excitation you see was to Courage and
Fortitude, and the Application was to Civil and Ecclesiastical Administrators,
and to all the People of the Land; What was all this for? The Words in the Text
are, And work.

I confess, it startled me at first, and made me think of changing my Text;
because it seems, at first view, to refer to Bodily Labor, such as is
mentioned, chapter 1. 8. Go up to the Mountains, and bring Wood* i. e. hew, and
build the House: But turning to the Hebrew, I found the Word used of such a
(...) of (...) which signifies primarily, Fecit, effecit, perfecit, absolvit,
ad certum usum aptavit, disposuit: As Philologers say.
Nature, as that it no way limits it to Bodily Labor, the Work of the Hand;
and much less when by a familiar Hypozeugma, it is to be applied to Zerubbabel,
the Governor, and to Joshua, the Lord's High Priest: Who cannot be thought to
be excited to any Action in this Case, but what became them as Governors,
Civil, and Sacred; and then the import of the Word is plainly this: Let every
one in his Place, and Station, set to the Business in hand, Governors as
Governors, and all the People of the Land, in what Capacity soever they be, to
further the Work; let Heads, Hearts, and Hands, be all employed, let every one
readily embrace, and thoroughly improve such Opportunities as offer themselves;
nay, seek out Seasons for this Service.

The Text, indeed, seems to lead primarily to the Work of the Temple, which was
their first Work: For it was to no purpose to talk of Religion, and Worship, in
the Temple, 'till there was a Temple to worship in; and to talk of the
Reformation of the Lives and Manners of the People, 'till there was an
Establishment of Religion, to regulate them by: Therefore I turned my Thoughts
to the other Prophet Zachary; who was raised up in the same Year, and within
two Months of Haggai: View but the first Verse o^ each Prophecy, and you will
soon see, when there there was not more intended in their Commission, than their
Care of Buildin^ the Temple: For I soon found, that the they were both engaged
in the Buildin^ of the Temple, yet they had more i^ their Commission; (if we
may judge o^ their Commission, by the unrebuked Exe^cution thereof;) for in
Zech. 1. 3. h^ calls them to turn: Turn ye unto me, sait^ the Lord of Hosts.
And in the Fourt^ Verse, Turn ye now from your evil Ways and from your evil
Doings. There wa^ Reformation of Life, and Manners: Ye^ because nothing is said
of that in the Text, look Zech. 5. 3, 4. where the Immorality of Men's Lives, in
the Instance^ of Stealing, and Swearing, are struck a^ by this Prophet; who,
doubtless, acte^ not beyond his Commission. And w^ must have great Charity, if
we can believe, that these were all the Immoralities amongst these People, though
no more are mentioned in express Terms in that place* because you read of many
more that needed Reforming, Chap. 7. 9, 10, 11 Verses After all this, what does
the Prophet do, but add Inforcement to this Encouragement he had given, and
that by telling them, The Lord was with them: and giving them God's Word for
it. I am with you, says the Lord; and I am with you as the Lord of Hosts; as a
God All-sufficient to direct you, to support you in your Work, under all the
Difficulties you have to encounter, and to reward you for your Work, whatever
the Success be: Duty is yours, Success is mine; but your Reward shall be sure,
whatsoever the Issue may be: Do your part, trust my part to me, and expect your
Recompense from me; Your Labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.

The Words thus Explained, will, without any violence, furnish us with these
Observables, that are not unsuitable to the Business we are Convened about.

I. First Doctrine, from the Hebrew Particle, the first Word in the Text, which
we translate, Yet now; or, Nevertheless, is plainly this:

That Works of Reformation (though but of God's House, of the Lives and Manners
of Men, Thieves, Swearers, etc.) do, and may meet with very great Opposition:
What need was there else of such a stirring up to be strong, vigorous, and
valiant, if there were not Difficulties to encounter?

II. Second Doctrine. That when Reformers of the Lives and Manners of Men, do
meet with great Opposition, are beset with great Difficulties, and Danger,
their Souls are apt to be dismayed, they are apt to sink down under their
Burden, and to give out, and say, To what purpose should we labor, harrass,
and hazard our selves any further; Wickedness is got above our control?

III. Third Doctrine. When Men concerned in Reformation, do meet with
Difficulties, and Opposition, enough to discourage, and sink their Spirits,
they should be stirred up by others, and they should stir up themselves; that
they might be able to prosecute their Work with good effect. Be strong, O
Zerubbabel, etc. It notes both his stirring up himself, and his being willing
to be stirred up by others.

IV. Fourth Doctrine. It Is plain, that the Work of Reformation, that is
accompanied with so many Difficulties, as it is apt to be, has need of all
Hands to help it on; it is not a Work of Magistrates, or Officers only (though
they are obliged to be stricter than other Men): But it is a Work in which all
the People of the Land should engage, as one Man. Don't shut your self out from
the Work, when God gives you an Opportunity to engage in it.

V. Fifth Doctrine. That it is a Matter of great Encouragement to encounter
courageously all the Difficulties we meet with, in so good a Work, that God
will be with us; and one God is enough for us, since he is All-sufficient.

I may not pretend to handle all, or many of these Doctrines, in the Minutes
your Patience does allow me: Yet the Occasion cannot well spare any one of
them. Let me fix your Thoughts upon the Third, which takes in the main Design
of the Text; and I will endeavor to throw the other Four into some part, or
other, of the Prosecution of that.

Doct. That when Men concerned in Reformation Work, do meet with Difficulties
and Opposition, enough to discourage and sink their Spirits, they should stir
up themselves, and should be stirred up, spirited, and invigorated by others,
that they may be able to encounter all the Difficulties they may meet with in
the Prosecution of their excellent Designs.

In the handling of this Point, I will Briefly hint at some Topics, from
whence I might evidence, 1. The (...), That it is so. 2. Argue the (...); Why,
or whence it is so: Because my main Design is at the Application; in which I
would not prevent my self, nor weary you. For the First, take a Text, or two,
Josh. 1. 6, 7, 9. Moses being dead, and there being need of a Man to conduct
God's Israel, to uphold, and to reform their Religion, Lives, and Manners, the
Lord spoke unto Joshua, Josh. 1. 6. and says, Be strong, and of a good Courage.
Here is another Word, viz. (...), added to that which is in our Text, and is
well enough translated, Be of good Courage. In another Verse, Only be thou
strong and courageous: Only (...): as if he had nothing else to do. And here*
another Word is added to both the former Words, and has a vehement Emphasis
attending it (...), Multum, abundanter, copiose, valde, majorem in modum. It
signifies Might, Vehemence, and Diligence, all one can do, one's utmost
Efforts. Verse the Ninth, Be strong, and of good Courage, as before; but adds,
[(...)] Be not afraid, nor dismayed; have a Co^rage that despises Fear, that
gives not back, be the Difficulties what they will; Being nothing terrified by
your Adversaries: As Paul words it, Phil. 1. 28. agreeably to both the Hebrew
Words. God was pleased to use in this Excitation of Joshua: He was a Man of an
excellent Spirit; yet see how he was treated. May be, it may tempt some Men to
think meanly of him, because of the Treatment he had; but if the best of Men
had not need of help to support and invigorate their Spirits, under such
Designs as this, the Spirit of God would never have bestowed so much Chafing,
and Excitation, on such a Man as Joshua. Again, Haggai 1. 14, 15. it is said,
The Lord stirred up the Spirit of Zerubbabel and of Joshua, and of the People.
As if that was not enough, God sends again in the Seventh Month, Chap. 2. 1. on
the same Errand as the Text has told you: For the Word of the Lord came to
Haggai, speak now to Zerubbabel, be strong, etc. Here let me obviate an
Objection, that I thought more solemnly to have considered.

May be, some that are ill Interpreters of well-meaning Minds, may think, that
that such a Call as this, to Courage and Fortitude, and an Heroic Magnanimity*
does insinuate, as if the Gentlemen engaged in our Reformation, were Men of
mean Spirits, and wanted Courage; Why else make I so much ado about it?

But as I have no such Thought in my Heart, and nothing but my Weakness can
betray me to be suspected of a Design to insinuate any such thing; so both the
Text, and the Evidence that other Scriptures have given to the Truth of the
Doctrine, will take away that suspicion: For if such a Man as Joshua, as
Zerubbabel, as the High* Priest, needed it so often, it will be no diminution
to those that have undertaken this Great Work, to treat them as others such
great, and such excellent Men have been treated, in Cases not unlike.

The two first Doctrines shall be the two first Reasons for the Proof and
Confirmation of this Doctrine. Why, or whence it is, that when Persons
concerned in Reformation do meet with Difficulties, and Oppositions, enough to
discourage and daunt their Spirits in their Undertakings, they should then stir
up themselves, and be stirred up by others, to prosecute the Work with all
vigor, wax stronger and stronger, 'till they prevail over all that is in the
Way.

1. Because there usually (why might I not say always) arises such Dangers and
Difficulties, as cannot be otherwise overcome. To this the Context speaks
fully, as I have showed you, when I raised this as a Doctrine from it: But let
Experience speak, Did you ever read of a Reformation, which was not thus
embarrassed, and incumbered? What Work did Noah find, in his Endeavors to
reform the Old World? Was it easier with Lot, in Sodom? If Josias will reform
his People, what Opposition does he meet with; What a Force must he exert to
cause them to do it? [2 Chronicles. 34.] If Nehemiah will put forward the Temple,
reform the Sabbath, Tobias, and Sanballat, will turn every Stone, to dismay him
in it? Did our Savior attempt the Redemption and Reformation of Men? With what
Fury did the Devil attack him? What Affronts do his Emissaries put upon him?
What Snares do his Relations, and Peter himself, lay for him? Master, save thy
self. No doubt but our Reformers have had large Experience of this kind, from
fair Friends, and quiet Neighbors, as well as boisterous Criminals. In this
Case, what can be done without Courage? Nay, what can ordinary Courage do? It
is not for timorous, and faint-hearted Men, to engage in such Enterprises; the
Spirit must be stirred up, surmount the Difficulties, or the Work will not be
done.

2. You must be stirred up, and invigorated, because the Nature of Man needs
it: The Imbecility of the Soul of Man renders him liable to sink under
Discouragements. Our Fear is mightily advanced in our fallen State, and our
Courage ^s much diminished. What a brave, knowing, fearless Man was Adam,
before his Fall! He could, upon Sight of the Creatures, give them Names,
answering their Natures, and was as fearless as knowing: But let him break off
his Dependence from God, and you shall presently find him playing the Fool, so
as none but a Man almost bereft of Thoughts, could do: You will find him struck
with Fear, which Sin had let in upon him, hiding himself in the Thickets (a
likely Shelter) from the Presence of God. And as he lost his Knowledge, he lost
his Courage; and we feel with what feeble Attacks we can resist the
Difficulties we meet withal; we are apt to be afraid, and dismayed, and
therefore our Courage must be excited, the Imbecility of our fallen Nature
makes ^t necessary.

3. The Third Reason may be argued from the Capacity of the Soul; our Soul ^s
capable of being excited: We have Faculties, and Powers, that may be excited,
and influenced by such Objects, and Mo* tives, as may be laid before us; we f^
others may hearten us; we can che^ our selves under, and against Discourag^
ments, that are not insuperable; else the Method of God by his Prophet, to s^^
up Zerubbabel, etc. had been a fruitle^ Attempt. Take Heart, my Friends; Sha^
the crowing, fighting Cock, clap h^ Wings, to stir up his Spirits and Vigou^
and will not you? So that you see, with out more Enlargement, you have need t^
stir up your selves, and suffer others t^ stir you up in these Matters, if you
cons^ der, 1. The Difficulties that attend them 2. The Imbecility of your
Nature und^ them. 3. The Capacity of your Soul^ to be by these Methods
fortified again^ them.

What Use may this Doctrine be of t^ us, in such a Case as this? Is it so, the
Men concerned in Reformation do me^ with Difficulties, and Opposition, enoug^
to discourage, and sink their Spirits, the they should be stirred up by others,
an^ they should stir up themselves, that the^ may be able to prosecute this
Work wit^ good effect.

I. Then, First, it is of Reprehension ^o several sorts of Persons amongst us.

1. To those, to all those, that I may ^tile Neuters in these Matters; on
neither ^ide, neither Criminals, nor yet Reformers, Men of Gallio's Temper,
That care for none of these things, Acts 18. 17. Let ^he Name of God be
blasphemed by Cur^ing, and Swearing; let the Sabbath be ^rofaned by Trading, by
Fudling; let Adultery, and Whoredom, have their Course: What is that to them,
they have other Business to mind, they will not be Busybodies in other Men's
Matters? Why should they involve themselves? Are they their Brothers Keepers?
Hear what God says, and tremble under thy daring Folly, thy base Neutrality:
Thou shall not ^ate thy Brother, in thine Heart; thou shall in any wise rebuke
thy Neighbor, and not suffer Sin upon him, Lev. 19. 17. Is it a light Matter
with thee, to neglect to re^uke thy Brother, thy Neighbor, when, in God's
Account, it is hating him in thy Heart? which God has let thee know is Murder,
1 John 3. 15. Whosoever hates his Brother, is a Murderer. Say not, I put thee
upon more than rebuking, even correcting and punishing of him: For the Word
which we translate in this plac^ Rebuke, signifies to rebuke by Deeds, as well
as Words, set as Judge, chastize and correct; as Psalm. 38. 1. Nay, the Word is
doubled; in rebuking, thou shall rebuke; in correcting, thou shall correct to
add the greater Emphasis to enforce the Duty: Moreover, the Words which we
translate, Thou shall not suffer Sin upon him; may be read, That thou bear no^
Sin for him; or, Take his Sin upon thee. It seems, the neglect of our Duty to
him* in rebuking, correcting him, and reclaiming him from his Sins, makes us
Partakers with him, both in his Sin and Punishment. And have not thou Sin
enough of thine own, to answer for, that tho^ dare involve thy self in other
Men^ Guilt? Awake, awake, shake off thy loathsome Neutrality; considering,

1st. It puts thee under the Dislike of God. 2dly, The Dislike of good Men^
And, 3dly, The Contempt even of ba^ Men.

1. It puts thee under the Dislike of God; who cannot but take it ill at thy
Hand: He has not played the Neuter with thee. Has he not given thee a Being?
and put thee into good Circumstances? and made thee capable of his Service?
Does he not show thee, that all thou art, and have, is his, by more Titles than
one? And does not Providence notify to thee, The Lord has now need of thee;
to help to stem this Tide of Wickedness, that bears so hard upon us, in this
Adulterous Generation? Has he not enabled thee by good Laws, and excellent
Magistrates, to do something for him? And will thou still excuse thy self? Oh!
thou art loath to meddle, notwithstanding thy Capacity, Ability, Opportunity to
help the Lord against his daring Adversaries! Well, if I must leave thee, (be
thou one in the Magistracy, or Ministry, or one of the People;) if I must leave
thee, as like the crafty Gallio, as I found thee, let me leave this with thee;
That if thou will not come out to the help of the LORD, though it be against the
Mighty, that support Debauchery, the LORD is like to overtake thee, Judges 5.
23.

Art thou afraid of the Ill Will, and fiery Fury of thy lustful and angry
Neighbor, and art thou not afraid of an angry God? What a Wretch art thou!
Do thou know, dare thou think, what this means, and yet hold on in thy
Neutral Temper* Read Zech. 1. 4, 5, 6. and do it at thy peril.

2. Thou art under the Dislike of good Men, that are active for God in
Reformation-Work; they are troubled at it, and grieved for it, to see God
dishonored, Debauchery perpetrated, and such a Person as thou, (who have so
many Advantages in thy Hand) stand by unconcerned: Have God, and good Men, been
every way s^ kind to thee, done so much for thee, and do they expect this from
thee? And will thou do nothing? What* not this little thing for them? Oh! where
is thy Gratitude (...) What a vile Wretch art thou, that has^ none?

3. Whatever Favor and Value tho^ hopest to conciliate to thy self, with ba^
Men, (that are impatient of the Reformation of their Lives and Manners;) they
will but contemn and despise thee, for thy base Neutrality; they cannot love
thee, because thou art not one of them; and they will despise thee, because
thou dare not appear against that in them, which they, and thou know, is bad
in them. They have some confessed, aweful Reverence, to Men of Piety and
Virtue* that dare to be good, and stand to it, and face all Oppositions and
Reproaches, that appear against it: They dare not to be wicked under a Cato's
Eye, in view of such a Man as he; But how mean a thing art thou, in the Eyes of
these vile Persons, who dare do nothing against the Immoralities thou dare
not act. Well, Sirs, what will you now do upon the whole Matter? Have you had
no Concern, for the rebuking, correcting, and reforming of Drunkenness,
Swearing, Cursing, Whoring, Sabbath-breaking, Stealing, and such like
Wickednesses, which the Laws of the Land enable you to, and the good and
excellent Magistrates of this Renowned City, encourage you in? And will you
have none after all God, and Man, have said to you, and expect from you? Quit
for shame, your sluggish Post; out, up, and be doing, and be at some more Cost
and Pains; (it may put you to both) because of the little you have yet done.

2. It reproves those that are Loyterers in this painful Work. It Is a Work
which, you hear, requires Strength and Vigor; a stirring up of Strength, such
as will prevail: Yet now be strong, and^* Sinner, I must deal plainly with
thee, (...) thou lay not out thy self to some purpose, to good purpose, to make
somewhat of it, thy idling Temper will entitl^ thee to an, Oh thou slothful,
and wicke^ Servant: Wicked, because slothful, Ma^^ 25. 26. And thy Reward shall
be according to thy Work. Read Verse 3^ For the Curse of the Lord cannot b^
take hold of thee, if thou do his Work d^ceitfully: i. e. negligently, Jer. 48.
1^^ God, and thy Redeemer, have not brough^ about the Work of thy Redemption,
(...) such a negligent, loytering Way of Wor^ing. Is this the best thou can,
thou w^ do for him, and at such a needful Ju^cture as this? We account an
Eye-Se^vant amongst bad Servants; and well we may; they will not work longer
than their Master looks on. I wish I knew how to persuade thee to be an
Eye-Servant, to work diligently, though but whilst thy Master looks on, and
expects it from thee: For his Eye is always on thee, he sees when thou shuttest
thine Eyes upon the Wickedness thou should punish; and take thine Ease,
when Matters call thee to be up and doing: Remember thy Judge maintains a Spy
in thy own Bosom, that will tell of all thy Sloth, Coldness, and Loytering in
his Work, and Service.

3. It reproves those that will not stir up themselves, with all their Might
and Vigor, when the Difficulties they labor under, are ready to dispirit
them. What not use and improve the Capacities you have? What sit down before
you have turned every Stone? Bear your Reproof, and chide your dastardly
Spirits: stir up your selves at such a rate, as you may not need the help of
others, who will be backward enough to do it.

4. It reproves those that will not endeavor to stir up, and invigorate others
to the Work, when they need it; when their Courage fails for want of it. The is
one of the Works of our Sacred Function, Isa. 58. 1. But it is not confine^ to
us. Our excellent Judges, Justices o^ the Peace, Stewards of Courts-Leet, c*
they bear a Testimony, they promote this Matter, as well as we.

V. And Lastly, It reproves those that take it ill, that will not bear to be
excited: It Is a thing which Men do worse bear, when they most need it. But 'ti^
not reasonable to presume, I am speaking to many such: What should they do here
on this Occasion? And therefore let us endeavor to improve it by way of
Excitation, to such a Work, at such a Season as this.

You see, by the Warrant of my Text, I have a justifying Occasion to apply my
self,

1. To those who are Civil, [if] Subordinate, Rulers, and Governors.

2. To those that are Sacred, and Ecclesiastical Governors, under the King;
(...) well as,

3. To all the People of the Land, of the City, and of the Country, into whose
Hands, God, by his Providence, puts any Opportunity to execute good Laws, for
the restraining Debaucheries of every kind: To thee, O Zerubbabel; to thee, O
Joshua; to you, O People of the Land, the Errand of my Text, and Doctrine
comes: And O that I knew how to give it its Force: O that the good Spirit of
God would give it its Authority and Power over all your Consciences, that it
might have an Effect upon all of us, as it had in Israel's Day, on all of them.

1. To those of you that are in any Offices, appointed to execute these good
Laws: Much I could say, to excite you to a zealous, prudent, impartial,
diligent Application to your Work: There are Topics for Arguments peculiar to
your Cases, your Commissions, your Oaths, the Trust you have taken upon you,
the Confidence our dread Sovereign, and his People, have in you, and the
Expectations all have from you. There are Counsels proper and necessary to be
taken, about dealing first with your own Hearts, Houses, and Conversations, in
order to your more effectual Management of what you endeavor for others: And
had I not been credibly informed, (by those that dare not impose upon me) of
the Conscientious Care that most of you have taken in these Things, I should
have presumed to address you with the Plainness that is natural to me, and as
necessary on this Occasion: But it is Matter of my Joy* that your Conduct, in
these Things, has so far superseded my Applications to you Go on, good
Gentlemen, to signaliz^ your selves to the End, as you have done in the
Beginning; that the uprising Generation may call you Blessed, and bless God for
you, as we do.

2. To those of, you my Brethren, that are as the Sons of the Prophets, that
lik^ Haggai the Prophet, and Joshua the Priest of the Lord, are, by the Sacred
Tie o^ your Honorable Function, under Obligation to cry aloud, to lift up your
Voices like Trumpets, Isa. 38. 1. To excite all to every great, and good Work;
especially one that is so excellent in itself, so beneficial to the World.
Topics are not to seek, to stir you up to the Duty of your Place, in such a
Juncture as this: Did it not better become me, to learn of you, than presume to
prescribe to you.

3. But to you, O People of the Land, let me say, Up, and be doing; every Soul
to its Post; this Work cannot be done without you. If no Criminal had been
punished in Israel, but those Moses found in the Fact, how few had they been?
Reformation calls for many; nay, I had almost said, all Hands: I need call no
other Vouchers than my Text and Doctrine.

And though I wave the Motives peculiar to Officers, Civil, and Sacred, on the
Grounds I hinted; yet give me leave to offer some Inforcements, that may (if
God please to give them their Weight with you) have a tendency to influence all
the sorts of Persons, my Text, and the Occasion warrant me to address, by way
of Excitation.

1. Consider how much of this good Work is already done, maugre all the
Difficulties under which it at first labored.

2. Consider how much is yet to be done, which cannot be done without more
Hands.

3. How much Encouragement there lies in the Text, for every one to do his
part, when God will be with him, and his Reward is sure to him.

First consider for your Encouragement, what has been done. Blessed be God,
there is any thing done: You may see reason to join in this Thanksgiving, and
take Heart to quit your selves like Men, in what remains to be done; if you
please but to look back with me, upon some of the many Discouragements, and
Obstructions, under which it at first labored.

1. It was done against all the Wickedness, and Corruption, that is in the
degenerate Natures of wicked Men; nay, of Corruption excited by the Devil,
rooted and strengthened into Habit; which is more than mere Nature; a second
Nature, worse (if possible) than the first. The Lusts, and Passions, of every
debauched, wicked Man, in Court, and City, are against the Work, and the Doers
of it; and spirit them, in some Fits, to design and endeavor those desperate
Things, which may be Exercise to the greatest Courage: Nay, it is a Wonder to
me, no more violent Effects have been produced, from such boisterous Causes; to
make those that hear, to fear, and meddle no more. Much of which is due to your
prudent Conduct, in concealing the Names of those that gave in the Informations.

2. There was another Difficulty, and that about the forming of these excellent
Societies, out of Men of different Persuasions about Matters in Religion, and
different Opinions about some Rites and Circumstances of their Religion.
Differences of smaller moment, have, by the Skill of Rome, and Hell, been so
managed, as to divide and imbitter the Hearts of good Men, both Ministers, and
People, and render many of them incapable of that Love and Union, which might
subserve many a Common Good; as yours has, and does, and is like (through
Divine Goodness) further to do. We must own it to our Reproach, *that we ought
to have set you a Copy of this kind; and by our bearing with, and forbearing of
one another, in our lesser Differences, have heartily joined in those Methods,
that might promote the common Interest, of our common Lord: How much more had
this been to our Honor, than to revile-and reproach one another, on Account of
these supposed little Differences.

But in this I must rebuke my self, because I have reason to hope, we, and our
Brethren, that have a deep Sense of the ill Influences these Things have upon
the Inwards, the Spirits, and Power of Religion, are coming to a better Temper
toward one another: May we write after your Copy, and laying aside all
Resentments, and carnal Contentions, join in that, in which we are so well
agreed, to promote the Interest of our great Master; verifying the old Irenick
Saying* Opinionum varietas and Opinantium unitas non sunt, (...). Oh! for a
fuller Measure of that Spirit of Christ, of pure Christianity, which would
facilitate that to us, it has already done to you.

3. Another great Impediment arose from the Iniquity of the late Reigns. It Is
not unknown to many of you, that have read the Secret Histories of those
Reigns, or the more Authentic Memoirs, and Collections thereof; that the
daring Designs of the Gunpowder-Traitors, Anno 1605, had such an Influence upon
that fearful Prince, King James the First, that few, if any, true Steps,
toward Reformation, were ever since advanced by him, or his. If this were a
place for it, I could easily tell you, that favor to Popery and Profaneness,
became Governing Principles in our British Politics: Witness the trinkling,
mean Condescension of that Prince to Papists; nay, to the Pope himself, under
the abusive Treaty for the Infanta of Spain, and the Proclamation for Loose and
Licentious Sports, on the Lord's-Days; (that Reproach of his, and his Son's
Reigns): And, if some guess right, the Foundation of the Ruin of that unhappy
Prince. And when he turned off from tantalizing of Spain, he applied to a
Daughter of France: Such a Biggot was she to the Romish Religion, and such an
Ascendant had she over his Son, her Husband, Charles the First, that all Things
ran in the like Channel, for Popery, and Profaneness, and with a greater
Torrent; witness repeated Proclamations, in favor of both: And though God gave
signal Notices of his Displeasure against that Family, in Ways I need not name;
yet the Return of Charles the Second, after all the sham Pretenses to the
contrary, issued in favor of Popery, and greater Profaneness, and Debauchery.
I have been assured, a Clergyman of that Communion, did in a Frolic freely
say, That it was agreed by their Politicians, that they had no hope to
introduce their Religion here, but by Atheism, Irreligion, and Debauchery of
the Gentry, and Clergy; which, by a variety of Means, they brought about so
effectually, that all sorts of Wickednesses were now barefaced, daring the Sun*
in the last Reigns, to the great Grief of many of the Reverend true Sons of the
Church: Now Swearing, Cursing, Damning, Whoring, Sabbathbreaking, hating,
reviling, and persecuting of all serious Godliness, were grown very modish, and
very fashionable Things, rode in Triumph, above the Control of those that
should have attested them.

4. Another great Impediment, was, that when this Revolution came upon us, over
all the Mountains of Difficulty, and Discouragement, in ways we looked not for,
so little was at first done to reform the Court, City, Country, Army, Navy,
Magistracy, and Ministry: It Is true, we made a glorious Step about our Judges,
(the Honor of the Courts they sit in;) But did we not stick there? I am told,
that the Politics that stopped us there, and kept us from a further, and fuller
Reformation, were such as these. This was to begin at the wrong End, which the
Nation would not yet bear: We must first settle the Throne, establish the
Government, and then reform what was amiss in Religion, and the Morals of Men.
And I have been told, that these Politics were carried over into a Neighbor
Nation, for a Measure of their Proceedings; and were proposed, and were too
like to take there also; but that a Great Man stood up, and signalized himself,
by saying, Let us do God's Work first, and trust him with ours; let us reform,
and God will settle us. And what has since befallen them, and us, under our
different Methods, may tell us who were in the right: For I will confess, that
when God did not go out with us, as before: When Success was withdrawn from us,
I had many searching Thoughts about the Cause of it; and found Reason to
acquiesce in the Discovery God made by our Prophet Haggai, in a Case not unlike
ours, Hag. 1. ver. 4, 6, 10, 11. But this may seem above my Sphere, and
therefore I will not presume so much, as to open the Words; much less apply
them to my Superiors, who may have other Thoughts of these Things, if they do
not consider this Text, in the Sense I have done.

5. Another Impediment was, the Reproach the worst of Men cast upon these
Honorable Societies; branding them for Informers, a Name a late Reign had
justly rendered most odious: For when their Diana, Popery, and Profaneness, had
a hopeful Prospect; they found there was a sort of Persons, (the Remains of the
old Puritans) who were not fully of the Way of the Established Church (which
they thought wanted a fuller Reformation); who by their Preaching, and Living,
gave great Rebuke to what was doing; Ways were found to discourage these Men,
Laws procured, Informers encouraged, and many Persons, and Families, ruined.

And as the Men called by that Name, and animated to that Work, were of the
Firstborn of the Devil, the vilest of bad Men; so their Business had justly
rendered them the Contempt of all that were not in a great measure like
themselves; and the Name Informer, brought no Idea to Men's Minds, but what was
horrid and abominable: These Societies advancing to their excellent
Undertaking, in this Juncture of Affairs, were instantly stigmatized with that
Name: As if the Mobb it self could not distinguish between an Informer engaged
to ruin good Men for Godliness* sake; and an Informer (for so he must be
called) engaged to detect, convict, correct, and reform the vicious Lives and
Manners of Men: And had not these Men been of a more excellent Spirit, advanced
above the Reproaches of Men, this Project could not but have perished here: I
will confess for my self, that the Notice of it, caused me to abandon further
Hopes of them, and it; but am glad I am so happily deceived.

6. And Lastly, When the first Season, at the beginning of this happy
Revolution, was so far slipped, and so little done toward the reforming a
vicious Army, Navy, Court, City, and Country; there were vigorous Overtures
made, by our excellent King, and Nonsuch Queen, to retrieve this false Step: I
need not recite their vigorous Application, to Officers Sacred, and Civil; but
how their, and our reasonable Hopes, were totally baffled, I need not say.
Whether, as some say, the Reformation was put into Hands that needed it, and
were heartily against it; or whether they looked upon Wickedness as got above
their Control, I am loath to say; but this I must say, that in all my Sphere,
(which was not the narrowest) I knew no Instances of any Attempts, made by
these Men, toward it. However, my Design is not to reflect upon any
Ecclesiastical, or Civil Administrators, in whose Hands the Work succeeded not:
May God cause them to reflect, to see whether they did their utmost in it; for
when such Overtures fail of their desired End, they render what was but
difficult before, next to impossible afterward; and so our Reformers found it:
And no Courage, and Greatness of Mind, but what was like theirs, could have
(humanly speaking) brought it to a better issue. But is any thing done, so much
done, in despite of all these Difficulties, and Discouragements? why should you
not take Heart? You may remember, that the Success the Great Alexander had
against the Great (I had almost said Greater) Darius, flushed him with fresh
Vigor, to pursue his Victories over unknown Countries. Did not Caesar's
Successes fortify his stout Mind, under, and against succeeding Difficulties?
the Fear and Danger of the proud Waves, were not to terrify, where Caesar, and
his Fortunes, were to be conserved: And though I have little of the Deference to
those Great Men, which I had when a Schoolboy, employed in the Encomiums their
Admirers gave of them; because I now easily see the Lust, the Cruelty, the
Arbitrary Invasion of other Men's Rights, and Properties, by which they were
notoriously acted: Yet I would learn from them (as bad as they were) to take
reasonable Encouragement from former Successes, to future Enterprises;
especially where they are good like yours.

2. A Second Motive to stir up all, both Magistrates, Ministers, and People, to
join Heart and Hand herein, is to consider how much is yet to do, and of what
kind it is: For there is an Inforcement in it both ways considered; though
Wickedness be (Praise to God, and Thanks to our Reformers) put under great
Rebuke, forced to seek its Corners, shelter itself in lurking Holes; yet we
have reason to think that many act cautiously, which do not live virtuously*
the Rule of the Cautious is, Si non cast tamen caute: Now if it be connived at
there, it will soon (like Vermin) creep abroad again: And if you do not drive
it out of its dark Corners, into which you have helped to drive it, what can we
hope for? And pray observe, that this kind of Work calls for more inquisitive
Search, and private Application than was needful, when Immorality walked
barefaced, was seen in every open Place, might be found without looking for:
And more Hands are, on that Account, yet necessary; the Lord awaken us to use
them, and to help you with them.

III. Thirdly, Consider by way of Inforcement, to a vigorous Activity herein;
the great Benefit, and Advantage, that has, and may accrue, from what is, and
may yet be done in this Matter; if you respect.

1. The Interest, and Honor of God; which is so daringly run upon, by the
Wickednesses you are endeavoring to reform: When these Vices bid Defiance to
God, affront, and pour Contempt upon his Laws, and Government; they make the
Great GOD seem mean, and look contemptible; as the last of the Prophets has
abundantly shown. Now has this Father any Child here, that is unconcerned for
his Honor, and Interest? It may be a Bastard, it cannot be a Legitimate Son:
If therefore you have any Deference for God, any hearty Concern for his
neglected Interest, and Honor, any Good Will to his Name, that is blasphemed;
his Sabbaths, which are profaned; his other Laws, that are openly, and
contemptuously violated: Sure you will up and be doing. Is not this God your
Owner, your daily Benefactor? Are not you his Stewards, his accountable
Stewards? And will you not stir at such a time, in such a Case as this, that so
nearly concerns your God, and Father? Will you pretend Reverence to your
Father, and yet suffer his Honor to be thus trodden in the Dirt?

2. If you respect the Good of so great a part of Mankind, now sunk into
Brutish Sensuality: Who knows, but it may be a Means to recover them out of
this Snare of the Devil, who are taken Captive (or taken alive, as in the
Margin) by him, at his Will, 2 Timothy 2. 26. The Word we translate Recover,
signifying, to recover from Madness* (...)
Shame, may bring him to a right Mind* and to awake out of a drunken Sleep
(...) They are dosed, stupefied; Shame, and Punishment may rouse them; of which
we have frequent Examples, if this were a place for them: However, we may
reasonably expect, a Threefold Advantage to our debauched Neighbors from
hence: It may prevent.

1. The present Ruin of his Body. 2. The necessary Ruin of his Estate. 3. The
aggravated Ruin of his Soul, (at least).
Need I tell them, or you, that Drunkenness, Whoredom, and suchlike
Immoralities, have a Natural Tendency, as well as a Moral procuring Efficacy,
to ruin both Body, Soul, and Estate: How often have the Diseases of a macerated
Body, and the small Remains of a wasted Estate, told the World, what these Sins
bring to? The Marks of the Sin, are legible in the Punishment: And is it
nothing to save him from ruining Poverty, and Rottenness in his Bones? and that
increase of Torment, which multiplied Sin would lay him under? Is this thy
Kindness to thy Friend? to thy Neighbor? His Case, the Case of his Family,
calls for Help and Pity; And have thou no Bowels?

3. If you respect the Good and Welfare of the Nation, and of this great City,
of which you are Members. If you had never seen your Bibles, had read only the
Roman Histories, you might see to what a glorious Height, severe Virtue
advanced them; and how soon their Prowess, Courage, Success, and Grandeur, sunk
to nothing, when they let loose to the Debaucheries, so long countenanced, and
practiced amongst us. By Virtue they advanced, 'till they were the Envy of the
World; by Vice they sunk, 'till they became the Contempt of all. And this was
in the Nature of the Thing, as well as from a Judicial Act of God: Vice did it,
as well as provoked God to do it.

Our Bibles, that teach us better Things than their Twelve Tables, are not
sparing in this Discovery: Is the Old World, is Sodom, are the Canaanites
ruined? Is Samaria, Judah, Jerusalem, to name no more, weakened, impoverished,
and brought low? You are Strangers to your Bibles, if you know not, that Sin
was the Cause. Si^ is the Shame, and Reproach, of any Nation; it brings it
into Reproach, and into a State fit to be despised: When as Righteousness,
greatens, heightens, and exalts a Nation, Prove. 14. 34. God will not long
honor them, with happy and felicitating Circumstances, that pour Contempt, and
Dishonor, upon him and his righteous Laws.

This Prophet furnishes us with a Passage, highly adapted to our present Case,
Hag. 1. 2. The People had discharged themselves from the Lord's Work; The time
is not yet: This is not a favorable Juncture for Reforming Attempts; they will
suffer Irreligion, and Immorality, to take their Swinge, (not but that they
intend better Things, in better Times).

This was their Course toward God, provoking enough: What was God's toward
them? How prospered they in their Trade and Commerce? Were they in a thriving
way, whilst unreformed, and void of Care about it? Hear the Prophet, Ver. 6.
Now therefore consider your ways, (or set your Heart on your Ways, as the
Hebrew has it;) q. d. (and it was from the Lord he said it), you take your
selves for wise, and great Politicians; no doubt you think your selves
altogether in the right, against me, after all my Prophets can say, to bring
you to a better Course; such a one as that wherein you might prosper: But pray
observe what you see and feel, without seeing the Cause: Ye have sou n much,
and bring in little; ye eat, but you have not enough; ye drink, but ye are not
filled with Drink; ye cloth you, but there is none warm; and he that earneth
Wages, earneth Wages to put it into a Bag, with Holes. (Or as the Hebrew
piersed through), Ver. 9. Ye looked for much, and lo it came to little, when
you brought it home, I did blow upon it: (Or as it may be read) I blowed it
away; it came to nothing, it did you no good.

I may not stay to Paraphrase these, and and several other Verses of the same
import, scattered here and there in this Prophecy, chap. 1. and chap. 2. ver.
10, 11. But they plainly notify, the unprosperous and calamitous State they
were in, under that Curse of God, which their neglect of Reformation had
brought them under: As he plainly tells them, ( chap. 2. v. 16, 17.) And the
way to have it better, 18, 19. And bids them consider it, again and again; that
though his Hand had been upon them, and they had felt it every way so heavy, yet
they had not so much as thought of that Sin, which procured it upon them.
Things went ill, but Sin was not the Cause; Things happen by Chance, ill
Conduct; And how can we help it? past Cure, past Care; yet Sin, the procuring,
and God, the efficient Cause of their bad Case, were overlooked. However, if
now, after all, they will set about God's Work, he will prosper them, he will
not be behind hand with the^; no, not a Day, Chap. 2. 18. From this Day will I
bless you, Chap. 2. 19.

I am with more Regret taken off from a due Enlargement on this, because I
verily fear it is too much our Case: May God put it into the Heads, and Hearts
of Governors, Supreme, as well as Subordinate, that we might (though it be late)
begin at the right end; recover those faulty Steps we have taken to bring us
into this State of Things, both at Home and Abroad. Does not every one feel,
and as feelingly complain of the Judgments we have, and yet do labor under?
Our unparalled Calamity, in, and about our Coin; our Loss of Trade by Land,
our Losses by Sea; our Expense in the War; the Treachery of some entrusted:
Nay, where do Complaints end? And notwithstanding that so good a King, (I think
it no Flattery to say, the best I hear of now in the whole World) and some
excellent Men, that are nearest to him, can do to ease us, we are but where we
feel our selves? What Fatigues do they endure? What Hazards does he run? And
how little comes in by all? It Is blown upon, it is blown away: One inveighs
against one Instrument, another against a second; but who looks into our
unreformed State, as the truest Cause of all this? Or who endeavors a National
Reformation; from which we might date our wished Retrieve: The Retrieve of our
Trade at Home, and Abroad; of our abated Successes by Sea, and Land: Nay, how
many Hands are yet unimploy'd in this narrower Reformation, you have so happily
set a going? Let me speak freely, that as the Sins of some Kings have had a
ruining Influence upon their People; so the Sins of many a wicked People, have
had a hand to weaken, disappoint (if not ruin) good Kings; Kings better than
their People: So that if you would show your selves Friends to Caesar, Friends
to so good a King, this is one of the best ways you can take, truly to serve
him. Is it not pity so Heroic a Prince, one on whose Life so much depends,
should do so much, hazard himself so often by Sea, in the Camp, and in the
High Places of the Field; put himself so frequently amongst the hottest
Firings, to secure our Properties and Liberties, our Religion and Lives; and
have it all blown upon, and blasted for our Sakes, for our Sins? If you will
not up to your Work, for God's sake, for your Neighbor's sake, for your
Nation's sake, for Posterity's sake, do it for the King's sake: For if we still
do wickedly, Both we, and our King shall perish. However, let me leave this
with you, as the most hopeful way to prevent his, and our bodeing Ruin; and to
render us yet again a flourishing and happy Nation; such as a holy God may with
Honor own, and stand by, and save; tho in a way of Prerogative: For I know not
any other way, in which it is to be done. I am loath to leave you almost
persuaded, and yet my prescribed Minutes forbid me to add much more. However,
let me try the Motive in the Text, the last in our proposed Order.

Lastly, Consider God will be with you: So indeed the Prophet said to
Zerubbabel, and his Helpers: And it was, no doubt, their great Encouragement;
and would be yours, if I could make out your Title to his Presence, as he did
theirs. In this you will reckon, I must make great Abatement: And I, at first,
thought I must have made greater, than now I see I need to make: For though I am
neither Prophet, nor Prophet's Son* pretend to no immediate Commission from
Heaven; yet I find to your Encouragement, and mine, that though this looks like a
peculiar personal Promise, not to be extended to any other Persons, in any
other (tho like) Cases; yet, I think, it will not be found so: For I find this
very Promise made to Joshua, by Moses, Deuteronomy. 31. 23. And I will be with thee;
meaning God, not Moses. And v. 6. He will not fail thee, nor forsake thee. And,
Josh. 1. 5. God himself repeats it to Joshua, I will be with thee, I will not
fail thee, nor forsake thee. And if this be Exegetical of the former, we find
this particular Promise extended to all that are good Men, Heb. 13. 5. It Is
used as an Argument for Content, to all that need it: For he has said, I will
never leave thee, nor forsake thee: So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my
Helper: A Helper to every one in particular, as well as to all in general. Mark
the turn, the change of the Number, We say, my Helper.

Now if God be with good Men, with every good Man, in every good Work (and
here is no restriction): I may say, after all this struggle, as the Prophet, The
Lord will be with you: nay, is with you in your Work; for it is his. Having
cleared up your Title to the Promise, let us see what is in it; what the better
you shall be for it. It has all in it, that is possible to be in a Promise; to
have a God with us, that is All-sufficient, it is enough: What would you wish
for more? I who am wise enough to counsel thee, able enough to afford thee
inward Support, and outward Assistance, and an abundant Recompense: I will be
with you, engaged for you; nay, for my self, it is my Work as well as yours;
it is only yours, because it is mine. I hope you have, and will look to your own
Hearts, that they be right with God; to see you be of upright Hearts, as well
as blameless Conversation; do more at Home, than you can hope to do Abroad: And
if so, this great God will be with thee, to every gracious Purpose: And one
encouraging Word I have for you, when disappointed of the Success you aimed at,
your Reward shall not be lost, though your Work succeed not, to your desired End:
Suppose, after all thy Endeavors, thy hardened Neighbors should remain as
wicked as thou foundest them: No Shame, no Pain, no Punishment will reclaim
them; and leave thee Reason only to lament, that all, as to God, to Them, to
the King, and Kingdom, is lost, and in vain; yet, I tell you, to you it shall
not be in vain. As it is with us, in our discouraging Function, so I find it
was with good Josias, that Reforming Prince: And so I verily reckon you will
find it, though I want time to open the Grounds on which you may hope for it;
only read for us, Isai. 49. 5. 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16.

For Josias, read 2 Kings 22. 19, 20.

And consider with your selves, though Duty be yours, Success is his; and your
Reward will be according to your Work, not according to his.

Christians, may I reckon of you as Persons honestly devoted to do the Will of
God, to work Righteousness, to have Respect to all the Commands of God: (I have
not given you your right Character, if I may not). Now how can you maintain
this Character toward God, the World* or your own prying Conscience, (that Spy
that dogs you, and of whom you will certainly hear one of these Days); if you
dare statedly continue in the daily neglect of so plain a Duty, and of such
momentous Concernment to God, and the World: Is not this the best
Characteristick thou have to try thy Sincerity by? And dare thou leave thy
self to the Assaults that Satan; nay, thy own Conscience may truly attack thee
with in a dying Bed? What partial in the Law, and yet sincere? Thou Hypocrite,
may they say, how can this be? And what will thou answer? Do not (for any
Reasonings I have not time to obviate) arm the Devil, and thine own Conscience,
with such an Evidence of thy Hypocrisy; for God is greater than thy Conscience.

Well, Sirs, we must part: I should be glad to bring to you some issue: What
will you now do? (Now, I say, without delay?) I was not without Fear, before I
appeared before you; least I should not be able to prevail with you, to engage
in a Work so unacceptable to Flesh and Blood: And are there no Causes for such
Fears yet to be found amongst this great Assembly? Let me freely tell you, that
these Fears drew Tears from mine Eyes more than once, before I came hither; if
I should manage this Matter so, as to leave my Hearers as I found them; What
shall I say either for mine own mean Performance, or their Refusal? How loath
shall I be, to bring in Evidence against any one of you, when this Sermon must
be heard again, and reckoned for! I ought not, I think, to let thee know this,
but in hopes to prevent that. Well, once for all, Up, and be doing; embrace,
nay, seek out Opportunities, to rebuke, and reclaim remaining Debauchery: And
if this be thy plain Duty, capable of being so powerfully impressed upon thee; if
God, and Conscience, have let thee know, what he expects from thee, have a
Reverence for both, though thou art excited to it, by no better a Hand than this.
Awake, Rouse up: Be strong, O Zerubbabel, says the Lord; and be strong, O
Joshua, Son of Josedech, the High Priest; and be strong all ye People of the
Land, says the Lord, and work: For I am with you, says the Lord of Hosts.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 15. l. 10. for (...), read (...).


