AN APPENDIX To the LIFE of the Right Revd Father in God SETH Lord BISHOP of
Salisbury; Written by Dr. WALTER POPE, F.R.S.

IN A LETTER to the AUTHOR.

LONDON: Printed for E. Whitlock, near Stationers Hall, 1697.

An APPENDIX to the Life of the Right Reverend Father in God SETH, Lord Bishop
of Salisbury.
SIR,
I Am wonderfully surprised at your History of the Life of Bishop WARD, Life of
Bishop Ward. p. 193.
considering too that you inform the World, that Your Intellectuals are as good
now as ever they were.

Pray be pleased to recollect, that a Writer of such an History should
endeavor at a concise, easy decent Style, expressing a Reverence for the
Memory of the Person whose Life he describes. The Relations ought to be
contrived for instruction, and chiefly set as Paterns of Imitation. Minute
matters ought to be chosen with Discretion, and common Passages just touched and
hinted at. Whereas your Narration is dressed up in a Comical and Bantering Style,
full of dry Scraps of Latin, Puns, Proverbs, senseless Digressions, long tedious
unedifying Tales, and not without an insipid page 165.
Bawdy Jest, and an impious page 26.
Ridicule of the Morality of the Fourth Commandment.

I protest I cannot see one instructing Page in the whole History, or that
tends that way, unless it is a wild and whimsical Account of the Bishop's
Charity and Hospitality.

Would a Man of tolerable Judgment commend a Reverend Prelate for a good
Iockey, page 51.
and in the History of his Life describe his Mare, with Dr. Weeks's Nag, and
Dr. Pope's own Nag, with an account of the Nag's unfortunate Life and Death,
page 96
though the joint Endeavors of the best Fariers were used for his recovery?
What Exposition will the ill-natured World make, when the Author says, by way
of Commendation, that his Bishop was never destitute of Friends of the fair
Sex? and that he page 83.
provided Husbands for his Nieces, page 6.
and preferred them? You injudicially ridicule him, page 179.
when you tell the World, he was cheated and laughed at by Surgeons and
Apothecaries; you make sport with his page 181.
Decay of Memory, and introduce into this History a pitiful Criticism upon Ovid
de Tristibus miraculously redeemed from the Fire in Lombard Street. page 151.
With a great deal of Solemnity you positively affirm that Dr. Barrow made use
of a Tinder-Box, p. 145, 146
and had no buttons upon his Collar; for that you knew the whole matter,
because you were his Bedfellow. How shrewdly do you argue, that if Dr. Barrow
was born in February, page 129.
it could not be in October? Your Discourse of sore Eyes and couching
Cataracts; your Advertisement that page 108.
Mrs. Mary Turbervile is a good Oculist; and that you had a disbanded Soldier
for your Bed-Maker at page 113.
Wadham-Colledg, etc. make such a mixture of Vanity, gossipping and quibling
Folly, that I cannot choose but recollect the just Character which Mr. Anthony
Wood gives of your Worship to this effect, viz. That Dr. Pope has spent much
time in observing the Motions and Appearances of the Heavens, which is hoped
will be published by him hereafter, instead of those vain and trivial things,
as he has hitherto done, Athen. Oxon. vol. II. p. 821. Thus that plain and
impartial Historian.

You have filled your History with such Remarks, as if you had designed to
imitate the Failings of Sorbiere, and had a mind that a better Pen should
record your Name by correcting your Errors. That I may explain my meaning, I
will follow your Method, and tell a Story. After Sermon, once upon a time, I
accosted an ingenious Friend that was plodding homewards after this manner;
Prithee how did like the facetious old Doctor to day? My Friend fetched a
deep Sigh, and replied in a melancholy note, Sir, very pert and very dull; the
sorriest Man that ever stood up to the Armpits in Wainscot; he has methodised
and collected into a Sermon all the impertinent Quibbles and Sayings of the
worst Preachers, and I really believe he has feloniously taken good part of
what Dr. Eachard exposed in his Contempt of the Clergy.

You have borrowed your Method, Transitions, and the Arguments of your Chapters
from the ridiculing History of Don Quixote. As thus, in the end of your Third,
Fourth, Seventh, Eighth, Ninth, Seventeenth, Eighteenth, Nineteenth, and
Twentieth Chapters of your Book, you conclude to this effect, What befell him
afterward during his stay at Cambridge shall be the Subject of the next
Chapter. And how Mr. Ward behaved himself at Oxford, and what befell him there,
will be the Subject of the ensuing Chapters.

The Arguments of several Chapters are in these Words, (viz.) A Continuation of
the precedent matter; The same matter continued; The Controversy concerning
Caps and Hoods; Of what happened to Dr. Ward at Oxford, concerning my self; A
Digression containing some Criticisms; Of the Bishop's Sickness and Death.

In the History of Don Quixote it runs thus; He began to speak what shall be
heard or seen by him that shall hear or read the next Chapter. It shall be so,
(quoth Don Quixote) and thus lifting up his Eyes, he saw that which shall be
recounted in the Chapter following, Chap. 7. Lib. 3. Part. 1. Of what happened
to Don Quixote going to Barcelona. (Chap. 60. Part II.) What befell Don Quixote
going to see his Mistress Dulcinea del Toboso. (Chap 8. Part II.) wherein is
prosecuted the former Narration of our Knight's Misfortunes. (Chap. 5. Lib. 1.)
wherein is recounued, prosecuted and finished the Novel of the curious
Impertinent. (Chap. 5, 6, 7. Lib. 4.) Wherein the Canon continues his
Discourse of Books of Chivalry. (Chap. 21. Lib. 4.) A Digression in the
Rehearsal of the despairing Verses of the dead Shepherd. (Chap. 6 Lib. 3.) How
Don Quixote fell sick, of the Will he made, and of his Death.

I firmly believe, no Man will be punished in the next World for being dull or
impertinent; but for Malice and Falsehood there will be a severe account. I
shall not trouble my self to examine the truth of the matters of fact through
your whole History. I will only show you your Mistakes in reference to one page
171.
Anthony a Wood, as you are pleased to phrase it; a Name that is mentioned with
Honor in places, where even that of Bishop Ward's is unknown.

ibid.
You have accused him as an Inventor of Calumnies: But that does not appear in
the Characters of Dr. Ward or Dr. Pope. And if you will venture to name any
other, I dare appeal to the World (but excepting those and their Relations who
have suffered by his plain dealing Pen) whither his Pictures have not near
resemblances with the Originals.

Dr. Ward, page 172,
you say, in the times of the Usurpation lived peaceably at Oxford, but was far
from any Compliance. Whereas the Committee for the Reformation of that
University made him Astronomy-Professor; and in October 1649. he took the
Engagement to be faithful to the Commonwealth of England, as it was then
established without a King or House of Lords, Athenae Oxon. p. 627. Vol. II. as
it appeared in the Registry belonging to the Committee for the Reformation of
that University, and as the Clerk belonging to that Committee informed Mr. Wood
and others many Years since. Vindication of the Oxford Historiographer, etc. p.
27.

You have added further, That he went not to his Grave unpunished, for he lived
to see his Book censured and burnt, himself expelled the University, obliged to
recant, page 174.
and give Security not to offend any more in that kind. And this he underwent
for writing too lavishly concerning a Great Man, etc.

I will not question the Legality of that Sentence, I shall content my self to
tell you that a Writer may relate a matter of fact upon an evidence sufficient
for History, which cannot amount to a Justification in a Court of Law. There
may be many things true in your Account of the Life of Bishop Ward; but I
believe you can hardly bring Two Witnesses that will swear to the truth of
every particular Paragraph. If the Sentence was legal, and if a Person deceased
many years ago can, properly speaking, suffer by a Reflection in History, and
the Heir bring an Action of Defamation for it: History must be laid aside; all
Enquiries into the Characters of Great Men in the Ages before us, and all
controversial Discourses, where the Opinions, Conduct, and Behavior of our
Forefathers of necessity must be examined. The Virtues of Men ought to be
displayed, and their Vices exposed for our instruction. And if the Historian is
mistaken, his Punishment is to be despised and neglected for a bad Writer.

Postulatur novo ac tunc primum audito Crimine (says Tacitus of Cremutius
Cordus) quod editis Annalibus, laudatogue M. Bruto C. Cassium Romanorum ultimum
dixisset. He goes on a little further, Libros per aediles cremandos censuere
Patres, sed manserunt occultati and editi. Quo magis socordiam eorum irridere
libet qui praesenti potentia credunt extingui posse sequentis aevi Memoriam;
nam contra, punitis ingeniis gliscit autoritas, etc. Tacit. Annal. lib. 4.

But perhaps you or some other would willingly have this Question discussed,
viz. Whether an Injury real, or by Word, or Writing may be offered to a
Deceased Person, terminating the Injury there, according to the Civil Law of
the Romans (as Mr. Wood's Case was, and by which Law Mr. Wood's Book was
condemned) so as an Action may be brought by the Heir, or Articles exhibited by
way of Indictment by him or any other.

I shall readily give my thoughts upon this Question; provided what I say is
not construed to extend to arraign the Legality of the Sentence against Mr.
Wood. For I thank God I have learned so much Sense and Manners, as to know that
the Determinations of Courts of Judicature ought to be respected and revered;
or that a Sentence may be just, tho you or I do not understand it.

To prevent Confusion in the Laws and Cases throughout the Books of the Civil
Law, which may delude some unwary Persons, I shall first acknowledge that a real
Injury, as opposed to a verbal one may be offered to a dead Person, and that it
is punishable by way of Articles, if it affects the Heir in Reputation or
Inheritance, and that an Action then also shall accrue to the Heir for
Recompense; For there the Estate and Reputation of the Heir himself is
concerned: But if the Injury (for the Propriety of the Word thus applied shall
not yet be questioned) terminates in the deceased Person only, and is so
pleaded, without any regard to or for the Heir, I cannot find any thing in that
Law sufficient to support the Assertion. For Et si forte Cadaveri defuncti fit
injuria, cui Haeredes, bonorumve Possessores extitimus, Injuriarum NOSTRO
nomine habemus Actionem. Spectat enim ad Existimationem nostram (that is,
Haeredis) siqua ei fiat Injuria. IDEMque and si fama ejus cui Haeredes
extitimus lacessatur. Dig. Lib. 47. tit. 10 De Injuriis and famosis Libellis.

And further in the sixth Paragraph, Quoties autem funeri Testatoris vel
cadaveri fit injuria, si quidem post aditam Haereditatem fiat, dicendum est
Haeredi quodammodo factam. Semper enim interest Defuncti Existimationem
purgare; quoties autem ante Haereditatem magis Haereditati and sic Haeredi per
Haereditatem acquiri. Denique Iulianus scribit, si Corpus Testatoris ante
aditam Haereditatem detentum est, acquiri Haereditati Actiones non esse Dubium.
I say the Injury in these cases follows the Inheritance, and is terminated in
the Heir, in the Person living, and upon his account only is the Complaint to
be heard. And this seems very reasonable, for if the Estate and Inheritance is
given to him, it ought to be his Duty to bury the Testator, to defend his Body,
while above-ground, from the Rudeness of Creditors, and from the barbarous
usage of any other Persons: and that, according to his quality, a Monument
should be erected in his memory, and afterward preserved by him, etc.

Secondly* I conceive, that a Verbal Injury, or Injury by Word or Writing
cannot be offered to a deceased Person by this Law, terminating the Injury
there; so as an Action may be brought by the Heir for it, or that there is any
such Crime or Punishment. Lest the contrary may be thought to be inferred from
the foregoing Laws, those parts must be explained which seem to look that way.
As, Spectat enim ad Existimationem Haeredis siqua Defuncto fiat injuria.
Idemque and si fama ejus, cui Haeredes extitimus lacessatur; for there also
spectat ad Existimationem sive famam Haeredis. I say the Text does not mean
that this can be done by Discourse or Writing. A real Injury affecting the
Reputation or Estate of the Heir himself is to be understood throughout the
whole Law, as appears by the leading and subsequent Expressions in it. The
leading instances are, Offering an Injury to the Dead Carcass, whereby an
Action does accrue to the Heir in his own name, upon this Account Spectat ENIM
ad existimationem Haeredis, if an Injury of that Nature is offered to it. The
Reason being given upon that Instance, the Discredit coming upon the Heir must
be referred to that Act, or to some other real Injury that is like it. Then
follows, with reference to the Injury offered to the Heir, IDEMque and si fama
ejus cui Haeredes extitimus, lacessatur, not by Words or Writing. but by some
Real Act, as the Gloss upon the Word lacessatur intimates, and gives Directions
for an Instance to the Institutions in the Title, Qui and ex quibus causis,
Man. par. 1. licet autem. Where because the General Law of Aelius Sentius
hindered the Manumising of Bondmen if it was in fraud to the Creditors, an
Exception is introduced, and Provision is made that a Bondman shall be made
free to act as Heir to the deceased, notwithstanding that the Creditor suffer
by his Freedom; and this, as the Text and Gloss declare, lest the Goods and
Estate of the deceased should otherwise ignominiously be sold by the public
Crier sub hasta; A method among the Ancients accounted always scandalous. Tully
pro Pub. Quinctio.

Remember I said, That the Reputation of the deceased was affected by some such
real Act as this, in the meaning of the Law, and that it did not include any.
Verbal Injury. But farther it is to be observed, that the above cited Gloss
says, Ne memoria defuncti (in that case) quadam injuria adficiatur, disowning,
that any Injury, properly speaking either verbal or real in a legal and strict
signification of that Word, can be offered to a deceased Person. And of this
Impropriety Hottoman the famous French Lawyer, in his Commentaries on this
place, takes notice and says, UTCUNQUE est injuria hic pro contumelia
accipitur, referring himself to such another improper Expression under the
Title De injuriis and famosis libellis, in the Digest which I repeated at large
above, and from whence, as I said before, we were referred to this place of the
Institutions.

Injury therefore in that place of the Digest and Institutions is so called,
quia non fit jure, as Ulpian gives the Etymology in a vulgar and general way,
according to the opinion of Commentators, but not in its legal Sense, or proper
Signification.

This is the result of those Expressions, Si Fama ejus, sc. Defuncti,
lacessatur, and Semper enim Haeredis interest Defuncti existimationem purgare,
which if they are considered further than the bare Letter, and the Passages and
References of the Gloss compared, the Injury falls only upon the Living, and
that neither real non verbal can properly speaking be offered to a deceased
Person, terminating the Injury there, without any further consideration. Upon
this Exposition, the Definition of Injury and other Laws are intelligible, as
Injuria est Delictum quo quid ad Contumeliam vel Dolorem alterius admittitur.
The Word alterius supposes a Person in being, and the Words Contumelia and
Dolor suppose him sensible of it.

Illud relatum peraeque est, eos qui injuriam pati possunt and facere posse,
excepting only the Cases of Infants and Madmen. L. illud relatum. Dig. De
Injuriis and Fam. Libel.

Injuriarum Actio neque Haeredi, neque in Haeredem datur. L. 13. Dig. de
Injuriis.

Est certissima juris regula ex maleficiis poenales Actiones in Haeredem rei
non competere, veluti furti, vi bonorum raptorum, injuriarum, Damni injuriae;
Sed haeredibus, hujusmodi Actiones competunt nec denegantur, EXCEPTA injuriarum
action, and si qua alia similis inveniatur. Inst. Lib. 4. p. 2. non autem
omnes. Where Mynsinger upon the same Paragraph, on the Words Excepta injuriarum
Action, says, Quod ideo est quia haec actio non pertinet ad rem familiarem,
sed ex mera vindicta descendit. What can be plainer!

Homo mortuus non patitur injuriam, says Tuschus in his 389. General
Conclusion, quia non potest vulnerari, neque suspendi, neque puniri. The
Exceptions to this General Rule are only some particular real Injuries, which
affect the Heir, or are punishable by some particular Constitutions, or are
esteemed Crimes upon some Religious Accounts, or are made so by the Canon Law,
viz. Robbing Tombs, a Man corrupting himself with the dead Carcass of a Woman,
and the striking or wounding the dead Body of a Clergyman, etc. Tho here I
must confess Tuschus and the Author which he quotes, give a Reason quite
contrary to the General Conclusion, viz. that those Crimes are punishable,
because in those particulars an Injury is offered to the Dead Body. But this
Contradiction is reconciled, if in the Exceptions the Word Injury is taken in
its general and loose Sense as before, according to its various Significations
repeated in the Digest, or in its improper Sense, as Hottoman before observed,
and not as in the abovementioned General Rule or Conclusion, according to its
special Meaning or Legal Definition. But what if the Exceptions were to be
taken in the same strict Meaning of the Word as we have supposed it to be in
the Conclusion? It confirms the General Rule in all other Cases, and is far
from maintaining that an Injury by Word or Writing may be committed. Either
way, in the Sense of this Compiler, that Notion is destroyed, and unknown to
his laborious Collections.

Hippolytus de Marsiliis, an Author of an established Reputation, in his
Commentaries upon the Title of the Digest De Quaestionibus, a number. 31. ad number.
65. has collected all the Laws and opinions of the Doctors, in what Instances a
Man dead or alive do agree or disagree, as to the Protection of the Law, or in
reference to legal Rights and Consequences. In their Disagreement, and that
particular Rights once due are altered by Death, he has observed and collected
twenty four Instances, and proved them by good Authorities. In their Agreement,
where the Effect of the Law continues after Death, he has found out nine Cases,
but not one Word that a dead Person may be defamed either by Word or Writing,
as undoubtedly he may when living, but expressly gives the Law, That Si Titius
est mortuus, non dicitur amplius Titius, telling his Reader that he would have
him remember those Instances, for that they will scarce be found so collected
in any other Author.

Praeterea nec haeredibus nec in haeredes conceditur injuriarum actio, quia
nihil abest ex patrimonio, neque enim in avertenda and minuenda re familiari
injuria versatur, sed in sola contumelia, and proinde qui ante litem
contestatam moritur, nihil transmittit ad Haeredem, quia simul Vindicta
extinguitur. Haersolte de Actionibus Civilibus and Criminalibus, in Prolegom.
number. 64.

Some Authorities here cited suppose indeed the Deceased to have received the
Injury while alive; but if upon his Death, before Action entered or Issue
joined in the Cause brought by him while alive, no Person afterward (not so
much as the Heir) could continue that Action, or raise a new one in the name of
the Deceased or in their own, either civiliter or criminaliter, we may be
allowed to make a Consequence, that it is not reasonable to suppose that the
Law will afford Satisfaction or a Remedy, if an Injury is pretended to be
offered him after his Decease.

An Action of Injury is a personal Action, whether moved civilly or criminally,
and it is a Maxim that such Actions die with the Person: It is extinguished and
ceases, both by the Death of the Person giving the Injury, and by the Death of
the Person who pretends to have suffered. How therefore is it reconcilable,
that such an Action should be supported by another, or Articles exhibited in
his behalf, for a pretended Injury that commenced against him after his Death,
of which he is wholly ignorant, and for which his Heir had no Remedy, if the
Ancestor had suffered while alive? For that such Actions should die with the
Person is a very rational Principle; because perhaps the Sufferer himself might
think it prudent to neglect the Injury, or his Interest to overlook and pardon
it. Shall therefore a disinteressed Person, after his Death, take up the
Quarrel and correct such prudential Forgiveness?

In this case I wish, Sir, I had your opinion, who are a Civilian by Office,
and manage Matters with a Skill and Learning peculiar to most of those who
preside in the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction throughout England.

It is to be allowed, that in the Common Laws of England there is one Precedent
contrary to my Interpretations of the Texts of the Civil Law; but that Doctrine
was never heard of till the Star Chamber Case, mentioned in the fifth Report,
and as I believe never put in practice since. It is notorious that the
Star Chamber would make Law, if they could not find any prepared for the
purpose. But there is a vast difference between the Star Chamber Case and the
Case of Mr. Wood. John Whitgift the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Person
traduced, had been just before a Magistrate, a Privy Counselor under the then
King, James I, and died under that Government, which had an Interest to support
his Reputation. Comment que le private Homme ou Magistrate soit mort, says the
Report, al temps del fes^uirs del Libel, uncore ceo est punishable, car en l'un
Case ceo incite auters de mesme le family, ou society, a revenge and a
infreindre le peace, and en l'autre le Libeller traduce and Slander le State
and Government, que ne morut pas. A Man therefore at this day by the Common Law
may be punished for talking scurvily of Henry VIII. or of William the
Conqueror, and the Courtiers and Magistrates under them; for the Government
never dies: and while there remains one of a Family to resent an Injury offered
to his Ancestor, there is danger, and the Law will lay hold on you for it.

This seems absurd in the general Notion. There ought therefore to be
reasonable Limitation and Distinction, if it can at any time be the Common Law.
Otherwise the former Ages are under this Protection as well as the later; and
the old Fool and Knave with the yesterday's Honest Wise Man: the Ancient
Disgrace and this day's Honor of Government or Family, stand upon the same
Bottom.

But however, neither can this Law govern in the present Case. My Lord
Chancellor Hide died in Retirement, a Private Person in France, before this
present Reign or the last; out of the protection of the Laws, while living and
under a Condemnation to perpetual Exile and Banishment. For the truth of this I
refer to the 19 Car. II. entitled An Act for banishing and disenabling the
Earl of Clarendon.

But it is true, Sir, there was such a Sentence or something like it as you
describe. For how could a poor Melancholy Monkish Scholar contend with that
powerful and noble Person (who was pleased to appear personally in the
Prosecution, and was the greatest Officer next to the Chancellor in the
University) in an inferior Court, before a modest private Fellow of a College,
who signed the Sentence as Judge, at the Instances of some worthy Persons, who
wisely concluded, it was convenient to pacify his Lordship.

One would think by the Gazette Account of it, and your Description, that his
Writings were censured in Convocation by the whole University, and that there
was the same Formality in the Condemnation as in that of Heresy. But, alas,
the Book was smothered in the Theatre-Court, not one Soul, besides an
Apparitor, at the Solemnity, as I could ever hear of. Notwithstanding all this,
Mr. Wood carried on his Studies in the University to his dying day, frequented
the public Library, took little or no notice of the Fire or Programma's,
continued his Acquaintance with the Learned Men of that venerable Body, and
generously gave by his Will his Printed Books and Manuscripts to the Public
Museum; where, and in the Public Libraries, all his Works, viz. Antiquitates
Oxon. and Athenae Oxonienses, in 2 Vol. are deposited as they were first
printed, as immortal Monuments of his Industry and Learning.

But that he recanted or gave Security, as you insinuate, it is utterly false,
for he died in firm persuasion that he had dealt impartially with my Lord
Chancellor, tho great Endeavors were used to convince him of a Mistake, and
that his Information coming from angry and disobliged Cavaliers, ought to be
suspected.

The Character of the Life of Dr. Pope, which is under his own Hand, in the
Custody of his Trustees, as I am informed, is certainly impartial, and a
Masterpiece, a very honest and pleasant Performance. In which I suppose the
most glorious Action of the Doctor's Life. about the Contest of Formalities is
recorded.

And here I should dismiss Mr. Wood, and close this Chapter, had I not a just
Cause of quarrelling with him upon my own account, for having endeavored to
rob me of my deserved Praise, and to obscure the most Glorious Action of my
Life. -- Diripere ausus
Haerentem capiti multa cum laud Coronam.
In not mentioning that famous Contestation, concerning Formalities, which I
have described at large in the Fifth Chapter of my being Proctor, but out of
ignorance or design, either of which is sufficient to ruin the Credit of an
Historian; he has falsified the History, having made the Proctors Byfield and
Conant serve for the Years 1657. and 1658. which is not only notoriously
untrue, but also it thrusts my Colleague and my self out of the Fasti, or the
University Chronicles; which is an intolerable Grievance to Persons thirsty of
Fame and ambitious of Honor. And this you are pleased to say was of importance
to his History.

I am of your opinion, that your greatest Praise, and the most glorious Action
of your Life was for being concerned in the famous Contestation about
Formalities, and in not giving your consent to alter the Caps in the
University. For indeed this Account of Bishop Ward's Life is but a Trifle to
it, and even to a Person (as you hint your self to be) thirsty of Fame and
ambitious of Honor, adds a less Credit and Reputation.

But as this Stuff is intolerably vain and fulsom, so it is also false and
malicious. Mr. Wood had no design to falsify the History, or to thrust you or
your Colleague out of the University Chronicles. It is perfectly a Mistake
either in the Printer or Transcriber; for in Mr. Wood's own Book given upon his
Deathbed to one of his Nephews, it stands corrected with his Pen, and Dr. Pope
(that important thing to his History) is inserted in its proper place. But for
your further satisfaction, look into the Historia and Antiquitates Oxon. in the
Fasti for the Year 1658. George Potter and Walter Pope are mentioned to be the
Proctors, with this Remark upon the latter, Potestatem sub finem Anni
impetravit Procurator junior profectionem ad exteras gentes instituendi, quare
vices absentis implevit Mr. Tho. Gourney e Coll. Aenaen. page 439.

Mr. Wood has another sort of Character given him by a Reverend and Ingenious
Writer, in his Vindication of the Oxford Historiographer, and his Works, in
page 29. which I shall make bold to transcribe, because I know that it is true,
( viz.) He did never in have and forwardness meddle with a Subject to which he
was not prepared by Education and a due Method of Studies. He never wrote to
oblige a rising Party, or to insinuate into the Disposers of Preferment, but
has been content with his Station, and aimed at no End but Truth. He never took
up with the Transcript of Records where the Originals might be consulted, nor
made use of others Eyes when his own could serve. He never wrote in post, with
his Body and his Thoughts in a hurry, but in a fixed Abode and with a
deliberate Pen. He never concealed an ungrateful Truth, nor flourished over a
weak place, but in sincerity of meaning and expression thought an Historian
should be a Man of Conscience. He never had a Patron to oblige or forget, and
has been a free and independent Writer. In a word, He confesses there may be
some Mistakes in modern Things and Persons; when he could have no evidence but
from the information of living Friends, or perhaps Enemies, but he is
confident, that where Records are cited, and where authentic Evidence could
possibly be had, there he has been punctual and exact. He may further confess,
that the Style of the Author is rugged and inartificial, almost as flat as your
own; But without your Quibbles and tedious Digressions which have no connection
with the principal Subject.

Had he had a Skill to have given an Air to his Narrations, his Books had been
more diverting; but he designed them for nothing else but a Record or Registry.

This, Doctor, contains Matter of good instruction to you and others. From
hence you may learn not to meddle with a Subject to which you are not prepared
by Education and Study. Some Men travel and converse, that they may be
qualified to tell a Story or crack a Jest over a Bottle, and to make such Sport
as you were pleased to divert your self with, when you took the cheerful Cup in
the Barn near Rochelle, as you were making your grand Tour of France, or to
come home furnished with Abilities to compose a Salisbury Canto, a Catch, or a
Ballad; But if this was also your Design, you must not meddle with any thing
that requires Thinking and Judgment. If you do, we ought to accost you in those
proper Expressions which you say the Vice Chancellor did in full Convocation,
viz. Egregie Procurator Tace.

Hence also you may conclude, that all Men are not of your opinion, that the
Credit of an Historian is ruined, because he is guilty of some Defects and
Escapes. Many things in Mr. Wood's Writings ought to be lopt off, and many
things will bear an Enlargement, yet I cannot but admire the vastness of his
Design, the Curiosity and Usefulness of his Performance. We are contented that
he himself should be censured where really defective. Deal with him as he has
dealt with others, yet his Friends will not be under any apprehension that they
shall be deprived of the Honor of his Reputation.

My Lord Chancellor Hyde was most certainly a brave, a loyal, and a wise but
unfortunate Statesman. His Country, I mean the more knowing part, will always
mention him with Gratitude and Honor; But that he had all the Virtues of a
perfect Hero, it is ridiculous to pretend to allow it.

Bishop Ward was a noted Mathematician and Astronomer, a good Divine, a
profound Reasoner, of an affable, courtly, Gentleman-like temper, a public
Spirit, and a good Friend. But before he was advanced to the Episcopal See, he
was suspected to waver in his Opinions about Government, and his good Nature
formerly betrayed him into some Irregularities; insomuch that I cannot see the
necessity why he should be set in the Calendar for a Saint, or canonized. But
for all that, to the Honor of the Church of England; I wish all his Successors
may deserve as good a Character, and have a better Historian.

Had the modern Biographers been as just and sincere as the Author of Athenae
Oxonienses, without Flourishes and Concealments, their Pieces had not been
thrown aside with Dissatissatisfaction, as Panegyrical, inimitable, and
Romantic.

Quintus Curtius, (says one) deserves Praise for being sincere. He says what is
good and bad in Alexander, and never suffers the Merit of his Hero to prevent
him. Whereas Eusebius shows nothing in Constantine but what is commendable; who
nevertheless had great Failings. We may expose their chief Faults faithfully,
but not irreverently. It is a fault in Platina to treat the Popes in such a
manner. Perhaps my Friend too upon this account may deserve sometimes to be
corrected. All that I contend for, is, that the Biographers ought to set down
the chief Virtues and Vices of those they represent. Every Historian of repute
does relate the Defects of those they write of. The sacred History shows us
Instances of the basest Villainy in the best Examples. Much rather should a
Biographer (whom we cannot properly call an Historian) describe his Subject in
its due proportion, being supposed, whilst he is writing, to have his Eyes and
his Thoughts contracted only to that narrow compass. Bishop Burnet says, in his
Preface to the Life of Sir Matthew Hale, to this purpose, That since all Men
have their blind Sides, and commit Errors, he that will industriously lay these
together, leaving out, or but slightly touching what should be set against them
to balance them, may make a very good Man appear in bad Colors. So upon the
whole matter, there is not that reason to expect either much Truth or great
Instruction from what is written concerning Hero's or Princes; for few have
been able to imitate the Patterns Suetonius set the World, in writing the Lives
of the Roman Emperors with the same Freedom that they had led them.

In God's Name therefore let there be no such Prevarication in Writing Lives of
private Persons, as there is no Necessity and little Temptation for it.

Diogenes Laertius, tho dry and jejune, is very plain and faithful. He tells us
that Socrates Wife would scold and throw Water upon him, and that he himself
would endure a Beating.

Plutarch says that the brave Cato Uticensis was a fudling Fellow and a
Cuckold. That Alcibiades lisp'd, or, as one of his Translators renders it, that
his Tongue was something fat; that he gave a Schoolmaster a Box under the Ear
because he would not lend him a Homer; that he had a very large Dog, and that
the Athenians mightily blamed him for cutting off his Tail, which occasioned
this ingenious Reply, That he did it to divert them from saying worse things of
himself; that he was a Promise-breaker, perjured, and that he got King Agis's
Wife with child, etc. Plut. in vita Alcib.

Suppose Plutarch's Works had been censured because he could not have brought
two Witnesses that would have sworn all this to be true? Do you think it would
have ruined the Credit of the Historian?

In short, Cornelius Nepos, a Latin, followed the same Method in writing of his
Lives, and makes the same Alcibiades an extraordinary Man and a very naughty
Spark.

Had Mr. Wood deferred the Publication of his last Volume for twenty or thirty
years, the Book had found more Friends; but there is a Simplicity and an honest
Design which runs through the whole that will for ever support it, were it
guilty of all those Errors which you or your Fellow Sufferers have been pleased
to charge it with.

The Sum of what I object is, That you have grossly abused Bishop Ward and Mr.
Wood, for which all good and learned Men call loudly for Satisfaction. And tho
perhaps I might have drawn up your Indictment in a more solemn manner, I found
it difficult to put on a serious countenance to confute your Jests, or
something absurd to answer your Merriments with a Syllogism. If you are
incorrigible, I concur in your WISH, that you may have leave to depart in
peace, for otherwise there will be little or no occasion of you in this World.

I am, Sir, Yours at command.
London, July 1, 1697.
FINIS.

