A Word in Season, to prevent Undue Elections and Returns of Members of
Parliament: Wherein the Method to be Observed, according to LAW, is Prescribed,
and several Illegal Practices Reformed, and several Clauses of Statutes
relating thereunto, Cited and Explained.
IN such a Crisis of Time as this, wherein both our Civil Liberties and
Religion are at Stake, and must certainly Stand or Fall together, I thought I
could not do a greater Service to the Public, than to offer some Remedies,
which might prevent the Fatal Consequences of Undue Elections and Returns,
especially since the great Design of the Adversaries of our Religion, upon
which they lay their whole Stress, and have used their utmost Efforts, for
these two Years last past, appears to be the framing of such a Parliament, as
might make Way for the Change of our Religion; to compass which, they have used
such Unheard of Methods, and practiced such open Violations upon the Rights and
Freedoms of Parliaments and Elections, as no Age can parallel, without any
color of Law or Precedent.

For the Demonstration of which, it shall suffice to give these few Instances.

Not to insist upon the Quo Warranto's brought, and Judgments given thereupon,
against the Charter of London, and other Places, at the latter end of the late
King's Time, with the Methods taken to procure Surrenders from Cities and
Corporations, with the Exhorbitant Fines imposed upon the Rioters of London, at
the Election, and the framing of Courts, Juries, and Sheriffs to this purpose,
which yet had been done in the forms, and under the countenance of Law, and
therefore are only fit for the Consideration of a Parliament, together with
that Proviso introduced into all the New Charters, wholly inconsistent with the
Nature of a Corporation, wherein every man has a Freehold, and the Corporation
itself a Perpetuity of an Inheritance, and which manifestly Subverts all the
Right and Freedom of Elections, not only of the Members of the Corporation, but
of their Representatives in Parliament, and have not yet the countenance of one
Precedent or Judgment of any Court; and therefore it is hoped, will be declared
Illegal and Void, by the next succeeding Parliament: All which matters have
been strangely Improved and Extended by the Ministers, in the Reign of his
present Majesty, as might be easily Demonstrated; but I shall only fix upon
such things as have been lately practiced, which come within the former Rule,
Of being without the Color of Law, or Precedent.

First, First and before all, that Method of Testing all the Officers in the
Kingdom, from the highest to the lowest, with these three Questions, and
Turning Out all such as refused to comply, 1st, Whether, if they were Chosen to
be Members of Parliament, they would give their Voice, to Repeal the Penal Laws
and Test? Directly opposite to the Right and Freedom of Parliaments, and the
Duty of the Members thereof. 2dly, Whether they would give their Voices to
Elect such as would Repeal the Penal Laws and Test, in Subversion of the Right
of Election, and Freedom of Members? 3dly, Whether they would stand by the
King's Declaration; wherein the King Assumes to himself to Suspend all these
Laws, without Limitation of Time or Persons?

Secondly, The underhand Imposing upon the Clergy, to Address for, and then
publicly, by order, to Read the Declaration, and the Proceeding against the
Bishops for not concurring therein, and against the Body of the Clergy that
refused to comply therewith.

Thirdly, The Testing the Corporations by Addresses and otherwise, to promise
to Elect such Members as should be for taking off the Penal Laws and Test, when
the King should please to call a Parliament, and the turning out all such, from
time to time, as refused.

Fourthly, The Imposing Charters upon several Buroughs, in Cornwall and Devon,
and elsewhere, before the Election of the last Parliament, without Petition,
and taking away the Right of Election from the generality, and restraining it
to a few, which has also been endeavored upon other Buroughs since.

Fifthly, Procuring an Order to be entered in most of the Cinque Ports, That
the King should have the Nomination of one Member.

Sixthly, Appointing a Committee or Commission, consisting for the most part of
Roman Catholics, both Lords and others, publicly to Meet twice or thrice a
Week, to Consult about the Method of framing a Parliament to these Ends, and
give out Orders for the same, and especially for the Regulating Corporations,
as it is called, and employing Commissioners into all Counties under them.

Seventhly, The Nominating many Lord Lieutenants, Sheriffs, Mayors, and
Bailiffs, professed Roman Catholics, and the generality of the rest, such as by
reason of their Dependence upon the Court, Indigence of their Fortunes, or
Obnoxiousness to the Laws, have contrary to their Duties, given an Assurance to
promote such Elections.

I have mentioned these, only to show the great Necessity incumbent upon every
good Englishman and Protestant, however differing in Opinion as to some
Religious Matters, to use their utmost Endeavors upon the approaching
Election, to oppose and prevent all further Illegal Practices, either in the
Election or Return: And the better to enable them, shall propose this following
Method, as I conceive, undoubtedly warranted by Law.

I. That since by the Statute of Westminster. 1 C. 5. it is declared, That all
EElections ought to be Free; and the King forbids, under grievous Forfeitures,
that no Great Man, nor other, by Power of Arms, or by Malice, or Threatenings,
should disturb to make Free Elections: and by the Statute 7 H. 4.15. it is
declared, That Elections ought to be freely, indifferently, made without
Request or Commandment: No Peer has to do in the Election of the Commons,
being no Suitour, or Summonable to the County Court, nor Contributary to the
Ways for his Land; that therefore no City, Borough, or Corporation, or the
Members thereof, or Electors for the County, do admit of any Recommendation,
Request, or Commandment from the King, or any Peer in Office, (who ought not by
the Law to intermeddle in any of these Elections) or make any Promise to any of
them, for the Choice of any Man, before such Election, nor admit of the
Presence of any Lord-Leiutenant, or of any Military Officer or Soldier, not
having Right to give a Voice to the said Election, but to insist upon it, that
they withdraw.

II. That after the Writ or Precept Read, they cause to be Read the Statutes of
7 H. 4.15. and 23 H. 6.15. wherein the Manner is prescribed for the Elections,
both in Counties, Cities, and Buroughs, and that they both pursue and require
of the Sheriff, and chief Officers, the Observation thereof, and not to permit
or suffer any Deviation from the same.

III. That they do principally observe two things in the said Statutes, 1st,
That as well the Return as the Election of the Knights, is to be made at the
next County Court after the receipt of the Writ, and the Sheriff not to Depart,
or Dissolve the Court till such time as the Return be made. 2dly, See also the
Clause in the Writ, added by the Statute of 23. H. 6.15.
That both the Election and Return is to be made by Indenture, which is to be
Sealed by every one of the Electors, and the Duplicate by the Sheriff, and the
such Indenture shall be annexed to the Writ; and the such Indenture is the
Return of the Sheriff: So that the Return is in the Power of the Electors, and
not of the Sheriff; the omission of which Sealing the Indenture, at the time of
giving in their Votes, by every Elector, which is the standing Poll of the
Election, by Law, and no other Poll required, has given the opportunity to the
Sheriff of practicing all the Partiality imaginable at Polls, and by Adjourning
of the Court to remote Places and Inns, after the Election, which he cannot do
without the Consent of the Freeholders, by Law, unless in case of necessity,
for want of Provisions, or Sickness broke out in the place since the last
Court, or the like, as also of the false and double Returns made by them. The
Method therefore to be taken is this, not wholly refusing the Poll, because it
has been long practiced, and gives the Sheriff opportunity of examining as to
40 s. per annum, to prepare an Indenture, one part whereof to have several
Skins of Parchment, to which (in case of Contest) either before or after the
giving their Votes, every Elector should set his Name or Mark and Seal, such
Sealing to be in the presence of some entrusted therewith, who may testify the
same; and such Seals to be dropped with hard Wax upon the Parchment, in rows,
with room to write the Names; which, at the end of the Election, with a
Duplicate is to be presented to the Sheriff, and he required to annex the same
to his Writ, and if he refuse so to do the same, they may justify the
detaining him there till he comply; nor can he Adjourn or Dissolve the Court
till he has performed the same, and sealed a Duplicate thereof, there being no
occasion for such an Ajournment; nor is he Judge of any Exception, but only
has Power to Examine upon Oath, as to the 40 s. per annum.

IV. As to Cities, Buroughs, and Towns Corporate, the like Method is to be
observed in their Elections and Returns, and though it be not particularly
expressed in the said Statutes, as to the manner of their Election and Return,
as in the Case of the Knights of the Shire, yet the constant Practice of making
Return by Indenture, either under the common Seal of the Corporation, or Hands
and Seals of the Electors, where no common Seal is, and annexing it to the
Precept, and proceeding in the same manner by Votes and Poll, in case of a
Contest, shows that this was the common Law and Custom of England, before the
making of the said Statutes, and only reinforced under Penalties by such
Statutes: and therefore the putting the Seal to this, and Annexing it to the
Precept, and Indorsing by the Mayor, or other chief Officer, upon the back of
the Precept, that the Return of this Precept, is in an Indenture thereto
annexed, is the Duty of the Mayor, and what he may be compelled to do after the
Election, before he Adjourn or Dissolve the Court; and by a Clause in the
Statute 23 H. 6.15. it is declared, The Citizens and Burgesses as have always
been Chosen by Citizens and Burgesses, and no other, and Returned to the
Sheriff, and upon their Returns accepted and received by Parliament.

V. In case the Sheriff shall refuse to annex such Return and Precept to the
Writ, for which end the Corporation ought to send some of their Number with the
Mayor or chief Officer; they may do well to detain the Return, and not deliver
it till the Parliament Sits; and in case of any doubt of the Practice of the
Sheriff and Mayor, after the Return made in manner aforesaid, they may keep the
Return, and carry it in to the Sheriff, such Indenture so annexed, being as
well the Return of the Mayor, as in the County of the Sheriff.

VI. Whereas many Foreigners have been made Members of Corporations, which do
not Live, nor Inhabit in the said Corporations, it is humbly conceived, that no
Votes in Election can belong to them; for that it appears not only by the
Statute 1 H. 5.1. and other Statutes that require the Electors to be Citizens
and Burgesses of the said Cities and Buroughs, that are resiant on the Place,
which tho it be Dispensed with as to the Persons Elected, being only a
prohibitory Clause, and not disabling the Person to be Elected, or making the
Election void, and that those Acts were made upon Petition of the Gentlemen,
not to be compelled to serve for Corporations, and so was granted to them as a
Privilege, if they would take advantage of it, but Volenti non fit injuria,
yet was it never Dispensed with, as to the Electors in Counties, nor ought it
to be so in Corporations or Buroughs; and that this is the Common Law of the
Realm, appears by the Clause in the Statute 23 H. 6.15. which after the recital
of the Statute 1 Hen. 5.1. declares, That the Citizens and Burgesses have
always been Chosen by Citizens and Burgesses, and no other; and also, that even
those that have been real Citizens or Freemen, or Inhabitants of Corporations,
as having been Apprentices there, yet when they live out of the said Towns,
cannot enjoy the Privileges that are Granted to the said Corporations, as in
the famous Judgment in Prizage, as to the Citizens of London: which shows that
the Privileges are Local and not Personal; and tho they have been sometimes
admitted to give Votes, yet it is conceived, this is against Law, and cannot be
defended.

VII. Where Sheriffs, Mayors, and other chief Officers have not taken the Test,
and will not comply with the Law, to make due Elections and Returns, it is
conceived, that they may be justly excepted against, and the Elections and
Returns made without them; and that where any Borough has a Corporation
lately put upon them, neither the Election nor Return is altered thereby, but
shall belong to the Inhabitants and Bailiff of the Borough as formerly, and
not to the Mayor or Bailiff by Charter.

FINIS.

