THE Leper, and the Leper's House, CLEANSED: BEING, AN EXPOSITION Upon some
part of the XIVth Chapter of LEVITICUS; The Mystery of which is Explained and
Applied to the State and Condition of a Sinner's becoming a Saint. WITH
Profitable USES and APPLICATIONS.

AS ALSO, What the Chapter may be applied to, as to the Cleansing or Destroying
of any particular Church of CHRIST, in and under the Time of the Gospel.

Divided into Ten PARTS.

Written for the Information of those which seldom concern themselves about the
Types and Shadows of the Old Testament: Very useful for all People.

By THOMAS WORDEN, Author of, The Types Unvailed.

LONDON: Printed for William Marshal; and sold at the Bible in Newgate-street,
and at the Bible in Gracious-street.

Where you may be supplied with most of Dr. Owen's, Mr. Caryl'^ and Mr.
Beverly's Works, with all sorts of Stationary Was^ and Paper-hangings of the
newest India and Japan Figure^ either by Yard or Sheet, etc. Likewise Bibles,
Testame^^^ Psalters, and all sorts of School-books. At the Bible in
N^^gate-street, you may have Matthews's Pill, rightly prep^^^^ and sold at a
reasonable Rate.

AN Epistle to the Reader.
AS the least of the Works of God are adorable, because they are the Works of
him who is infinitely Wise, Powerful, Just and Good, much more are the greater
Works of God adorable and admirable* There are three great Works of God,
presented to our Sense and Understanding, which invites us all, with David, to
cry aloud, Many are thy Works, O Lord, and in Wisdom have thou made them all:
And these are, 1st, His Works of Creation, in making the World. 2dly, His Works
of Providence in providing for the World, in sustaining, governing, and
preserving of it. 3dly, In redeeming and eternally saving of his Elect in the
World. In his Creating-work there is much of his Wisdom and Power manifested;
in his Providential-work there is much of his Bounty and Goodness declared;
and, in this Work of Redemption, how much of his Love, Grace, Mercy, and Bowels
of Pity is there in this to be magnified? And unto all this has God added his
written Book of Scripture, by the Inspiration of his own Spirit in the holy
Prophets and Apostles, wherein he has plainly opened, to our dark
Understandings, both the Matter, Method, and the Means to obtain the End of it,
which is Everlasting Life and Blessedness. And though this be plainly incerted
in the Word of God, that sanctified Babes do (...) to the Knowledge of it, yet
it is a Book sealed up from the (...) sanctified, Wise, and Learned in the
World, that they underst(...) nothing of the saving Mystery and Meaning of it;
those whi(...) have not the Key of Grace to unlock it, shall never dis(...) the
Riddles of it, as to be able to say, by experience, (...) this Eater comes
Meat, and out of this strong One comes (...) ness; but though there is nothing
obscure in the Scrip(...) what the meanest Child of God may understand, as
n(...) his Salvation, yet there are many things in it which (...) (...) still
ignorant of, as a hindrance to their growth in Knowledge, to the furtherance of
their Consolation; and these difficult things, not easily to be understood,
consists much, if not mostly, of the dark Types of the Old Testament: The
difficulty of them makes many a Christian to throw by the reading of the two
Books, (viz.) Exodus and Leviticus, as wholly useless in their Esteem, which
was one considerable Reason which put me upon that Task of bringing forth my
Book, called, The Types Unvailed, above Thirty Years agon, it was to incline
the ignoranter sort of Christians to a greater Freedom, to make themselves more
familiar with these Old Testament-Mysteries, in which (as so many Pearls hid in
a heap of Earth) the Substance of the whole Gospel is included; and the same
Design I have in being willing to let go this Exposition to public View, the
Piece having lain by me in secret for some Years, not knowing that ever it
might be of any farther Use than to benefit my own Children; but, God, which
orders all Events by his Providence, it seems, was resolved that this Work of
mine, (though but a Mite prepared for his Treasury) yet it should not be buried
in Oblivion, but did order it to be so, (though unknown to me) did cast a
Servant of his into a Family, unto which I had lent the Manuseript to read for
their private Instruction, it pleased God to order it so, that the People of
the House should give their Friend a sight of the Copy; and when he had read
part of it, it begat a through Resolution in his Mind, not to rest until he had
been at the Press with it; and though it be void of Letters of Attestation, yet
it has past under several good Ministers Approbation: So, commending the whole
Work to the Blessing of God, with thy Soul in the reading of it, which if it
prove a Means of the increase of thy Faith in God, thy Knowledge of God, and
Love to God, give the whole Honor to him from whom I received this Light, as
indeed they must who are mostly acquainted with the Original of my Education,
and give me thy Prayers, (not thy Praises) that God would make my
Preaching-labours, as well as my Writing-labours, very profitable to the Souls
of those I labor in the Ministry amongst: And so, crave leave to write my self
the meanest of Ministers, and yet Christ's and the Churches Servant,

T. W.

THE Leper, and the Leper's House, CLEANSED.
EXPOSITION I.
AN Exposition upon some part of the Fourteenth Chapter of Leviticus,
entitled, The Leper Cleansed: The Mystery of which, is explained and applied
to the State and Condition of a Sinner's becoming a Saint, which is seconded
with some profitable Uses and Application: As also what the Chapter may be
applied to, the Cleansing or Destroying of any particular Church of Christ, in
and under the time of the Gospel. Written for the Information of those which
seldom concern themselves about the Types and Shadows of the Old Testament.

IN which Chapter you have these two Generals insisted upon; First, The
Subject. (1st. What is spoken of the Subject.) First, You have the Subject
itself, and that is twofold: First, The Man. Secondly, His House.

Secondly, You have what is spoken of the Subject, namely, The Man and his
House, and that is twofold: First, The Disease which hapend to either.
Secondly, The Remedy prescribed to both: I shall first speak of the Man,
beginning with him, and in the second place speak of his House, which is the
other part of the Subject to be treated of: And here, First, with respect to
the Man, we may observe these two things: First, His Disease, and that was a
Leprosy. Ver. 2. This shall be the Law of the Leper, in the Day of his
Cleansing. The Mystery of which, is to lead us into the Knowledge of that
spiritual Leprosy, which, by original Sin, is begotten in our whole Man, a
Disease derived from Father to Son, a Disease which has spread itself over the
face of the Earth, leaving neither Man, Woman, or Child untouched with the
Venom of it, says 1 John 5. 19. The whole World lies in Wickedness. This
spiritual Leprosy is a Disease, that no Man in the World can possibly escape;
this takes hold of the highest King upon the Throne, as well as the Beggar
upon the Dunghill. I do not say, That every Man is a Leper in a corporal Sense,
no, but yet the Antitype of that corporal Leprosy, which the Jews were so
subject unto, which shadowed forth this spiritual Leprosy which I am speaking
of, (which is a thousand times more distructive than the former:) This is a
Leprosy which cleaves to every Man in the World, and as it cleaves to every
Man, so it cleaves to every Part in Man; it is a Corruption and Disorder so
universal, that the whole Soul is bound under it, without any supply of its own
to rescue itself, because the whole Faculties of the Soul are corrupted with
this unclean leprous Pollution; therefore it is called, The Dominion of Sin,
Romans 6. 12. A Body of Death, Romans 7. 24. and a Law of Sin bringing the Soul
into Captivity, Romans 7. 23. For first of all, this Leprosy darkens the
Understanding, Ephesians. 4. 18. Having the Understanding darkened, being alienated
from the Life of God, through the Ignorance which is in them, because of the
Blindness of their Heart: And from hence the Imaginations of the Heart become
Vain, Romans 1. 21. and not only Vain, but continually Evil, Genesis 6. 5. pursuing
unprofitable Curiosities, Acts 19. 19. and impertinent Questions, Titus 3. 9.
vain Deceir, Col. 2. 8. it wants a Capacity to discern things of the greatest
Concernment, 1 Cor. 2. 14. so that the best Habits of the Understanding are
corrupted by this leprous Disease; the Wisdom of the World is not only
Foolishness, 1 Cor. 3. 19. but Enmity against God, yea, earthly, sensual, and
devilish, James 3. 15. These, and the like, does this spiritual Leprosy
produce in the Understanding: the Light being either quite out or dim, the
Actings of the Understanding become irregular; and it is one of the great Works
of Christ in our Regeneration, to give us the Spirit of Power and a sound Mind,
2 Timothy 1. 7.

1st, So for the Will, this Leprosy has as much perverted that, as it has
darkened the Understanding, and that upon a double account: First, By reason of
that Corruption which is in the Understanding, for the Prosecution or
Aversation of the Will, is much qualified and ruled, according to the Light
that is in the Understanding; and if that Light be Darkness, then there must
necessarily follow a great miscarriage in the Will.

2dly, By reason of that Captivity that the Will lies under to the Law of Sin
and the Flesh, God gave to Man a righteous Law, which was to be a Law and Rule
to his Mind, planted in him to direct and guide him in all things answerable to
the revealed Will of God; but by reason of this Leprosie's corrupting the Will,
it is now not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can it be, Romans 8. 7.
nay, the Will is so much mastered and pressed down, by being possessed of this
Leprosy, through this powerful Law of Sin which it whers into the Soul;
insomuch when it meets with the Law of God coming into the Heart, it takes an
occasion thereby to work in the Soul all manner of Concupiscence, Romans 7. 6.
and all this, merely out of Malice and Policy, to make the Law of God (which
should restrain the Soul from Sin, and rescue the Soul) more odious to the
Soul, and the Soul to it; as Conquerers use to do, who introduce Laws, Customs,
and Languages of their own, the more to estrange the Conquered from any Memory
of their former Duty and Freedoms; but now, when Christ comes into the Soul, he
rescues the Soul from the Dominion (though not from the being) of Sin: Romans 6.
14. Sin shall not have Dominion over you; for ye are not under the Law, but
under Grace.

3dly, This Leprosy has not only darkened our Understandings, and corrupted
our Wills, but it has poisoned our Affections also: The great and Masterpiece
of our Affections is Love, and the prime Object of it is God; and in our
original Creation our Love was rightly placed upon God, the only Discerner of
our Love; and when our Love was rightly qualified, it was most intense Love,
according to the Law and Command of God, Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Thou shall love the Lord
thy God, with all thy Heart, with all thy Soul, and withal thy Might: But now
this Leprosy, though we have lost the proper Object of this Affection, yet not
the Affection itself, but in as much as our Love has lost its Guide; hence it
is, that it wanders after something else, like Noah's Dove, seeking rest
amongst the Creatures, and Pleasures of the Flesh, but finds none, and at
last takes up in ourselves, making them the sole Objects of our Love and
Affection; so that as our Love is misplaced with respect to its Object, so it
mistakes in the pursuit of that Object; for no Man does truly love himself, who
does not truly love God; because the true Effect of Love, is to do all the good
we can to the Thing we Love. Now the chiefest Good to ourselves, lies in our
Conformity unto the Will of God, wherein indeed lies the beauty, happiness,
and blessedness of the Soul: Thus when a Man has lost the true Object of his
Love, no wonder he wanders up and down, in a Wilderness of Mistakes, and so at
last makes himself the sole Object of his Affection. Romans 1. 25. Who has
changed the Truth of God into a Lie, and worshipped and served the Creature
more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever, Amen. So that, that Man, who
terminates his Love upon himself, Serves and Worships himself: Thus the Order
and Beauty which God at first planted in Man, it being corrupted and turned
into so much Disorder in the Soul by this Leprosy, this makes that Confusion
in all the other Affections and Passions of the Mind: But this is not all, But,

4thly, As Paul speaks to Titus, Tit. 1. 15. This Leprosy has defiled the
Consciences of Men, it has first darkened the divine Light of God in the Soul,
in a great measure, which has much weakened the Evidence that Conscience should
give in for God, and made it so much the more uncertain in its Testimony; so
also has it weakened it in its Power, that it stirs not as otherwise it would
do, like a Man overpowered and benumbed with much heaviness to Sleep. Hence in
some Men, it is said to be feared, as with a hot Iron; as seared Flesh is dead
Flesh, so are the Consciences of some Men in their Breasts, dead, powerless,
unable to act or speak. Therefore this spiritual Leprosy, is very lively
shadowed out by the Jewish corporal Leprosy, for the over-spreading Nature of
it; a corporal Leprosy runs over all the parts of the Body, so does this
sinful Leprosy as you have seen, it spreads itself over all the parts and
powers of the Soul, leaving no part of it untainted: The same which the Prophet
spoke of the State of Israel, as a Body Politic, with respect to its Pollution
by Sin, Isa. 1. 6. From the sole of the Foot unto the Head, there is no
soundness in it; but Wounds, and Bruises, and putrefying Sores; they have not
been closed, neither bound up, neither mollified with Ointment.

Thus having discovered the spiritual Leprosy, which cleaves to every Man by
Nature, I shall next give you the Grounds and Reasons of it.
Adam, upon a double account: First, Naturally. Secondly, Morally. First,
Naturally, as we are the Offspring of Adam, our first Father in the Flesh; for
we were vertually included in him, as a multiplicity of Seeds in the first
Seed, and so reasonably must partake of the same natural Quality which were in
him: For if it be granted, that his Posterity, descending from him by ordinary
Generation, had partook of the Qualities of Righteousness, Wisdom, and Holiness
from him, had he not fallen, then, is it not as reasonable to conclude, that we
must necessarily partake of his Sin and Pollution (the Effects of his Fall)
which fastened upon him by his Transgression? And that you may see the
Attestation which the Spirit of God gives to this as a Truth, read Genesis 5. 3.
And Adam lived a hundred and thirty Years, and begat a Son in his own Likeness,
after his Image. Now for Adam to beget a Son after his own Image, (if we
respect his external Form, and parts of his Body) this carried no such note of
Observation in it, for, who would expect that it would be otherwise? Because
ordinary it is not, unless the Birth be monstrous; but the thing to be noted in
the Text is this, That as Adam, by his Transgression, became a poor, depraved,
sinful, leprous Creature himself, so his Child, which naturally sprang from
him, derived from him the same leprous Pollution, which Adam by his Fall,
procured to himself, and unavoidably to every one else which should succeed
him: But then, Secondly, It is so upon a moral account; because Adam and all
his Posterity were in Covenant with God together, and in that Covenant, both
himself and all his Seed, made up (as it were) one entire Man in the Account of
God. Adam's Person representing (under that Covenant) every Man, Woman, and
Child, that ever did or should spring from him to the end of the World; so that
when he fell, we all fell in him; and when he broke Covenant with his Creator,
we then broke Covenant with him and in him, and consequently when the Penalty
of Covenant-breach (which was the Curse and Death) fell upon him, it fell upon
us in him at the same time. So reasons the Apostle, Romans 5. 17. For if by one
Man's Offense, Death reigned by one. So. ver. 18. Therefore as by the Offense
of one, Judgment came upon all Men to Condemnation. So ver. 19. For as by one
Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners. See ver 12. also. So that, upon this
moral Account, as by Adam's Sin, we were made Guilty, so by the same
Transgression, are we become leprously Filthy, Ezekiel. 16. 6. I saw thee polluted
in thy Blood. Hence says our Savior, Matt. 15. 19. Out of the Heart proceed
evil Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, false Witness,
Blasphemies.

Reason 2.] Why this spiritual Leprosy is so unavoidable, it is because it is
an Evil propagated from Father to Child, by a natural Generation; it runs in a
Line from one to another; it is such an entailed Evil, as cannot be cut off by
any thing that Man can do; it is as impossible for Man not to beget a leprous
sinful Substance, as it is for him not to beget a natural fleshly Substance, if
his Loins be fruitful to beget any thing at all. It is the Order which God has
planted in Nature, that every Kind should bring forth his like: Therefore if a
Man be an Instrument to produce any thing by Generation, it must be in his own
Likeness; for though Man originally was not unclean, (but as Solomon speaks, he
was made Just and Upright) yet as the case now stands with Man, he being
corrupted with this sinful Leprosy, he cannot beget his own Likeness unless he
do naturally and instrumentally produce an ugly Leper like himself.

From hence we infer these two Uses:

1st Use, This informs us then of the Ground and Reason of that great Distance
that there is betwixt God and Men, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 2. 13. We are
afar off from God; and as we are at a great distance from God, so is he at as
great a distance from us; all which arises from the Impurity and Defilement of
our Natures, upon the account of this Leprosy. God is a holy God, and ^ we are
sinful and unholy Creatures; the Nature of God will not permit of any
Fellowship with sinful Men, He is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity, Hab.
1. 13. neither can Evil dwell with him. Isai. 50 2. Your Iniquities have
separated betwixt you and your God, and your Sins have hid his Face from you.
So 2 Cor. 6. 14. What fellowship has Righteousness with Unrighteousness, and
what communion has Light with Darkness.

2d Use, Let it serve to teach us Humility. Alas! What little cause have Lepers
to be proud, or to harbor a highminded frame of Spirit in the least degree?
What if they wear better Clothes than other Folk, and walk with their sweet
perfuming Smells about them, yet according to the Law about Leprosy, Levit.
13. 45. they were to cry out (to every one they met) Unclean, unclean. Vzziah,
though a King, and in his Royal Robes, yet when a Leprosy brake out upon him,
he was driven out from his Throne to live in a separated House alone, from the
Society of all other Men, 2 Chronicles. 26. 20, 21. So that the best that can be
said of Lepers, let them be never so Rich, Noble, or gorgiously Attired, richly
Perfumed, yea though they are mounted upon the Throne, yet still there is a
Leprosy cleaving to them, yea when they mount up their Heads at the highest,
they are but Lepers. It may be that thy Gifts and Parts do exceed many of thy
Equals, in going beyond them for Learning, and Knowledge, and Utterance; yet
for all this, remember that a Leprosy is upon thee, thou art but a knowing,
learned, eloquent Leper at the best; and thou have always cause to rent thy
Clothes, and to make thy Head bare, and to put a Covering upon thy Upper-lip,
and to cry out, Unclean, unclean, according to Levit. 13. 45. Isaiah had as
large a Portion of Gifts and Parts, as the Proudest of you all had or have to
boast of, yet you may read, under all his highest Seize, what a humbling
Consideration this was to him, that he still had the remainders of his Leprosy
upon him, Isai. 6. 5. Then said I, Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a
Man of unclean Lips, and I dwell in the midst of a People of unclean Lips. And
as this was Matter of Humiliation to that Prophet, so should it be to every one
else; for if a corporal Leprosy be so debasing a thing, much more must a
spiritual Leprosy be so, because the more spiritual an Evil is, the more vile
and debasing: Oh! how Humble should the Thoughts of this make us, under our
greatest Enjoyments and Seize in this Life.

PART. II.
Thus having spoken to the Disease, we next come to speak of the Remedy against
it.

ABout which we may note these three things: First, There was something to be
done by the Leper himself, in order to his Cleansing. Secondly, You have the
Person noted by whom the Cure was to be wrought. Thirdly, You have the Means
noted also, which was to be used in order to the Cure of the Leper. First of
all, we are to consider what was to be done by the Leper himself in order to
his Cure, which has two things in it: First, He was to go or be brought to the
Priest, that his Disease might be discovered, and looked into. Secondly, And if
it proved to be the Leprosy, then was he to go out of the Camp, and be
separated from the People.

First of all, He was to go or be brought to the Priest, that his Disease might
be discovered and looked into, in order to his Recovery: Levit. 13. 2. When a
Man which shall have in the Skin of his Flesh, a Swelling, or a Scab, or a
white Spot in the Skin of his Flesh, if it be like the Plague of Leprosy, then
shall he be brought to the Priest. Now the Levitical Priest, who was to be the
Instrument of this corporal Cure, was a Type of Jesus Christ, our Gospel
High Priest, who alone can heal the spiritual Leprosy of our polluted and
defiled Natures; and indeed, one great part of the Apostle's Work, in his
Epistle to the Hebrews, is to show the Levitical Priesthood, typical of the
Priesthood of Christ, not only in the Work of offering Gifts and Sacrifices
for the People; but also, in that compassionating Care that Christ should
exercise over his Members, in healing and helping them under their Infirmities,
Heb. 5. 1, 2. From whence we shall raise this Observation:

Doct. That if any have a desire to be healed of their (...) Leprosies and
Soul-pollutions, they must come, on be brought to Jesus Christ.

Where could the Is^^^lites go, or unto whom could they repair for healing Help
against their corporal Leprosies, but unto their Levitical Priests? Had they
^ayelled, through the whole Would for a Cure, they could not imagine to obtain
it from the Hands of any whom God had not appointed to administer it; but God
never appointed any, but their Priests to be the Instruments in this Work, and
none but them; therefore, to neglect the Use, of them, was to abide still under
the power of their Leprosies: So in the case of our spiritual Leprosies, it is
only Jesus Christ which God has appointed to administer Health and Healing
against it; it is he alone that is the anointed. High Priest, to deal with our
Soul-pollution, in order to the removing of it: Heb. 2. 17, 18. Wherefore in
all things it behoved, him to be made like unto his Brethren, that he might be
a merciful and faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make
Reconciliation for the Sins of the People. For in that himself has suffered
being tempted, he is able to Succo^^ them that are tempted. Acts 4. 12. Neither
is there Salvation in any other; for there is no other Name under Heaven given
amongst Men, whereby we must be sa^ved. So that if we seek to this High Priest
for a Cure of our Soulpollution, we need not doubt of healing Grace, to our
effectual Recovery; because he is able to save them to the uttermost, which
come unto God by him, Heb. 7. 25. Thus as Jesus Christ is our only High Priest,
appointed and ano^^ed of God for Soul-cure, so it is our coming to him which
gives us the Benefit in order to our Recovery; the reason is, because our
coming to him is made the Condition of it, Matt. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye
that Labor, and are heavy Laden, and I will give you Rest. Isai. 55. 1. Ho,
every one that thirsts, let him come to the Waters. He that is a Thrist, let
him come, and he that will, let him come, and take of the Waters of Life
freely, Rev. 22. 17. Thus you see, though Christ our High Priest be every way
qualified and appointed by his Father for our Healing, who has said of Christ,
I have laid help upon one that is Mighty; yet still it is our coming to Christ
for help, which effects the Cure in us (Mark) the leprous Person was to be
brought to the Priest, Leo. 13. 45. and thou must be brought to Christ; or thou
must endure thy Leprosy for ever; and so I come to make some Application upon
this particular Point.

Use, This informs then, whence it is, and why it is, that we have so many
spiritual Lepers amongst us, so many Men and Women, who live in their Sins,
walk after the Flesh, taking pleasure in Iniquity, fulfilling the Desire of
their fleshly Minds, and are still wandering after the Course of this World,
yielding up of themselves to the Government of the Prince of the power of the
Air, the Spirit that works in the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience. The
reason lies here, they come not to the Priest for a Cure, they make no use of
Jesus Christ for healing Grace; there is a deep Fountain opened to the House of
David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for Sin, and Uncleanness, Zech. 13.
1. but they will make no use of it; which Fountain being the free Grace of God,
running forth through the Merit of Christ's Blood, publishing itself to our
Souls by the preaching of the Word and Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, this
Grace and freely proffered Mercy, they neglect, slight, and contemn, which is
the only ordinary Means of their Cleansing and Healing; now of these
Christ-slighting and Graceundervaluing Souls, there are two sorts: First, Those
who wilfully resufe and slight the Means of their Cleansing, which is the
Ministry of the Word; of such we read in John 5. 40. They would not come to
Christ that they might have Life; that is as you read in John 6. 66. They went
back from Christ, that is, they turned their Backs upon the Ministry of Christ,
for it is said, they walked no more with him; and Solomon tells you, That such
as refuse Instruction despise their own Souls, Prove. 15. 32. Thus, through the
pride and haughtiness of their Hearts, they ssight the Means that should
cleanse them; many of them are so Self-conceited, that they think they know
already as much as the ablest Minister of Christ can tell them, and are as
ready to say, What can the best of them all say any more to them, than they
have heard long ago? Neither for the future do they expect, that their longer
waiting upon their Preaching, can be any addition to that measure of Knowledge,
which by their Ministry they have attained unto already: Thus by their
despising of Instruction, they despise their own Souls, and discern it not.
Might not the poor Cripple, who lay at the Pool of Bethesda thirty eight Years,
have slighted his waiting upon that Means long within that time, upon the same
account? For had he come off from the Pool, and in his coming off should have
met with any one, which might have exhorted him to a return again, and to have
waited a while longer upon that healing Pool, might not he have replied, Do not
I know what the Pool of Bethesda is? Have I not seen the Waters of it, with the
frequent Signs of the Angels troubling of them? Can any Man acquaint me with
any Passage or Circumstance about that Pool, which I know not as well as
themselves? And whatever others are pleased to say or affirm about the healing
Virtue of it, yet for my part, I lay a Waiter upon it for thirty eight Years,
and am come off a Cripple at last. But yet you may read, that his long waiting
upon it, and keeping close to it, in obedience to God's Ordinance, relating to
it, had a full Recompense, with a perfect Cure; the Story you have at large in
John 5. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 Verses. This Pool of Bethesda was a lively Figure of
the Preaching of the Word, with the rest of the Ordinances of the Gospel, which
are called the Healing Waters, Ezekiel. 47. 9. and the Fountain which is opened
for Sin and Uncleanness, Zech. 13. 1. And as the Waters of Bethesda healed not
until the Angel came down into them, giving a present Virtue to them for that
purpose; so the Word and Ordinances of the Gospel, must receive their Power and
Virtue from the Presence of Christ in them, who is the Angel of the Covenant;
this and only this makes them healing to our leprous Souls, John 15. 3. Now are
you Clean through the Word which I have spoken unto you. Beware then, as you
value your Souls, that you give not way to a haughty Spirit, in slighting and
neglecting the healing Waters of the Sanctuary, for fear lest you Perish and
Die in your Leprosies: Oh! read and tremble at that word in Heb. 2. 3. How
shall we Escape if we neglect so great Salvation.

2dly, There are a second sort of Lepers which are not healed by the cleansing
Means of the Word and Ordinances of the Gospel, and they are your careless
Hearers; which tho they attend upon the Means and Ministry of the Word, yet
they do not seriously intend any saving Benefit to their Souls thereby. There
are many whose Consciences will not allow them to neglect an Ordinance, yet
never propose to themselves any spiritual End in their waiting upon them: There
are several that will travel some Miles to be at a religious Meeting, where the
Word is preached, but never design the Conversion and Regeneration of their
Souls thereby. Such as these who have no higher End in waiting upon the Gospel,
but only to keep Peace with their Consciences, are in the Eyes of Christ no
better than Refusers of that healing Means, which he holds forth to them in the
Gospel, there being (in his account) little difference betwixt not regarding
the end of the Means and an open refusal of it; of such we read in Ezck. 33.
31, 32. They come unto thee, as the People comes, and sit before thee as my
People, and they hear thy Words; but they will not do them, for with their
Mouths they show much Love, but their Hearts goes after their Covetousness;
for lo thou art unto them as a very lovely Song of one that has a pleasant
Voice, and can play well on an Instrument, for they hear thy Words, but they do
them not.

2dly, A second thing observable about the Leper, is this: After he had been
with the Priest, and if his Disease was found to be a Leprosy, he was then to
be separated from the rest of his Brethren, Lev. 13. 46. All the Days wherein
the Plague shall be in him; he shall be Defiled, he is Unclean, he shall dwell
alone, without the Camp shall his Habitation be. Now if we apply this to the
Antitype, we may note this Truth from it:

Doct. That those Persons, which are under the Power of their spiritual
Leprosies and Pollutions, are not only unfit for Fellowship and Communion with
God, but with his People also.

This is a Truth so clear, as if it were written with the Beams of the shining
Sun: As, first of all, That God and spiritual Lepers (whose Leprosy is
reigning in them) can have no Fellowship nor Communion together: Isa. 59. 2.
Your Iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your Sins have hid
his Face from you. Hab. 1. 13. Thou art of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity,
nor can thou behold Evil. 2 Cor. 14. 15. What Fellowship has Righteousness
with Unrighteousness, and what Communion has Light with Darkness, and what
Concord has Christ with Belial. Yea, though he be a King in his Royal Robes,
and has this Leprosy on him in the Dominion of it, God will have no
Fellowship with him though he sits upon the Throne, Psalm. 94. 20. Shall the
Throne of Iniquity have Fellowship with thee, which frames Mischief by a Law?
Thus, as God will have no Fellowship with Lepers himself, so has he prohibited
his People from the same; this you see in Lev. 13. 46. That as soon as the
Leprosy did appear upon any Israelite, he was to be separated from the Camp,
he was to have no more Communion with his Brethren, nor they with him until his
Leprosy were healed: And does not the Apostle seem to apply this in a
spiritual Sense to the People of God, as a Rule to be observed by the Churches
of Christ in the times of the Gospel? Does he not say in 2 Cor. 6. 15. What
part has he that believes with an Infidel? So 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. If any Man obey
not our Word by this Epistle, note that Man, and have no Company with him, that
he may be ashamed. So 1 Cor. 5. 11. But now I have written unto you, not to
keep Company; if any Man that is called a Brother, be a Fornicator, or
Covetous, or an Idolater, or a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with
such a one, no not to Eat. Thus you see how plain and clear it is, First, That
God will not; and, Secondly, His Will is, that his People should not have any
Fellowship with spiritual Lepers. And so we come to the Reason upon which this
Truth is bottomed.

The Reason is this, That as one scabbed Sheep may spoil a whole Flock, so may
one spiritual Leper spoil a whole Church: The Apostle told the Corinthians,
that one incestuous Person amongst them, might leaven all the rest of the
Society; if not with the same spiritual Pollution, yet with so much Guilt for
their allowing of him amongst them, which might procure some heavy Judgment
upon them, 1 Cor. 5. 6. It Is true, while we are in the World, we cannot avoid a
common Commerce with them, upon a civil account, but we ought to avoid a
spiritual Communion with them, in the highest Christian Ordinance, upon any
account, because they are Lepers.

Use, This then may serve for Instruction to the Churches of Christ: First, Who
they should keep out. Secondly, Who they should keep out. Secondly, Who they
should thrust out of their Fellowships and Communion.

First of all, this Truth may reach them who should keep out of their
Fellowships and Communion: namely, The leprous Person. None can deny but that
the House of Isael were the visible Church of God; and few but will grant, That
a spiritual Leprosy, is far more dangerous, therefore more to be avoided, than
that which is corporal; so then, if the Church of God under the Law, were to
drive out from their Communion, those which had the less dangerous Leprosy,
then surely the Churches of Christ in Gospel Times, ought to keep out those
from their Communion which have the more dangerous Leprosy upon them;
therefore the same which the Apostle says of him that is a Brother, may very
well be applied to one (that with respect to particular Church Communion) would
be a Brother, If he be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or a Drunkard, or a Railer,
or an Idolater, or an Extortioner, with such a one, no not to Eat, 1 Cor. 5. 11.

2dly, This serves to instruct the People of God, who they are which they
should thrust out of their Fellowships and Communion, (viz) Every spiritual
unclean Leper, that will not be cleansed; you have seen, that as soon as the
Leprosy was broken out upon the Body of the Jewish Leper, he was immediately
put out of the Camp of Israel, which Camp was the Church of God: Lev. 13. 46.
As long as his Disease shall be upon him, he shall be defiled, he is unclean,
he shall dwell alone, without the Camp shall be his Habitation. So also you may
read, how agreeable to this Levitical Rule, is the Order which Christ has
established in his Gospel-churches, Matt. 18. 15, 16, 17. with 1 Cor. 5. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5 Verses. This special Care which ought to be taken by the Churches, in
keeping close to this Rule, is not only enjoined upon the Ministers of the
Gospel, but it was the great Duty of the Priests and Prophets under the
Levitical Administration, Jer. 15. 19. If thou take forth the Precious from the
Vile, thou shall be as my Mouth; let them return to thee, but return not thou
unto them, Ezekiel. 44. 6, 7. with Ver. 9. And thou shall say to the Rebellious,
even to the House of Israel, thus says the Lord, O ye House of Israel, let it
suffice you for all your Abominations, in that you have brought into my
Sanctuary Strangers uncircumcised in Heart, and uncircumcised in Flesh, to be
in my Sanctuary to pollute it, even my House, when ye offer my Bread, the Fat
and the Blood, and they have broken my Covenant, because of all your
Abominations. Only this Rule is to be observed, before the Leper is to be
separated, Matt. 18. 15, 16. Go and tell him his Fault between thee and him
alone; if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy Brother, but if he hear thee
not, then tell it to the Church. It is not simply the Offense committed, which
proves a Ground of casting out the spiritual Leper; but it is his persifting in
his Offense, his refusing to return, and his unwillingness to be cleansed.

Thus far touching the Action of the Leper, in order to his Cleansing: First,
He was to be brought to the Priest. Secondly, If his Disease were found to be a
Leprosy, then was he to be separated from all Communion and Fellowship with
his Brethren.

2dly, We next come to the Action of the Priest, by whom the Cure was to be
wrought, and here we shall handle the Action of the Priest, together with the
Means he was to use in order to the Cleansing of the Leper, Lev. 14. 4, 5, 6,
7. Then shall the Priest command to take for him that is to be cleansed, two
Birds alive, and clean, and Cedar-wood, and Scarlet, and Hyssop. And the Priest
shall command that one of the Birds be killed in an earthen Vessel, over
running Water. As for the living Bird he shall take, and the Cedar-wood, and
the Scarlet, and the Hyssop, and shall dip them and the living Bird, in the
Blood of the Bird that was killed over the running Water. And he shall sprinkle
upon him that is to be cleansed from the Leprosy, seven times, and shall
pronounce him Clean, and shall let the living. Bird loose into the open Field.
Now for the opening of this Mystery, we shall begin with the two Birds, which
some think were two Sparrows, and they are called Clean, with respect to that
Statute, Lev. 11. which made the difference betwixt Things allowed and
disallowed to be Eaten; those Creatures which were allowed to be Eaten, were
called Clean, of which kind were these Birds that are here used in the
cleansing of the Leper. Now these two Birds are very significant of the twofold
Work of Christ in our spiritual Cleansing from our leprous and polluted Natures.

For first of all, you read that the first Bird was killed, which shadowed out
the Death of Christ; for as the Leper could not be healed of his corporal
Leprosy without the shedding of the Blood of the innocent Sparrow, no more
could we be healed of our spiritual Leprosy of Sin, without the shedding of
the Blood of an innocent Savior, 1 John 1. 7. And the Blood of Jesus Christ
cleanses us from all Sin. Rev. 5. 9. For thou wast Slain, and have redeemed us
to God by thy Blood. Heb. 9. 22. And without shedding of Blood is no Remission.

2dly, The living Bird was to be let loose, or to be let to fly away into the
open Field, which signified the Action of Christ in order to his Work of
Intercession, who was likewise to be let go from the Grave, tha^ from thence he
might take his flight for Heaven, there to fit at the righthand of God, to make
Intercession for us, according to Heb. 7. 25. For as by his Death upon the
Cross, he made a full and complete Satisfaction for all our Sins; so by his
Ascension to Heaven, he there is making continual Intercession for Sinners; and
as by his Death upon the Cross, he made Peace with God for us, so by his
Intercession, he maintains that Peace with God for us. And, again, as he by his
blessed Sacrifice (in offering up of himself) did thereby purchase our Right to
all the Promises, relating to Life and God liness, so by his Intercession he
powerfully prevails with his Father, that the Good of them might come down upon
us.

3dly, And whereas you read, That the living Bird, with the Scarlet, the
Cedar-wood, and the Hyssop, all which was to be dipped into the Blood of the
slain Bird; this being done, it made the Scarlet, the Cedar-wood, and the
Hyssop, so effectual in the Cleansing of the Leper. This great Mystery,
signifies thus much to us, when applied to its Antitype, That what Benefit
upon a saving account there is in Christ, or of Christ, which any do receive in
order to their effectual Redemption, and Soul-cleansing, it does all originate
in, or originally proceed from the Virtue, Worth, and Merit of the Sufferings
and Blood of Christ, as the procuring cause of all. Have we any Benefit by any
Office of Christ, or Righteousness in Christ, Grace from Christ, or relation to
Christ? All this flows from the Spring and Fountain of a Christ crucified and
flain for Sin; for you plainly see, that all the Means which was used in the
Cleansing of the corporal Leper, took its Efficacy from the Blood of the slain
Bird, the Scarlet, the Cedar-wood, and the Hyssop, were all dipped in the Blood
of the slain Bird. From whence we may note this Observation:

Doct. That the Blood of Christ shed for Sin, is the only Procuring-cause, of
all the Grace, Mercy, and Favor, which the Elect of God are capable to
receive, both in the Life that now is, and that which is to come.

This is a Truth which does abundantly evidence itself from the Scriptures;
Have we Grace and Sanctification in this Life? This the Scripture attributes to
the Blood of Christ, as the Procuring-cause of it, Heb. 9. 14. The Blood of
Christ purges our Consciences from dead Works, to serve the Living God. Have
we Peace with God? This he has procured by the Blood of his Cross, Col. 1. 20.
Have we Power and Strength to overcome our spiritual Enemies. Satan and the
Lusts of the Flesh? This is done by the Blood of the Lamb, Rev. 12. 11. In a
word, There is not a good Action done or performed by us, but the Grace which
enables us thereunto, is the Fruit of Christ's Blood, Heb. 13. 20, 21. The God
that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ, the great Bishop of our
Souls, through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every
good Work to do his Will, working in you that which is wellpleasing in his
sight, through Jesus Christ. Is it Assurance, Joy, Peace in believing the Blood
of Jesus Christ have procured this also, Col. 1. 11, 12, 13, 14 Verses: And so
for Heaven and Glory to come, this is the Fruit of Christ's Purchasing-bloud
which has accomplished all this, Ephesians. 1. 14.

And so we come the Reason of the Point:

Reason.] This must be so, because, what Good the Elect of God partake from
him, either in this World, or in the World to come, let it be to their
Sanctification here, or their Glorification hereafter; all this must flow forth
to them from the Love of God, as the grand Cause of it, Ephesians. 2. 4, 5, 6
Verses, But God who is rich in Mercy, for his great Love wherewith he loved us,
even when we were dead in Sins, has quickened us together with Christ, by Grace
are ye saved, and has raised us up together, and made us sit together with
Christ Jesus in heavenly Places. So that you plainly see, to be quickened from a
Death in Sin, and to be graciously Saved, (that is, from the Curse and
Condemnation of the Law, Gal. 3. 13. with Romans 8. 1. and from the Dominion of
Sin, Romans 6. 14. and from the Captivating-power of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. and
from the Wrath of God, These. 1. 10. And after all this, to be dignified and
exalted to that hight of Honor,) so as to be made to sit with Christ, yea
together with him in heavenly Places. The Apostle tells you in the fourth
Verse, That the great Love of God is the Foundation of all this to the Elect:
Now it cannot be, that God should deal with his Elect in such a way of Love,
until he be-first reconciled to them, and becomes their Friend; now he cannot
become their Friend until a Reconciliation be made, for them, which was done,
wrought out, and brought about by the Blood of Christ, Romans 5. 8. In that while
we were yet Sinners, Christ died for us. So Verse 10. When we were Enemies, we
were reconciled to God by the Death of his Son. So Col. 1. 20. And, having made
Peace by the Blood of his Cross, by him to reconcile all things to himself.
Thus you see, how, through the Blood of Christ, the innocent Bird and Lamb of
God, the way is abundantly opened, to God the Father's letting forth of his
Grace and Love to the Elect, whom he had ordained thereunto, before the World
began, Ephesians. 1. 4.

And so we come to make some Application of the whole:

1st Use, Is to teach us Thankfulness to the ever-blessed God, for this special
Benefit, which he has so graciously afforded us in order to our spiritual
Cleansing. Oh! Brethren, this was the highest Act of God's Love and Goodwill to
the lost Children of Adam, that could be manifested from Heaven itself, Romans 5.
8. but God commended his Love toward us, in that while we were Sinners, Christ
died for us: The meaning is, That there was nothing beyond this that could
afford a higher Evidence of the Grace and Good Will of God to the lost World:
For God to create us Creatures, was a wonderful Expression of his Power and
Wisdom, it being a bringing of something out of nothing, a most adorable Act;
but to save them when lost, the Fruit of which is their being made new
Creatures, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, which God
before ordained that we should walk in them, Ephesians: 2. 10. This was the highest
Expression of God's Wisdom, Power, Love, and Grace, that possibly could be
manifested in the Face of Men and Angels. What could Abraham give to God, of
all he did possess, beyond the Life of his Son Isaac? And, What could God give
more to Sinners, than the Life of his Son? John 3. 16. God so loved the World,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not
Perish, bu^ have everlasting Life. This was the most costliest Means for a
Cure, that Heaven and Earth could procure, Oh, Christians! and shall we not be
Thankful for this, and rejoice in the Lord for this? How unsuitable to a
David-like Spirit would this be in us? Psalm. 103. 2, 3. O bless the Lord, O my
Soul, and forget not all his Benefits; who forgiveth all thine Iniquities, and
heals all thy Diseases. Oh Brethren, this special Blood, calls for special
Thankfulness, and the precious Effects of it, calls for the most preciousest of
our Obedience to God again; for as God the Father gave us his Son, so did God
the Son give himself for us, that he might Redeem us from all Iniquity, and
Purify us to himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works, Titus 2. 14.

2d Use, This should serv^ to teach us all, only to look upon the Blood of
Christ for the Curing of our leprous Souls: Oh have a care of mingling Christ's
Blood with the polluting Dross and Dregs of Creature-worth and Worthiness: the
Blood of Christ will cleanse the pollutedest Leper in the World, if it be
applied in its own Purity by Faith; but if mixed with the least of Self-merit,
it spoils the Virtue, Power, and Efficacy of it, and renders it of no use to
the Soul.

3d Use, Learn hence also to put an inestimable Value upon the Blood of Christ;
O remember it is the Blood of Cleansing, and no Blood but this can cleanse
Lepers: Thou have heard, that nothing but the Blood of the slain Sparrow could
heal the corporal Leper, to show you that nothing but the pure Blood of Jesus
Christ, can cleanse the Soul from his spiritual Leprosy. Oh what a high Price
should you put upon this Blood! Peter calls it precious Blood, 1 Pet. 1. 19.
Hence then, How should we say of every thing (with the greatest Indignation)
that would offer itself as a Co-worker with Christ's Blood, in the Cleansing of
our Souls, as Paul did? Phil. 3. 8. Yea doubtless, and I count all things but
Loss, for the excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; for whom I
have suffered the Loss of all things, and do count them but Dung that I may win
Christ.

PART III.
WE are next to speak to the earthen Vessel, over which the Innocent Bird was
to be killed, in which Vessel was the running Water, Lev. 14. 5. And the Priest
shall command that one of the Birds be killed in an earthen Vessel, over
running Water. (Mark,) It must be running Water, which signifies the Purity and
the Liveliness of it, in opposition to standing Water, which is usually dead
and corrupt; therefore this Water in the earthern Vessel, must be running
Water, it must be Water that has Life and Purity in it.

But first of all, to begin with the earthen Vessel, which may signify the
reality of the Humane Nature of Jesus Christ, from whence our Healing comes:
You see that the Leper was cleansed by the Blood of the Bird, and so must we be
cleansed (from ou^ Soul-leprosie) by the Blood of Christ, if ever we be
cleansed indeed, 1 John 1. 7. Now this Blood could not proceed from Christ, as
he was only God, abstracted from his Manhood; for as he was God only, he was no
way capable either to suffer or to shed Blood; therefore the Godhead of Christ
assumes an earthen Vessel, even our Humane Nature to his Divine, answering the
earthen Vessel, over which the Sparrow was to be killed, that so out of that
Humane Nature, he might issue forth the Blood of our Cleansing: He was born of
a Virgin, he took her very Nature upon him, but not the Sinfulness of it in the
least degree, no, he left all that behind; and this Humane Nature was very
earthly, for from the Earth it came, and to the Earth it must return again:
And, inasmuch as the Body of our Savior was made up of this earthy Nature, he
(as to his Body) may well be called an earthen Vessel, signified by the Vessel
over which the Bird was killed.

Secondly, By the running Water, in this earthen Vessel, is understood by some,
the Water of Sanctification, which comes from him, for, says John, He came by
Water and Blood: But this cannot be exclusive of the Divine Nature of the Son
of God, which rendered the whole Sacrifice of Christ, only sufficient to Cleanse
us from our spiritual Leprosy, and Soul-pollution, in the sight of God. For as
the Godhead of Christ, could not issue forth Blood to Cleanse us, (apart from
his Manhood) so neither could the Blood of Christ (apart from his Godhead) have
been any way availing to our Cleansing from the Guilt or Filth of Sin in our
Souls; so that the Union of the two Natures, in the Person of Christ, became so
wonderfully efficacious to our Justification and Sanctification, wherein lies
the Leper's spiritual Cleansing; hence, Christ's Blood is called the Blood of
God, Acts 20. 28. because of the Union of the two Natures in the Person of
Christ. Thus you see how the earthen Vessel and the pure Water must go together
in our spiritual Cleansing.

From whence we shall observe this Note:

Doct. That the Blood of Jesus Christ, who is very God, and very Man, is the
only appointed Means to Cleanse our Souls from our sinful Leprosies and
Pollutions in the Sight of God.

The Truth of this cannot be called in question by any, who question not the
Truth of Scripture, Rev. 1. 5. And from Jesus, who is the faithful Witness, the
first Begotten from the Dead, unto him that has loved us, and washed us from
our Sins in his own Blood. Rev. 5. 9. For thou wast Slain, and have Redeemed us
unto God by thy Blood. 1 John 1. 7. And the Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us
from all Sin. Heb. 9. 14. The Blood of Christ, who, through the eternal Spirit,
offered himself without Spot to God, purge your Consciences from dead Works to
serve the Living God.

And so we come to the Reasons of this Truth, and the first is this:

Reason 1.] It must be so, because the Blood of Christ is the only Means which
God has appointed to be used for this Purpose, in opposition to all other
Means whatsoever, Acts 4. 12. Neither is there Salvation in any other, for
there is no other Name under Heaven, whereby we must be saved.

Reason 2.] And it must be so, because, as God has only appointed this Means
for Soul-cleansing, so has he (only) fitted this Means for Soul-recovery: Isa.
61. 1. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me
to preach good Tidings unto the Meek; he has sent me to bind up the
Brokenhearted, to proclaim Liberty to the Captives, and to open the Prison
Doors to them that are Bound.

Therefore, whoever they are that shall make use of nay other Means, besides
this, for the Cure of their Souls, will find it so far from Cleansing, that
himself will be found guilty of the highest Presumption, because it is a
slighting of the Blood of the Covenant, and counting it a common thing, as Paul
speaks, Heb. 10. 29. and then, upon so doing, the same Apostle tells you, that
such Men who are found guilty of such a Sin, will find it a fearful thing to
fall into the Hands of the Living God, Ver. 31.

And so we come to the Application of the Point: Use, This serves to inform us
then of the dangerous Principles of two sorts Persons, (First, Of the
Socinians. Secondly, Of the Quakers;) who, betwixt them both, deny the pure
Water in the earthen Vessel, and the earthen Vessel in which the pure Water is.

First of all, The Socinians, who deny the God head of Christ. Secondly, The
Quakers, who deny the Manhood of Christ in Being; for if Christ be not God, and
of the same essential Nature with the Father, as the Socinians affirm; and, on
the other hand, if Christ retain not his Humane Body now in Heaven, as the
Quakers affirm, then is he neither God nor Man, and consequently he is nothing
at all; who thereby make good what the Apostle said of old, speaking of a sort
of Men which should spring up in the latter Ages of the World, that should deny
the Lord that bought them, bringing thereby swift Destructio^^pon themselves, 2
Pet. 2. 1. with Jude, 4 Ver.

PART IV.
Thus you see the Mystery of the earthen Vessel, with the run^^ing pure Water
in it, opened to you; we next come to speak of the rest of the Things which the
Priest was to use in the Cleansing of the Leper, which was the Scarlet, the
C^da^-wood, and the Hyssop.

THe Assemblies Annotations speak to this purpose, That the S^arlet,
Cedar-wood, and the Hyssop; these three things together, made up the Brush
wherewith the Loper was to be sprinkled, in order to his Cleansing; the
Cedarwood made up the Handle of the Brush, the Hyssop made up the Brush itself,
and the Scarlet, which was a Scarlet Thread, with this Thread the Hyssop was
bound fast to the Cedar-handle: Now the Mystery of which I conceive to be this,
The Handle of the Brush, which was made of Cedar-wood, may signify the Word of
God, the instrumental Means of our spiritual Cleansing, for as Cedar is sweet
and durable, so is the Word of God.

First of all, The Word of God is like Cedar for sweetness, Psalm. 19. 10. The
Word is more to be desired than Gold, yea sweeter than the Honeycomb; thus you
see how sweet the Word is to the Palate for Taste, and it is no less sweet in
the Nostrils for smell, Cant. 1. 2. Thy Name is as Ointment poured forth; that
is, the Name of Christ published, or poured out in the Preaching of the Gospel.

2. The Word of God may be compared to Cedar for the durableness of it, 1 Pet.
1. 25. But the Word of the Lord endures for ever, and this is the Word, which
by the Gospel is preached to you.

2dly, By the Hyssop-brush, we may understand the Grace of Faith, another
instrumental Means of our Cleansing from our spiritual Leprosy: For as Hyssop
is sweet, and not so subject to corrupt and wither so soon as other Herbs are,
so the Grace of Faith, is a most sweet and precious Grace, it is called
precious Faith, for the sweetness and uncorruptibleness of it, 2 Pet. 1. 1.
Good Education, natural Parts, and moral Gifts, may wither and come to nothing,
but true Faith is a ^race that never loses its Life, Sap, or Savor.

3dly, And by the Scarlet Thread, we may understand the Purchasing-bloud of
Christ, which is the Procuringcause of that Virtue, and Healing-property which
we find and feel in the Word and Faith, in order to our spiritual Cleansing:
Now the Sprinkling-brush being thus finished, the Scarlet Thread binding the
Hyssop to the Cedar-handle; with this Brush, the Priest was to sprinkle the
Leper seven times, the Sum of which holds out to us, our Justification and
Sanctification, which is procured for us by our High Priest Jesus Christ.

From all which we may observe this Point of Doctrine: Doct. That who-ever
intends to be Justified from the Guilt of Sin, and Sanctified from the Filth of
Sin, must get himself sprinkled with the Blood of Christ, through the Word of
God, by the Hyssop of Faith and Believing. Hence the Scripture attributes, both
our Justification and Sanctification to the Blood of Christ, as the meritorious
and Procuring-cause of it: First, For our Justification, Romans 5. 9. Much more
then, being now Justified by his Blood.

2dly, Our Sanctification is meritoriously procured by the same Means, Heb. 9.
14. How much more shall the Blood of Christ purge our Consciences from dead
Works to serve the Living God?

2. As the Scriptures do direct us to the Blood of Christ alone, as the
meritorious Cause of our Justification and Sanctification, so does it direct to
Faith as the Means which only can make the Application of both to the Soul,
Romans 5. 1. Being Justified by Faith, we have Peace with God, through our Lord
Jesus Christ. Not that Faith can Justify of itself, a part from the Object of
it, which is Jesus Christ, but only as Faith apprehends and applies the Blood
and Obedience of Christ to the Soul, which is the alone Matter of our
Justification; and as Faith is the Instrument of our Justification, so it is of
our Sanctification also, Acts 15. 9. And put no difference betweeen them and
us, purifying their Hearts by Faith.

Reason.] Now, the Reason why the Soul is to make use of Faith, in his
Justification from the Guilt of Sin, and in his Cleansing from the Filth of
Sin, is, because God has ordered Faith to be the Grace, which must deal with
the Blood of Christ, which is the Procuring-cause of both: For as nothing can
Justify or Cleanse the Soul (if applied) but the Blood of Christ, so there is
nothing which can apply the Blood of Christ to the Soul, but the Hyssop of
Faith and Believing, Heb. 11. 6. But without Faith it is impessible to Please
him.

And so we come to the Application of the Point:

Use, This should teach us all to look after Faith, yea, above all things, to
labor for this Grace of Believing, if ever we mean to be healed of our sinful
Leprosy and Uncleanness. Oh Friends! this is the Means that can only do your
Souls good; slight this, and you slight your greatest Mercy under Heaven;
because you thereby slight that very Means which God has appointed for a
Soulcure: Neglect this (says Christ) and you die in your Sins, John 8. 24.
This was Israel's Sin, and that which kept them in their Sins, as the Apostle
speaks, Romans 10. 3. They submitted not themselves to the Righteousness of God,
which is elsewhere called the Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4. 13. It was not
enough for the Jewish Leper, only to use the Blood of the Bird, for his
Cleansing, no, but he must dip the Hyssop-brush into the Blood also, he must
keep to the Means, and the whole Means, which God instituted and appointed for
his Cleansing, Deuteronomy. 12. 32. What t^^ng soever I have commanded you, observe to
do it, thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it.

If the Priest had used the Hyssop-brush, without the Blood of the Bird, or if
he had dipped the Hyssop-brush in any other Liquor, as Water, Milk, or Wine, this
would not have been Cleansing to the Leper; or, if he had made use of the Blood
of the Bird, without dipping of the Hyssop-brush into it, this would all as
little have wrought the Cure, because this would have been a Contradiction to
God s Institut on; but both of the Means must be used together the Blood of the
Bird, with the Hyssop-brush bound fast to the Cedar-wood, these three things
together would be Healing to the Leper, because it was the Means of God's
Appointment.

The Mystery of which (when opened) shows us thus much, That the Blood of
Christ, handed, out to us by the Word of God, and applied to our Souls by
Faith, (it being the Institution of God for our Soul-cure) this, and only this,
will Cleanse our Souls of the foulest Leprofie that ever happened to a Sinner in
this Life; for we find, that it was this which David desired might be applied
to him, in a time of Soul-defilement and Pollution, Psalm. 51. 7. Purge me with
Hyssop, and I shall be Clean, Wash one and I shall be whiter than the Snow.
Shall we think that David (in this Cleansing-work) did look no farther than the
bare Hyssop, and the typocal Sprinkling therewith, for the cleansing of his
Soul from the guilt and filth of Sin; ^o, no, doubtless it was the spiritual
Hyssop of Faith, dipped in the Blood of Christ, which was the chief thing in his
Request, and the principal thing which his Eye was fixed upon. So, Soul, this is
thy great Duty also, to pour out thy Soul in Prayer to God, as David did, for
this Grace of Believing: Oh! spread thy Leprosy before him; open the
Plague Sore of thy Heart in his sight; take off thy gouty Clouts, and lay open
thy Wounds and Unclers in his sight, and beg him to cast his merciful Eyes
toward thee, who is the only Physician of Value, that can heal thee of thy
soul Disease, which neither Men nor Angels can Cure besides himself: Oh!
wrestle with him as Jacob did, Genesis 32. 24, 25, 26. Cease not, give him no rest
until he has sent down the Hyssop-brush of Believing into thy Heart, that by
it, thy Heart may be purified from thy Soul-pollution, according to Acts 15. 9.
A sight of Misery does sometimes (in a tenderhearted Physician) stir up Bowels
of Mercy to a ready Helping of the Distressed; but much more in God, the
greatest Healer and Helper that is in Heaven or Earth; and for thy
Encouragement to make to him for Healing, read often that Text, Jam. 1. 5. If
any Man lack Wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives liberally to all Men, and
upbraideth not, and it shall be given him.

2. Lay thyself in the Ways and Walks of God, even in those Places where he
^seth to dispense this precious Grace of Faith; the Ways and Walks of God are
in his Ordinances, and amongst his golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1. 13. which
golden Candlesticks are his Gospel-churches, the Places where his Worship and
Ordinances are, as Prayer, preaching of the Word, with the Sacraments and Seals
of the New Covenant, in these things he meets with the Souls of Men, Isa. 64.
5. He meets him which works Righteousness, and those that remember him in his
Ways. Here it is that God makes the Sorrowful to rejoice, and makes glad the
Hearts of the Righteous; here it is in these things, that he gives out the
Sense of his Love, Grace and Favor in Christ Jesus; here it is that he pours
forth the rich Anointings, even the Graces of his holy Spirit, and amongst them
this Grace of Faith, Romans 10. 17. Faith comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the
Word of God. Oh! then, be admonished to be a constant and diligent Waiter upon
these Ordinances of the Gospel; neglect no Opportunity of doing thy Soul good
this way, for thou do not know how soon God may meet thee with healing and
cleansing Grace in these Ways and Walks of his.

PART V.
Thus having finished the Work about the Sprinkling-brush, which was made up of
Scarlet, Cedar-wood, and Hyssop; we next come to speak of some other things
which were used in the Cleansing of the Leper.

THe Particulars you may read at your leisure, as they are noted in Lev. 14.
13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18 Verses, where, first of all, the Priest was to kill
the Lamb in the holy Place, then was he to take some of the Blood of the Lamb,
and put it upon the right Ear, the Thumb of the right Hand, and the great Toe
of the right Foot of him that was to be cleansed; then was the Priest to take
some of a Log of Oil, and pour it into the Palm of his own left Hand, then was
he to sprinkle the Oil, with his Finger seven times, before the Lord. This Work
was done by a Synecdochy, tipping some parts of the Body for the whole, which
vertually comprehends the several Parts of the Whole Man; which Mystery shadows
out these two things to us, namely, Our Justification and Sanctification by
Jesus Christ.

First, The Lamb that was to be killed, was a Type of Christ dying for Sinners,
as the Bird was before, the Blood of both being of one and the same
Signification, typing out the Blood of Christ, as the meritorious Cause of our
being washed and cleansed from the Guilt of all our Sins, 1 John 1. 7.

2. The Oil used in this Cleansing-work, typed forth to us the Graces of the
Spirit of God in our Sanctification, of which the Apostle speaks in 1 John 2.
27. But the Anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you, and ye
need not that any Man teach you, but as the same Anointing teaches you all
things, and is Truth. New we need not question, but that John the Divine has
referrence to the Anointing-oyl which was poured forth upon the Head of the
levitical High Priest, who was a Type of Jesus Christ, Lev. 8. 30. of which
David speaks more at large in Psalm 133. Ver. 2. which the Apostle applies to
Christ, Heb. 1. 9. Thus have loved Rightousness and hated Iniquity, therefore
God, even thy God has anointed thee with the Oil of Gladness above thy Fellows.

And one reason that is given of Christ's being anointed, you have in John, John
1. 16. That of his Fullness we might all receive, and Grace for Grace: For as
Oil is beautifying to the Countenance, mollifying to the Flesh, and cheering to
the Heart, so is the Oil of Grace and Sanctification; its beautifying to the
Soul, Ezekiel. 16. 14. Thou art Perfect through my Comeliness put upon thee, says
the Lord.

2dly, It Is softning to the Heart, Job 23. 16. For God makes my Heart soft.

3dly, And it is comforting and cheering to the Whole Man, Psalm. 4. 7. Thou
have put Gladness into my Heart, more than in the time that their Corn and Wine
increased.

One thing more to be observed in the Cleansing the Jewish Leper, is this;
namely, That the Priest was to make an Application both of the Blood and Oil to
the Leper; not the Blood without the Oil, nor the Oil without the Blood, but
both of them together, as soon as the Priest could apply each one after the
other, the Blood applied first, and then the Oil next.

From hence we may observe this Point of Doctrine: Doct. That when Christ does
Justify a Soul by his Blood, the same does he Sanctify by the Oil of his
Grace.

Look through the whole Book of God, and you will find nothing more a truth
than this, nor can you read of one Person therein, who is recorded for a
justified Man, by the Blood of Christ, but you shall find it affirmed of him,
that he was a sanctified Man by the Oil of Christ's Grace; besides, How fully
does the Word speak out the Truth of the thing itself, Romans 8. 30. Moreover,
whom he did Predestinate, them he also Called. 1 Pet. 1. 2. Elect, according to
the Foreknowledge of God, through the Sanctification of the Spirit. 1 John 5.
6, 7, 8. This is he that came by Water and Blood, even Jesus Christ, not by
Water only, but by Water and Blood; for there are three that bear Record in
Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one; and
there are three that bear Witness in Earth, the Spirit, the Water and Blood,
and these three agree in one. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. Because God has from the
beginning, chosen you to Salvation through Sanctification and Belief of the Truth.

And so we come to the Reason of the Point:

Reason.] Now the Reason why, where Christ Justifies by his Blood, there he
Sanctifies by his Spirit, is, that the Justified might be made meet and fit
Temples for himself to live in here; and also, that they may be filled and made
meet to dwell with him hereafter. First, Christ must dwell in his People here
in this Life, Ephesians. 3. 17. That Christ may dwell in your Hearts by Faith. 1
Cor. 6. 19. Know ye not that your Body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which
is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own. Thus, as Christ fits
the Souls of his People, by Grace and Sanctification, as Temples for himself to
dwell in here, so also by the same means does he prepare them, that they may be
Company meet to dwell with him in Glory hereafter, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 14. Whereunto he
has called you by our Gospel, to the obtaining of the Glory of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Col. 1. 12. Who has made you meet to be Partakers of the Inheritance
of the Saints in Light.

Now it is only Sanctification that can fit, prepare, and qualify the Soul, as
a Habitation fit for Christ to take up his Residence in, while in this Life;
and it is nothing short of true Sanctification, which can prepare the Soul to
live in Glory with Christ, when this Life is over, Acts 15. 9. Purifying their
Hearts by Faith. And, without Holiness, no Man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14.

The second Reason of the Point is this, because, all those which are Christ's
justified Ones, are ordained thereby to bring forth Fruit to God; this is what
our Savior told his Disciples, That the reason why his Father elected them by
his Grace, and why himself redeemed them by his Blood, and justified them by
his Obedience, all this was that they might bring forth holy Fruit to God,
Ephesians. 2. 10. For ye are his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good
Works, which God has before ordained that we should Walk in them. Ephesians. 1. 4.
According as he has chosen us in him, before the Foundation of the World, that
we should be Holy, and without Blame before him in Love. John 15. 16. Ye have
not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that you should go and
bring forth Fruit, and your Fruit should remain.

Now this Fruitfulness can never be brought forth, without Grace and
Sanctification be first poured forth upon the Heart; for, whatever the Fruit be
that is brought forth, it can be of no other kind than the Root is from whence
it springs; if the Root be but Nature's Qualification, (take it in its highest
Flourish) yet the Fruit, which springs from it, is but Rottenness and
Hypocrisy in the sight of God: The best that is spoken of the Fruit which the
Children of Nature do bring forth in the Eyes of God, is what you have recorded
in Deuteronomy. 32. 32, 33. For their Vine is as the Vine of Sodom, and of the Fields
of Gamorrah; their Grapes are Grapes of Gall^ their Clusters are bitter, their
Wine is the Poison of Dragons, and the cruel Venom of Asps. So that where the
Oil of Grace is not the Root, there the best of our Obedience will not pass for
Fruit in God's Eyes, Matt. 7. 18. A good Tree cannot bring forth evil Fruit,
neither can a corrupt Tree bring forth good Fruit. Therefore the Root must be
Grace and Sanctification, or the Fruit will meet with no less than final
Rejection: Let it be the greatest of Self-denial, Patience, Temperance,
Self-mortification, Meekness, Works of Charity, Prayer, with the performance of
any other Duties done in the Worship of God, if it flows not from the Root of
true Grace and Sanctification in the Heart, all is abominable in the Sight of
God, Prove. 21. 27. The Sacrifices of the Wicked is Abomination, how much more
when he brings it with a wicked Mind?

Use, This shows us then, how much they are mistaken about their eternal State,
who think they are Justified by Christ's Blood, and yet were never Sanctified
by his Spirit. How many Thousands are there of these, living in a
Gospelprofessing Kingdom, which are held under the Power of this Soul-damning
Delusion, who will not believe, but they are Justified in the sight of God,
though they were never yet Sanctified in the fight of Men? They are just like a
company of Drunkards, who dreamed, that they were all Feasting in a Royal
Palace; but when they awoke, they found themselves made fast, with their Feet
in the Stocks: Of such a sort of Dreamers James speaks, Jam. 2. 18. Yea, a Man
may say, Thou have Faith, and I have Works; show me thy Faith without thy
Works, and I will show thee my Faith by my Works. Thou believe there is one
God, thou do well; the Devils also believe, and tremble: But will thou know,
O vain Man, that Faith without Works is dead. Oh never think, that the Blood of
Atonement has been shed for thee, if the Oil of Sanctification has not been
poured forth upon thee.

The second Use is to instruct us how to attain to some hopeful Assurance of
our Justification, which is by a Trial made of our Sanctification; I know that
it is much a Query amongst the doubting part of Christians, Oh, How shall we do
to know whether we be in a Justified State and Condition?

Answ. Look into your Hearts, and search whether the Oil of Grace be infused
into it; Grace changes the Heart, Ezekiel. 36. 26. Grace renews the Heart,
Titus 3. 5. Grace regenerateth the Heart, John 3. 3. Grace turns the old Man
into a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Grace purifieth the Heart, Acts 15. 9. And
purges the Heart from dead Works, Heb. 9. 14. Grace works Desires after
Christ, Psalm. 42. 1, 2. Grace imbitters Sin to the Soul, Jen 2. 91. Grace
crucifies the World with the Affections and Lusts thereof, Gal. 5. 24. Gal. 6.
24. Grace puts the highest Value upon Jesus Christ, Phil. 3. 8. Grace makes the
Word sweeter than the Honeycomb, Psalm. 19. In a word, The gracious Soul can
better live without its appointed Food, than it can without Prayer, Psalm. 55.
17. Psalm. 109. 4. Grace is a living Principle, which never will lie still, but
will be working, stirring, acting and moving in the Soul: Grace cannot be idle,
it will still be bringing forth things new and old; here you have a
Looking-glass before you, present your Hearts before this Glass, and see what
you can espy of these Signs of Grace within your Souls, in order to the finding
out of your Justification by the Blood of Christ, the Lamb slain for the
Cleansing of your spiritual Leprosy.

2. Thus, after the Priest had poured out the Oil into the Palm of his Hand, we
next come to take notice of the Parts of the Leper's Body, which the Priest was
to apply the Oil unto, and that was to the Tip or Lap of the right Ear, the
Thumb of the right Hand, and the great Toe of the right Foot, which Parts,
(viz.) The Ear, Thumb or Hand, and Foot, are the three principal Members of
Service to the whole Body; and you find, that the Blood of Christ, which was
typed out by the Blood of the Lamb and the Bird, the Apostle calls it the Price
which Bought us. Now the Purchase which Christ made for us, is twofold:

1st, From the Curse and Condemnation of the Law, Romans 8. 1. with Gal. 3. 13.

2dly, He by the same Price bought us for his Use and Service, 1 Cor. 6. 20.
For ye are Bought with a Price, therefore glorify God in your Bodies and
Souls, which are the Lord's. So that the Priest's putting of the Blood and Oil
upon the right Ear, Hand and Foot, of the Leper, that was to be Cleansed,
shadowed out these Mysteries to us:

First of all, as to Priest's applying of the Blood of the slain Lamb, to the
right Ear, Hand and Foot, which are the three principal Members of Service to
the whole Body, it notes to us this Truth for our Observation, That the same
Blood of Christ, which redeemed us from Wrath to come, did also purchase us for
that Work and Service which he commands us to do for him; for so much as this I
gather from the Priest's tipping of the right Ear, Thumb, and Toe of the right
Foot of the Leper, with the Blood of the slain Lamb, which Lamb was a Type of
Christ; which Action held a Congruity to the levitical Manner of making Men
perpetual Servants to the Jewish Masters, Exodus 21. 5, 6. If the Servant shall
plainly say, I love my Master, my Wife, and my Children, I will not go out
free; then his Master shall bring him unto the. Judges, he shall also bring him
unto the Door, or to the Door-post, and his Master shall bore his Ear through
with an Awl, and he shall serve him for ever. So in like manner, the Leper that
was to be Cleansed, was to have the Blood of the Lamb tipped upon his Ear, to be
a professed Servant of the levitical Administration (by which he was Cleansed)
for ever.

Now, inasmuch as the Blood of the Lamb, (by which the corporal Leper was
Cleansed) was a Type of the Blood of Christ, and the corporal Leper a Figure of
a spiritual Leper, and his corporal Cleansing binding him to perpetual Service,
typocal of that perpetual Obligation which every spiritual-cleansed Leper lies
under to Christ, altogether affords us this Note:

Doct. That he which intends to be redeemed from Sin, the Curse and
Condemnation of the Law and Wrath to come, must become willing to give up
himself to the Service of Christ for ever.

For the proof of this Truth, read 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. You are not your own, you
are bought with a Price, therefore glorify God in your Bodies and Spirits,
which are God's. As if the Apostle had said, O, ye Corinthians, remember that
the Blood of your Redemption has been put upon the tip of your right Ears,
your Hands, and Feet, in token of your perpetual Service to Christ, as the
Levitical-servant had his Ear bored through with an Awl, to be his Master's
Servant for ever; Oh, so has the Blood of Christ been upon your Ears also, to
make you his perpetual Servants for ever, you are bought with a Price, you are
not your own, therefore glorify him in your Bodies and Spirits, which are his.
Have a care that you rob him not of his Right in you, in giving that Service to
the Devil, World, and the Flesh, which is only due to him.

And so we come to the Reason of the Point:

Reason.] Why, that Soul, who would have Redemption by Christ, must be willing
to become a perpetual Servant to Christ, is because Christ redeems none, but
upon that Condition, Isa. 1. 19. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat
the good things of the Land. Heb. 5. 9. He is the Author of eternal Salvation,
to as many as obey him. Romans 8. 13. If ye live after the Flesh, ye shall die;
but if through the Spirit ye mortify the Deeds of the Body, ye shall live. So
Ver. 6. For to be carnally minded is Death, but to be spiritually minded is
Life and Peace.

Thus you see how Conditional the Promises are, which speak out a Soul's
Benefit, by the Redeeming-bloud of Christ, which do all call upon us for a
willing, cheerful and sincerc Obedience to Christ, though we grant, That it is
not an old, but a New Covenant-condition, even such a Condition, that the Grace
and gracious Aid, which only can enable us to perform the Condition, is
graciously given into the Soul by Jesus Christ, and who will as graciously
accept our Endeavors, (though clothed with many Weaknesses and Infirmities) so
that our Obedience to him be but sincere, 2 Cor. 8. 12. If there be first a
willing Mind, it is accepted according to what a Man has, and not according to
that he has not.

And so we come to make some Application of this Matter:

1st Use, This informs us then, why the Number is so small, which comes under
the Yoke of Jesus Christ; the Reason is, because there are so few that are
willing to come up to the Terms he propounds, which is, a willing Subjection to
the Government of his Word and Spirit, which is the Condition he propounds to
all that would have an Interest in his Salvation: They would willingly accept
of his Blood to wash away the Guilt of Sin from their Souls, but they like not
to have it tipped or applied to their Ears, to engage them to his Work and
Service: they would be made happy, but not holy; but this cannot be, because
this would prove a flat Contradiction to the Design of God, in sending of his
Son from Heaven, Isa. 55. 4. Behold, I have given him for a Witness to the
People, a Leader and Commander to the People. Acts 5. 31. Him has God the
Father exalted to be Prince and a Savior. Psalm. 2. 10, 11, 12. Be wise, now
therefore, O ye Kings; be instructed, ye Judges of the Earth: Serve the Lord
with fear, rejoice before him with trembling. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry,
and ye perish from the way, when his Wrath is kindled but a little.

Such as these may well be called Balaam's Disciples, whose Desire was more for
a happy Death, than for a holy Life; Let me die the Death of the Righteous, and
let my last end be like his, Numb. 23. 10. But (alas!) who can sufficiently
lament the fearful Disappointment which such Hypocrites will meet with, when
all their Hope shall become like the Spider's Web to them, whose present
Confidence, for a happy End at last, lies only in a few faint fruitless
Desires that it may, and in a few vain Hopes that it will be, as well with them
at last, as it will be with those who make a greater Show for Religion than
they do? Their Hope is, that that merciful God which made them will not destroy
them. There is one dreadful Text of Scripture written against all such
Soul-deluded Sinners, Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20. And it shall come to pass, when he
hears the Words of this Curse, that he bless himself in his Heart, saying, I
shall have Peace, though I walk in the Imaginations of my Heart, to add
Drunkenness to Thirst. The Lord will not spare that Man, but then the Anger of
the Lord, and his Jealousy shall smoke against that Man, and all the Curse^
that are written in this Book shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out
his Name from under Heaven.

2d Use, Let this serve in the next place, to persuade the cleansed People of
God, to study all they can to be serviceable to Jesus Christ, because you are
bought by Christ to that end and purpose, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. You are not your
own, for you are bought with a Price, therefore glorify God in your Bodies and
Spirits which are his. Oh, remember you carry the Mark of Christ's Servants
upon the Tip or Lap of your Ears; you are his Cleansed Lepers, and the Leper,
when Cleansed, was to have his right Ear marked with the Blood of his
Cleansing, in token that now he is no more his own, but wholly his, and for his
Use and Service from whom he had the Cure, so this is the Voice which
continually hangs at the Ears of the Cleansed Lepers of Christ, Thou shall
Worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou Serve. So Romans 12. 1. I
beseech you Brethren, by the Mercies of God, that you present your Bodies as
living Sacrifices, holy and acceptable to God, which is your reasonable
Service, and be not conformable to this World, but be ye transformed by the
renewing of your Mind. And as your Service is Christ's Right, so it is your
Honor; Paul knew that he could not dignifie himself in any thing so much, as
he did in writing himself the Servant of Jesus Christ, Romans 1. 1. Paul a
Servant of Jesus Christ.

Object. But you may say, who are there that are more slighted, despised, and
reproachfully loaded with all manner of Contempt and Scorn, than these are whom
you count the Servants of Jesus Christ?

I Answer, But who are they, and what are they, which so evilly treat the
Servants of Jesus Christ, are they any other than the blind, ignorant Rabble of
the World, such whom the Word of God counts the Dross of the Earth? Psalm. 119.
119 ver. What matter is it to hear a Man that was born Blind, to speak
reproachfully of the Sun, or to hear a Man that is born Deaf, to speak
contemptibly of Music, or to hear an ignorant Fool speak deridingly of the
best of Learning? Is the Sun, Music or Learning any thing the worse for this;
or does it detract any thing from the Excellency of these things? Whose Opinion
will you rather cleave unto about this Point, either the Opinion of the blind
ignorant World, which wholly lies in Wickedness, or the Opinion of the Penmen
of Scripture? The Word says, That the Servants of Christ are the honourablest
Men in the World, yea, that they are to be accounted worthy of double Honor, 1 Timothy 5. 17; yea, God himself does Honor them, 1 Samuel 2 30. with Psalm. 91. 15.
and because God honors them himself, therefore he makes them Honorable in the
Eyes of others; yea, God has made many of his Servants to be highly honored
in the Eyes of the Heathen and professed Pagans, Genesis 23. 4. The Children of
Heth, how highly were they made to Honor Abraham? Hear us my Lord, for thou
art a mighty Prince amongst us, in the choice of our Sepulchers bury thy Dead.
What a wonderful Honor was there given to Joseph by Pharaoh? Genesis 41. 39, 42.
And Pharaoh said to Joseph, Forasmuch as God has showed thee all this, there
is none so Discreet and Wise as thou art: And Pharaoh took off his Ring from
his Hand, and put it upon Joseph's Hand, and arrayed him with Vestures of fine
Linen, and put a golden Chain about his Neck. So the like we read of Solomon,
2 Chronicles. 9. 23. And all the Kings of the Earth sought the Presence of Solomon
to hear his Wisdom, that God put into his Heart. The like we read of the Honor
which Beishazzer, a Pagan, gave to Daniel, Dan. 5. 29. Then commanded
Beishazzer, and they clothed Daniel with Scarlet, and put a Chain of Gold about
his Neck, and made Proclamation concerning him, that he should be the third
Ruler in the Kingdom.

Thus you see, though some base-spirited Men may despise the Servants of God,
yet, when God pleases, he can make the Wicked'st that are to Honor them at
the highest rate; therefore, let the Opinion of the World be what it will,
about the People of God, my Opinion is, and I hope ever will be, That it is far
better, and a thousand times more honorable to be a Servant of Christ in Rags,
than to be the Devil's Slave, in the most glorious Royal Robes; and that the
meanest Christian (if Sincere) is far more Est mable, with Christ's Cross upon
his Back, than the highest Monarch (if Graceless) with his Royal Crown upon his
Head.

Secondly, The next thing that the Priest was to do, was to dip his Finger in
the Oil, and to apply it to the same Parts unto which the Blood was applied
before, which was first to the Ear, binding it to the Duty of hearing Christ's
Voice, John 10. 27. Then to the Hand, binding it to the Duty of working
Righteousness, Phil. 2. 12. Lastly, To the Foot, binding of that to the Duty of
Walking in the Ways of God's Commandments, Jer. 7. 23. Thus, when all these
parts of the Body were tipped with the Blood of the Lamb, then the Oil was next
to be applied to the same Parts. Oil (you know) is of a mollifying and softning
Nature: Oil is good to fetch off Rust from Clocks and Jacks, making them to go
the more freely and nimbly, which, when clogged with Rust, became unserviceable
before; comparatively to the nature of Oil in this case, is the Usefulness of
Grace held forth in Scripture, Isa. 1. 6. Thy Sores have not been closed,
neither bound up, neither mollified with Ointment. The meaning is, they had no
Grace (which here is compared to Oil) to Sanctify their ulcerated corrupt
Natures, which, like so many Plague-sores, were continually issuing from them;
with this Oil of Grace, the cleansed Lepers of Christ were to have their Ears,
Hands and great Toes of their right Feet anointed.

From all which, we may observe this Note:

Doct. That as the Blood of Christ has bought us for his Use and Service, so
the Oil of his Grace, is that only which can fit us for it, and make us willing
to set about it, Psalm. 110. 3. In the Day of my Power, thy People shall be a
willing People: By Nature every Man is averse to every part of Christ's Work
and Service. Romans 8. 7. The natural-minded Man is Enmity against God; it is not
subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. John 5. 40. Ye will not come
to me that you might Live. Jer. 44. 16. As for the Word, which thou have spoken
unto us in the Name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee.

The Ear will not hear the Voice of Christ, Jer. 11. 10. the Hand will not Work
for Christ, Jer. 11. 7, 8. neither will the Feet walk in the Way of Christ,
Psalm. 78. 10. But now, when our High Priest, Jesus Christ, has tipped the Ear,
the Thumb, and Foot of our Souls, with the Oil of his Grace and Sanctification,
then will they be ready for any Work and Service, which he shall employ them
in, or call them unto; the Ear which was bought by Christ, is now taught by
Christ to hear his Voice, even his Voice in his Word, Works, Ordinances and
Providence, against all which, the Ear was deaf, and shut up before, Psalm. 58.
4. The Hand which was bought by Christ, is now taught to Work for Christ, Heb.
13. 21. Working that which is wellpleasing in his sight. Isa. 54. 13. All her
Chrildren are taught by the Lord. They are taught to work the Works of
Repentance, Faith, Love, Self-denial, Mortification; how to be Praying to God,
and Praising of God, Suffering for God, and to Walk with God; Grace teaches
all this, and makes the Heart willing to all this; the Spirit shall teach you
all things, says Christ, John 14. 26. Lastly, The Feet, which were bought by
Christ, (by this Oil of Grace) are now taught to Walk with Christ, as Enoch
did; And Enoch walked with God, Genesis 5. 22.

And so we come to the Reason of the Point:

The Reason of all this is, because Grace is of a conquering, subduing Nature,
and of and inabling Quality; Grace is sent down into the Heart, to subdue the
Power and Strength of Sin therein, Romans 6. 14. Sin shall not have Dominion over
you, for you are not under the Law, but under Grace. And as Grace subdues and
weakens Corruption in the Heart, so it enables, strengthens, and empowers the
Heart to act for Christ; it is a holy Oil, that dissolves the corrupt Rust
which has been begotten in it by Sin, and, as it dissolves the Rust, so it
mollifies and softens the Heart, and thereby it makes it able and willing to
run the Ways of God's Commandments, Psalm. 119. 32. So Isa. 40. 31. They shall
renew their Strength, they shall mount up as on Eagles wings, they shall run
and not be weary, walk and not be faint.

Use, This informs us then, what matter of Lamentation it is to consider, That
though there be so many thousand of Ears, Hands, and Feet in the World, yet
that there should be so few of them employed in the Service of Christ, that as
David speaks of the Idols of the Nations, They have Ears, but hear not; Hands,
but handle not, and Feet they have, but walk not. The Reason lies here,
Because they never had their Ears, Hands and Feet, tipped with the Blood and Oil
of the Justifying and Sanctifying-grace of Jesus Christ: They are yet dead in
their Sins and Trespasses, Ephesians. 2. 1. and dead things cannot act of
themselves; yea, they are not only unable to act for Christ, but through the
Enmity of their Natures, they are wholly averse to every part of Christ's Will
and Work: As the Apostle speaks, They are reprobate to every good Work and
Word; it is not only, they cannot, but the real Truth is, that graceless Souls
will not act for Christ, if they could; let not such deceive themselves any
longer, for if you have no Ears to hear Christ's Voice, no Hands to do his
Work, nor Feet to Walk in his Paths, you are yet in an unjustified and
unsanctified State and Condition: But would you have your Ears opened to the
Voice of Christ, so that your Souls might live? Would you have your Hands at
Work for Christ, working that which is well-pleasing in his sight? Would you
have your Feet made able and willing to run in God's Commandments? In the
keeping of which, is great Reward, Psalm. 19. 11. then lay thy Soul in the Ways
and Walks of Christ, who is the great High Priest; Oh, run to him, set thy Soul
in his presence, be in his sight, thrust thy self through the Crowd and Throng,
press in upon him, and evermore keep up the Canaanitish Woman's Cry in his
Ears, Matthew. 15. 22. Lord, thou Son of David, have mercy upon me, for my Soul
is grievously overrun with a Leprosy; thus, with Jacob, be ever Wrestling
with him, until he has tipped thy right Ear, Hand, and Foot, with the Blood and
Oil of his Grace.

Quest. But why was the Priest to tip the Leper's right Ear, right Thumb, and
Toe of the right Foot, with the Blood and Oil? Why the right more than the left
Ear, Thumb, and Toe?

Ans. The Reason may be this, To signify the difference betwixt the Services
that Hypocrites and sincere Christians do offer to him, and do for him; all the
Service that comes to him from Hypocrites, is but left-ear'd, left handed, and
left-footed Service, which is no way pleasing to him.

Quest. But when may it be said, that we give unto God this left-ear'd,
left handed, and left-footed Service?

As, first, When are we said to bring forth left-ear Service to God?

I answer, first, When we content our selves with the bear Hearing of his Will
preached, neglecting the Practice of it; this is the Service of the left Ear;
indeed, of such a sort of Hearers we read in Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 33. 31. And they
come unto thee as the People comes, and sit before thee as my People, and they
hear thy Words, but they will not do them; for with their Mouth they show much
Love, but their Hearts goes after their Covetousness. Not to answer the end of
Hearing, which is Obedience, is as bad (if not worse) than not to hear at all,
Jam. 1. 22. But be ye Doers of the Word, and not Hearers only. We use to say,
when Men give little Attention to our Words of Discourse, to them, That they
turn the deaf Ear to us; and when we observe not what God speaks to us, then do
we give the deaf and left Ear unto him.

2. But when may we be said to give left handed Service to God?

Ans. First, When we give him only partial Obedience, when we do but a part,
and not the whole of his revealed Will; this kind of Service Saul and Jehu gave
to God, which was as unacceptable to God, as it was unprofitable to themselves,
as you may read, first, in King Saul, 1 Samuel 15. 11. It reponteth me that I
have set up Saul, for he is turned back from following me, and has not
performed my Commandments: and it grieved Samuel, and he cried to the Lord all
night. The Case was this, King Saul had a strict Command given to him from the
Lord, to destroy the Amalekites, not to spare Man, Woman, Child, nor Cattle,
Ver. 3. It Is true that Saul destroyed many Men, Women, and Children, and some
of the Cattle, but he spared Agag, and the best of the Sheep and Oxen, with the
Farlings and Lambs, but every thing that was vile and refuse, that he destroyed
utterly, Ver. 9 Here was Obedience, such as it was, but it was only left handed
Obedience, because it was but partial, and not universal Obedience; and, as
Readiness Covetousness was the cause of this, so it is Men's unmortified Lusts,
which proves the cause of the like partial Obedience in every Man else, 2 Pet.
2. 15. Balaam loved the Wages of Unrighteousness.

A second Instance, which the Scripture gives us of this lefthanded Obedience,
is that of Johu, 2 Kings 9. 6, 7, 8, 9. ver. where you find, that he was
anointed King, to destroy the whole House of wicked Ahab, and all his wicked
Idolatry; and, in pursuance of his Commission, he cuts off Ahab's Fam^ly, roots
out his Idolatry, overthrows the House of Baal, cu^s off all his Idolatrous
Priests and Worshippers in Baal's House; but yet still he must be partial in
his Service, as Saul was in his, being under the power of the like unmortified
Lust, which held him back from doing the whole Will of God prescribed to him in
his Commission, 2 Kings 10. 31. But Jehu took no heed to Walk in the Law of the
Lord God of Israel with all his Heart, for he departed not from the Sins of
Jeroboam, which made Israel to Sin.

Secondly, We may be said to give the Lord left handed Obedience, when we give
him only bodily Service, without the Heart, Will and Affections; and says
Paul, thiswill not profit, 1 Timothy 4. 8. This kind of Service the Israelites
gave to God in the Wilderness, Psalm. 78. 36, 37. they flattered God with their
Mouths, and dealt deceitfully with him in their Hearts, neither were they
steadfast in his Covenant: Yet how do the most of Men take up, and rest in a
little bare outside Work in external Performances, and quiet themselves with a
few Names and empty Titles? So they have a Name to live, and are called
Christians, and give unto God a little bodily Exercise, they are well
contented, when all this is but left handed Service and no more. Alas! these
Christian-names and Titles, separated from the power of Godliness, they
signify no more than a parcel of fine sweet, smelling Flowers decked about the
Body of a dead Corpse, which, though they help to Garnish the Dead, yet cannot
they make a dead Body to live., O trust not to these things, nor rest in them,
because they are no more in the sight of God, than a dead Body without a Soul
is in our sight, James 2. 26. For as the Body without the Soul is dead, so
Faith without Works is dead also. For Circumcision is nothing, and
Uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the Commandments of God, 1 Cor.
7. 19.

Thridly, and lastly, When may we be said to give unto God left-foot Obedience?

I answer, first, When we walk not steadfastly with him, when we are sometimes
for him, and sometimes for Baal; sometimes in his Worship, and sometimes in the
contrary, like those spoken of in Zeph. ^ If you read the fifth Verse, it is
said, There they Worshipped or Swore by the Lord, and Worshipped and did Swear
by Malcham. In the ninth Verse, it is said, That they leapt on the Threshold, as
Men divided in their Thoughts, when they come to enter a House, ^hey put one
Foot over the Threshold, with a purpose to go into the House, but then they
draw it back again, not knowing whether it be best to enter in: This is the
Disease of many Lepers about the Matters of God's Worship, especially when
Religion is in danger; they are usually at such times, unresolved what to do,
or which way to take, whether it be best to stick (wholly) to the Worship of
Christ, or the Worship of Malcham; a worldly Interest calls upon them to leap
over Malcham's Threshold, and so into her Temple; but Conscience, from the
Light of Scripture, calls them back again: thus they dance to and fro in their
divided Purposes and Resolutions, because they are not able to bring Conscience
and Interest to run in one Chanel together; but at length Carnal-prudence steps
in and compounds the Difference, by advising Conscience and Interest to divide
Cuts betwixt them, to Swear sometimes by Malcham, and sometimes by Christ; but
however Prudence may Judge of this kind of Work, yet the Word of God does judge
it to be but left handed Service, 1 Kings 18. 21. If the Lord be God, follow
him; but if Baal be God, follow him: How long will ye halt betwixt two Opinions?

2dly, We give unto God left-foot Obedience, when we walk at Random and not by
Rule, when we cease making the Scriptures our Guide, and instead thereof, we
make the Traditions and Humane Inventions of Men (in the Matters of Faith) our
Rule and Guide to walk by, Matt. 15. 9. In vain do they Worship me, teaching
for Doctrines the Commandments of Men.

And here I shall acquaint you with five corrupt Rules, which the most of Men
propose to themselves, as their Guides to walk by in the Matters of their Faith
and Conversation, in opposition to the Word of God, which indeed is the only
Rule which all Men ought to Walk by, according to Isa. 8. 20.

First of all, Some walk by the rule of Custom, which in Ephesians. 2. 2. the
Apostle calls a walking after the Course of this World; many there are that do
think, because the most of Men do do so and so, therefore they may do so, and
walk so too without the least scruple; How common is this amongst Men to make
this the Rule of their Lives, concluding that they are in a very safe
condition, if they go that Way wherein the most do walk? This was the Way which
the Jews chose as their Rule to walk by, Jer. 44. 16, 17. As for the Word which
thou have spoken unto us in the Name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto
thee; but we will certainly do whatsoever thing goes forth of our own Mouth,
to burn Incense to the Queen of Heaven, as we have done, we, and our Fathers,
our Kings, and our Princes, in the Cities of Judah, and in the Streets of
Jerusalem. But for Men to make the Ways and Walks of the Multitude their Rule
and Guide to Walk by, must needs be a very unsafe and dangerous Rule; it is to
walk after a wicked World, as John speaks, 1 John 5. 19. The whole World lies
in Wickedness. Chap. 2. Ver. 16. All that is in the World, the Lusts of the
Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life, is not of the Father, but
is of the World. Hence is that Exhortation, Exodus 23. 2. Follow not the
Multitude to do evil; and the reason of that Exhortation, is given you in Jer.
10. 3. For the Customs of the People are vain. Now, that you may see ^herein
the Danger lies of making the Customs of our Fathers before us, or the Customs
of the Places (wherein we live) a Rule to Walk by, it will appear by these
Scriptures, Jer. 11. 10, 11. They are turned back to the Iniquity of their
Forefathers, which refused to hear my Words, and they went after other Gods to
serve them: the^ House of Israel, and the House of Judah have broken my
Covenant which I made with their Fathers. Therefore, thus says the Lord,
Behold, I will bring Evil upon them, which they shall not be able to escape;
though they shall cry unto me, I will not hearken unto them.

2dly, A second unsound Rule which Men choose to Walk by, is Antiquity, to do as
their Forefathers have done before them; this is, and has been a wonderful
prevailing Argument with many of the ignorant Sort in the World: What, shall we
think our selves wiser than our Forefathers? Did not they know how to choose
the best of Ways to walk in themselves, and to leave behind them, their own as
the best Examples for us, their Children, to imitate in their Absence? Shall we
think that our Fathers are all lost; if they are not, then are we safe enough?
So that let the Way be never so wicked, and sinfully Provoking to God, and
Destructive to their own Souls, yet will they not be brought off from their
Resolution, of keeping in their good old Way, by all the Arguments that the
wisest of Men shall use with them: So powerfully captivating was this Disease
upon the Hearts of the Jews in Jeremiah's Days, that it bore down the strength
of the clearest Convictions that the Prophet could bring to the contrary, ^er.
44. 17. But we will certain^y ^^ whatsoever thing goes forth of our Mouth, to
burn Incense to the Queen of Heaven, and to pour out our Drinkofferings to her,
as we have done, we, and our Fathers, our Kings and our Princes. Here, you see,
where an ignorant Wilfulness carries the sway, how desperate it makes Men in
their Resolutions to adhere to the sinful Customs of their Ancestors, that they
will rather adventure to damn their Souls to Eternity, than they will be turned
out of the common Road which their Forefathers walked in before them.

3dly, Others choose to Walk by the Rule of Men's Traditions, though it be never
so contrary to the Rule of the Scriptures, though it be about the weightiest
Matters of God's W^^ship, though the Rules which Men appoint them to Worship
God by, are merely of Human Invention, and without the least Warrant from
S^^^pture, yet, how conformable are the most of Men to such Rules and Orders?
Why, say they, can we do amiss to follow the Wise and Learned of the Land? Do
not learned Men know best how to make such Form^ of Worship as may be most
acceptable to God, and which may be mostly profitable to our selves? But how
rotten a Rule this is to Walk by, and how unapproveable in Christ's sight, you
may read again in Matt. 15. 9. But in vain do you Worship me, teaching for
Doctrines, the Commandments of Men. Where a People shall make the Prccepts of
Men their Rule to w^lk by, rather than the Word of God (especially in the
Matters of divine Worship;) this is to set up Men in the room of Christ, which
is, no better than Idolatry it self. It is a great Derogation to the Honor of
Jesus Christ, as if he wanted Wisdom to know what Rules and Laws to make for
the Government of his Churches, but vain Man must supply the Defect with his
Human Wisdom, which is a dangerous thing, both to the Lawmakers and
Law-observers, as our Savior told the superstitious Pharisees, Matt. 15. 14.
If the Blind lead the Blind, both shall fall into the Ditch.

4thly, Others there are which make their own perverse stubborn Wills, their
Rule to walk by, they will do what they will do, they will have their Lusts,
they will have their Pleasures, they will fulfill the Desires of the Flesh and
of the Mind, let God, his Word, and Ministers say what they will against it:
This was the Rule which Ephraim made choice of to Walk by, in despite of all
the Convictions which the Prophet brought to the contrary, Hos. 2. 5. For she
said, I will go after my Lovers that gave me my Bread, my Water, my Wool, my
Flax, my Oil, and my Drink. The like Wilfulness was found in the Hearts of the
Jews against the Will of God, Jer. 44. 25. Thus says the Lord of Host, the God
of Israel, saying, ye and your Wives have both spoken with your Mouths, and
have fulfilled it with your Hands, saying, We will surely perform our Vows that
we have made, to burn Incense to the Queen of Heaven, and to pour out our
Drink Offerings to her; ye will surely accomplish your Vows. Mark, how the Lord
takes notice of their Wilfulness, no less than twice in this Verse, you will
fulfill your Vows, and you will accomplish the Promises which you have made to
your Idols, you will do it, you are wilfully bent upon it, and, inasmuch, as
you are so wilful in your Resolutions, I am resolved to be as wilful on my part
in your Destruction, and then it shall be known whose Word shall stand, either
mine or yours, ver. 27, 28. Thus you see what a dangerous thing it is for Men
to make their Wills their Rule to walk by, especially when we consider how
opposite the Will of Man is (by Nature) to the Will and Word of God, John 5.
40. Ye will not come to me, that ye might have Life.

5thly, Others again there are, which walk by the Rule of enthusiastical
Inspirations, Visions, and pretended Revelations, casting off the written Word
of God, which was formerly their Rule and Guide, and now account themselves
more happy in walking by these Guides, though this latter Age have abounded
with (but) too many of these filthy Dreamers, as St. Jude styles them, Jude, 8.
Verse, yet it is no new thing, but a thing as ancient as the Prophet Jeremiah's
Days, Jer. 23. 32. I am against them that Prophecy false Dreams, says the
Lord, and do tell them, and cause my People to Err, by their Lies and by their
Lightness, yet I sent them not, nor commanded them, therefore they shall not
profit this People at all.

It appears that the Design of these ancient enthusiastical Dreamers, and
Pretenders to Divine Revelations, was on purpose to weaken the Authority of the
Word of God in the Mouths of the Prophets of the Lord, inasmuch as God does
plead the Efficacy of his Word in opposition to these chaffy Dreams and
pretended Revelations, so much cried up by these ancient Deluders, Jer. 23. 28,
29. The Prophet that has a Dream, let him tell a Dream; and he that has my
Word, let him speak my Word faithfully. What is the Chaff to the Wheat? Is not
my Word like as Fire, says the Lord, and like a Hammer that breaks the Rock
to pieces?

It is a very dangerous thing, when Persons, through their slighting of the
written Word, shall thereby provoke God to give them over to wander after these
satanical Delusions, because (many times) what Ways Men do sinfully choose to
walk in, and deluded Rules to walk by, the same Ways and Rules God will
judicially choose for them, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11, 12. Because they received not
the Truth in the Love of it, that they might be saved; for this Cause, God
shall send them strong Delusions, to believe Lies, that they might be damned.
Therefore have we that Rule given us in Isa. 8. 20. To the Law, and to the
Testimony; if any Man speak not according to this Rule, it is because there is
no Light in him; and; says Peter, 2 Epist. 1. 19. But we have a more sure Word
of Prophecy whereunto ye do well to take heed, as a Light that shines in a
dark place, until the Day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your Hearts. Thus you
see what the false Rules are, which the most of Men do propound to themselves
as their Guides to walk by, which will appear at length to be nothing else but
left-footed Obedience, in the Eyes of God and Jesus Christ.

3dly, We give unto God left-footed Service, when we walk not constantly with
him, when we are off and on with God, when we play fast and loose with God;
some there are, when affrighted by strong Convictions, and grieved by and with
sore Afflictions, will then for a fit be Religious, then they will Pray and
Read good Books, and frequent the Worship of God, and set about the Practice of
religious Duties in their Families; but when the sense of the Conviction is
abated, and the smart of their Affliction a little worn off, then, like
Ephraim, all their Righteousness appears like the morning Cloud, and all their
Goodness like the early Rain that passes away: This kind of inconstant
Obedience, the Israelites gave unto God in the Wilderness, Psalm. 78. 36, 37.
Nevertheless they flattered him with their Mouth, and lied unto him with their
Tongues, for their Hearts were not right with him, neither were they steadfast
in his Covenant. This inconstant Service was never yet acceptable Service with
God, nor will it ever be esteemed otherwise than left-footed Service offered
unto him.

4thly, When we walk not sincerely with God, then we give him left and not
right-footed Service; this was the Service Amazia gave to the Lord, 2 Chronicles.
25. 2. He did that which was right in the sight of God, but not with a perfect
Heart. All the Ways of God (says David) are Mercy and Truth: Good and upright
is the Lord, therefore will he teach Sinners his Ways, Psalm. 25. 8. So that you
see there is Truth and Uprightness in the Lord toward us, and he expects to
find the same in us toward himself again: Truth is the Nature of God, and he
cannot but hate the contrary, wherever he sees it: let Men clothe themselves
with never so much outside Holiness, yet if Truth and Sincerity be found
wanting, all is but glittering Hypocrisy in the Eyes of God, Rev. 3. 1. Thou
have a Name to live, and art dead. The Scribes and Pharisees had as much of an
outward Holiness upon them as most Men living, but their want of Sincerity,
turned all their painted show of Holiness into perfect Rottenness, in the Eyes
of Christ, Matt. 23. 27. It Is not the Matter of our Services only, which
commends us to God, but the Manner of our performing of them: If our Ends and
Aims (...) more for our own Praise, Honor, and Profit, than for the Honor and
Glory of God, we shall never hear more of it, unless it be to our Shame and
Sorrow: David was well instructed in this, therefore prays he that God would
make his Heart sound in his Statutes, Psalm. 119. 80.

Thus you have seen the Reasons why the Priest was to tip, not the left, but
the right Ear, right Thumb, and the great Toe of the right Foot, of the Leper,
with the Blood of the Lamb, and Log of Oil; the Blood to purchase the Leper,
for the Work and Service of the Purchaser, and the Oil of Grace to make him fit
for it, and willing to set about it.

Now, Soul, if thou would hear the Voice of Christ in a saving manner; if
thou would hear when he speaks to thy Soul, in his Works, Word, Ordinances
and Providence; if thou would work the Works of Righteousness, as the Work
of Repentance before God, Faith in God, Love to God, with the Works of Holiness
in his sight, together with the Works of Justice and Mercy toward Men; and if
thou would Walk with God, as Enoch did, walking in all the Commandments and
Ordinances of God, Blameless and without Rebuke, as did Zacharias and
Elizabeth, then be not satisfied until thou have gotten thy right Ear, thy
right Thumb, and the right Foot of thy Soul, tipped with the Blood and Oil which
drops out of the Palm of the Hand of the High Priest Jesus Christ, Who is
willing to save to the uttermost, them which come unto God by him, Heb. 7. 25.

PART VI.
Thus after the Priest had tipped the right Ear, the Thumb of the right Hand, and
the great Toe of the right Foot, of the Cleansed Leper, with the Blood of the
Lamb, and the Log of Oil; then, as in Levit. 14. 16. the Priest was to dip his
right Finger in the Oil that is in his left Hand, and sprinkle of the Oil, with
his Finger, seven times before the Lord.

THis number Seven was of a sacred Use amongst the Hebrews, is was used in holy
Ministrations, as also in miraculous Operations, 2 Kings 5. 10, 14. and also it
had a sound of Perfection in it, as witnessing the Perfection of the Creatures
made in six Days before, so that there was no need of any more to be done: See
the Assemblies Annotations upon the place: So then, by the Priest's sprinkling
of the Oil seven times before the Lord, denoted that the Work was perfectly
done; which Action of the Priest teaches us thus much, (if we consider him as
a Type of Christ in the Cleansing of his spiritual Lepers,) That as Jesus
Christ has undertook to go through, with the Work of the Elects Justification
and Sanctification; so, by his sprinkling of the Oil seven times before the
Lord, (which he did in the Person of the Levitical Priest) it was to assure his
Father for his Satisfaction, and to assure his People for their Consolation,
that the Work of their Justification and Sanctification, is complete and
perfectly done, according to his last Words, when he suffered upon the Cross,
John 19. 30. then he said, It is finished.

From whence we may observe this Note of Observation:

Doct. That Jesus Christ, a Believer's High Priest, has perfectly finished and
completed the Work of their Justification and Sanctification before the Lord.

The Truth of this Observation is attested both by himself and his Father also:
First, By Christ himself, John 17. 4. I have glorified thee on the Earth; I
have finished the Work which thou gave me to do. Now the great Work which the
Father gave his Son to do and finish, was the Work of the Justification and
Sanctification of the Elect, Isa. 42. 1, 2, 3. Behold my Servant whom I uphold,
my Elect in whom my Soul delights; I have put my Spirit upon him, and he
sh^^^ bring forth Judgment to the Gentiles.

2dly, This Truth is also witnessed unto by the Father, as well as by the Son,
Isa. 53. 10, 11. He shall prolong his Days, and the Pleasure of the Lord shall
prosper in his Hands; he shall see of the Travel of his Soul and be satisfied:
That is, the Father shall see his Son's Work finished to his full Contentment.

Reason. Now the Reason of the Point is this, Because Christ was God as well as
Man, and because he is so, therefore he wants no Sufficiency to accomplish
whatever he takes in hand, nor never yet did he begin any Work, but he always
finished it before he left it: He made the Heavens and the Earth, and he did it
completely; he made Man upon the Earth, and made a perfect Piece of him; and
when he had finished his whole Work, he beheld it, and it was very good, good
for Matter, and good for the Form of it, and the ending of it was a glorious
Work, Psalm. 19. 1. hence, says Moses, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. His Work is perfect. So
that this is the Reason that a Believer's Justification and Sanctification is
so complete and perfect, it is because it was carried on by Jesus Christ, who
is very God as well as very Man, and there is nothing too hard for the Lord.

And so we come to Application:

Use, Let this serve for Comfort to the doubting People of God, who are very
apt to be dejected and cast down in their Spirits; their Doubt is not so much,
whether Christ were able to finish the Work of Justification and Sanctification
for them, that is put beyond Question with them, but their Trouble arises from
their Darkness as to their Interest in this Justification, and the Littleness
(if they have any at all) of the Grace of Sanctification.

First, As to their Darkness about their Interest in this Justification; many
there are, because they cannot read the Lines of their Justification upon the
Book of their, own Consciences, are apt to fear whether it were ever written
for them upon the Book of Christ's Records in Heaven.

There be three things, which makes some Christians to doubt about their
Interest in their Justification: 1st, A sight of old Sins upon the Book of
their Consciences. 2dly, A natural Proneness to commit new Sins. 3dly, A want
of Skill to distinguish between the old Reckoning, as it stands upon the Book
of God's Accounts, and as it stands upon the Memory and Conscience of the Soul.

First of all, The sight, of old Sins, as they stand upon the Book of their
Consciences; They think, because the sense of Sin remains upon their
Consciences uncancelled, therefore the guilt of Sin must needs remain upon the
Book of God above unpardoned.

Ans. But this does not always follow, but rather the contrary: For where Sin
is unpardoned, there the Heart (as to the sense of it) is mostly hardened: Look
over all the Justified Men which you can find in Scripture, and you will find,
none more under the Conscience of Sin, than those who were truly Pardoned and
Justified from their Sins, as David, though Nathan told him that his Sin was
pardoned, yet how did the sense of it bleed in his Conscience, Psalm. 51. 2, 3.
Wash me thoroughly from my Iniquity, and cleanse me from my Sin; for I
acknowledge my Transgressions, and my Sin is ever before me. The like we find
in Job, though God himself testified of him, that he was a pardoned Man, one
that feared God, and eschewed Evil, yet how did Job charge home the Guilt of
Sin upon his own Conscience, Job 13. 23. How many are my Iniquities and Sins,
make me to know my Transgression and my Sin. So good Heman, Psalm. 88. 15. I am
afflicted and ready to Die; while I suffer thy Terrors, I am Distracted. So
that this should rather be thy Cordial than a Corrosive to thee, that with
those good Men, the sense of Sin is made to visit thy Conscience: A sense of
Sin is necessary to help on Repentance, Repentance is the Fruit of a justified
State, Romans 8. 30. Moreover, whom he did Predestinate, them he also Called,
(that is by Repentance) and whom he Called, them he also Justified.

Secondly, A second Ground of doubting in Christians about their Justification,
arises from their Proneness in Nature to commit new Sins: Certainly, says a
doubting Soul, if I were ever Justified from the Guilt of my Sins, I should
never be so apt to commit Sin as I do.

Ans. It is one thing to have the guilt of Sin acquitted to the Soul, and
another thing to have the filth of Sin removed out of the Soul, the one belongs
to Christ's Justifying, and the latter to Christ's Sanctifying Grace; the Act
of Christ's Justifying of the Soul is done at once, upon the very Act of the
Soul's believing, Acts 13. 39. By him all that do Believe, are Justified from
all things, from which ye could not be Justified by the Law of Moses. But the
Act of Christ's Sanctifying a Soul, is done by degrees, and is a Work of Time;
so that a Soul may be fully Justified from all his Sins, and yet the Nature
very prone to commit it; Paul had no cause to doubt of his Justification, yet
he deeply complains of his readiness and proneness, Romans 7. 21. I find a Law in
my Members, that when I would do Good, Evil is present with me.

There is this difference bewixt a Justified and an Unjustified Man's
Inclination to Sin; a Justified Man always Sins with Reluctance, but the other
with Allowance; the Justified Man is ever renewing his State by Repentance,
Psalm. 51. 1, 2, 3, 4. And the other is adding of Sin to Sin without Repentance.
Jer. 8. 6. I hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright; no Man repented
him of his Wickedness, saying, What have I done? Every one turned to his
Course, as the Horse rusheth into the Battle. Sin is squeezed forth from a
Justified Man, but it comes freely without let or hindrance from the other: Now
look into thy Heart, though thy sinful Nature works in thee, yet is it with
Regret? Is it with due Repentance? Does it not come freely from thee? Is it the
Evil thou would not do, as Paul speaks, and does it oftentimes make thee to
cry out as he did in Romans 7. 24. O wretched Man that I am; who shall deliver me
from the Body of this Death? Then doubt not, because thou have no more reason
to question thy Justification than David, Heman, Paul or Peter had.

The third Ground of a Christian's doubting about his Justified Condition,
arises from his want of Skill, to distinguish betwixt the old Reckoning, as it
stands upon the Book of God's Accounts, and as it stands upon the Book of God's
Accounts, and as it stands upon the Book of his own Conscience: It is just with
such Christians, as it is with some ignorant Servant, who is sent to a
Shopkeeper to buy such and such Commodities; the Shopkeeper sets it all down
in his Shop-book, the next Week the Servant comes and discharges the Debt, the
Week following, the same Servant comes again for new Commodities, the
Shopkeeper books down all again as before; but as the Shopkeeper is writing
down of the new Debt, the Servant looking over his shoulder, espies the Items
of the old Reckoning upon the Book, which was discharged before; this sends the
Servant away with a Heart loaded with Grief and Trouble, fearing that the Debt
(which he had discharged) will be demanded again. It Is true, he saw some
strokes crossed over the Particulars upon the Book, but being wholly ignorant
that the crossing of the Book was a full Discharge of the Debt in Law, this
keeps the poor Servant under his Fear and Trouble still. Thus stands the Matter
with many a doubting Christian about their Justification, though the Book of
Accounts in Heaven be discharged and crossed above, with the red strokes of the
Blood of Christ, the Virtue of which discharges the whole in Law, 1 John 1. 7.
The Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all Sin. Yet the Soul being
unaquainted with this Mystery, he beholding the Items standing yet upon his own
Conscience, thinks that the whole Debt is still to be exacted from him, as if
there had never been any Satisfaction made for his Debt at all: But, O doubting
Soul! if thou would have Peace in thy Soul, thy Work must be to acquaint thy
self with the nature of a Believer's Discharge (as to his Debt) in the Court of
Heaven above: Labor, by an Eye of Faith, to see the red Strokes of Christ's
Blood, with which the grand Book above is crossed for thee for ever; and then
whatever the Items are which stands upon the Book of thy Conscience, yet they
can do thee no hurt, because now they signify nothing against thee in Law,
Romans 8. 33, 34. Who shall condemn? It is God that Justifies. Who shall lay any
thing to the Charge of God's Elect? It is Christ that Died. So that you plainly
see, that God justifies a Believer upon the account of Christ's Death, the
Blood of whose Death, discharges his Debt, and gives such a Satisfaction to
the Law of God, that nothing can condemn the Soul for ever; thus you see what
these Doubts are, which do darken a Christian's Interest in his Justification;
and also the Grounds and Reasons from whence these Doubts and Fears do arise:
But here lies thy Comfort, Christ thy High Priest has completed this Work
for thee, though thou can not apprehend thy Interest in it, by a clear sight
of Faith, yet he by one Offering, has perfected this Work for thee, and that
for ever, if thou be truly Sanctified, Heb. 10. 14.

2dly, This affords ^^mfort to Believers, against their Doubts arising from the
littleness of their Sanctification: Oh, says a doubting Soul, who is sensible
of the weakness and littleness of his Grace? Oh! if I have any Grace at all,
yet it is so little, I fear it will never last long, and so I shall never be
able to hold out: Oh! my Faith in God, my Love to God, my Zeal for God, my
Sincerity before God, my Patience under Trials, my Self-denial and Holiness is
so little, that I fear all my Religion will end in mere Formality, and my
Profession conclude in Hypocrisy when all is done.

Ans. Oh! Soul, against all these Fears, thy Duty is to look up to Jesus
Christ, who is thy mystical Head, and in him thou shall see thy Soul completely
Sanctified as well as completely Justified; I do not say, that Christ has
completed the Work of Sanctification in a Believer's own Person, while in this
Life; No, no, while a Believer is in the Body, the Flesh will be lusting
against the Spirit, Gal. 5. 17. and Believers again through the Spirit do
mortify the Deeds of the Body, Romans 8. 13. which is one special part of
Sanctification: And, further, I do not say, that the Spirit in his working of
Mortification, does so kill and subdue Sin in Believers, as that it shall never
trouble, grieve or defile them more; No, that Freedom belongs to the perfect
State in Heaven; but though Christ has not perfected this Work in a Believer,
yet Christ has perfected Sanctification in himself for the Believer. Does not
the Apostle say, 1 Cor. 1. 30. But of him, are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God
is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption.

First, It must be acknowledged, that (by Nature) thou art in thy self a Fool,
Luke 24. 25. O Fools, and slow of heart to believe.

Secondly, It is as true, that thou have no Righteousness of thy own, Isa. 64.
6. We are all as an unclean Thing, our Righteousness is as filthy Rags.

Thirdly, Thou art by Nature a perfect Slave and Vassel to Sin and the Devil,
therefore is Christ said to proclaim Liberty to the Captives, even to such as
thou art, Isa. 61. 1.

Fourthly, And it is as true, that thou art as void of Sanctification, Ezekiel.
16. 6. When I passed by thee, I saw thee polluted in thy own Blood.

But now thou see that Christ is made over to thee by God the Father, to be
Wisdom for thy Foolishness, Righteousness for thy Raggedness, Sanctification
for thy Pollutedness, and Redemption for thy Slavery; he is all this in the
sight of God for thee, and he looks upon thee, as if thou were all this in thy
self for his Son's sake, unto whom thou art united by Faith. What if thou
feel in thy self but thy right Ear, thy right Thumb, and Toe of thy right
Foot tipped with the Oil of Sanctification, yet be not discouraged, it is enough
that the Perfection of it is in Christ, thy Head, for thee, and in God's
Account? This is as well as if it were in thy self and better too, and God
accounts it as thine, and imputes it to thee for thy own upon thy believing,
and would have thee to reckon it so for thy Comfort and Consolation, Romans 6.
11. Likewise reckon ye your selves to be dead indeed unto Sin, but alive unto
God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. (Mark,) To be Dead unto Sin is a part of
the Perfection of our Sanctification.

Object. But can a Man be Dead unto Sin in this Life?

Ans. It Is true, no Man is so himself, yet in his Head, Christ, he is so,
therefore would God have a Believer to reckon it, as if he were so in himself;
for so much seems to me to be manifestly handed out to us in Lev. 14. about
Cleansing the Leper, if we compare the 14 with the 18 Verse of that Chapter;
for in Ver. 14. there you have our Savior in the Person of the High Priest,
(or any other of the levitical Priests) Sanctifying of the spiritual Leper,
which was shadowed out in the Person of the corporal Leper; and in the 18 Ver.
there you have Christ in the Person of the Priest, Sanctifying of himself, for
the spiritual Leper, who Believes in him. Mark the Words, Ver. 18. And the
remnant of the Oil, that is in the Priest's Hand, he shall pour it out upon the
Head of him that is to be Cleansed.

But, first, let us see what light the 14 Ver. will afford us in this Matter,
for, in this Verse, you have Christ in the the Person of the Priest,
Sanctifying of the believing Leper; and, in that Act, you may see that the Work
was very imperfectly done, only the Tip or Lap of the right Ear, the Thumb of
the right Hand, and the great Toe, and that done too but with the tip of his
Finger dipped in Oil, which could not carry home much of the Oil to either part,
yet the Priest was to sprinkle the rest of the Oil, which was upon the top of
his Finger, seven times before the Lord; which number, amongst the Hebrews, (as
we have told you before) was accounted a number of Perfection; the meaning of
the sprinkling seven times before the Lord, was as much as to say, O Lord, the
Work which is done upon the Leper, is perfect Work, it is a Work completely
done: So that though there be no more than an Ear, Thumb, and Toe of the
spiritual Leper tipped with the Oil of Grace and Sanctification, yet it being
true Grace, therefore the Work is perfect Work, perfect for Parts though not
for Degrees: So that, in a sense, as low and little as the Grace and
Sanctification seems to be in thy Soul, yet it may be said to be Perfect, and
that in this double respect:

First, With respect to the Parts of the Work.

Secondly, With respect to the Quality of it.

First, For thy low Measure of Sanctification, as low and little as it seems to
be, yet it is Perfect with respect to the Parts of it: A Child which is but a
Day old, may be said to be a perfect Man for his Parts, though yet he is not so
for Degrees; for he has all the Parts and Members of a Man; the Father that
begat him, who far exceeds it for quantity, yet has he not one Limb more in
his Body than the Child has. So it is as true in this spiritual Case, the
strongest Believer under Heaven, who has made the greatest Improvement of his
Grace, has not one Grace more than the least Saint on Earth. In a word, Christ
himself has not one Grace in him more than the weakest Believer on Earth; this
we grant, That he has more Grace than the greatest Believer ever had, or all
the Saints and Angels in Heaven have, put them all together, for Grace was
poured into him without measure; but for the number of Graces, there are no
more in Christ than in the weakest Saint; for you read in John 1. 16. That of
his Fullness we all received, and Grace for Grace.

Secondly, Sanctification in Believers may be said to be Perfect for the
quality of it; as little as thy Grace in thee seems to be, yet for what there
is of it, it is as perfect as is the greatest Measure of Grace in the tallest
Saint in the World; as a spark of Fire is as true Fire for the quality of it,
as that is which makes the greatest Blaze; a drop of Water is as perfect Water
as is the whole Ocean or Sea; a little piece of Gold, though but to the value
of Sixpence in Silver, yet, for the quality of it, it is as perfect Gold, as a
quantity which amounts to a Talent in weight; so the least degree of Grace, is
as perfect for the quality of it, as where there is the greatest quantity: So
that, by this you may perceive, that in this sense, the Work of Sanctification
may be said to be Perfect in the weakest Believers, who are therefore counted
perfect Men, though otherwise made up of their Failings and great Infirmities,
as you read of Noah, Genesis 6. 9. compared with Genesis 9. 21. So Job 1. 1. compared
with the third Chapter. So David, Acts 13. 22. compared with 2 Samuel 12. 7, 8,
9. So Hezekiah, 2 Kings 20. 3. compared with 2 Chronicles 32. 25. And in this sense
our Savior is to be understood in Matt. 5. 48. Be ye therefore Perfect, as
your heavenly Father is Perfect; who means by Perfectness in this place, a
laboring after Grace in the Sincerity and Reality of it, in opposition to
Hypocrifie: So then, if thy Grace be but true Grace, and thy Sanctification be
real and not fained, though it be but as a grain of Mustard Seed, as in Luke
17. 6. this declares thee in a Gospel Sense to be a perfect Believer. Thus we
have dispatched the first Particular, which relates to Christ's Sanctifying the
spiritual Leper, which he shadowed out to us in the Person of the Levitical
Priest's Cleansing of the corporal Leper.

Secondly, We next come to speak of Christ's Sanctifying of himself for the
spiritual cleansed Leper: The Light we have into it, springs out of the 18
Verse, And the remnant of the Oil that is in the Priest's Hand, he shall pour
upon the Head of him that is to be Cleansed. Suitable to this, is that Passage
of our Savior, John 17. 19. For their sakes I Sanctify my self, that they
also may be Sanctified through the Truth. Says the Assemblies Annotations upon
it, Christ did it by a voluntary Dedication and Consecration of himself, as an
unblemished Sacrifice for his People: But the Scripture further tells us, That
Christ's being Sanctified for his People, is meant his receiving a Fullness of
Grace for them, that with that Fullness they might be made Gracious also, John
1. 14, with 16 Ver. The Word was made Flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we
beheld his Glory, as the Glory of the only Begotten of the Father, full of
Grace and Truth, that of his Fullness we might receive, and Grace for Grace. Now
who is it that the Scripture calls the Head of every spiritual cleansed Leper?
Is it not Jesus Christ? 1 Cor. 11. 3. The Head of every Man is Christ. Col. 1.
18. And he is the Head of the Body, the Church. Ephesians. 5. 23. Even as Christ is
the Head of the Church, and he is the Savior of the Body.

Now the Oil which was to be applied to the Head of the cleansed Leper, that,
was not to be given out in a few Drops with the tip of the Priest's Finger, as
it was to the Leper's Ear, Thumb and great Toe, as before, no but when the Oil
comes to be applied unto the Head of him that was to be Cleansed; here it was
to be poured out without measure, And the Remnant of the Oil in the Priest's
Hand, he shall pour it upon the Head of him that is to be Cleansed, Ver. 18.
Hence the Scripture, speaking of Christ the Head of his cleansed Lepers, tells
you, That he received not the Spirit by Measure, John 3. 34. And that it
pleased the Father, that in him should all Fullness dwell, Col. 1. 19. And that
he was full of Grace and Truth, John 1. 14. And he was anointed with the Oil of
Gladness above his Fellows, Psalm. 45. 7. And that Grace was poured into his
Lips, Ver. 2. So that this Fullness of the Oil of Grace, which was poured out
upon Christ, the Head of Believers, this dwells in Christ for them upon a
double account:

First, That the Fruit of it, which was his Obedience, might be imputed to them
for their Justification.

Secondly, That the Grace of it might be imparted to them for their
Sanctification, as far as they need it, and he sees good to impart it.

First of all, That Christ's Obedience unto Righteousness (which was the Fruit
of his Anointing) might be imputed to Believers for their Justification, Romans
5. 18. Even so by the Righteousness of one, the Free-gift came upon all Men
unto Justification of Life.

Secondly, That it might be imparted unto Believers for their Sanctification,
John 1. 16. Of his Fullness, we have all received, and Grace for Grace. Both of
these two Benefits Paul sums up together in one Verse, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Who of God
is made unto us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. And
Paul, supposing that the Colossians were invested with these two saving
Benefits; now, says Paul, Ye are Complete in him, Col. 2. 10.

Thus you see where a Believer's Perfection lies as to his Sanctification, it
lies and lives in Christ their Head; hence then, when Satan shall raise
Objections against thee, laboring thereby to discourage thy Soul, from the
lowness and littleness of thy Sanctification, then reply to him as a Man would
do to those who upbraid him with the course Clothes which he wears on his Back,
he is ready to answer them, O ye Despisers, did you know the rich and costly
Raiment which I have at Home, you would never despise me as you do for the
Clothes I now wear. So, poor drooping Soul, reply to Satan in like manner, What
though the Sanctification which dwells in me, be both low and little, yet I
have better Clothes than these laid up in Christ for me: Look not so much upon
the Habit which I wear my self, but look upon the glorious Robes of Christ my
Head, and behold the rich Clothing he appears in, at the Father's right hand
for me; all this is mine, and for my Use, to be put on by me when the fullness
of Time is come, for then, Phil. 3. 21. He changes our vile Body, that it may
be fashioned like unto his glorious Body, according to the working whereby he
is able even to subdue all things unto himself. This was it which caused the
Spouse to hold up Heart and Head above Water, in opposition to all the
Discouragements that the Malice of Hell could cast into her about the
littleness of her Sanctification, Cant 1. 5. Though I am black, yet comely, O
ye Daughters of Jerusalem, as the Tents of Kedar, and the Curtains of Solomon:
That is, though she were black with Affliction and Persecution, for which the
World derided her; and though she were black in her self with Corruption, for
which the Devil objected against her, yet she still comforted her self with
what she was in Christ; there she was more comely than the Curtains of Solomon:
And the same Testimony Christ gives of all his cleansed Lepers, Cant. 4. 7.
Thou art all Fair, my Love, there is no Spot, in thee. In a word, as little as
that Grace is which seems to be in thee, yet the Scripture calls it glorious
Grace, Psalm. 45. 13. The King's Daughter is all glorious within, her Clothing
is of wrought Gold.

PART VII.
Lastly, when all the foregoing Particulars were applied to the Leper, in order
to his Cleansing, then was the L^per, by orders from the Priest, to shave off
the Hair of his Head, Beard, and Eyebrows, Levit. 14. 9. because in the Hair
of the Head, Beard, and Eyebrows, might much of the Filth and Scurf of the
Distemper lie, and might prove Hiding-places to the same, whcih might much
anticipate and hinder the Cure, and greatly hazard the breaking out of the old
Distemper upon the Leper again.

THerefore the Leper was to shave the Hair wholly off from his Head, Beard, and
Eyebrows, Ver. 9. the Mystery of which is to show us what his Duty is, who is
Cleansed from the Guilt and Filth of Sin by Jesus Christ, namely, to endeavor
ever afterward, the Mortification of the same, which is called the Cutting off
or Circumcising the Foreskin of your Hearts, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. which the Apostle
makes to agree with the Work of mortifying the Lusts of the Flesh, Col. 3. 5.
Mortify, therefore, your Members which are upon the Earth, Fornication,
Uncleanness, inordinate Affection, evil Concupiscence, and Covetousness, which
is Idolatry.

The Words thus opened, afford us this profitable Observation:

Doct. That as Jesus Christ in love to the Souls of his People, has washed
them in his own Blood from the Guilt of Sin, and by the Oil of his Grace
removed the dominion of Sin from them; so it is the Duty of every Christian to
endeavor ever afterward, the Mortification of the remains of Sin, in their
Hearts and Lives continually.

This is so clear a Truth, that nothing shines with more brightness in all the
Scripture, Romans 8. 13. If ye Sin after the Flesh, ye shall Die; but, if through
the Spirit, ye mortify the Deeds of the Body, ye shall Live. Ephesians. 4. 22.
That ye put off, concerning the former Conversation, the Old Man, which is
Corrupt, according to the deceitful Lusts. Col. 3. 5. Mortify therefore your
Members which are upon the Earth, Fornication, Uncleanness, inordinate
Affection, evil Concupiscence, and Covetousness, which is Idolatry. Tit. 2. 11,
12. The Grace of God that brings Salvation, has appeared to all Men,
teaching them to deny Ungodliness and wordly Lusts, to live Soberly,
Righteously and Godly in this present World.

1st Reason.] The Reason of the Point lies here, because this was one special
Purpose of Christ in satisfying the Law for us, and thereby in reconciling of
his Father to us, it was, that Sin might be destroyed in us, Romans 5. 10. with
Rom, 6. 6. For when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the Death of
his Son. Knowing that our Old Man is Crucified with him, that the Body of Sin
might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve Sin.

2d Reason.] It must be so, because our Lord Jesus Christ designed, and
intended, that every one of his Redeemed and Cleansed Lepers, should hold a
holy Communion with himself, both in the Life that now is, and in the Life
which is to come, John 14. 20, 21. At that Day ye shall know that I am in the
Father, and you in me, and I in you; and he that loves me, shall be loved of
my Father, and I will love him. and I will manifest my self to him. Tit. 2. 14.
Who gave himself for us, that he might Redeem us from all Iniquity, and Purify
to himself a peculiar People zealous of good Works. Christ is the Prince of
Purity, his Eyes are Eyes of Purity, that cannot look upon Iniquity; his Nature
is a Nature of Purity, he is called the Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts,
whose Glory fills the whole Earth, Isa. 6. 3. therefore he cannot live in an
impure Heart, nor have communion with impure Souls that are no way washed from
their Iniquities. Surely then this makes it highly the Duty of every Christian,
to be Cleansing of himself from all filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, and to
be perfecting of Holin^ss in the fear of God. 2 Cor. 7. 1.

Thus having given you the Reasons of the Point, we next come to the
Application of what has been said upon it:

Use, If this be so, let it serve then for Matter of Examination to every
Christian, whether we are of the number of Christ's Cleansed and Healed Lepers?
Oh! what a blessed thing would it be, if, upon trial and search, we might
appear to be such, not in show, but in substance, not in appearance only, but
in reality also; an Israelite in deed and in truth, as Nathanael was, in whom
was no Guile.

There be not a few, but would fain persuade themselves that they are the Men
in whom the Leprosy is cured, they hope that the Blood of the Lamb Christ has
been applied to the Ear, Thumb, and Toe of their Souls; but let me ask such
Men, whether the Pri^st's Razor have yet been upon them? Oh! bethink your
selves, and remember that those which were healed Lepers were shaved Lepers,
the Hair of their Heads, Beards, and Eyebrows is all shaved off, which were the
parts and places in which the Scurf and Filth of the Disease lay and hid it
self before: The same is spiritually true of thee, if thou art a healed Leper
indeed, the Scurf of thy Corruption, which has lain hid in thy Heart, (as to
the Dominion of it) is shaved off and ^emoved out of thy Soul: Romans 6. 14. Sin
shall not have Dominion over you. Christ will have clean Work made in the Heart
wherein he begins to Work, Rev. 21. 5. Behold I make all things new says
Christ; and so says Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any Man he in Christ, he is a new
Creature; all old things are d^ne away, and all things become new: So that
there is a unive^sal Change made in the whole Man, of every one that are the
cleansed Le^ers of Jesus Christ, the Judgment, Will, and Affections are all
new, and renewed by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy
Ghost, Tit. ^. 5.

Now, Soul, what Shaving-work has there been upon thy Heart and Life? Reflect
upon thy former Conversation; Have thou not been a loose Liver, a Swearer a
Blasphemer, an unclean Person, a Sabbath-breaker, a Harer of Godliness, a
wicked Scoffer, and cruel Persecutor of those which have truly feared God? But
is this shaved off from thee? Is this filthy Scurf gone, and removed from thy
Heart within, and thy Life without? Thou know that thou have been a common
Drunkard, an unjust Dealer, a known Liar, a wretched Worldling, a greedy
covetous Oppressor, thy whole Life has been a prayerless Life, an irreligious
Life, casting the Word, Worship, and Ordinances of God behind thy Back,
spending of thy precious Time (which should have been spent in the Service of
thy God:) Oh! this precious Time which thou can never recall more, have thou
laid out in the satisfying of thy Lusts and sensual Appetite: Oh! but has the
Razor o^ thy High Priest shaved all this away, and can thou now say in the
Words of Paul to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Such were some of you; but ye
are Washed. but ye are Sanctified, but ye are Justified, in the Name of the
Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Be not deceived, there was never a
healed Leper came out of Christ's Hands, but he was a shaved, mortified, and
sanctified Leper, the Blood, the Oil, and the shaving Razor, always went
together; the Blood to justice, the Oil to sanctify, and the Razor to mortify
the Affections and Lusts; Redemption from the Guilt of Sin, is only proved by
our Mortification to the love and power of Sin in our Natures: Romans 8. 1. There
is therefore no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not
after the Flesh but after the Spirit.

(Mark,) There is therefore no Condemnation, [there is Guilt removed, who walk
not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit,] there is the Truth of it proved,
the shaving of the Head, Beard, and Eyebrows, were evident Signs what the Man
had been, and with whom he had been; they were Signs that the Man had been a
Leper, and, secondly, That he had been with the Priest for a Cure, and is now
come off healed and cleansed of his Distemper: So, likewise, if thou have been
with Jesus Christ indeed, he has fixed these visible Signs upon thy Soul. 2
Cor. 5. 17. Thou art come of a new Creature, all old things are done away, and
all things are become new in thee; but if the Signs of thy Cleansing be not
upon thee, thou have still cause, with the Leper, Lev. 13. 45. to rent thy
Clothes, and to go with thy Head bare, and to put a Covering upon thy
Upper-lip, crying out to every one which thou meetest, Unclean, unclean.

PART VIII.
Thus having dispatched the first part of our Discourse about the Subject
contained in this 14 Chap. of Levit. which is the Leprous Person, wherein you
have seen the manner of his Cleansing, with the Particulars which results from
it; concluding each particular Part, with suitable Application. Secondly, We
next proceed to the Leprous House, about which you have these things
observeable,

FIrst, The Malady. 2dly, The Remedy. 3dly, If that failed, then, Lastly, You
have the total Ruin and Destruction of the leprous House laid before you: But,

First, As to the Malady, you may observe these things:

First, The Disease it self. 2dly. The Signs of the Disease. 3dly, What the
Inhabitant was to do upon the breaking forth of the Disease: And, 4thly, The
Reasons of his so doing: And, Lastly, The Application upon the Point: But,

First, Here you have the Disease of the House spoken of in the first place,
and that is a Leprosy, which was a contagious Pollution, an unclean Infection,
dangerous to the Inhabitants dwelling in it, Levit. 14. 34. And when ye be come
into the Land of Canaan, which I give to you for a Possession, and I put the
Plague of Leprosy in a House, of the Land of your Possession.

Secondly, You have the SIgns of the House-leprosie, described by these Notes:
as, When it appeared in deep Spots, reddish or greenish in the Walls of the
House; and if they were lower than the Wall, (that is, if the Spots were
fretted deeper than the Wall,) then was it to be counted a real Leprosy, as
Ver. 37 shows; which litteral or material House, with this Pollution cleaving
to it, may fairly figure out those spiritual Houses or Gospel-churches, which
our Lord Jesus Christ has ever had in this World; which while they are in this
Life, they are likewise subject to their spiritual Leprosies, Defilement and
Pollution, by reason of Sin; and, that this may the better appear, it will be
necessary to consider the Resemblance which the Scripture gives betwixt a
material House, and a well-constituted Gospel Church of Jesus Christ: As,

First, In a material House there are the Foundation-stones, so there is the
same belonging to the Churches of Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 6.

Secondly, To a material House there belongs the chief Cornerstone, which
upholds all the rest of the Building, so there is in the Churches of Christ,
Ephesians. 2. 20.

Thirdly, In a material House there are rows of Stones laid up upon the
Foundation-stones, so it is in the Churches of Christ, Ephesians. 2. 20.

Fourthly, In a material House, all the Timber-work which has been fitted and
framed for the Building, is all laid up, and coupled together, so it is with
the Churches of Christ, Ephesians. 2. 21.

Fifthly, They agree also for Design and Purpose, because the Design of
Building a material House, is for a Habitation to live in, so are the Churches
of Christ appointed for the like purpose, even to the Habitations for Christ to
dwell in, Ephesians. 2. 22. with 2 Cor. 6. 16. Thus, as the Scripture gives you the
Resemblance betwixt a temporal House, and the Churches of Christ, so also does
it give the same Denomination to Christ's Churches, calling them Houses and
Habitations, Heb. 3. 3, 4, 5. Who was faithful to him that appointed him, as
also Moses was faithful in all his House; but this Man was counted worthy of
more Honor than Moses, inasmuch as he who has builded the House has more
Honor than the House. So Ver. 6. But Christ as a Son over his own House, whose
House are we, if we hold fast our Confidence, and the rejoicing of the Hope
firm unto the end. Thus you see how the Scripture makes a temporal House and
the Churches of Christ to agree, both for Name and Substance.

From all which we shall note these two Observations:

1st Doct. That the spiritual Houses or Churches of Jesus Christ, are subject
to great Defilement and Pollution while in this Life.

2d Doct That the Defilement and Pollution, which the Churches of Christ are
subject unto in this Life, is many times very open and visible.

1st Doct. That the spiritual Houses and Churches of Jesus Christ are subject
to great Defilement and Pollution while in this Life.

In the prosecution of this first Observation, I shall, First, prove the Point.
Secondly, Give the Reasons of it. And, Thirdly, Apply the same by wa^ of Use.

First, For the Proof of it, you will find that this was the Case of Christ's
old Testament-church, Isa. 1. 4, 5, 6. Ah! sinful Nation, a People laden with
Iniquity, a Seed of evil Doers, Children that are Corrupters; they have
forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the holy One of Israel to Anger, they are
gone away backward. Wh^ should ye be stricken any more? Ye will revolt more and
more; the whole Head is sick, and the whole Heart is faint: From the Sole of
the Foot, even unto the Head, there is no Soundness in it, but Wounds, and
Bruises, and putrefying Sores; they have not been closed, neither bound up, nor
modified with Ointment. The like we read has happened to Christ's
Gospel-churches, we read of an incestuous Defilement, and sacramental Pollution
which broke out in the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 5. 1. with 1 Cor. 11. 20, 21,
22. We read of the Defilement of Fornication, which broke forth in the Church
of Pergamos, yea, and the Pollution of Idolatry too, Rev. 2. 14. We read of the
Pollution of false Doctrine, which broke forth in the Church of Thyatira, Rev.
2. 20. And also we read of the Defilement of carnal Security, which happened to
the Church of Sardis, Rev. 3. 1. and of the Pollution of a lukewarm Spirit,
which cleaved to the Church of the Laodiceans, Rev. 3. 16. Lastly, Do not we
likewise read how the Gallatian Church was corrupted and defiled in the
Doctrine of it, confounding the Righteousness of Christ by Faith, with their
own personal Obedience, Gal. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. with Chap. 4. 21. Thus you see the
Point proved by clear Scripture-evidence; and so we come to the Reasons of it:

The first Reason may be taken from the Ministers of the Churches; and,
Secondly, From the Churches themselves.

But, first of all, The Pollution and Defilement of the Churches of Christ,
many times do arise from the sleepy Drowsiness of the Ministers and Guides of
the same. We read that a Minister's sleepy Season is the Devil's seeding
Season; whiles the Minister snores in his Sleep, then is the Devil's Season to
sow his Seed, Matt. 13. 25. But while Men slept, his Enemy came and sowed Tares
among the Wheat, and went his way.

This was the Unhappiness of the Church of God in the Prophet's Days, to be
given over to the Conduct of an ignorant lazy sleepy Ministry, Isa. 56. 10. His
Watchmen are Blind, they are all Ignorant, they are all dumb Dogs, they cannot
bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to Slumber; yea, they are greedy Dogs, which
can never have enough, and they are Shepherds that cannot understand, they all
look to their own way, every one for his Gain from his quarter. Hence it is,
that, though we read of so much Corruption breaking forth upon the Seven
Churches of Asia, yet the Ground and Cause of it (in some Measure) was charged
upon the Ministers of those Churches, which were called the Angels of the same;
when Ministers are given up to an idle lazy Life, to be remiss in nothing more
than in and about their Duty to God and the Souls of their People, no wonder if
their Hearers do decline and wither, as to the Spirit, Life, and Power of
Godliness under their Hands. Ministers are called Physicians, and you know when
a Physician grows careless and negligent in his Office toward his Patient, no
wonder if the Body of such a Patient abounds with corrupting Humors, and the
Malignity of their old Distempers returns back upon them again: He that reads
the Conversation of Israel's Pastors, Isa. 56. 10, 11, 12. need not wonder at
Israel's Corruption, which is expressed in Isa. 1. 4, 5, 6.

Secondly, A second Ground of the Churches Corruption, arises from the
earthly-mindedness of their Ministers; when Ministers, through Covetousness,
shall make Merchandise of the Souls of their Hearers, and set their everlasting
Happiness to sale, to fill their Treasures with worldly Gain, I mean, when they
shall mind more their own worldly Wealth, than their Peoples spiritual Health;
this opens a Door to let in bad Diseases upon their People, it is a very rare
thing to find a Minister greedy of the Churches Wealth in worldly things, and
the People to grow spiritually Wealthy under such a Minister.

Thirdly, A third Ground arises from the Debauchery and bad Lives of
Ministers, this excludes the Presence of God, and his Blessing from their
Labors, and leaves a Curse in the room of it; such a Minister may Preach until
he has preached out his Heart, before he shall do any good upon his People,
Jer. 23. 14, 32. I have seen also in the Prophets of Jerusalem an horrible
thing, they commit Adultery, and walk in Lies, they strengthen also the Hands
of Evildoers, that none does return from his Wickedness, they are all unto me
as Sodom and the Inhabitants of Gomorrah. Ver. 32. They cause my People to err
by their Lies and by their Lightness, yet I sent them not, nor commanded them,
therefore they shall not profit this People at all, says the Lord.

Fourthly, A fourth Ground arises from the Superstitiousness of a Minister;
when the blind Zeal of a Minister shall incline him to a greater eagerness to
promote the Superstition of the Church, than faithfully to promote the pure
Institutions of Christ, woe to that People which lives under the Charge of such
a Man, Matt. 15. 8, 9. Ye Hypocrites, well did Esaias Prophecy of you, saying,
This People draws nigh unto me with their Mouth, and honor me with their
Lips, but their Heart is far from me; but in vain they do Worship me, teaching
for Doctrines the Commandments of Men.

Secondly, The Reasons are also drawn from the Churches themselves, that there
is so much Corruption amongst them.

First of all, It arises from their Negligence in not exercising of their
Faith in the hearing of the Word, Heb. 4. 2. For unto us the Gospel was
preached as well as unto them, but the Word preached did not profit them, not
being mixed with Faith in them that heard it.

Secondly, It arises from a Peoples not receiving the Truth in the Love of it;
when a People shall rather hear the Word to please their Fancy, than to feed
their Faith, when they shall hear more to get Head-notions, than warm
Affections, or to grow in Gifts rather than to grow in Grace, let such beware
of that fearful Judgment spoken of in 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11, 12. Because they
received not the Love of the Truth that they might be saved; and for this
cause, God shall send them strong Delusions, that they should believe a Lie,
that they all might be damned who believe not the Truth, but had pleasure in
Unrighteousness.

Mark, There was a receiving of the Truth, but not to a right end, many there
are, and but too too many, which are sick of this Disease, (viz.) To hear much
and read much, to increase their Parts, but not their Piety, to be admired of
Men rather than to be approved of God; but when Men from a Spirit of Vainglory
attend the Ministry of the Word, but not aiming at the Glory of God, wonder not
if such Men's Knowledge prove at last like the Wilderness-manna to the
Israelites, when ^athered and unlawfully kept, Exodus 16. 20. It bred Worms, and
stank: So woeful have been the Effects of an unsanctifying hearing of the Word
upon some Men.

Thirdly, It arises from the Peoples Unfruitfulness under the Word which they
hear; this was Israel's Sin, which greatly increased their Corruption, even the
same Means which was sent to soften them, turned to their hardening, through
their unfruitfulness under it, Isa. 5. 1, 2. My Beloved had a Vineyard in a
very fruitful Hill, and he looked for Grapes, and it brought forth wild Grapes:
But what was the Issue of this? Read Isa. 6. 9, 10. Go and tell this People,
hear ye indeed, but understand not, and see ye indeed, but perceive not; make
the Heart of this People fat, and their Ears heavy; shut their Eyes lest they
should see with their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and understand with their
Hearts, and convert and be healed. Thus having given you the Grounds and
Reasons whence it is, that the spiritual Houses of Christ are so subject to
their Defilement and Corruption in this Life, we next come to the Application
of the Point:

1st Use, This serves then, in the first place, to inform us of the Duty both
of the Ministers and Hearers.

First, Of the Ministers, who, under Christ, are the Owners of his spiritual
Houses or Churches: Would you know what his Duty was that was the Owner of the
Levitical House, when the Plague of Leprosy broke forth in it? Read Lev. 14.
35. He was to go to the Priest, and tell the Priest, that it seemed to him,
that there is as it were a Plague in the House; so in like manner ought every
Pastor or Minister to do, even by Prayer, Fasting and true Humiliation, to
acquaint Jesus Christ the great High Priest, with the leprous Distemper, which
is broken forth in his Churches: This is the Advice which the Spirit of God
gave the Old Testament-churches, as a means to cure them of their Pollution and
Defilement, Joel 2. 16, 17, 18. Gather the People, sanctify the Congregation,
assemble the Elders, gather the Children and those that suck the Breast; let
the Bridegroom go forth of his Chamber, and the Bride out of her Closet; let
the Priests and Ministers of the Lord, weep between the Porch and the Altar,
and let them say, Spare thy People, O Lord, and give not thy Heritage to
reproach; then will the Lord be jealous for his Land, and pity his People. The
same Counsel was given to the New Testament. churches, in order to their
healing, when the Plague of Leprosy (at any time) broke out upon them, Rev. 2.
4, 5. Nevertheless, I have some what against thee, because thou have left thy
first Love; remember from whence thou art fallen and repent. But, alas, how far
are the Guides and Ministers of most Christ's Churches from acquainting our
great High Priest, by Fasting, Prayer, and Humiliation, with the great
Pollution which has lately broken forth in many of their Congregations? Where
can we find one Minister amongst them, that goes to Christ and says, It seems
to me that there is as is were a Plague begun in my Congregation; yea, so far
are some from making an open Discovery of it, that they labor to hide and
cover it what they can; like Persons whose Houses are insected with the Plague,
endeavor to hide it from the Searchers, to avoid the Affliction of being shut
up: How common is it to hear how some Men will palliate and lessen the
Corruption of their Churches, by making great Corruptions to appear to be
little, and those that are of the lesser sort, to be nothing at all; but this
is not the way to a Cure, no more than the hiding and keeping secret an Ulcer
in the Bowels is the way to save a Man's Life, Prove. 28. 13. He that confesses
and forsakes his Sin shall find Mercy, but he that hides his Iniquity shall
not pro^per.

Secondly, We man learn hence, what the Duty of the Hearers and Members of
Churches is, as well as what we heard is the Duty of Ministers and Pastors.

First of all, Their Duty is this, (viz.) To be earnest with God by Prayer,
that he would continue his special Presence of Grace with their Ministers, and
give them a double Portion of his Spirit, that the U^m and Thum^^n might never
depart from their Heads and Hearts so long (...) live with you ^ Your Ministers
are your ^eedsmen, and if they, through their Unfaithfulness or U^skilfulness,
should ^ow Hemlock instead of Wheat, what a sad disappointment would this be to
your Souls? Your Ministers are your Watchmen, and if they should fall under the
Power of a sleepy Lethargy, how speedily will the Devil sow his Tares amongst
you? Your Ministers are your Angels, and if they through a Spirit of Debauchery
turn Devils, how soon may your Churches be turned from so many Be^hels, into so
many Bethavens? Your Ministers have large Opportunities to do you a great deal
of Good, or a great deal of hurt, they may be great Blessings, or great Curses
to you, and you may expect them to be to you, as you make them, either with or
without your Prayers, Col. 4. 3, 4. Withal, praying for us, that God would open
unto us a door of Utterance, to speak the Mystery of Christ, that I might make
it manifest as I ought to speak.

And so we come to the second Observation:

2d Doct. That the Defilements and Pollutions, which the Churches of Christ are
subject unto, while in this Life, are many times very open and visible.

In the prosecution of this Note, I shall, first, prove it. 2dly, Give you the
Reasons of it. And, 3ily, apply it.

But, First, for the Proof of it, if you look back to the Old Testament-church,
how open and visible were the Pollutions and Desilements of it, Ezekiel. 24. 7.
For her Blood is in the midst of her, she set it upon the top of a Rock, she
poured it out upon the Ground to cover it with the Dust. Hos. 4. 13. They
Sacrifice upon the tops of the Mountains, and burn Incense upon the Hills.
Zeph. 1. 5. And them that Worship the Host of Heaven upon the House tops. Now
what could be more open and visible, than to commit their Iniquity upon high
Hills, high Mountains, and House-tops? So the Church of Rome, who was once
styled the Beloved of God, and called to be Saints, Romans 1. 7. yet at last how
open and public was the Pollution of that Church, Rev. 17. 5. And upon her
Forehead was written, Mystery, Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots, and
Abomination of the Earth.

And so we come to the Reasons of the Point:

Reasons.] The first is drawn from Satan. The second from God; and, The third
from the Churches themselves.

The first Reason is drawn from the Devil, who out of a perfect Enmity to God,
and Hatred to his Honor and Glory, labors to drive on the Corruption, by the
corrupt Inclinations of the People of God, to the highest pitch what he can: He
knows that the Honor of God never suffers so much by the Sin of a profane
World, as it does by the Sin of one of God's Churches in the World; and this is
that which makes God so severe with his People, in punishing of them when they
offend him with their Transgressions, Am^s 3. 2. You only have I known of all
the Families of the Earth, therefore will I punish you for your Iniquities.

Secondly, The Devil does it in Policy, that he might thereby so much the more
stablish the Hearts of his own Children in their Wickedness; besides he knows
that it will abundantly stumble weak Christians in their way to Sion, hoping
thereby to bring them back again into their old Snare^.

The second Reason is taken from God himself, who in a way of Judgment to a
People, that shall take a liberty to Sin in any one degree, and refusing to be
reclaimed, then God gives them up to a greater freedom to Sin, Hos. 8. 11.
Because Ep^raim has made many Altars to Sin, therefore Altars shall be unto
Ephraim to sin. So that what Choice M^n will make for themselves sinfully, God
(sometimes) will make the same Choice for them judicially.

The third Reason is drawn from the Churches themselves, with respect to the
unmo^tifiedness of their Luits; ^ome there are which have such great swelling
Lusts, that if God should suffer them to break out, they would make open as
well as woeful Work upon the best of Men: You may read how vi^lently the
Corruption of David run forth, when a little let slip by the Lord, and how
visibly and open it showed it self to the World. So Peter, What could be more
visible and open, than to Curse and Swear that he knew not his Master? So good
Aaron, How open was his Sin in making the golden Calf?

And so we come to the Application:

1st Use, Is this so, that many times the Defilement and Pollution of the
Churches of Christ are so open and visible, while in this Life? Let it serve
then to stir up the Churches and People of God, to labor after a spotless holy
Conversation, that they may regain the Honor which God has so often lost,
through the careless walking of the rest of God's professing People: You hear
how industrious the Devil is to endeavor the polluting the spiritual Houses of
Christ, whilst they are in this World, which arises from his Malice and
Hatred to his Creator, and that he may harden his Children in their Sins, and
damp the Resolutions of weak Christians in Godliness: Oh! how should this stir
up the Hearts and Hands of all (that have any Love to Christ) to be pressing on
so much the more in the Practice of true Godliness, redeeming the Time because
the Days are evil, that the World may see that Christ has (yet) a few Names in
Sardis, that do walk with him in white, and have not defiled their Garments as
the most have done! Have other Churches their Spots upon them? How should you
get your Garments washed in the Blood of the Lamb? Are other Churches publicly
Scandalous, Earthly-minded, walking with a proud and haughty Spirit? Oh! how
should you labor to regain the lost Honor of Christ again, in laboring after
a more heavenly frame of Spirit, in being meek, holy, and humble in the sight
of all Men? Oh! that you would consider this, that Jesus Christ was never more
wounded in the House of his Friends, than at this Day: Oh! if you have any Love
for Christ, labor to heal these Wounds again, by adorning the Doctrine of God
and your Savior, with your holy Conversations: Oh! forget not what a large
Portion he has given you in his Blood, and what a good Inheritance he has
purchased for you by his Blood; let him have the Fruit of it which is a holy
Conversation, John 15. 8. Herein is my Father glorified, that you bear much
Fruit.

2d Use, Have the Houses of Christ been hitherto subject to their Defilements
and Pollutions; Learn hence then by Faith and Prayer to hasten on those happy
Times, which the Word of Prophecy faith, are yet to come upon the Churches of
Christ in this Life, when these spiritual Habitations of his, shall no more be
troubled with these leprous Defilements and Pollutions in this World. There is
one Prophecy which I shall mention for all the rest, Psalm. 102. 13. with 16
Ver. Thou shall arise, and have mercy upon Zion, for the time to favor her,
yea the set-time is come: When the Lord shall build up Zion, he will appear in
his Glory. I grant that this Prophecy (partly) had its fulfilling in the Jews
Redemption, out of their seventy Years Captivity by Cyrus, and in the building
of the second Temple by Nehemiah: but this was not the utmost extent of the
Prophecy, which clearly points to the latter times of the Gospel-churches;
even when as in Ver. 22 of this Psalm. The People are gathered together, and the
Kingdoms to serve the Lord. Which time John the Divine, places after the great
Rent that shall be made in Antichrist's Kingdom, Rev. 11. 13. and then he tells
you in Ver. 15. that the Kingdoms of this World, are become the Kingdoms of the
Lord and of his Christ, and he shall Reign for ever and ever; so that then, and
not till then, may we expect the full Accomplishment of this Prophecy, in this
102 Psalm. Ver. 13, with 16. Certainly, this must needs be a glorious Work, and
a very glorious Day, when the Lord shall arise to build Zion himself, but
although it be said, that God will build Zion himself, we are not to understand
it in opposition to the use of outward Means or humane Instruments which God
has formerly used in this Work; no, but comparatively, such will the marvelous
Presence of his Glory be, which he will then attend those withal, which he will
employ in this Work of building his Zion, as if God had never had a Hand in the
Work before; which will make the Work exceeding excellent and glorious in four
Respects; beyond whatever the Churches were adorned with before.

First, For Beauty and Glory, in the Eyes of the World, Isa. 54. 11, 12. Oh
thou afflicted, and tossed with tempest, and not comforted, behold, I will lay
thy Stones with fair Colors, and lay thy Foundations with Saphires. I will
make thy Windows of Agates, and thy Gates ^f Carbuncles, and all thy Borders of
pleasant Stones.

Secondly, This Work of building Zion will be marvelous, for Light and
Knowledge in Mysteries of Faith, about our Redemption and Justification by
Jesus Christ, together with those lesser Points about which the Churches
heretofore have been so apt to disagree: Isa. 60. 19. The Sun shall be no more
thy Light by Day, neither for Brightness shall the Moon give Light unto thee,
but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting Light So Isa. 29. 18. And in
that Day shall the Deaf hear the Words of the Book, and the Blind shall see out
of Obscurity, and out of Darkness.

Thirdly, This Work will be as marvelous for Peace and Quietness to the
Churches, who have enjoyed very little of this in the Ages of the World
heretofore; indeed, for a spurt or a short space of time, we have found that
the Churches of Christ have had some silence in their heavenly Places for the
space of half an Hour, Rev. 8. 1. some short breathing, some little freedom
from Persecution, but their Clouds have soon returned upon them again after the
Rain: Oh! but when the Lord shall arise to build Zion himself, then Violence
shall no more be heard in their Land, nor Wasting and Destruction within their
Borders, but they shall call their Walls Salvation, and the Gates Praise, Isa.
60. 18.

Fourthly, When the Lord shall arise to build Zion the Work will be firmly and
lastingly done; though the former Builders were gracious and godly Men, yet how
quickly have their Work tumbled down again? David and Solomon, which builded
the Temple and City of Zion at first, and though they were holy and wise Men,
yet their Building stood not long after them: And the like we read of,
Nehemiah, Ezra, and Zerubbabel, Men of great Wisdom and Integrity, who were
Builders of the City and Temple of Zion a second time; but, alas! how soon did
the Romans demolish their Work again? But when God shall arise to build Zion
himself, the Work shall surely stand for ever, as that no Sanballet or Tobiah
shall be able to obstruct it, nor no Nebuchadnezzar, or Roman Titus shall ever
be able to pull down this Work to the World's end. Isa. 4. 5. And the Lord will
create upon every Dewlling Place of Mount Zion, and upon her Assemblies, a
Cloud and a Smoke by Day, and the Shining of a flaming Fire by Night, for upon
all the Glory shall be a Defense. Oh, that we could get such a sight of this
glorious Work by Faith, as might put us upon the hastening of it into the World
by Prayer!

Last Use, In the mean time, until this glorious Work comes into the World, let
what has been said about i^, serve to make us (who may never live to see this
glorious Day) but must yet remain amongst the Churches of Christ so subject
(yet) to their Defilements and Pollutions, let the Thoughts of it, make Heaven
the more desirable to us. Oh! think often upon the Purity of that new Jerusalem
which is above, and comfort your selves in the Meditations of the Spotlesness
of those heavenly Societies unto which you are a going: Houses that never had
the least of a Leprosy found in them, nor the least spot of any Defilement or
Pollution obstain them; where you may be sure to find all clean and pure, clean
from Sin and Corruption, or the least inclination thereunto, where Hypocrisy
and Heresy never was, nor ever enters, where Strife and Contention shall never
show its Face, nor a Backbiter ever appear within the limits of that holy City,
which have so troubled and perplexed the Churches of Christ in this Life: Oh!
let the Thoughts of these things comfort your Hearts, that it is your Father's
good Pleasure to give you a Kingdom.

PART IX.
Thus having dispatched what related to the Disease of the House, which was a
Leprosy; together with what the Inhabitant in it was to do upon the breaking
forth of the Disease, namely, he was to go to the Priest, and say, It seems to
me that there is as it were a Plague in the House.

WE next come to the Grounds and Reasons why the Inhabitant of the House was to
make such a Discovery of the Plague to the Priest. The Reason was this, (viz.)
To preserve the things in the House from the like Infection, Lev. 14. 36. Then
the Priest shall command that they empty the House before the Priest go in to
see the Plague, that all that is in the House be not made Unclean. Now if we
apply this to the spiritual Houses of Jesus Christ, it will afford us this
profitable Observation:

Doct. That it is the Duty of the Churches of Christ, who are sound and healthy
in the Faith, (in order to their Preservation) to keep as much at a distance as
they can, from such Churches as are corrupted, and will not be healed.

The Truth of this Observation appears both from the Old and New Testament:

First, From the Old Testament, when the ten Tribes became Corrupt with
Idolatry, through their Compliance with Jeroboam's Calves at Dan and Bethel,
who had several Prophets of the Lord sent to them, to reduce them to their
Obedience again, but would not be reclaimed; upon this Refusal, God sends an
Exhortation to the Church of Judah, not to do as Israel had done, Hosea 4. 15.
Though Israel play the Harlot, yet let not Judah offend. But to prevent Judah,
from being defiled with Israel's Pollution, a thorough Separation is enjoined
upon Judah, that their Communion with the ten Tribes might not occasion their
Pollution with the same Idolatry, Hos. 4. 15. with 17 Ver. Come ye not unto
G^lgal, neither go ye up to Bethaven; Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him
alone. I know, that some are of the Opinion, that this 17 Verse is to be
applied to the Prophet Hosea, he only was to let Ephraim alone, so as not to
Preach or Prophecy to them any more, seeing they would still be a rebellious
House; but who ever shall compare Chap. 1. Ver. 9, with the 4 Chap. and the 15,
16, 17 Ver. must needs conclude, that it was Judah's Separation from the ten
Idolatrous Tribes, which was principally intended in these Texts.

Secondly, The like Truth will the New Testament afford us; for if we consider
the Church of Rome in its original and first Plantation, none can deny but that
it was a famous Gospelchurch of Jesus Christ, and one of the
Golden-candlesticks amongst which he delighted to walk; for we read that their
Faith was spoken of throughout the World, Romans 1. 8. but withal, you may read,
when they became a leprous Church, and would not be healed, are then all the
sound People of God required to separate from her, Rev. 18. 4. And I heard
another Voice from Heaven, saying, Come out of her my People, that ye be not
Partakers of her Sins, and that ye receive not of her Plagues.

Quest. But what kind of Corruption is it, which will warrant our Separation
from any Church in order to our Preservation?

Ans. That most of our Divines do agree in this, that a Churches Corruption in
the Doctrine of the Gospel, and will not be reformed; this gives Warrant for
our Separation from such a Church. And, that a Separation from such a Church
appears to be our Duty, will appear from these Grounds:

First, Because of the Reason which is given in the Case of the Levitical
House, Lev. 14. 36. Ye shall empty the House, that all that is in the House be
not made Unclean. But spiritual Pollution is the most dangerous of all, it
seizes the spiritual part, therefore the more to be abandoned; Nature teaches
Men to avoid the Plague, which only endangereth the Body; and ought we not much
more avoid that Plague which does inevitably endanger our Souls to our eternal
Damage? A corporal Leprosy does only shut out the Diseased from Communion
with Men, but a spiritual Leprosy, shuts Men out from Communion with God, Isa.
59. 2. But your Iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your
Sins have hid his Face from you, that he will not hear. God can Love us,
Comfort us, and hold Communion with us, under the greatest outward Pollution
that can light upon our outward Man; but he can neither Love us, or Delight in
us, not hold the least Fellowship with us, in our allowed Sins.

2d Reason.] Why we ought to separate from corrupt Churches, if unreclaimable,
because, otherwise, we make our selves Partakers with them in their evil Deeds,
for we ought not to partake with other Men's Sins, Rev. 18. 4. Partake not with
her in her Sins.

3d Reason.] Because if we partake with others in their Sins, we are liable to
partake with them in the Punishment which God shall inflict upon them for the
same, Rev. 18. 4. Partake not with her in her Sins, lest ye partake of her
Plagues. God has Plagues for Apostatizing Churches, and Punishments for those
that shall ioyn with them: Good Jehoshaphat's joining with an Idolatrous Ahab,
was like to cost him his Life; God will punish the Circumcised with the
Uncircumc^sed, if they be both found in one Transgression.

4th Reason.] Why we must separate from unreclaimable corrupted Churches, is,
because in so doing we are Witnesses for God against their evil Deeds: You may
read, that when the Church of Rome became a corrupt Church, first, God gave his
reformed People a Call to separate from her, Rev. 18. 4. And, secondly, Stirs
up his People to be Witnesses against her, Rev. 11. 6.

And so we come to the Application: Use, From all that has been said upon this
Point, let us learn these four Lessons:

1st, Let us learn to be Humble. 2dly, Fruitful. 3dly, Thankful. And, 4thly,
Watchful.

First, Let us learn to be Low and Humble in our own Eyes, many of us may have
Parts, Gifts and Graces, enough to make us to forget our selves, if the Lord,
by a strong Hand upon our Hearts, did not keep us Humble. Oh! remember that all
your Advancements are of Free Grace, you have nothing which you can call your
own but your Sins, therefore have you nothing of your own to be proud of, or to
glory in, unless you will glory in your Shame; your Sins are yours, and your
Corruptions are yours, and your inward Thoughts are full of Rottenness, and can
you boast of this? And what you have besides this, is none of yours but God's;
And will you be proud of that which Free Grace has bestowed upon you? Does not
the Apostle say, Who is it which makes thee to differ? And what have thou which
thou have not received? You yet retain the Essentials of a Church, whilst
others have lost theirs, and you yet stand when some other Churches are dropped
to the Ground, you yet retain the Soundness of the Doctrine of the Gospel, and
good Discipline according to the Order of the Gospel is upheld amongst you,
when both Doctrine and good Discipline are almost worn to nothing in some other
Churches: Oh! be not High-minded, but fear: Oh! remember that you are as liable
to fall from your Stedfastness as any Church which has fallen before you; and
you are liable to the worst of Errors and Corruption both in Doctrine and
Discipline as well as others, and you stand by Faith, says the Apostle: Oh!
take heed, because you are never nearer Ruin, than when your Gifts, Parts and
Privileges do lift you up, Luke 10. 15. And thou Capernaum, which art exalted
to Heaven, shall be thrust down into Hell.

Secondly, Let it teach us Fruitfulness, because there is nothing which will
preserve your standing more than this; not to receive the Truth in the Love of
it, is the ready way to lose it, and to be given up to believe Lies, that you
may be Damned, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11, 12. and not to hear the Word mixed with Faith,
is the ready way to lose the Faith at last; it is the Barrenness of the Vineyard
which makes the Husbandman to throw it open to the wild Beasts, which was the
Threatening of God to his Israel of old, Isa. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 Ver.
therefore look to it, that your Hearts and Lives be fruitful; God will not be
put off with the fruitless Leaves of an empty outward Profession, Matt. 21. 19.
When once we let go the Power and Life of Religion, and think to please God
with an empty Form of Godliness, he will s^ew such Churches, or particular
Church Members out of his Mouth, Rev. 3. 16. Oh! let us labor for a spirit of
Zeal and Fervency in all we do for God; let the Heart-searching God, see more
of our Sincerity, Faith, and Love to him, in all the Duties of our Obedience
which we direct to him, with more of our Self-denia, Meekness, Mercy, Charity
and Holiness in our Conversations before him: Oh! account not your selves truly
safe, longer than you are answering the ends of your spiritual Privileges; you
have had much from God, many choice Ordinances, many a precious Waterings, many
rich Gifts and Graces. all which do call sor great Fruitfulness: Oh! have a
care, that for these golden Doilars, you pay him not off with a sew brass
Counters again at last.

Thirdl^, Let it learn you the Duty of Thankfulness to God, that you are yet a
People, bearing his Name upon you, and that you are yet Churches and Houses
standing in the Faith of our Lord Jesus; and especially, let us bless God for
this, namely, in that he has made such provision for our Preservation, to keep
us from that Corruption which has so much endangered other Churches, which
Provision lies in that Precept of his, Rev. 18. 4. with 2 Cor. 6. 16, 18.
requiring our Separation from other infected Churches that will not be ^^aled.
What a sad condition had the reformed Churches been in, who lived in the Bowels
of the Roman Apostasy, if they might not have had liberty to separate from
them? But, you hear, it was not only their Liberty, but their commanded Duty so
to do. You have also seen in the ^evitical House, which was a Tipe of the
spiritual Houses of Jesus Christ, the Prieit was to command, that the things in
the House not infected, should be all brought forth, that they might be
preserved from the Leprosy within; which was a merciful Provision to be
embraced with Thanksgiving: Oh! therefore, be you truly thankful to God, First,
In that you may separate your selves from ^^prous Churches for your own
Preservation. Secondly, Be thankful that it is not your Portion to be separated
from by others for your own Pollution, that the red Cross is not yet fixed upon
your Church-doors, to be a Warning to all others to stand off from you: Oh! how
does this call upon all such Churches for Thankfulness to God for his hither to
preserving of you, and to cry out with David, Let us take the Cup of Salvation,
and give Thanks to thy Name; and see to it, that it be not a Lip-thankfulness
only, but a Life-thankfulness principally: Let your Obedience to God, be the
Interpreter of his Goodness to your Souls, because he delights more in
Obedience, than in whole Burnt-offerings, or Sacrifices of the fattest Lambs.

Fourthly, Let this Truth teach us Watchfulness; wakeful Christians are usually
the safest Christians, safest from the Errors and Pollutions which secure
Christians and Churches are endangered by. The Watchman's sleepy Season, was
the Evil Ones seeding Season, Matr. 13. 25. the Devil (by whose hand the
Churches of Christ are defiled) is a wakeful Enemy, who does but watch when
Christians are secure, then is his time to work and plot their Ruin. St. Peter
well understood this, therefore gave the Churches this Admonition, 1 Pet. 5. 8.
Be sober, be vigilant, because your Adversary, the Devil, like a roaring Lion,
goes about seeking whom he may devour. You know in pestilential Seasons, when
the Plague is hot in a Town or City, then will Men keep Watch and Ward in those
Towns and Cities which are free from the Disease, that they may preserve
themselves, because, otherwise, a great deal of Hurt may acrue to such Places
in a little space of time: No less Security ought the Churches of Christ to
take to preserve themselves, because they live in a World of Danger; the Plague
is everywhere round about them, in every Heart, in every House, that they have
to do with all; the Plague of Hypocrisy, Formality, Pride, Earthly-mindedness,
Error, Idolatry, with all manner of lying Wonders, with strong Delusions of
deceivable Unrighteousness, in every Place you can light upon, or enter into;
all which calls upon all Christians and Christian churches, to be watchful, and
narrowly to look to themselves.

And so we come to the second Ground of Discovery, namely, Why the Inhabitant
of the leprous House, was to go to the Priest, and to say, That it seems to
me, there is as it were a Plague in the House; the Purpose of it was, that the
House might be healed, Lev. 14. 41. And he shall cause the House to be scraped
within, round about, and they shall pour out the Dust, that they scraped off,
without the City, into an unclean place. Which leads us to the second General,
namely, To the Remedy it self, about which we may observe these things:

First, The Healer, or the Person healing, and that was the Priest, Ver. 36.

Secondly, We are next to observe, what was to be done by the Priest, in order
to the Healing of the leprous House; where, first, he was to scrape off that
part of the Wall which was infected.

Secondly, If that would not do, then was he to take out the infected Stones,
and to place other Stones in the room of the former, Ver. 40, 41, 42. Which
leads us to the last thing, (viz.) If nothing of all this Means used, will
prove healing to the House, then was the Priest to break down the House, the
Stones thereof, the Timber thereof, and the Mortar thereof, and carry it out of
the City, into an unclean place, Ver. 45.

But, first of all, we are to take notice of the Person who was the Healer, and
that was the Priest, Ver. 36. 37. The Priest shall go into the House, and shall
look on the Plague: Which Priest in this Work was a Tipe of Christ, who is our
great Gospel High Priest, whose Office it is to heal his Gospel-houses of their
spiritual Leprosies, which they are subject unto whilst in this World.

From whence we may observe this Note:

Doct. That Jesus Christ is the great Healer of all the spiritual Leprosies,
Pollutions and Defilements, which happens to his Churches in this Life. Jer. 3.
22. Return ye backsliding Children, and I will heal your Backslidings. Exodus
15. 26. I am the Lord that heals thee. 2 Chronicles. 30. 22. The Lord hearkened to
Hezekiah, and healed the People.

First, He heals his Churches of the Guilt of Sin, by the sprinkling of his
Blood upon them, 1 John 1. 7. The Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all
Sin.

Secondly, He heals them of the Prevalency of Sin, Romans 6. 14. Thirdly, He
heals them of the Fruits and Effects of Sin; as, first, he heals his
Churches of their erroneous Doctrine, Prove. 8. 20. Isa. 42. 16, with Chap. 29.
24.

Fourthly, He heals his Churches of their Lukewarmness, Mal. 4. 2.

Fifthly, He heals them of their Barrenness and Unfruitfulness under the
Means of Grace, which consists of his Word of Instruction and Rod of
Correction, Hos. 14. 4, 5, 6 Ver.

Sixthly, Christ heals his Churches of their Divisions, and that unhappy
contentious Spirit, which the Devil is always kindling amongst them, Isa. 11.
13.

Seventhly, Are the Churches of Christ, (sometimes) torn and rent to pieces
with Error and violent Persecution? Christ will have his time, when to heal
his Churches of all these Rents and Wounds, which they have suffered for his
Name and Glory in this World, Ezekiel. 34. 16. In a word, he has not only Healing
in himself for his Churches (who is their Tree of Life for that purpose) but
the Leaves which hang about him, brings Health and Healing to the Nations of
the Earth, Rev. 22. 2. because wherever he goes, he carries Healing in his
Wings, Mal. 42. 2.

And so we come to the Application.

1st Use, Is this so, that Jesus Christ is the great Healer of the spiritual
Leprosies of his Churches? this serves to inform them, then, where to go, and
unto whom to repair, for spiritual Healing, when their spiritual Leprosies do
at any time break out upon them. You have seen that it was the Levitical
Priest, which was appointed to heal the leprous House under the Old Testament,
so it is Jesus Christ our Gospel-Priest, and only him, which is appointed to
heal the spiritual Houses of the Lord under the New Testament; and as God the
Father appointed him to this Healing Work, so did he fit him with all
unspeakable Accomplishments for it, Isa. 61. 1. The Spirit of the Lord God is
upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to preach good Tidings to the Meek,
he has sent me to bind up the broken Hearted, and to proclaim Liberty to the
Captives, and to open the Prison-doors to them that are bound. And, says John,
The Fullness of Grace is in him, John 1. 16. not only a fullness of Grace, but a
fullness of Grace and Truth too, Ver. 17. Certainly we do but run from the
Living to the Dead, when we go for a Cure of Church-pollution, to any means
(primarily) but Christ in this case: Yet, how common is it to hear some
Christians, relieving their dying Hopes under Church-decays and Disorders, in
looking to some outward Means for help at this side Christ? Oh, their great
Hopes have been, that the King, or such and such a Parliament, Synod, or
Convocation would set things in better order, and give us a Cure to all our
Church-devisions and Distempers: But, alas! Princes, Parliaments, Synods and
Counsels, may pity, but little profit the Churches under their spiritual
Maladies; but to cure them, they cannot, because the Gilead-balm which should
do the Work, they have not with them: Constantine the Great, labored as much
to heal the Churches of the Arian Heresy, as ever did any Emperor, but he
found it a Task for no earthly King to perform: Oh! no, it was only Christ that
was appointed and fitted for this Work, it is Christ and not Man, that has the
Honor to be the Repairer of Zion's Breaches, and of raising up the decayed
Tabernacles of David, it is none but he that can close up the Breaches of his
divided People, Amos 9. 11. At that Day I will raise up the Tabernacle of David
that is fallen down, and cl^se up the Breaches thereof, and I will raise up his
Ruins, and I will build as in the days of old. Hence then we need not wonder at
so many sick and sore Churches, which we hear and see to be in the World; some
almost overspread with the Leprose of Superstition; others sick with a proud
haughty Spirit, ruling with Rigor over the Consciences of their Brethren;
others again, full of the boils and botches of Profaneness; others blister'd
all over with the sores of a contentious and dividing Spirit, the Cause of all
this, even from whence these Maladies do arise, lies here, (viz.) These
leprous Churches, either labor not for Healing at all, or seek not to the true
and right Physician for help; they seek not to Christ, but to Creatures for a
Cure, their Help stands not in the Name of the Lord, but rather in the Name
of worldly Powers, in Synods, Convocations and Parliaments, and if their Help
and Succor come not in this way to them, they will seek it no where else, or
if they do, it shall not be to Christ; But whenever, or wherever we hope to
see such Churches in a better Condition, without the use of better M^ans then
the most have hitherto used (in the neglect of Christ) you may plainly see what
the Portion is which such Churches may expect at Christ's Hands, Jer. 17. 5, 6.

2d Use, Let what has been said, persuade the Churches of Christ in general,
and every Christian in particular, to give the whole Honor of their spiritual
Cure to Christ alone; have a care of thrusting him out of his Work, by
thrusting in of any thing into it, or by employing of any one else about this
Work, which is only proper to him: there is no Man ought to take this Honor
upon him, but he that is called of God as Aaron was, Aaron was ^ut a Typical
Healer to the Church of the Jews; it is true, he was a visible Healer of their
Plagues, Pestilence, Sins, and Sufferings which they were subject unto, but
still, the principal Healer was Christ, in the Person of Aaron: Oh! take not
away this Honor from Jesus Christ, either by not making use of him, or by
making use of others for help in opposition to him; which is worst of all: For,
he will not give his Glory to another, nor his Praise to Graven Images, Isa.
42. 8. Christ is the Head of his Church, and who should the Members make use of
for Healing if not him? as (...) once said, John 6. 68. Lord, to whom shall we
go? for thou have the Words of eternal Life. Christ is the good Shepherd, John
10. 11. and unto whom should the Sheep repair for Help, but to the^r S^epherd?
Christ is the good Physician, and unto whom should his ^^ick Pa^ients have
recourse unto for Health and Healing, if not to him? In a word, He is that Sun
of Righteousness, which carries that Healing in his Wings, which makes the
feeblest of his People to grow up as Fat as the Calves of the Stall, Mal. 4. 2.
Thus having viewed the Healer of the leprous House, which was the Priest; we
next come to consider, what was to be done by the Priest, in order to the
Healing of the House.

First, He was to scrape off that part of the Wall in the House, which was
infected with the Leprosy, Ver. 41. He shall cause the House to be scraped
within round about.

This Action of the Levitical Priest, does livelily Type out the Work of
Christ, who is our Gospel High Priest, in the cleansing of his Gospel
Spiritual-houses; we need not doubt, but the levitical Priest had his
Instruments and other Means, to use in the cleansing of the leprous House. So
Jesus Christ he has also his Instruments and Means to use in the cleansing of
his leprous Churches; no doubt but the Levitical Priest had his Levites to
assist him in scraping off the infected Plaster of the House; so has Jesus
Christ, his Ministers to work by, in the scraping off the Pollution of his
Churches: Hence they are called Workmen, 2 Timothy 2. 15. and Laborers, such as
labor in the Word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 5. 1^. even such by whose Labors they
present Men perfect in Christ Jesus, Col. 2. 28.

Secondly, The Means which Christ uses in cleansing of his Churches, is the
Preaching of the Word, with the Power of the Holy Ghost working with it, John
15. 3. Now are ye clean through the Word, which I have spoken unto you. By this
it is, that Christ scrapes his Churches clean, from that leprous Filth which is
apt to cleave unto them; by this it was, which h^ healed his diseased Church in
the Wilderness, from those frequent Rebellions which so often broke out amongst
them, Psalm. 107. 20. He sent his Word and healed them, and delivered them from
their Destruction. By this it was which he healed by scraping his People in
Babylon, from that Uncleanness, which they went away Foul and Filthy withal
from their own Land: He sent his Word and Prophets to them, to scrape them
clean of that Defilement, Ezekiel. 3. 11. ^o get thee to them of the Captivity,
unto the Children of thy People, and speak unto them, and tell them, thus says
the Lord God, Whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear. So Ezekiel.
36. 33. Thus says the Lord, In the Day that I shall have cleansed you, from
all your Iniquities, I will cause you to dwell in the Cities. And by the same
Means it was, which our Lord endeavored to cleanse the seven Churches of Asia,
as Ephesus, from their coldness of Love to him, Perga^os of its unsound
Doctrine, Thyatra of its Neglect in Discipline, Sardis of its spiritual
Deadness, and Laodicea of its Lukewarmness, he sent his Word to them all by his
Servant John, to cleanse them from their spiritual Leprosies and Pollution,
Rev. 1. 4, 5 Verses.

Secondly, But if the use of this means will not do, Christ will use other
means that shall, and that is Affliction: If the Word will not scrape, the ^^od
shall rake, until Christ has fetched off the Rust from his People; the Rod,
sometimes, eff^cts and brings to pass what the Word does not; the Word may, and
does show Men their Duty, but it is the Rod which drives Men to it; many a Man,
which has leapt over the Word, yet at last has been fetched back again by the
Rod: Afflictions (if sanctified) are as necessary for the People of God, as
Physic is for a diseased Body, they are purging Means in order to a healthful
Constitution. David found much good by his Afflictions, Psalm. 119. 71.
Afflictions makes way for the entrance of the Word into the Affections, which
have lain for some Years as lifeless upon the Heart, as Seed upon the Ground
that wants Rain. Joseph's Brethren, who sinfully sold him into Egypt, lay under
the unrepented Gilt of that Sin for twenty Years together, until the Rod of
Affliction awakened it in their Consciences, Genesis 42. 21.

So we come to the Application.

1st Use, This then should teach the Churches of God great Thankfulness to him,
who has made such gracious Provision against their spiritual Maladies, he
might have suffered you all to have perished in your Pollutions and
Defilements, and have took as great Satisfaction in the glorifying of his
Justice in your final Destruction, as in magnifying of the Riches of his Grace
and Mercy in your Recovery: Oh! but on the other Hand, what cause have we all
to adore the Riches of boundless Grace with a thankful Admiration, that a
Fountain of Mercy is sound out, and set wide open for the worst of Lepers, and
leprous Churches, to Wash in and be Clean? Are you liable to the Leprosy of
Pride, Passion, Lukewarmness, Errors. Earthly-mindedness? Does a Spirit of
Discord, Backbiting and Envy break forth amongst you? Lo here is the Word and
Ordinances of the Gospel in Place, to scrape and cleanse off all this from you,
which if attended with a divine Blessing, it is a quick and powerful Means,
sharper than a twoedged Sword, to divide asunder the Joints and Marrow, the
Soul and Spirit, and is a Discerner of the Thoughts of the Heart, Heb. 4. 12.
And you have heard, if this Means will not do, rather than God will suffer his
People to Perish and Rot in their Corruption, he will use his Rod of
Correction, to set home his Word of Instruction upon their Souls, which shall
smart their Backs, to recover their Hearts, Isa. 27. 9. By this therefore the
Iniquity of Jacob shall he purged, this shall be the Fruit thereof, I will take
away their Sin. Oh! therefore all ye that are the Seeds of Jacob, be you
thankful to God that he has given you his Word, and will not suffer you to
want his Rod, they being both appointed in his divine Wisdom, as a healing
Means against your spiritual Leprosies, whenever they shall break out upon you:
How should the thoughts of this abundant Care of God over you, make you to cry
out with David, Psalm. 103. 2, 3. O bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all within me
forget not his holy Benefits, who forgiveth all thy Iniquities, and heals all
thy Diseases.

2d Use, Let this Truth serve to persuade, all the cleansed Lepers of Christ,
to carry the Matter as they ought to do, toward the means of their Cleansing,
which, as you have heard, consists of these two things: First, The Word of
Instruction. Secondly, Of the Rod of Correction.

First of all, See to it, that you carry the Matter well toward the Word of
Instruction, so as not to imprison it in your Heads; make not your Heads (as
too many do) a Jayl to the Word: there be but too many that will hold the Truth
in Unrighteousness, who are unwilling that the Light of the Word, which is got
into their Heads, should come down into their Hearts, for fear lest its shining
Light should become a perplexing Heat within them; to prevent that, they strive
to hold fast the Doors against the Truth, as a Man who fears an Arrest, bolts
fast the Doors of his House against the Bailiffs; but if ever you mean co have
benefit by the Word, so as to be cleansed from your sinful Leprosies, you must
let the Truth out of Prison, and give it a free Passage, that it may be
glorified in you: Let it run from Room to Room, from the Head to the Heart, and
from the Heart to the Will, and from the Will to the Conscience, and from
thence to the Affections, that so it might have an uninterrupted Outlet into
the Conversation; so to do, is co carry the Matter as you ought toward the
Word of Instruction.

Secondly, Be sure you carry the Matter well toward the Rod of God's
Correction; when Afflictions do light upon you, do not fret, repine, nor murmur
at them, as if some sore Evil had happened to you for your Hurt; but rather
rejoice under them, that God by them is about to scrape and cleanse you from
that Heart-naughtiness which cleaves to you; and if the Rod seems to smart, do
not say to God as Jonah did, Jonah 4. 9. I do well to be angry to Death: But
rather to say with David, Psalm. 119. 75. In faithfulness have thou afflicted
me. And instead of muttering at the length or strength of your Affliction, you
should reason thus: It seems that our Lusts are strong, and our Corruptions are
rooted fast in us, which makes our dear Redeemer to put the greater strength
into our Afflictions; for, where the Disease in a Body is more malignant than
ordinary, there the Ingredients must be the stronger in the Medicine to work it
forth again: Christ had rather his People should be preserved in Brine, than
rot in Honey; and you may be sure of this, that when Christ by his Rod has
done his Work upon you, then may you expect the removal of it from you, Isa. 4.
4, 5. When the Lord shall have washed away the Filth of the Daughter of Zion,
then will be create upon the Dwelling-places thereof, a Cloud and a Smoke by
Day, and the shining of a flaming Fire by Night, and a Glory, with a Defense
upon it.

Thus you have seen what the Priest was to do, in order to the Cleansing of the
Levitical leprous House, and how well it shadowed out the Way, Instruments, and
Means, which our great Gospel High Priest uses, in Cleansing of his Churches
from their spiritual Leprosies and Defilements: We now come to a second Work
which the Priest was to do, in order to the preserving of the Levitical House
that was infected; his Work was to pull out the infected Stones thereof, and to
put other Stones in the room of them, Lev. 14. 40, with 42 Ver. Then the Priest
shall command that they take away the Stones, in which the Plague is, and be
shall take other Stones, and put them in the place of those Stones, and he
shall take other Mortar and plaster the House.

Thus you see, if scraping of the Walls, wherein the Infection lay, would not
serve the turn, then the infected Stones must be pulled out, and cast away into
an unclean Place; which Action, in a most lively manner, leads us to behold the
sacred Order which our Lord Jesus Christ observes, in the Cleansing and keeping
Clean of his Gospel-churches; who, in like manner, if the Means he has already
used will not do, (as his scraping of them by his Word of Instruction, and the
smarting of them with his Rod of Correction,) if nothing of this Means will
heal, then out must the Stones be plucked in which the Infection lay.

Quest. But some may ask, What, or who may we understand by the Stones of
Christ's spiritual Houses?

Ans. They are the visible Members of Christ's Churches, 1 Yet. 2. 5. Ye also
as lively Stones, are built up a spiritual House, an holy Priesthood, to offer
up spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. So that the Meaning
will amount to this, That if any of these Stones shall be so leprous, as that
neither the Word nor Rod will procure their Amendment, wherein they walk
contrary to sound Doctrine, either in Judgment or Practice, then ought they to
be separated from the rest of their Brethren, by a Church-excommunication. You
see how clear this appears in the Tipe, the infected Stones were to be pulled
out of the House, to show us that the incurable infected Members of Christ's
House (which Peter calls the Stones thereof) must be pulled out from thence
also.

From whence we may observe this Note:

Doct. That when ordinary Means have been used to reclaim offending
Church Members, but all to no purpose, then is the Church to cast out such
corrupt Members, by an Act of Excommunication.

This is such a necessary Rule to the keeping of the Churches clean, that it is
an established Rule by our Savior himself, Matt. 18. 15, 16, 17, 18. If thy
Brother shall trespass against thee, go to him and tell him his Fault, between
thee and him alone; and if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy Brother;
but if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that in the
Mouth of two or three Witnesses, every Word may be established; and if he shall
neglect to hear them, tell it to the Church, but if he shall neglect to hear
the Church, let him be unto thee as an heathen Man and Publican. The meaning
is, let him be cast out of the Church, no more to be communed, with than a
professed Pagan, or the worst of Men, unless he Repents; which act of
Excommunication, past upon incurable Offenders, you may read at large in the
Corinthian-Church, 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5 Verses.

And as an Addition to this severe Corinthian. Excommunication, which was
executed upon the Incestuous Person, you may read what a strict Charge the
Apostle gives to the Members of this Church, that if a Brother be known amongst
them, to be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or a Railer, or an Idolater, or a
Drunkard, or an Extortioner, not to keep Company with such a Man. Thus you see
the Point proved by the Word of God.

And so we come to the Reason of it:

The first Reason is drawn from the Will of God, God will have it to be so: So
that a Neglect in the doing of this Work by the Churches, it will be grossly
inexcusable on their Part: The Will of God in this Matter, has been
sufficiently revealed to you already, both in the Tipe of the Levitical House
under the Old Testament, and by our Savior's Words under the New, Matt. 18.
15, 16, 17, 18. with 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5 Verses. And it will be esteemed as our
Righteousness, (I mean a Righteousness of Sincerity) if we fulfill the Will of
God, Matt. 3. 15.

Second Reason why the Churches of Christ should cast out incurable leprous
Persons from amongst them, is, Because, as by their Sin they have forsaken
their God, they thereby have given God cause to forsake them; therefore ought
the Churches to forsake the Company of such too: The ground of the Churches
Union one with another, is that visible Union which they all prosessedly hold
to Jesus Christ, but when in outward Appearance, the Bond of that sacred
Relation (which any prosess they hold to Christ) cease, then is their visible
Union to Christ dissolved by it: Because it was founded and built upon visible
Holiness, and when visible Holiness cease, the Union cease also: Therefore
whoever they are that oppose the Father and Son, as to their Laws and
Government, ought to be opposed by all the Lord's People, Psalm. 139. 21, 22. Do
not I hate them that hate thee? am not I grieved at them that rise up against
thee? Yea, I hate them with a perfect Hatred, I count them my Enemies.

Third Reason: It Is so because God has promised his peculiar Presence amongst
his Churches, Matt. 18, 20. But he will not be in any such Sense with any
Church, but upon Terms of their Purity, and that they keep themselves clean
Houses to him and for his Company, Psalm. 93. 5. Holiness becomes thine House,
O Lord. Men that return (after a religious Profession made) to their old sinful
Course again, are compared to the Sow that was once Washed, to Wallow in their
old Mire again, and as a Dog that licks in his old Vomit: And be sure of this,
that God will not make his abode with dirty Swine and filthy Dogs: Therefore if
the Churches do not proceed to the Casting out of such Swine and Dogs from
amongst them, they may expect that God will not continue long amongst them.

Fourth Reason, why Churches ought to Cast out their irrecoverable infected
Members, is, Because otherwise, they may be infected, with the same Infection
themselves; according to the old Proverb, One scabbed Sheep may spoil a whole
Flock: And does not the Apostle say as much, 1 Cor. 5. 6. Know ye not that a
little Leaven, leaveneth the whole Lump? Psalm. 106. 35. They were mingled
^^nong the Heathen, and learnt their Works. As one rotten Apple may corrupt a
whole Heap, so may one rotten Member corrupt a whole Church, nothing more
dangerous than to be Familiar with Men of corrupt Lives and corrupt Principles;
for their Words will Eat as does a Canker, (says Paul) of whom is Hymeneus and
Philetus, 2 Timothy 2. 17. If Corab be of a terbulent Spirit himself, and overrun
with Pride and Envy, he quickly draws no less than two hundred and fifty
Princes of the Congregation into his Conspiracy, to their utter Ruin, Numb.
16. 1, 2. with the 35 Verse.

Fifthly and Lastly, The Reason why the Churches are to cast out their polluted
Members, is, That those of them who belong to the Election of Grace, may
thereby be recovered again, and made the fitter for the Bulding at last: It is
a common Saying, That a Bone once broken, if well set again, is stronger in
that part than ever it was before: This is that merciful End which God aims at
toward some, (who are habitually living Stones) in and by their
Excommunication. To this Purpose it will not be amiss to read the Institution,
1 Cor. 5. 4, 5. In the Name of our Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together,
and my Spirit with the Power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such a one
unto Satan, for the Destruction of the Flesh, that the Spirit may be saved in
the Day of the Lord Jesus. Mark the word, That the Spirit might be saved in the
Day of the Lord Jesus; that is, at the great and last Day, when he shall come
in flaming Fire to Judge both Quick and Dead. So that you see, that God cuts
off some of his here in this Life, that they may not be out off from the Life
which is to come; he will cast some out of the Church milirant, that they may
not be cast off from the Church triumphant: God delivers the Soul (by this
Ordinance) into the hands of Satan for a time, that thereby he might deliver
him from the Power of Satan for ever; though the Means applied be sharp, yet it
being blessed of God to that end, the Effect you see will be good, gracious and
profitable: Oh the depths both of the Riches of the Grace, Wisdom, and Counsel
of God, which appears in this thing! How unsearchable are his Judgments, and
his Ways post finding out!

Thus having given you the Reasons of the Point, we next come to Apply it:

Use, Let what has been said upon this Head lead us to a Use of Lamentation;
How may we take up the Apostle's Complaint of old, and apply it to our selves,
Phil. 2. 21. For all seek their own, and not the things of Jesus Christ. So,
how few are there which do truly value the Honor of Jesus Christ in this
Matter, namely, in laboring to keep the spiritual Houses of our Lord clean and
pure? How have we lost that ancient primitive Spirit, in casting out the
incestuous Person? Where is that sc^aping of the Walls, and Pulling out the
infected Stones of God's Houses, which have their Leprosies visibly upon them?
How are our faithful Jeremiah's ceased, that would put a difference between the
Precious and the Vile? Jer. 15. 19. Where ^^e our reforming Nehemiah's, who so
stoutly refused the Sanballars, and Tobiah's (Men of unsound Principles) to
build the House of God with them? Neh. 2. 19 20. Where are our zealous Paul's,
who are ready to deliver over to Satan the Hymeneuser and Alexanders that shall
dare to Blaspheme? 1 Timothy 1. 20. How in the Glory of Reformation gone to the
Grave, with these famous Worthies? For want of whose Zeal for the Truth, how
are the Vines of God degenerated into wild Fig Trees, and his Trees of
Righteonsness (in many places) turned into Trees of Rottenness? Have we not
cause to run to the Graves and Tombs of those deceased Worthies, Moses, Samuel,
David, Nehemiah, Jeremiah and Paul, with the rest of our Church-reformers,
beseeching them all to arise from their Graves again, to put their helpful
Hands, to the reforming of our disordered Churches, in the pulling out of the
leprous Stones, which have infected the Walls of so many of the Houses of God
in our Land, which has made the Sanctuaries of the Lord both unsafe and
unpleasant, for the sounder sort of Christians to abide in them? Oh! if the
Graves of the Dead will not hear our bitter Complaints, where shall we go to
find out any Healers, that will close up our Wounds, repair our Breaches, and
make clean our leprous Houses, that we may with more pleasure and safety
inhabit in them? But, alas! ho^ is the Gold of our Zion's become dim! How is
the most find Gold changed, and the Stones of the Sanctuary poured out in the
top of every Street! Oh! how lamentable is it, that some Churches that were the
perfection of Beauty, and the joy of our Land, are now, in many places, so
polluted and defiled, that they are become the Objects of Grief and Sorrow to
many thousands of sound-hearted Christians; and that which adds to their Grief
is, that there is not one Nehemiah to be found in a Country, that zealously
concerns himself about these things, either to remedy it, or labor to be
helpful in it; but instead thereof, the most of Men fall upon the Work of
building up the Honor, Dignity, and Wealth of their own Houses. Is this Men's
Love to Jesus Christ? Is this their Faithfulness to their Lord and Master? And
had they the Houses of God committed to their Care for no other end and
purpose, but to let them lie in their leprous Uncleanness, whilst themselves
are building their own ceiled Houses, at the costliest and cleanest Rate they
can invent and imagine? Will this Work endure the fiery Trial at the great Day
of Account?

2d Use, Is for caution to those, who yet have not joined themselves to any
particular Church: Beware then amongst whom you list your selves for
Church Communion, especially where Discipline is openly neglected; be sure of
this, that the Leaven of Sin and Wickedness remains a Leaven to be avoided to
this day, and the danger of leaping into leaprous Houses is as great as ever;
and the more refined a Church out wardly seems to be, yet if Wickedness do
allowedly lodge in it, the more dangerous will such a Society be to you: The
Church of Rome has a Golden Cup, but the Poison of Asps was in it; you would
account it a high piece of presumption against God, should you adventure to
lodge in a House infected with the Plague or Leprosy, when you may be
entertained in other Houses which are free from such Diseases, and are willing
to receive you; and will you be less careful where to house and harbor your
Souls? Therefore make your Choice of holy Societies and well-governed
Congregations, then may you expect the Blessing of God upon you, and his
Presence with you.

PART X.
Now we come to the last Particular about the Leprous House, namely, That if
nothing of the forementioned Means used by the Priest for the Cure of the House
would avail, then was the House to be demolished and levelled with the Ground.

LEvit. 14. 43, with 45 Verse, And if the Plague come again and break ou^ in
the House, after that he has taken away the Stones after that he has scraped
the House, and after it is plaistered, then shall be break down the House, the
Stones thereof and the Timber thereof, and all the Mortar of the House, and he
shall carry them forth out of the City into an unclean place.

This leads us to behold the end of all polluted and impenitent Churches, who
wilfully persist in their Impenitency; when they hold fast their Iniquities and
refuse to return, as the Prophet speaks, Jer. 8. 5. Then the next thing to be
done is, they must be pulled in pieces and cast down to the Ground, they shall
stand no longer, the great High Priest will root them up, even to the last
Foundation Stone; what he commanded the Levitical Priest to do to the Levitical
Leprous House, when no means would heal it, pull it down to the Ground, the
same will he cause to be done to his Gospel poluted Church, which refuses to
be healed, Rev. 18. 21. Thus with violence shall Babylon that great City be
thrown down.

From whence we may observe this Note for our Information: Doct. That when no
Means used will heal and help the Leprous Churches of Christ, then will Christ
unchurch such Churches again.

In the handling of this Point, I shall first prove it; 2ly, Show you what that
Infection is which will endanger the unchurching of Christ's Churches; 3ly,
Give you the Reasons of it; And 4ly, apply the whole.

First, For the Proof of this Point, you see how evident this appears from the
Type it self, where command was given for the pulling down the Levitical House,
when scraping of the Walls nor pulling out of the Stones would avail to the
cleansing of it: And this holds as true in the Antitype, How severely did God
make this good upon his Old Testament House? Behold (says Christ) I sent unto
you wise Men, and Prophets, and Scribes, some of them ye scourged, some ye have
persecuted, and killed others of them, Matthew. 23. 34. The sending of these
Prophets, wise Men, and Scribes to them was in order to their Healing, but they
would not be healed; then mark what followed hereupon, Verse 38. Behold your
Houses is left unto you desolate.

So if you consider the seven Asian Churches, after they began to be Leprous,
Ephesus, Rev. 2. 4. Pergamos, verses 14, 15. Thyatira, verse 20. Sardis, Chap
3. 2, 3. and Laodicea, verse 15, 16, 17. Unto all these Churches was John the
Divine sent, as a means to heal them, by bringing them to Repentance, but
because they received no benefit by it, at length how has the great High
Priest of Heaven and Earth pulled them all to pieces and thrown them flat to
the Ground? And what has he done less to the Church of Corinth, Galatia,
Philippi, Thessalonica, and the Church of Rome, but broke them all down to the
Dust, with the Stones thereof, and the Timber thereof, and the Mortar thereof,
and has caused it to be carried out of the City into an unclean place; for
what uncleaner place can there be, than to lie in the Dregs of Mahometisin?
which is the condition of most of the Eastern Churches to this day.

Here is one thing more to be observed, That this Levitical Rubbish must be
carried without the City, which City was a Type of Christ's reformed Churches
on Earth in Gospel Times, for so are the Churches of Christ compared, Psalm.
122. 3. Jerusalem is builded as a City compact together, which shows us thus
much, That such Churches as are left and forsaken by Jesus Christ, ought to be
abandoned by the whole City of God.

What though such Churches (with Sardis) may have a Name to live, and may
vainly glory in their ancient Title, of being once named a Church of Christ;
yet in as much as they have lost the vital Spirit of a Church, in ceasing to
hold Union with Christ, the true Head, they thereby forfeit their right of
Fellowship to the true Churches of Christ: also, Hosea 4. 17. Ephraim is joined
to Idols, let him alone.

Thus you see the Point proved, and so we come to show you what kind of
Polution it is, (which if Churches persist in) will endanger their being
unchurched again.

First of all, a universal decay in their Love to Christ and one another, so
says Diodate, in his Annotations upon Rev. 2. 4. Indeed there may be an
abatement of Love to Christ, in some particular Persons in a Church, and yet no
danger of the whole Churches be in; unchurched; God is so just and righteous,
that he will not lay the Stroke upon the whole Church, when the Guilt is only
chargable upon the lesser number, Ezekiel. 18. 20. The Soul that sins it shall
die.

But if it be the Sin of the Church in general, to fall back in their Love to
Christ and one another, this is a dangerous step to the unchurching of such a
Church: Read the threatening of Christ in this case, Rev. 2. 4, 5. Because thou
have left thy first Love, remember therefore from whence thou art fallen and
repent, and do the first Works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will
remove thy Candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.

2. An allowed Spirit of Formality and Lukewarmness, is another Sin which may
endanger the unchurching of a Church of Christ; this frame of Spirit is very
dangerous, if it be found in a particular Soul; a formal indifferent frame of
Heart in a Christian, is not only a bad sign but a bad distemper, it is like the
Plaguespots appearing before death, and the distemper is like an Ague in the
Body, which proves the foundation (sometimes) of many other mortal Diseases
which succeed afterward.

The like is as true of a prevailing formal lukewarm Spirit in a Christian, it
ushers into the Soul several other spiritual Maladies: when Ephraim became like
a Cake not turned, Hosea 7. 8. that is, as we use to say, halfbaked, viz.
formal and lukewarm, then suddenly it became proud, idolatrous, treacherous
and rebellious against God, Hosea 8. 11. with chap. 9, 10. So that if this evil
frame of Heart in a particular Christian, be so detestable to God, how much
more disrelishing to God, must a whole Society of Christians be, where this
evil spirit reigns in the power of it, especially when this Disease in a whole
Church is become so malignant, that it expels the Virtue of all good Means that
shall be applied for the recovery of it? This greatly endangers the pulling
down of such a Church.

Rev. 3. 16. So then because thou art lukewarm, neither hot nor cold, I will
spue thee out of my Mouth.

3. The third Sin which endangers the unchurching of a Church of Christ, is the
sin of professed Idolatry, Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone. Idolatry
is a violating of the Marriage-Covenant betwixt a Church and Christ, and a
defiling of the Marriage Bed; which sin in a Wife called for a Bill of Divorce,
to divorce the Wife from her Husband, Matthew. 5. 32. So that in Scripture,
Idolatry also is called Whoredom, Ezekiel. 16. 20. And it is called playing the
Harlot, Jer. 2. 20. Now as the Law allowed a Man to put away his Wife for the
sin of Whoredom, so for the sin of Idolatry, which is a spiritual Whoredom,
will Jesus Christ put away a whole Church from him, unless it repents, Hosea 1.
6. with 8 and 9th verses.

4. A fourth Sin which helps forward the unchurching of a Church of Christ, is
the Looseness and Profaneness of it: this kind of sinning was charged upon the
ten Tribes, as the ground of Christ's unchurching of them, and casting them out
of his sight, though once a People in Covenant with him, Hos. 7. 3, 4, 5. They
make the King glad with their wickedness, and the Princes with their lies, they
are all adulterers as an Oven heated by the Baker, who cease from rising
after he has kneaded the Dough, until it be leavened. So Verse. 2. They
consider not in their Hearts, that I remember all their wickedness, now their
doings have beset them about, they are before my face: but because of the
unreclaimable looseness and profaneness of this Church, Christ at last utterly
renounceth them, Hos. 1. 9. Then said God, call his name Loamini, for ye are
not my People, and I will not be your God.

The great reason why Christ takes a People into a Covenantrelation with
himself, is upon Terms of their Holiness.

Levit 19. 1, 2. And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, speak unto all the
Congregation of the Children of Israel, and say unto them, ye shall be holy,
for I the Lord your God am holy.

If ever Christ chooses any to be his peculiar People, it shall be upon the
same Terms which he redeemed them by his Blood, and that was to be a peculiar
People to him, zealous of good Works, Tit. 2. 14. But then when that visible
Holiness cease to be in a Church, which was the ground of that visible Union
which was betwixt Christ and them at first, the Union betwixt them is dissolved.

Jer. 7. 9. with the 15th Verse, Will you steal, murder, and commit adultery,
and swear falsely, and burn incense unto Baal, and walk after other gods whom ye
know not, and come and stand before me in this house, which is called by my
Name, and say, We are delivered to do all these abominations: So 15 verse. I
will cast you out of my sight, as I cast out all your Brethren, even the whole
Seed of Ephraim.

Thus you see what the Sins are which do so pollute and defile the Churches of
Christ, as do greatly endanger their being unchurched again: therefore where we
find such Pollution reigning in Churches, it is good to avoid them; and so we
come to the Reasons of the Point.

The first Reason why Christ will unchurch Leprous Churches, which will not be
healed, is, because he will thereby admonish all other Churches, that they may
hear and fear, and do no more so wickedly.

Rev. 2. 21, with 23. I gave her space to repent of her fornication and she
repented not, I will kill her Children (...) death, and all the Churches shall
know that I am ^e which searches the Reins and Hearts, and I will give unto
every one of you according to your works.

Christ's Severity upon some Offenders, will make others the more afraid to
offend; when the angry Father takes up the offending Child to correct it, this
makes the rest of the Children to quake and tremble.

The second Reason, It is so, because Christ will perform the Trust which is
reposed in him by his Father, with relation to the Churches, and that with the
greatest circumspection: all the Churches of Christ in the World, were
originally the Fathers, John 17. 6. Thine they were, and thou gave them to
me: That is, the Father gave them to Christ, to be kept, watched over, governed
and ruled in his Father's Name, as Verse. 12. shows; and one special purpose
why the Father has ^ntrusted Christ with the care of his Churches, is, that
God might have fruitful service from them, John 15. 8. In this is my Father
glorified, that you bear much fruit. The Church is God's Vineyard, and Christ
is made the Vine-dresser of it, with this Commission, That if any of the Vines
proves so rotten, that instead of bringing forth of good Fruit, they bring
forth nothing but wild Grapes; then must he cut down such unfruitful Vines,
Isa. 5. 1, 2. with Verse 5. My Beloved has a Vineyard in a very fruitful Hill,
and he looked that it should bring Grapes, and it brought forth wild Grapes;
now I will tell you what I will do to my Vineyard, I will take away the Hedge
thereof, and it shall be eaten up, and I will break down the Wall thereof, and
it shall be trodden down.

And this Trust our Lord Jesus discharges with a world of Justice on each
hand; first of all, he discharges this Trust in order to the making of his
Vineyard fruitful, Isa. 27. 2, 3. In that day sing ye to her a Vineyard of red
Wine; I the Lord do keep it, I will water it every moment, lest any hurt it; I
will keep it night and day. Secondly, And he is as righteous to fulfill his
Commission upon them, if they prove unfruitful, Verse. 5. of the 26th Chapter,
For he brings down them that dwell on high; the lofty City he lays low, he
lays it low even to the Ground, he brings it even to the Dust: So that if
Churches will not be Trees of Righteousness, Christ will fell them to the
Ground for Trees of Rottenness; if they will not yield him Fruit for his
Father's Table, they must be Fuel for his Father's Fire, Luke 3. 9. Now the Ax
is laid to the root of the Tree, every Tree therefore which brings not forth
good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the Fire.

Christ is his Fathers Servant in this great Work, and the Will of his Father
he must and will do, both in the preservation of some, or destruction of other
of his Churches in this Life, according as they prove either fruitful or
unfruitful in his sight; for he came not to do his own Will, but the Will of
him that sent him, John 6. 38.

The third Reason. It must be so, because Christ will manifest to all the World
the Righteousness of his Government over his Churches whilst here on Earth. In
Isa. 9. 6. it is said, that the Government shall be upon his Shoulder, and his
Name shall be called the wonderful Counselor; and as it shall not be said,
that so wonderful a Counselor Rules indiscreetly, so neither shall it be said,
that he rules his Churches unrighteously: It is said, that Christ our Lord will
order his Kingdom, and establish it with Judgment and Justice for ever;
therefore let those Churches which will not be subject to the Government and
Discipline of this high Governor, know their doom, Deuteronomy. 32. 20, 21, 22, 23,
24, 25. And when the Lord saw it, he abhorred them, because of the provoking of
his Sons and of his Dvughters; and he said, I will hide my Face from them, I
will see what their end shall be, for they are a very froward Generation,
Children in whom is no Faith; they have moved me to jealousy with that which
is no God; they have provoked me to anger with their vanities, and I will move
them to jealousy with those which are not a People: I will provoke them to
anger by a foolish Nation, for a fire is kindled in my anger and shall burn to
the lowest Hell, and shall consume the earth with her increase, and shall set
on fire the foundation of the Mountains; I will heap mischief upon them, I will
spend my Arrows upon them, they shall be burnt with hunger, and devoured with a
burning heat, and with bitter destruction; I will send the teeth of wild Beast
upon them, with the poison of Serpents of the dust, the sword without and
terror within shall destroy thy young Men, and the Virgin, the Suckling also,
with the Man of gray Hairs. This will our Lord do to his polluted Churches, to
vindicate his righteousness in the Government which he exercises over them.

So that I shall conclude with this hearty Prayer, That God would give you the
Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the knowledge of these things, that so you
might have a clear discerning of the fatal Ruin which is like to light upon
our Lukewarm Congregations, who have the Leprosy of so much Formality upon
them, who with Sardis have a Name to live, but are dead, and that you may be of
the few Names in Sardis, which have not defiled your Garments, and having your
Lamps trimmed, your Lights burning, and Garments shining, and so accounted
worthy to walk in white with your dear Lord Jesus, both now and for evermore.
Amen.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of BOOKS lately printed for Will. Marshal; and sold at the Bible
in Newgate-street, and at the Bible in Gracious-street.
1. A Discourse of Christian Religion, in sundry Points. Preached at the
Merchants Lecture, in Broad-street, by the late Reverend Mr. Tho. Cole, Master
of Arts, and Student of Christ' s College in Oxford. Price bound 2 s. 6 d.

2. God all in all: or, The Kingdom of the Son delivered up to God, even the
Father by the Son himself, by T. B. Price 6 d.

3. A true second Spira: or, A Soul plunged in his Case, but is recovered;
being Comfort for Back-sliders. Price 6 d.

4. An Answer to six Arguments, produced by Du-pin. Likewise a Refutation of
some of the false Conceits in Mr. Lock's Essay of Human Understanding. Price 6
d.

5. A wakening Call: or, An Alarm from Heaven, to wise and foolish Virgins;
wherein the Vice of the Age is laid open and bewailed. Price 6 d.

6. A Review of what God has been pleased to do this last Year, according to
Prophecy, by T. B. Price 6 d.

7. God's Exaltation, in the glorious Work of Man's Salvation through Christ,
by Samuel Blower. Price 6 d.

8. Stated Christian Conference asserted to be a Christian's Duty. Price 6 d.

9. The heavenly Footman, by J. Bunyan. Lately printed. Price 6 d.

10. Separation from the Church of England. Price 3 d.

11. A new methodised Concordance. Price 6 d.

12. The everlasting Covenant: or, The Nature of the Covenant of Grace opened;
being a sweet Cordial for a drooping Soul, by B. K. Price 6 d.

13. The true Spring of Gospel Light, and Sense of Sin, Jesus Christ and him
Crucified, evidently set forth by his Spirit in his Word: Delivered in a
Sermon, preached at London, and since enlarged, by Richard Davis. Price 6 d.

14. An Examination of the Pacifick Paper, chiefly consisting of absolute
Election of particular Persons, with the universality of Redemption, and the
Conditionality of the Covenant of Grace. Price 4 d.

15. A Compendium of the Covenant of Grace, as the most solid Support under the
most terrible Conflicts of Death; though armed with Desertion, decay of Grace,
and sense of Guilt, by Walter Cross, M. A. Price 6 d.

16. An Account of some doing Sayings of Susannah Yeats, with her Funeral
Sermon, by Tho. Wording, Minister. Price 6 d.

17. (...) Divine Questions and Answers, (...) Price 2 d.

18. Bunyan of Election and Reprobation, unfolded and explained, in eleven
Chapters. Price 6 d.

19. Christianity the great Mystery, in answer to a ^ate Treatise, Christianity
not Mysterious; together with a Postscript Letter to the Author. Price 1 s.

20. The young Man's Guide for Drawing, Limning, and Etching, with printed
Directions. Price 1 s.

21. A Discourse of the Powers of the World to come: or, The miraculous Powers
of the Gospel and Kingdom of Jesus Christ. Price 1 s.

22. Dr. Owen of the Spirit and his Works and of spiritual Gifts, being an
Addition to his Folio. Bound 2 s.

23. Evidences of the Faith of God's Elect, left by Dr. Owen, for his Wife's
private Meditations. Bound 1 s.

24. Principles of the Doctrine of Christ; useful for all Families, by Dr.
Owen. Price bound 6 d.

25. A Guide to Church Fellowship and Order, according to the Gospel
Institution, by Dr. Owen. Price bound 6 s.

26. A Plea for ancient Gospel. 1. Of Christ and the Elect. 2. Of the Covenant
of Grace. 3. The Natures of Saving-Faith. 4. Of the free Offer of Christ to
Believers. 5. Of Union to Christ before Faith. 6. Of Justification only by
Faith. 7. Of the way to attain Assurance, by D. C. Price bound 3 s.

27. Ashood' s heavenly Trade. Price bound 2 s. 6 d.

28. The best Treasure: or, The unsearchable Riches of Christ, by Mr. Ashood.
Price bound 2 s. 6 d.

29. Observations of English Bodies, with physical Receipts for most Distempers.
Price bound 2 s. 6 d.

30. The fulfilling of Scripture. Last Edition. Price 2 s. 6 d.

31. Eyres of free Justification of a Sinner. Price 2 s.

32. A View of the State of Mankind in the first and second Adam. Price 4 d.

33. A Map of Salvation and Damnation, by John Bunyan. Price 6 d.

34. Faith and Order of Congregational-Churches in England agreed upon. Price
bound 6 d.

35. The Child's Delight, fitted for the Education of Children and Youth, as
Spelling, Reading, casting Account, with Letters to Parents. Price bound 6 d.

36. Doctrine according to Godliness; being a Body of Divinity, by D. Chaunsey.
Price bound 2 s.

37. Terms of Toleration: or, An Abstract of the Act of Parliament, for the
Liberty of Dissenters. Price 2 d.


