Imprimatur.

Ian. 3. 1694/5. John Hoskyns, V.P.R.S.

An ESSAY toward a Natural history OF THE EARTH: AND Terrestrial Bodies,
Especially MINERALS: As also of the Sea, Rivers, and Springs. With an Account
of the UNIVERSAL DELUGE: And of the Effects that it had upon the EARTH.

By John Woodward, M.D. Professor of Physic in Gresham-College, and Fellow of
the Royal Society.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Wilkin at the King's Head in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1695.

To the Honorable Sir Robert Southwell, Knight, President of the Royal Society.
SIR,
THE Subject of these following Papers being Philosophical, and so not foreign
to the Conversations you frequent, I could not direct them better than to the
Person whom the Royal Society have so often made choice of to fill their Chair.
For though your Business has been much in the open World, yet am I well assured
that Things of this Nature have always been your Recreation and Delight. The
Truth is, your Attention to hear me discourse of my Travels under Ground, and
the Uses I proposed of what there I found, gave me no small Encouragement to
expose my Observations to the public View: And it is my Hope, that those Things
may find Pardon from others, which have had Approbation with you. I am very
truly,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, I. WOODWARD.

PREFACE.
HAving in the Essay it self given some Intimation both of the Design of it,
and the Reasons which induced me to make it public, I shall not here keep the
Reader in suspense much longer than only while I acquaint him that, proposing
to draw a considerable number of Materials into so narrow a Compass that they
might all be contained in this small Volume, I was obliged to be very brief and
concise. And therefore, as Pieces of Miniature, Sculpture, or other Workmanship
in little, must be allowed a closer Inspection, so this ^reatise will require
some Care and Application in the Perusal.

Not but that I have endeavored, as far as was practicable in so little room,
so to dispose and order things, by interweaving with the Assertions some of the
Proofs whereon they depend, and occasionally scattering several of the more
important Observations throughout the Work, that it will be no very hard Task
for any one to discover the main Grounds whereon all that I here advance is
founded.

That this may be the more clearly apprehended, I shall beg leave to illustrate
it by one or two Instances. It will perhaps at first sight seem very strange,
and almost shock an ordinary Reader to find me asserting, as I do, that the
whole Terrestrial Globe was taken all to pieces and dissolved at the Deluge*
the Particles of Stone, Marble, and all other solid Fossils dissevered, taken
up into the Water, and there sustained together with Sea-shells and other
Animal and Vegetable Bodies: and that the present Earth consists, and was
formed out of that promiscuous Mass of Sand, Earth, Shells, and the rest,
falling down again, and subsiding from the Water. But whoever shall duly
attend to what I elsewhere lay down, viz. that there are vast Multitudes of
Shells, and other Marine Bodies, found at this day incorporated with and lodged
in all sorts of Stone, in Marble, in Chalk, and to be short, in all the other
ordinary Matter of the Globe which is close and compact enough to preserve
them: that these are found thus reposited amongst this Terrestrial Matter from
near the Surface of the Earth downwards to the greatest Depth we ever dig or
lay it open, and this in all Parts of it quite round the Globe: that the said
terrestrial Matter is disposed into Strata or Layers, placed one upon another,
in like manner as any earthy Sediment, settling down from a Fluid in great
quantity, will naturally be: that these Marine Bodies are now found lodged in
those Strata according to the Order of their Gravity, those which are heaviest
lying deepest in the Earth, and the lighter sorts (when there are any such in
the same place) shallower or nearer to the Surface: and both those and these
amongst terrestrial Matter which is of the same specific Gravity that they
are, the heavier Shells in Stone, the lighter in Chalk, and so of the rest; I
say, whoever shall but rightly weigh all this, he will have no need to go further
for Proof that the Earth was actually so dissolved, and afterward framed
anew, in such manner as I have set forth. And if to this he shall think fit to
add the other Arguments of the same Thing which he will meet with in their
Place, they also will I hope not fail of doing their Part in convincing him
still more of the Truth and Certainty of this Matter.

The other Instance I make choice of shall be of the Universality of the
Deluge, which is another Proposition that I insist upon. And for this, let but
the Reader please to consider, what I deliver from authentic Relations, that
the marine Bodies aforesaid are found in all Parts of the known World, as well
in Europe, Africa, and America, as in Asia, and this even to the very tops of
the highest Mountains; and then I think he cannot reasonably doubt of the
Proposition: but more especially if hereunto he shall join what I offer
concerning the Great Abyss, and thence learns that there is at this day
resident, in that huge Conceptacle, Water enough to effect such a Deluge, to
drown the whole Globe, and lay all, even the highest Mountains under Water. But
if he should be at a loss to know how I got such Notice of that subterranean
Reservatory, as to enable me to make a Computation of the Quantity of Water now
concealed therein, if he carefully peruse the Propositions concerning
Earthquakes, and some others in the Third Part, he cannot but discover at least
some of the ways whereby I got light thereinto: and at the same time find why
it is that I am so particular in relating the Phenomenon of Earthquakes, and
dwell so long upon that Subject in this shorter Work.

These I intend for Example and Direction to the Reader how he may satisfy
himself in any of the other Heads. It Is impossible for me to foresee the
Difficulties and Haesitations of every one: they will be more or fewer,
according to the Capacity of each Peruser, and as his Penetration and Insight
into Nature is greater or less. They who have Attention enough to take in the
entire Platform as here laid down: who see the Chain which runs through the
whole: and can pick up and bear in mind the Observations and Proofs here and
there as they lie, and then confer them with the Propositions, will discern (in
great measure) how these Propositions flow from them: but they who cannot so
easily do this must be entreated to have a little patience, until the Thing be
further unfolded, and more amply and plainly made out.

A few Advances there are in the following Papers, tending to assert the
Superintendence and Agency of Providence in the Natural World: as also to
evince the Fidelity and Exactness of the Mosaic Narrative of the Creation, and
of the Deluge. Which it is not improbable but some may be apt to stumble at, and
think strange that in a Physical Discourse as this is, I should intermeddle
with Matters of that kind. But I may very safely say, that, as to the former, I
have not entered farther into it than merely I was lead by the necessity of my
Subject: nor could I have done less than I have, without the most apparent
Injury and Injustice to Truth. And for Moses, he having given an Account of
some Things which I here treat of, I was bound to allow him the same Plea that
I do other Writers, and to consider what he has delivered. In order to this I
set aside every thing that might bias my Mind, overawe, or mislead me in the
Scrutiny, and therefore have regard to him here only as an Historian. I freely
bring what he has related to the Test, comparing it with Things as now they
stand: and finding his Account to be p^nctually true, I fairly declare what I
find; wherein I do him but simply Right, and only the same that I would to a
common Historian, to Berosus or Manetho, to Herodotus or Livy, on like occasion.

The CONTENTS.
AN Account of the Observations upon which this Discourse is founded. P. 1. A
Dissertation concerning Shells and other Marine Bodies, found at Land; proving
that they were originally generated and formed at Sea: that they are the real
Spoils of once living Animals: and not Stones, or natural Fossils, as some
Learned Men have thought. p. 15.
PART I.
An Examination of the Opinions of former Writers on this Subject. The Means
whereby they thought these Marine Bodies brought out upon the Earth. Of certain
Changes of Sea and Land, and other Alterations in the Terraqueons Globe, which
they suppose to have happened. p. 34.
PART II.
Concerning the Universal Deluge. That these Marine Bodies were then left at
Land. The Effects it had upon the Earth. p. 71.
PART III.
Concerning the Fluids of the Globe. Sect. I. Of the great Abyss. Of the Ocean.
Concerning the Origin of Springs, and Rivers. Of Vapors, and of Rain. p. 115.
Sect. II. Of the Universality of the Deluge. Of the Water which effected it.
Together with some further Particulars concerning it. p. 157.
PART IV.
Of the Origin and Formation of Metalls and Minerals. p. 170.
PART V.
Of the Alterations which the Terraqueous Globe has undergone since the time
of the Deluge. p. 226
PART VI.
Concerning the State of the Earth, and the Productions of it before the
Deluge. p. 242
ERRATA.
PAge 19. Line 6 after Buccin^ add (*) p. 32. l. 3. for Crustaneous read
Crustaceous p. 61. l. 23. after. firm add (,) p. 75. l. 14. after precipitated
add (,) p. 94. l. 6. after been add given. p. 168. l. 25. f. Alargatis ^.
A^arg^tis. p. 173. l. 10. (in the Margin) f. it r. the said Stone. p. 184. l.
13. f. C^chitae r. Conchitae. p. 243* l. ^ r. f. the r. that. p. 270. l. ^. f.
frigitive r. fugitive. p. 275. l. 12. (in the Margin) f. the r. that.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE OBSERVATIONS Upon which this DISCOURSE Is Founded.
FROM a long train of Experience, the World is at length convinced, that
Observations are the only sure Grounds whereon to build a lasting and
substantial Philosophy. All Parties are so far agreed upon this matter, that it
seems to be now the common sense of Mankind.

For which reason, I shall in the Work before me, give my self up to be guided
wholly by Matter of Fact; as intending to steer that course which is thus
agreed of all hands to be the best and surest: and not to offer any thing but
what has due warrant from Observations; and those both carefully made, and
faithfully related.

And that each Reader may the better inform himself, not only of what sort my
present Observations are, but see in what manner also, and with what kind of
Accuracy they were made, 'twill be convenient to give some light into that
matter, and to begin with an Account of them; whereby he may be enabled to
judge how far they may be relied upon, and what measure of Assent the
Propositions which I draw from them may claim.

But before I go any farther, I ought to put in a Caution, that an ample and
prolix Relation either of the Observations themselves, or of the Deductions
from them, is not to be expected here. I design this but for a Sample of what I
hope, in good time, more fully to discuss and make out: proposing no more in
this Treatise, than only, in a few plain words, to deliver my Sentiments on
certain Heads of Natural History, with some of the Reasons and Grounds of them,
in order to give somewhat of present Satisfaction to the Curiosity and Demands
of some of my Friends.

The Observations I speak of were all made in England; the far greatest part
whereof I traveled over on purpose to make them: professedly searching all
places as I passed along, and taking a careful and exact view of Things on all
hands as they presented, in order to inform my self of the present condition of
the Earth, and all Bodies contained in it, as far as either Grotto's, or other
Natural Caverns, or Mines, Quarries, Colepits, and the like, let me into it,
and displayed to sight the interior Parts of it; not neglecting, in the mean
time, the exterior or surface, and such Productions of it as any where
occurred, Plants, Insects, Sea, River, and Land Shells; and, in a word,
whatever either the Vegetable or Animal World afforded.

Nor did I confine these Observations to Land, or the Terrestrial Parts of the
Globe only, but extended them to the Fluids of it likewise, as well those
within it, the Water of Mines, of Grotto's, and other such like Recesses, as
those upon the surface of it, the Sea, Rivers, and Springs.

My principal Intention indeed was to get as complete and satisfactory
information of the whole Mineral Kingdom as I could possibly obtain. To which
end, I made strict enquiry wherever I came, and laid out for intelligence of
all Places where the Entrails of the Earth were laid open, either by Nature (if
I may so say) or by Art, and humane Industry. And wheresoever I had notice of
any considerable natural Spelunca or Grotto; any digging for Wells of Water, or
for Earths, Clays, Marle, Sand, Gravel, Chalk, Cole, Stone, Marble, Ores of
Metals, or the like; I forthwith had recourse thereunto: and taking a just
account of every observable Circumstance of the Earth, Stone, Metal, or other
Matter, from the Surface quite down to the bottom of the Pit, I entered it
carefully into a Journal, which I carried along with me for that purpose. And
so passing on from Place to Place, I noted whatever I found memorable in each
particular Pit, Quarry, or Mine: and it is out of these Notes that my
Observations are compiled.

After I had finished these Observations, and was returned back to this City,
such were the Commotions which had then so unhappily invaded Europe, that I saw
I must necessarily desist here, and sit down (for the present at least) with
what I had already done; having little prospect of an opportunity of carrying
on these Observations any farther, or of going beyond Seas, to consider the
state of the Earth, and of all sorts of Fossils, in more distant Countries.

But to supply, as far as possible, that Defect, I made Application to Persons
who had already traveled, and I knew were of such Integrity, that they would
not impose uncertain or false Relations upon me: as also of so much Curiosity
as to be likely to give me some tolerable insight into the condition of these
things in Foreign Regions. I likewise drew up a List of Quaeries upon this
Subject; which I dispatched into all parts of the World, far and near, wherever
either I my self, or any of my Acquaintance, had any Friend resident to
transmit those Quaeries unto.

The Result of this was, that in time I was abundantly assured, that the
Circumstances of these Things in remoter Countries were much the same with
those of ours here: that the Stone, and other terrestrial Matter, in France,
Flanders, Holland, Spain, Italy, Germany, Denmark, Norway, and Sweden, was
distinguished into Strata, or Layers, as it is in England: that those Strata
were divided by parallel Fissures: that there were enclosed in the Stone, and
all the other denser kinds of terrestrial Matter, great numbers of Shells, and
other Productions of the Sea, in the same manner as in that of this Island. To
be short, by the same means I got sufficient intelligence that these Things
were found in like manner in Barbary, in Egypt, in Guiney, and other parts of
Africa; in Arabia, Syria, Persia, Malabar, China, and other Asiatick Provinces;
in Iamaica, Barbados, Virginia, New England, Brasil, Peru, and other Parts of
America. But I reserve the more particular Relation hereof to its proper place.

So that though my own Observations were confined to England, yet by this means
I was made acquainted with the state of these Bodies in other Countries; even
in almost all parts of the World wherewith the English maintain any Commerce or
Correspondence: and learned from all hands, that the state of them there was
conformable to that of ours here, in the main, and as far as I shall lay any
stress upon it in my Conclusions; which indeed are not built upon any Niceties,
or solitary and uncommon Appearances, but on the most simple and obvious
Circumstances of these terrestrial Bodies.

As to the Certainty and Accurateness of my Observations, thus much may
modestly and very truly be said, that I do not offer any one before I had first
thoroughly and clearly informed my self in all material Circumstances of it,
and had opportunity of observing it in more places than one, that I might be
satisfied there was nothing casual or contingent in any of those Circumstances.
This will not be thought an overgreat exactness, or any thing more than was
needful, by those who have noted how much Philosophy has suffered by the
neglect and oversight of some Naturalists in this respect. A transient and
perfunctory Examination of things, frequently leads Men into considerable
Mistakes, which a more correct and rigorous Scrutiny would have detected and
avoided. The truth is, I have been the more scrupulous and wary in regard the
Inferences drawn from these Observations are of some importance: 'twas but
necessary that the Foundation should be firm, when a Superstructure of Bulk and
Weight was to be raised upon it. And therefore I advance nothing from any
Observation that was not made with this Caution, and that any Man may not, as
well as my self, without any great pains, inform himself of the truth of: And
as long as the next Cole-pit, or Mine, the next Quarry, or Chalk-pit, will give
abundant Attestation to what I write, these are so ready and obvious in almost
all places, that I need not be any where far to seek for a Compurgator; and to
these I may very safely appeal.

Concerning the Observations themselves therefore, there cannot well arise any
doubt but what may be easily satisfied: And what I propose in this Essay being
founded upon these Observations, every Reader will be judge of the truth and
probability of it, and whether that which I do so propose naturally follows
from them or not.

I shall distribute them into two general Classes or Sections, whereof the
former will comprehend my Observations upon all the Terrestrial Matter that is
naturally disposed into Layers, or Strata; such as our common Sandstone,
Marble, Cole, Chalk, all sorts of Earth, Marle, Clay, Sand, Gravel, with some
others.

Of this various Matter, thus formed into Strata, the far greatest part of the
Terrestrial Globe consists, from its Surface downwards to the greatest depth we
ever dig or mine. And it is upon my Observations on this that I have grounded
all my general Conclusions concerning the Earth; all that relate to its Form;
all that relate to the Universal and other Deluges; in a word, all that relate
to the several Vicissitudes and Alterations that it has yet undergone. Nay,
upon the same Observations I have also founded several Conclusions touching
Metalls, Spar, and other Minerals, which are found lodged either in these
Strata, amongst the Sand, Chalk, Earth, and the rest; or in the perpendicular
Intervals of the Strata of Stone, Marble, or other solid Matter.

For upon the particular Observations on the said Metallic and Mineral Bodies,
(which are the Subjects of the second Section,) I have not founded any thing
but what purely and immediately concerns the Natural History of those Bodies.

To proceed therefore to the Account of my Observations upon Sand-stone. And in
these, though I do not neglect to note the several Kinds or Varieties of it:
Freestone, Ragg-stone, Limestone, and the rest: the different Hardness, or
Solidity, of each: as also its Color, Texture, and the peculiar matter which
constitutes it: yet I confine my self more strictly to consider the manner how
it is disposed in the Earth: the Strata, into which, by means of horizontal I
call those Fissures, which distinguish the St^ne into Strata, Horizontal ones;
and those which intersect these Perpendicular: not so much with respect to the
present site of the Strata, which (as I shall show) is altered in many places,
as to its original situation; concerning which, see Part 2. Consect. 5.
and parallel Fissures, it is divided: the Order and Number of these Strata:
their situation in respect of the Horizon: the Thickness, Depth, and other
Circumstances of each: the Interruptions of the Strata, I mean the
perpendicular Fissures, which intersect the horizontal ones: the different
Capacity or Largeness of these perpendicular Intervals: their Distances from
each other: and the Spar, and other Mineral and Metallic Matter, usually
contained in them.

But, because I saw that Deductions of considerable import and consequence
might be drawn from them, I have with great Care and Intention observed the
Condition of such heterogeneous Bodies, which I found immersed and included in
the mass of this Sandstone; particularly the Shells of Oysters, Muscles,
Scallopes, Cockles, Periwinkles, and very many other marine Productions. I
have, I say, very diligently noted all Circumstances of these Shells: the vast
Numbers of them; the several kinds that are thus lodged in the substance of the
Stone: the Order and Manner of their position in it: the several Depths at
which they are found: the Matter which they contain in them, and wherewith
their Cavities are usually filled.

These Observations about Stone are succeeded by others, of like nature,
concerning Marble, Cole, and Chalk: their Fissures: the Situation of their
Strata: the Shells, and other heterogeneous Bodies lodged therein.

In the next place, those which concern Marle, Clay, the several kinds of
Earth, Sand, Gravel, and some other Fossils: the Shells and other like Bodies,
lodged in their Strata: the Position of those Strata: their Order; their
Distinctions from each other, by the difference of the Matter of each, and by
its different Consistence and Color; the Strata of these laxer kinds of Matter
being not ordinarily divided from each other by interposition of horizontal
Fissures; as those of Stone, and such other solid Matter, constantly are.

And lastly, those which relate to the upper or outmost Stratum of all: I mean
that blackish Layer of Earth or Mould which is called by some Garden-Earth, by
others Vnder-turf Earth, wherewith the Terrestrial Globe is almost every where
invested, unless it be disturbed, or flung off by rains, digging, plowing, or
some other external force; insomuch, that whatsoever lies deeper, or
underneath, whether Stone, Marble, Chalk, Gravel, or whatever else, this
Stratum is still expanded at top of all; serving, as it were, for a common
Integument to the rest: and being (as shall be shown in due place) the Seminary
or Promptuary that furnishes forth Matter for the formation and increment of
Animal and Vegetable Bodies; and into which all of them successively are again
finally returned.

The Observations being thus dispatched, my next step should have been to have
proposed the Deductions from them; to have determined how these Sea-shells were
brought to Land, and how they became interred in the bowels of the Earth, in
the manner described in those Observations. But before I could proceed any
farther toward that, I found my self necessarily obliged to take off a
difficulty not long since started 'by some learned Men, who suspect that these
Shells are not real; that they were never bred at Sea; but are all of
Terrestial Original, being mere Stones, though they bear a resemblance of
Shells, and formed, in the places where they are now found, by a kind of Lusus
of Nature, in imitation of Shells.

How nearly I am concerned to remove this Obstacle, before I pass on any
farther to the prosecution of my Design, any one may presently see. For to go
about to enquire at what time, and by what means these Shells were conveyed out
of the Sea to dry Land, when a Doubt has been moved whether they are Shells or
not, or ever belonged to the Sea, without first clearing this Matter, and
putting it quite out of doubt; would be senseless and absurd. In order
therefore unto this, I premise

A Dissertation concerning Shells and other marine Bodies, found at Land;
Proving that they were originally generated and formed at Sea: that they are
the real spoils of once living Animals: and not Stones, or natural Fossils, as
some late Learned Men have thought.
I Shall be the more brief and sparing in my Extract of this Dissertation, in
regard that coming on thus in order before the other Parts of this Work, it
will it self, of course, see the Light somewhat sooner than they, any of them
will. For which reason, I shall at present only say thus much of it in general;
that therein I first fairly lay before the Reader the Arguments that have been
urged by these Gentlemen to persuade us that these Bodies are mere Mineral
Substances; and having detected the insufficiency of them, by evincing from the
most plain and simple Reason, how far they are from being conclusive, and how
much they fall short of proving what they are alleged for; I then proceed to
lay down my own, and offer those Reasons which have induced me to believe that
these are the very Exuviae of Animals, and all owing to the Sea.

I would not be thought to insinuate that the Opinion of these Gentlemen
carries no show of Truth, nor umbrage of Reason of its side. It Is not to be
supposed, that Persons of their Learning and Abilities would ever have espoused
it, were it not in some measure plausible: and had not at least a fair
appearance of probability. The very finding these Bodies included in Stone, and
lodged in the Earth together with Minerals, was alone enough to move a
Suspicion that these were Minerals too: the finding them even to the very
bottom of Quarries and Mines: in the most retired and inward Parts of the most
firm and solid Rocks: in the deepest bowels of the Earth, as well as upon the
surface of it: upon the tops of even the highest Hills and Mountains, as well
as in the Valleys and Plains: and this not in this or that Province only, not
only in one or two Fields, but almost everywhere: in all Countries and Quarters
of the Globe, wherever there is any digging for Marble, for Stone, for Chalk,
or any other Terrestrial Matter that is so compact as to fence off external
Injuries, and shield them from Decay and Rottenness. This, together with their
being lodged in company of the Belemnites, Selenites, they supposed, in the
place of their formation, was enough to stagger a Spectator, and make him ready
to entertain a belief that these were so too. It Is a Phoenomenon so surprising
and extraordinary, that it is not strange that a Man should scarcely credit his
very Senses in the case: that he should more readily incline to believe that
they were Minerals, as the Belemnites, and the others recited, are: or indeed
almost any thing else rather than Sea-shells; especially in such Multitudes,
and in places so unlikely: so deep in the Earth, and far from the Sea, as these
are commonly found.

Nor was this, as indeed they tell Persons had to surmount; They found,
together with these, certain Bodies that bore the shape and resemblance of
Cockles, Muscles, and other Shells, which yet were not really such; but
consisted entirely, some of them, of Sand-stone: others of Flint, and others of
Spar: or some other kind of Mineral Matter.

That were in all appearance Shells: that were of the same bigness, figure, and
texture, with the common Echini, Scallops, and Perewinkles; but had
notwithstanding Flint, Native-Vitriol, Spar, Iron-Ore, or other Metallic or
Mineral Matter, either adhering firmly in lumps to the outsides of them, or
insinuated into their substance, into their pores, and inner parts, so as to
disguise them very much, and give them a face and mien extremely unlike to that
of those Shells which are at this day found at Sea.

They observed also, that amongst the Shells, Shellfish now found upon the
Sea-shores.

And that on the contrary, there Buccina of the Conchae Veneris; of Crabs,
Lobsters, and others, both of the Crustaceous and Testaceous kind, which yet we
never met with at Land, or in our Quarries.

Nay there were some other Difficulties which they have urged, and which
(though they be of lesser weight) shall all of them be recounted and considered
more particularly in the Differtation it self.

Upon the whole therefore it is very plain, that these Authors did not espouse
this Opinion without some grounds: without some countenance of probability: and
that they have charged the opposite with a large crowd of Difficulties. Yea, so
far are they from being destitute of an handsome Apology, that they very well
deserve the Thanks of the world for what they have done. For although they have
not succeeded in their Attempts about the Origin of these Bodies, yet they have
made Discoveries in other respects concerning them, and in other parts of
Nature likewise, of that moment and consequence, as to have thereby laid a
great and lasting Obligation upon the intelligent and discerning part of
Mankind.

But that they have failed notwithstanding in this Enterprise, it is, I think,
not over difficult to prove. And this is the Subject of the present Discourse.
they are so far from being formed in the Earth, or in the places where they are
now found, that I shall evince, Part 4. Consect. 2.
that even the Belemnites, Selenites, Marchasits, Flints, and other natural
Minerals, which are lodged in the Earth, together with these Shells, were not
formed there, but had Being before ever they came thither: and were fully
formed and finished before they were reposed in that manner.

Cavities of Shells of those kinds which they so resemble; these Shells having
served as Matrices or Moulds to them; the Sand, Sparry and Flinty Matter being
then lost, or in a state of solution, and so, susceptible of any form, when it
was thus introduced into these shelly-Moulds: and that it consolidated, or
became hard afterward. Concerning these Conchitae, Cochlitae, etc. see Part 4.
Cons. 2. and Part 5. Cons. 5.


That for the Metallic and Mineral adventitious Part 4. Conf. 2.
; the mineral Particles being plainly to be distinguished from the testaceous
ones, or the texture and substance of the Shell, by good Glasses, if not by the
naked Eye. That though the thing had been so that this Accretion had not been
thus discernible, and consequently the Alteration of these Shells could not
have been accounted for, so that we had been perfectly in the dark as to the
Origin of the Bodies thus altered, and that nothing at all could have been
determined concerning them; yet this would not have been any the least
Impediment or objection against that which I insist upon; there being so very
few of these in comparison of those which have undergone no such Alteration.
There being, I say, besides these, such vast multitudes of Shells contained in
Stone, etc. which are entire, fair, and absolutely free from any such mineral
Contagion: which are to be matched by others at this day found upon our Shores,
and which do not differ in any respect from them: being of the same size that
those are of, and the same shape precisely: of the same substance and texture;
as consisting of the same peculiar Matter, and this constituted and disposed in
the same manner, as is that of their respective fellowkinds at Sea: the
tendency of the Fibers and Striae the same: the composition of the Lamellae,
constituted by these Fibers, alike in both: the same Vestigia of Tendons (by
means whereof the Animal is fastened and joined to the Shell) in each: the same
Papillae: the same Sutures, and every thing else, whether within or without the
Shell, in its Cavity or upon its Convexity, in the Substance, or upon the
Surface of it. Besides; these Fossil Shells are attended with the ordinary
Accidents of the marine ones, ex. gr. they sometimes grow to one another, the
lesser Shells being fixed to the larger: they have Balani, Tubuli vermiculares,
Pearls, Coral, and the like, still actually growing upon them. And which is
very considerable, they are most exactly of the same specific Gravity with
their fellow-kinds now upon the shores. Nay farther, they answer all Chemical
trials in like manner as the Sea-shells do: their parts when dissolved have the
same appearance to view, the same smell and taste: they have the same vires and
effects in Medicine, when inwardly administrated to Animal Bodies: Aqua fortis,
Oil of Vitriol, and other like Menstrua, have the very same effects upon both.
In one word, so exactly conformable to the marine ones are these Shells, Teeth,
and Bones, which are dug up out of the Earth, that though several Hundreds
of them, which I now keep by me, have been nicely and critically examined by
very many Learned Men, who are skilled in all parts of Natural History, and who
have been particularly curious in, and conversant with, Shells, and other
marine Productions, yet never any Man of them went away dissatisfied, or
doubting whether these are really the very Exuviae of Sea-fishes or not. Nay,
which is much more to my purpose, some of the most eminent of those very
Gentlemen who formerly were doubtful in this Matter, and rather inclinable to
believe that these were natural Minerals, and who had wrote in defense of that
Opinion, do notwithstanding upon strict and repeated Inspection of these Bodies
in my Collection, and upon farther Enquiry, and procuration of plain and
unaltered Shells from several parts of this Island, fully assent to me herein,
and are now convinced that these are the spoils and remains of Sea-Animals.
And, being thus satisfied, such is the Ingenuity of these worthy Persons, and
so great their Affection to Truth, when, where, and by whomsoever manifested,
that they have personally requested me to publish my Thoughts in order to the
fuller clearing of this matter. But to proceed.

pair, with Sea-Shells, several of these Fossil ones that these Gentlemen have
pronounced altogether unlike any thing that the Salt Water produces; yet it is
indeed very true, that there are found some Shells at Land, in Stone, and in
Chalk, which cannot probably be matched by any species of Shells now appearing
upon our Shores. But notwithstanding this, I cannot but affirm that these, even
the most strange and enormous of them, have all the essential Notes and
Characters of Sea-Shells, and show as near a relation to some now extant upon
the Shores, as the different Species of those themselves do to one another:
that they are of the very same specific Gravity with those to which they are
so generically allied: and of the same Texture and Constitution of parts; the
substance of these being as plaintly testaceous, as that of those is; insomuch
that any Man that compares them, can no more doubt of the reality of the one
than of the other; whence it must needs follow, that there were such Shellfish
once in being; which is enough for my purpose; I being no ways concerned to
make out that there are of the same kinds still actually living in the Ocean.
Though if I was, 'twould be no very hard task; it being evident from the
Relations of Dyvers, and Fishers for Pearls, that there are many kinds of
Shellfish which lie perpetually concealed in the Deep, skreen'd from our Eyes
by that vast world of Water, and which have their continual abode at the bottom
of the Ocean, without ever approaching near the Shores, it being as unnatural
for these to desert this their native station, as it is for those that are the
inhabitants of the Shores, to quit theirs, and retire into the deep: that for
this reason these are called by Naturalists (...), and Pelagiae, as the others,
that reside nearer to the Shores, are by them called Littorales. Now the Shells
which we find exposed upon our Shores, are only those which are cast up and
stranded by tides and by storms; and consequently are all of them Exuvi^ of
those kinds that live near the Shores, and not of those that inhabit the Main,
or the deeper and remoter parts of the Ocean; it being certain from the
Relations also of Dyvers, that the Tides and Storms, even the most tempestuous
and turbulent, affect only the superficial parts of the Ocean, the Shallows,
and Shores, but never reach the greater Depths, or disturb the bottom of the
Main: these are as quiet, and free from Commotion in the midst of storms, as in
the greatest calm; so that the Shellfish, which are resident in these places,
live and dye there, and are never dislodged or removed by storms, nor cast upon
the Shores, which the Littorales usually are. When therefore I shall have
proved more at large, that those which we find at Land, that are not matchable
with any upon our Shores, are many of them of those very kinds which the
forecited Relations particularly assure us are found no where but in the deeper
parts of the Sea: and that as well those which we can match, as those we
cannot, are all Remains of the universal Deluge, when the Water of the Ocean,
being boisterously turned out upon the Earth, bore along with it, Fishes of all
sorts, Shells, and the like moveable Bodies, which it left behind at its return
back again to its Chanel, it will not, I presume, be thought strange, that
amongst the rest, it left some of the Pelagiae, or those kinds of Shells which
naturally have their abode at main-sea, and which therefore are now never flung
up upon the Shores: and it may very reasonably be concluded, that all these
strange Shells, which we cannot so match, are of these Pelagiae: that the
several kinds of them are at this day living in the huge bosom of the Ocean:
and that there is not any one entire species of Shellfish, formerly in being,
now perished and lost.

Buccinae, and Conchae Veneris, of Lobsters, Crabs, and others of the
crustaceous kind, that are very rarely found at Land; so rarely, that some of
these Gentlemen have asserted that they are never found; but that I shall show
to be a mistake, all the Shells in their whole List having been found in the
Earth in one place or other. But that these are very seldom found any where, I
most readily grant; and this is so far from being an Argument against what I am
going to advance, that it is as full and substantial a Proof of the truth of it
as I could possibly wish. For the Shells in this List are all lighter than
Stone, Marble, and the other ordinary Terrestrial Matter. Now both these and
all other sorts of Shells that are so light, occur very seldom at Land, or in
the Earth, in comparison of the Shells of Cockles, Perewinkles, and the rest
which are more ponderous, so as to equal the Stone, and the other Terrestrial
Matter in Gravity. The Reason of which will be very plain, when I shall have
shown Vid. Part 2. Cons. 2.
that at the time of the Deluge (when these Shells were brought out upon the
Earth, and reposed therein in the manner we now find them) Stone, and all other
solid Minerals, lost their solidity: and that the severed Particles thereof,
together with those of the Earth, Chalk, and the rest, as also Shells, and all
other Animal and Vegetable Bodies, were taken up into, and sustained in, the
Water: that at length all these subsided Vid. Part 2. Cons. 3.
again promiscuously, and without any other order than that of the different
specific Gravity of the several Bodies in this confused Mass, those which had
the greatest degree of Gravity sinking down first, and so settling lowest; then
those Bodies which had a lesser degree of Gravity fell next, and settled so as
to make a Stratum upon the former; and so on, in their several turns, to the
lightest of all, which subsiding last, settled at the Surface, and covered all
the r^st: that this very various Miscellany of Bodies being determined to
subsidence in this Order merely by their different specific Gravities, all
those which had the same degree of Gravity subsided at the same time, fell
into, and composed, the same Stratum; so that those Shells, and other Bodies,
that were of the same specific Gravity with Sand, sunk down together with it,
and so became enclosed in the Strata of Stone, which that Sand formed or
constituted: those which were lighter, and of but the same specific Gravity
with Chalk (in such places of the Mass where any Chalk was) fell to the bottom
at the same time that the Chalky Particles did, and so were entombed in the
Strata of Chalk; and in like manner all the rest: that accordingly we now find
in the Sand-stone of all Countries (the specific Gravity of the several sorts
whereof is very little different, being generally to water as 2 or 2 9/16 to 1)
only those Co^shae, Pectines, Cochle^, and other Shells that are nearly of the
same Gravity, ( viz. 2 or 2 to 1) but these are ordinarily found enclosed in it
in prodigious numbers; whereas of Oyster-shells, (which are in Gravity but as
about 2 to 1) of Echini (which are but as 2 or 2 to 1) or the other lighter
kinds of Shells, scarce one ever appears therein; but, on the contrary, in
Chalk (which is lighter than Stone, being but as about 2 1/10 to 1) there are
only found Echini, and the other lighter sorts of Shells; it being extremely
unusual to meet with so much as one single Shell of any of all the heavier
kinds amongst Chalk; but for the said Echini, and other the lighter sorts of
Shells, they are very numerous and frequent, in all the Chalk-pits of Kent,
Surrey, Essex, Hartfordshire, Barkshire, Oxfordshire, and all others that I
have searched; being found indifferently in the beds of Chalk from the top
quite down to the bottom of the Pit; I having my self commonly observed them to
the very bottom of all, in Pits that were an hundred foot deep, and in Wells
much deeper. To conclude, those Shells, and other Bodies, that were still
lighter than these, and consequently lighter than Stone, Chalk, and the other
common Matter of the Earth, such as the Shells of Lobsters (which are but as 1
to 1) of Crabs, (1 to 1) and the rest of the Crustaneous kind: the Teeth and
Bones of the cartilaginous and squammose Fishes, and many other Bodies, would
subside last of all, and so, falling above the rest, be lodged near, if not
upon the Surface; where being continually exposed to Weather, and other
Injuries, they must in tract of time needs decay and rot, and at last quite
vanish and disappear; and it is not to me any great wonder, that at this
distance of four thousand years, we find so very few of them remaining. So that
I think I may now safely appeal to any ingenuous and impartial Looker on,
whether this, That we find all those kinds of Shells (now extant upon our
Shores) which have nearly the same Gravity with Stone, and the other ordinary
Matter of our Earth, that is so tight and compact as to preserve them, enclosed
in great plenty therein, and only those, the rest which are lighter being so
very rarely found, can reasonably be supposed to have happened by mere chance,
with this Constancy and Certainty, and that in so many and distant Places: as
also, whether this be any Objection against my Hypothesis; or rather be not the
strongest accessory Confirmation of it that could well be expected, or even
desired.

To this Dissertation I shall subjoyn an Appendix, which will consist of
several Sections, touching the Bodies called Vnicorn^ Fossile, Lapis Iudaicus,
Entrochus, Asteria, or the Star-stone-Columns: with some farther Reflections
upon the Bufonites, Glossopetra, and Cornu Ammonis: proving that these, and
several more, which have been (for many Ages) reputed Gemms, and mere Stones,
are really nothing else but the Teeth, Bones, and other parts of Sea-Animals,
and (as the rest were) left behind by the Universal Deluge.

PART I. An Examination of the Opinions of former Writers on this Subject. The
Means whereby they thought these Marine Bodies brought out upon the Earth. Of
certain Changes of Sea and Land, and other Alterations in the Terraqueous
Globe, which they suppose to have happened.
THIS so considerable a point being thus gained: the Legitimacy or Reality of
these Marine Bodies vindicated and asserted: and my Way so far effectually
cleared by the foregoing Dissertation; I now reassume my original Design, and
pass on to enquire by what means they were hurried out of the Ocean, the place
of their native Abode, to dry Land, and even to Countries very remote from any
Seas.

And this is a Question of great Antiquity; and which has, for many Ages,
given no small Fatigue to Learned Men. Nor has the present been less
inquisitive into this Affair than the former Ages were. We have seen several
hands employed herein; and many of them very excellent ones too. The great
number of the Undertakers: the Worth of some of them: and their Zeal to bring
the Matter to a Decision, are sure Arguments of the Dignity and Importance of
it: and that it is not hitherto decided, is as certain a proof of its
difficulty.

Some were of Opinion, that these Shells were fetched from Sea, by the ancient
Inhabitants of those Countries where they are now found; who, after they had
used the included Fishes for Food, flinging forth the Shells, many of them
became petrified, as they speak; being thereby preserved down to our times, and
are the same which we at this day find in our Fields and Quarries.

Others rather thought that they were only Relics of some former great
Inundations of the Sea; which, furiously rushing forth, and overflowing the
adjacent Territories, bore these Bodies out upon the Earth along with it: but
returning at length more leisurely and calmly back again, it left them all
behind.

Many were of Opinion, that the Sea frequently flitted and changed its place:
that several parts of the Globe which are now dry Land, and habitable, lay
heretofore at the bottom of the Sea, and were covered by it: that particularly
the very Countries, which present us with these Spoils of it, were anciently in
its possession; being then an Habitation of Sharks and other Fishes: of
Oysters, Cockles, and the like; but the Sea, in tract of time, retreating
thence, and betaking it self into new Quarters: gaining as much ground on the
opposite Coasts, as it lost upon those, left these Shells there as Marks of its
ancient bounds and seat.

Amongst the rest there were indeed some who believed these to be Remains of
the General Deluge, and so many Monuments of that calamitous and fatal
Irruption. These last assuredly were in the right; but the far greater part of
them rather asserted than proved this: rather delivered it as their Opinion,
than offered any rational Arguments to induce others to the same Belief: And
for the rest, who did offer any, so unhappy were they in the Choice, and
unsuccessful in the Management of them, by reason of the shortness of their
Observations, and their not having duly informed themselves of the state of
these Things, that none of the other Partisans appeared with less Applause:
none less strenuously maintained their ground, than these did.

The Truth is, as Matters were ordered amongst them, no Man could receive much
Light or Satisfaction from what was advanced by any of them. They little more
than clashed with one another: each could demolish the others Work with ease
enough, but not a Man of them tolerably defend his own; which was sure never to
outstand the first Assault that was made. Yea upon so equal Terms did they all
stand, that no one could well lay claim to a larger share of Truth for his
side: no one had a fairer pretense of right, than the rest; and it being
impossible to imagine that all could be in the right; some* Learned Men began
to suspect that none of them were so.

These thereupon laid out on all hands for some new Expedient to solve and put
an end to the perplexity; and 'twas this last Effort that brought forth the
Opinion, that these Bodies are not what they seem to be; that they are no
Shells, but mere Sportings of active Nature in this subterraneous Kingdom; and
only Semblances or Imitations of Shells; they imagining that this shortened the
Difficulty, because it spared them the trouble of accounting for their
Conveyance from Sea; which was what had so severely exercised all the former;
though in reality, this only heightened and enhansed it, and rendered it still
more intricate; as will appear more at large when I shall have published the
preliminary Dissertation, whereof I have already given some Account above. And
this was the most received and prevalent Opinion when I first brought my
Collection of these Things up to London.

There have been, besides these recited, some other Conjectures proposed about
the removal of these Bodies to Land: which I choose, rather than trouble the
Reader with a detail of them here, to deferr to their proper place, that I may
proceed directly onwards in my Design. Now the more effectually to smooth my
way, and that this very great diversity of Opinions may not be any longer an
Amusement to the World, 'twill be very convenient that I look into the Reasons
and Pretensions of each, and show upon what ground it is that I embrace that of
the Deluge, and set aside all the rest.

Why I adhere to them who suppose these Marine Productions brought out by the
Universal Deluge, will be best learned from the succeeding part of this Essay,
which is wholly dedicated to that purpose: and whereunto I shall prefix, An
Historical Account of the Labors of Fab. Columna, Nic* Steno, P. Boccone, Iac.
Grandius, Mr. John Ray, and other Learned Men, on this Subject: showing what
they have already done in it, wherein they failed, and what remains still to be
done.

Why I reject all the other Conjectures, falls under our present Consideration;
and to make as short of the Matter as possible, it is because they will none of
them abide the Test: because they have not due warrant from Observation, but
are clearly repugnant thereunto: in a word, because the present Circumstances
of these Marine Bodies do not square with those Opinions, but exhibit
Phenomenon that thwart them, and that give plain Indications that they could
never have been put into the Condition we now find them by any such short and
partial Agents as those they propose.

Now in regard that the said Circumstances are impartially related in my
Observations, we need only have recourse to them to put an end to this
Business. For, as Mathematicians say of a straight Line, that it is as well an
Index of its own Rectitude, as of the Obliquity of a crooked one; so these may
serve indifferently to detect the erroneous ways, and to point forth the true;
and it is from these Observations: from the Number, Order, Variety, Situation,
Depth, Distance from the Sea, and other Accidents of these Bodies, that I shall
show

That they were not brought from

That they were not carried together

That they were not born forth of Ogygean, the Deucalion^an, and others of
fresher date: such as are those which usually attend* Earthquakes: or those
which are sometimes occasioned by very high Tides, by impetuous Winds, and the
like; as other Writers have thought.

they were not left behind at the beginning of the World, when the Sea
overspread the whole Globe, till its Retreat into its assigned Chanel, and that
the Waters were gathered together unto one place, the third day from the
Commencement of the Creation; which others believed.

they were not left by the Seas being constrained to withdraw from off certain
tracts of Land, which lay till then at the bottom of it, but being raised to an
higher pitch, so as to surmount the Level of the Seas surface, they, by that
means, became Islands and habitable: the said tracts being thus elevated by
Earthquakes, or the like subterraneous Explosions; in such manner as Rhodes,
Thera, Therasia, and many other Islands were supposed to have been raised;
which is the Conjecture of others.

they were not left by the Seas changing its place, receding from the Parts it
anciently possessed, and betaking it self to new Quarters: this change being
occasioned by some accidental Emotion or Transposition of the common Center of
Gravity in the Terraqueous Globe; and thereupon the Fluids of it, the Sea, and
the rest, immediately shifting likewise, as being the more easily moveable
parts of the Mass, and coming to another AEquilibrium; that they might thereby
the better accommodate themselves to their new Center. As others.

That they were not left upon the Ostia of those Rivers, and by that means
making continual Additions to the Land, thereby excluding the Sea, daily
invading and gaining upon it, and preserving these Shells as Trophies and Signs
of its new Acquests and Encroachments; which others have imagined: they
concluding that the Islands Echinades, the Lower Egypt, Thessaly, and many
other Countries, were thus raised out of the Mud brought down by Achelous, the
Nile, Peneus, and other Rivers.

they were not left by the Seas continual flitting and shifting its Chanel:
this Progression being occasioned by the Seas wearing and gaining upon one
Shore, and flinging up Mud, and, together with it, these Shells, upon the
other, or opposite Coasts, thereby making perpetual Additions unto them; which
is the Opinion of other Authors.

These Propositions (which are no other than so many Consectaries drawn from
the Observations) are, we see, all Negative; as being directed against the
Mistakes of some who have formerly engaged in this research. The ways they have
taken to account for the Conveyance of these Marine Bodies to Land, are very
many, as well as different from each other. For so eager and sollicitous has
the inquisitive and better part of Mankind been to bring this Matter to a fair
issue and determination, that no Stone has been left unturned, no way, whereby
these things could ever possibly have been brought forth of the Sea, but one or
other of them has pitched upon it. So that by this Refutation of all these, I
might prove my own (which is the only one remaining) by Induction; but this
kind of proof is not needful, where more cogent and positive Arguments are not
wanting.

And thus much of this Part I get over by the sole guidance of my Senses. A
View of the present state of these Bodies alone convinced me sufficiently that
the means, proposed by these Authors, were not the true ones: that they were
both levelled wide, and fell all short of the Mark. Now though this was enough
for my present purpose; and when I had evinced that, although such Alterations,
as those which these Gentlemen suppose: Transitions, and Migrations of the
Center of Gravity: Elevations of new Islands: whole Countries gained from the
Sea: and other like Changes had actually happened, yet these Shells could never
possibly have been reposed thereby in the manner we now find them: I say, when
I had proved this, I was not immediately concerned to enquire whether such
Alterations had really ever happened or not; yet partly for a fuller and more
effectual Disproof of the recited Opinions: and partly because I am more
especially obliged by my general design to look into all Pretenses of Changes
in the Globe we inhabit, and I saw very well, that scarce any, of all these
alleged, had the least countenance either from the present face of the Earth,
or any credible and authentic Records of the ancient state of it, I resolved
to pursue this Matter somewhat farther, and to show that, although there do
indeed happen some Alterations in the Globe, yet they are very slight and
almost imperceptible, Part 5. Cons. 1. etc.
and such as tend rather to the benefit and conservation of the Earth and its
Productions, than to the disorder and destruction both of the one and the
other, as all these supposititious ones most manifestly would do, were there
really any such; but from clear and incontestible Monuments of Antiquity: from
History and Geography: and from attentive Consideration of the present state of
those Countries where these Changes were supposed to have been wrought, I prove
that they are imaginary and groundless, and that such in earnest never
happened; but that the bounds of Sea and Land have been more fixed and
permanent: and in short, that the terraqueous Globe is to this day nearly in
the same condition that the Universal Deluge left it: being also like to
continue so till the time of its final ruin and dissolution, preserved to the
same end for which 'twas first formed, and by the same Power which has secured
it hitherto. But, with respect to my present Design, I more particularly make
out,

That although Rainwater be indeed (as these Writers suppose) very plentifully
saturated with terrestrial Matter, and (as I shall make appear) that peculiar
Matter out of which the Bodies of Vegetables, and consequently of Animals, are
formed, nourished, and augmented, Water being the common Vehicle and
Distributer of it to the Parts of those Bodies, and all Water (especially that
of Rain) being, more or less, stored with this, it being light in comparison of
the common Mineral earthy Matter, and therefore easily assumed into Water, and
moved along with it; yet that this Matter being all originally derived from the
surface of the Earth, either by the Vapor that continually issues out, and
ascends from all parts of it, Part 3. Sect. 1. Cons. 8.
or washed off by Land-floods, and conveyed into Rivers and the Sea, and thence
elevated up, together with the Vapor, which, as the former, constitutes the
Rain that falls: I say, it being thus originally all raised from the Earth,
when restored back again thereunto, it is but where it was before, and does not
enlarge the Dimensions of the Globe, or augment the surface of the Earth, and
only lie idly and unserviceably there, but part of it is introduced into the
Plants which grow thereon, for their Nutrition and Increment, and the rest,
which is superfluous, either remounts again, with the ascending Vapor, as
before, or is washed down into Rivers, and transmitted into the Sea, and does
not make any sensible Addition to the Earth, as some have believed.

That the terrestrial Matter, which is thus carried by Rivers down into the
Sea, is sustained therein, partly by the greater Crass^tude and Gravity of the
Seawater, and partly by its constant Agitation, occasioned by the Tides, and
by its other Motions, and is not permitted to sink to the bottom; or, if any of
it do, it is raised up again by the next Storm, and being supported in the Mass
of Water, together with the rest, it is by degrees exhaled, mounted up with the
Rain that rises thence, and returned back again to the Earth in fruitful
Showers. That by this perpetual Circulation a vast many things in the System of
Nature are transacted: and two main Intentions of Providence constantly
promoted; the one a Dispensation of Water promiscuously and indifferently to
all parts of the Earth; this being the immediate Agent that both bears the
constituent Matter to all formed Bodies, and, when brought to them, insinuates
it in, and distributes it unto the several parts of those Bodies, for their
Preservation and Growth: the other, the keeping a just AEquilibrium (if I may
so say) betwixt the Sea and Land; the Water, that was raised out of the Sea,
for a Vehicle to this Matter, being by this means refunded back again into it:
and the Matter it self restored to its original Fund and Promptuary, the Earth;
whereby each is restrained, and kept to due Bounds; so that the Sea may not
encroach upon the Earth, nor the Earth gain ground of the Sea. That there never
were any Islands, or other considerable parcels of Land, amassed or heaped up:
nor any enlargement, or addition of Earth made to the Continent, by the Mud
that is carried down into the Sea by Rivers. That although the Ancients were
almost unanimously of Opinion that those Parts, where Egypt now is, were
formerly Sea: and that a very considerable portion of that Country was recent,
and formed out of the Mud discharged into the neighboring Sea by the Nile;
that yet this tract of Land had no such Rise, out is as old, and of as long a
standing, as any upon all the whole Continent of Africa: and has been in much
the same Natural Condition, that it is at this day, ever since the time of the
Deluge; its Shores being neither advanced one jot further into the Sea for this
three or four thousand Years, nor its Surface raised by additional Mud deposed
upon it by the yearly Inundations of the Nile. That neither the Palus Maeotis,
nor the Euxine, nor any other Seas, fill up, or by degrees grow shallower. That
Salmydessus, Themiscyra, Sidene, and the adjacent Countries, upon the Coasts of
the Euxine Sea, were not formed out of the Mud brought down by the Ister,
Thermodon, Iris, and the other Rivers which discharge themselves into that Sea.
That Thessaly was not raised out of the Mud born down by the River Peneus: the
Islands Echinades, or Curzolari, out of that brought by the River Achelous:
Cilicia, by the River Pyramus: Mysia, Lydia, Ionia, and other Countries of
Anatolia, by the Caicus, Hermus, Cayster, and the other Rivers which pass
through them. To be short, That no Island or Country in the whole World was
ever raised by this means, notwithstanding that very many Authors, and some of
considerable note, have believed that all the abovementioned Countries were so
raised; nay, to so strange a height of Extravagance do some, otherwise Learned
and Curious, Persons run, when they indulge Fancy too far, and rely wholly upon
Probabilities and Conjectures, there is hardly any one single Island or Country
all round the Globe, that one Writer or other has not thought to have been
formed after this manner, or at least, some very large part of it.

That there is no authentic Instance of any considerable tract of Land that
was thrown up from the bottom of the Sea, by an Earthquake, or other
subterranean Explosion, so as to become an Island, and be rendered habitable.
That Rhodus, Thera, Therasia, and several other Islands, which were supposed by
the Ancients, and, upon their Authority, by later Authors, to have been thus
raised, had really no such Original, but have stood out above Water as long as
the rest of their Fellow Islands, and stand now just as the Universal Deluge
left them.

That as to that affection of Bodies which is called their Gravity, it clearly
^urpasses all the Powers of mere Nature, and all the Mechanism of Matter. That
as any one Body, or part of Matter, cannot be the Cause of its own Gravity: so
no more can it ever possibly be the Cause of the Gravity of another Body, or
part of Matter. That neither the Earth's diurnal Revolution upon its Axis: nor
any magnetic Effluvia of the Earth: nor the Air, or Atmosphere which environs
the Earth: nor the Ether, or Materia subtilis of the Cartesians, in what
manner soever moved or agitated: (all which have been proposed by several
Learned Men as the Causes of Gravity) nor any other Fluid or Matter whatever,
can of it self produce such an Effect as is that of the Gravity of Bodies. That
it does not proceed from the Efficiency of any such contingent and unstable
Agents, but stands on a Basis more firm and steadfast, being entirely owing to
the direct Concourse of the Power of the Author of Nature, immediately in his
hand, and the main Engine whereby this stupendous Fabric of the Universe is
managed and supported: the prime Hinge whereon the whole frame of Nature moves:
and is principally concerned, if not the sole Efficient in the most remarkable
Phoenomena of the Natural World; which, should Gravity once cease, or be
withdrawn, would instantly shiver into Millions of Atoms, and relapse into its
primitive Confusion. That the common Center of Gravity in the terraqueous Globe
is steady, immovable, and not liable to any accidental Transposition, nor has
it ever shifted or changed its Station. And that there is no declination of
Latitude: nor variation of the Elevation of the Pole; notwithstanding what some
Learned Men have asserted.

What concerns the raising of new Mountains: Deterrations, or the Devolution of
Earth down upon the Valleys, from the Hills and higher Grounds: and Islands
torn off from the main Continent by Earthquakes, or by the furious and
impetuous insults of the Sea; these, I say, will fall more properly under our
Consideration on another Occasion Part 2. and Part 5.
. And for the Mutations of lesser moment, which some have fancied to have
happened within this Interval, I mean, for the last four thousand Years since
the Deluge, I choose rather to pass them over at present, than to crowd and
encumber this short Tract with the account of them.

I must needs freely own, that when I first directed my Thoughts this way,
'twas matter of real Admiration to me, to find that a Belief of so many, and
such great Alterations in the Earth, had gained so large footing, and made good
its ground so many Ages, in the World; there being not the least signs nor
footsteps of any such thing upon the face of the whole Earth: no tolerable
Foundation for such a Belief either in Nature or History. But I soon saw very
well, that the Moderns generally entertained it merely upon the Credit and
Tradition of the Ancients, and that without due Examination, or Enquiry into
the Truth and Probability of it; and 'twas not long e're I discovered what it
was that so generally misled the Ancients into these Mistakes. But of that more
by and by.

Those ancient Pagan Writers were indeed very much excusable as to this matter.
Philosophy was then again in its Infancy: there remaining but few marks of the
old Tradition, and those much obliterated and defaced by Time; so that they had
only dark and faint Idea's, narrow and scanty Conceptions, of Providence: and
were ignorant of its Intentions, and of the methods of its Conduct in the
Government and Preservation of the Natural World. They wanted a longer
Experience of these things: a larger stock of Observations, and Records of the
state of the Earth before their times; having, as things then stood, nothing to
assist them in their Enquiries besides their own Guesses and Fancy. For their
Progenitors, and those who had lived in the earlier Ages, were almost entirely
taken up with Business of another kind. That fatal Calamity, the Deluge, had
wrought such a Change, Part 2.
that they beheld every where a new face of things: and the Earth did not then
teem forth its Increase, as formerly, of its own accord, but required Culture,
and the Assistance of their Hands, much more than before it did. The provision
of Bread for Food: Clothing to ward off the Injury and Inclemency of the Air:
and other like Employs for the Comfort and Support of Life, being of
indispensible necessity, were to be first looked after; and these Employs,
being then for the most part new to them, and such as they were unskilled in,
were alone enough to take up the greatest part of their time. The methods they
used of Agriculture, and other Arts of like importance, were so awkward and
tedious, as to afford them little leisure for Works of the Brain, for History,
or Contemplations of that nature. And till better Experience had led their
Posterity to the Improvements of Arts: till the Plow, and other useful
Instruments, were found out: and they had learned more compendious and
expeditious ways of dispatching those Affairs, whereby they shortened their
Labors, and so gained time, there was no show of Learning, or Matters of
Speculation among them; and we hear little or nothing of Writing, nay 'twas a
very considerable time before Letters themselves were found out. I know very
well, there are some who talk of Letters before the Deluge; but that is a
matter of mere Conjecture, and I think nothing can be peremptorily determined
either the one way or the other; though I shall show, that it is highly probable
they had none. Be that how it will, I shall plainly make out, that the Ages
which next succeeded the Deluge had none; so far from it, that they knew
nothing at all of them; and the first Writing they used was only the simple
Pictures, and Gravings of the things they would represent, Beasts, Birds, and
the like; which way of Expression was afterward called Hieroglyphick. But this
fell into disuse, when Letters were afterward discovered; they being, in all
respects, a far more excellent and noble Invention. We see therefore that there
were several Reasons why those early Ages could not transmit Accounts of the
state of the Earth and of these Marine Bodies, in their times, down to the
succeeding Generations. So that these having little more to trust to than their
own Imagination, and no surer a Guide in their Reasonings about these things
than bare Conjecture, 'twas no wonder that they fell into gross and palpable
Mistakes concerning them.

Nor much more wonder is it that an Epicurus: one who could ever espouse a
Notion so enormously absurd and senseless, as that the World was framed by
Chance: that this vast, regular, and most stupendous Pile was owing to no
higher a Principle than a fortuitous Congress of Atoms: and that either there
was no God at all, or, which is much the same thing, that he was an impotent
and lazy Being, and wholly without concern for the Affairs of this lower World:
I say, it is in no wise strange that such a one should believe, as he did, that
things were blindly shuffled and hurled about in the World: that the Elements
were at constant Strife and War with each other: that in some places, the Sea
invaded the Land: in others, the Land got ground of the Sea: that all Nature
was in an Hurry and Tumult: and that as the World was first made, so should it
be again dissolved and destroyed, by Chance: that it had alreaready made large
Advances that way, being infirm and worn with Age, shattered and crazy, and
would in time dwindle and fall back again into its original Chaos.

Did Gravity, the Inclination of Bodies toward the same common Center, to
which Inclination they owe their respective order, and site in regard of each
other, very many of their Motions and Actions, and in a great measure, their
present Constitution: did this, I say, happen from so contingent, precarious,
and inconstant Causes as many have believed: or did it stand upon so ^icklish
and tottering a Foundation as some Men's fancy has placed it, 'twould be no
wonder should it frequently vary: its Center swerve and shift, upon every turn:
and that there should ensue thereupon, not only such Motions and Alterations of
the Bounds of the Sea as they imagine; but likewise many other, and not less
pernicious, Perturbations of the course of even universal Nature.

Or was the Universe left to its own Conduct and Management: the whole Mass of
created Matter to its proper Disposition and Tendency: were there no restraint
of Bounds to the Earth, nor Curb to the fury of the Ocean: was there not One
who had set bars and doors to it, and said hitherto shall thou come, but no
farther, and here shall thy proud Waves be staid; then indeed might we well
expect such Vicissitudes and Confusions of things: such Justlings and Clashings
in Nature: such Depredations, and Changes of Sea and Land.

But if the same mighty Power, which in the beginning produced this vast System
of Bodies out of Nothing, and disposed and ranged them into the most excellent
and beautiful order we now behold: which at first framed an Earth of a
Constitution suitable to the innocent state of its primitive Inhabitants: and
afterward when Man had degenerated, and quitted that Innocence, altered that
Constitution of the

Earth, by means of the Deluge Part 2. Cons. 2. etc.
, and reduced it to the Condition it is now in, thereby adapting it more nearly
to the present Exigencies of things, to the lapsed and frail state of humane
Nature: If that same Power be yet at the Helm: if it preside in the Government
of the Natural World: and has still the same peculiar Care of Mankind, and,
for their sake, of the Earth, as heretofore, (all which shall be evidently made
out:) then may we very reasonably conclude 'twill also continue to preserve
this Earth, to be a convenient Habitation for the future Races of Mankind, and
to furnish forth all things necessary for their use, Animals, Vegetables, and
Minerals, as long as Mankind it self shall endure; that is, till the Design and
Reason of its Preservation shall cease; and till then, so steady are the
Purposes of Almighty Wisdom, so firm established, and constant the Laws,
whereby it supports and rules the Universe; the Earth, Sea, and all natural
things will continue in the state wherein they now are, without the least
Senescence or Decay, without jarring, disorder, or invasion of one another,
without inversion or variation of the ordinary Periods, Revolutions, and
Successions of things: and we have the highest security imaginable, that While
the Earth remains, Seed-time and Harvest, and Cold and Heat, and Summer and
Winter, and Day and Night shall not cease.

And whatever may be urged in behalf of the Ancients, I cannot well see, I
confess, what can be said for the later Authors, who have embraced the same
Tenets, more than that these Learned Men took up those Tenets on trust, their
overgreat deference to the Dictates of Antiquity betraying them into a
persuasion of such Changes in the Earth. I have given my Reasons above why I
cannot think the Ancients competent Judges in this Case. We have, at this time
of day, better and more certain means of Information than they had; and
therefore it were to have been wished, that these Gentlemen had not thus
obsequiously followed them, but gone another way to work. It would certainly
have been much better, had they taken the pains to have looked a little into
Matter of Fact: had they consulted History and Geography, in order duly to
acquaint themselves with the past and present state of the terraqueous Globe;
and not to have passed Sentence till they had first compared the most ancient
Descriptions of Countries with the Countries themselves as now they stand. Nay,
had they but read and attended to the Accounts which the very Authors, from
whom they borrow these Opinions, have left us, they might have discovered, even
from them, the Errors and Oversights of their Authors: and have learned, that
the Face of Sea and Land is the very same at this day that it was when those
Accounts were compiled: and that the Globe has not sustained any considerable
Alterations, either in the whole, or any of its Parts, in all this time.

Those who can content themselves with a Superficial View of Things: who are
satisfied with contemplating them in gross: and can acquiesce in a general, and
less nice Examination of them: whose Thoughts are narrow and bounded: and their
Prospects of Nature scanty, and by piecemeal, must needs make very short and
defective Judgments, and, oftentimes very erroneous, and wide of truth. Some
fanciful Men have expected nothing but Confusion and Ruin from those very means
whereby both that and this is most effectually prevented and avoided. One
imagines that the terrestrial Matter, which is showered down along with Rain,
enlarges the Bulk of the Earth, and that it will in time bury, and lay all
things under ground. Another, on the contrary, fancies that the Earth will ere
long all be washed away by Rains, and borne down into the Sea by Rivers; and,
its Chanel being thereby quite filled up, the Waters of the Ocean turned forth
to overwhelm the dry Land. Whereas by this Distribution of Matter, continual
Provision is every where made for the supply of Bodies: the just state of Sea
and Land preserved, and the Bounds of each secured; quite contrary to the
preposterous Reasonings of those Men, who expected so different a Result of
these things. And should this Circulation (from which they dreaded those dismal
Consequences) once cease, the Formation of Bodies would be immediately at an
end: and Nature at a perfect stand. But I am aware that I transgress: and that
this is a Prolixity not allowable in a Treatise of this nature; wherefore I
shall conclude, after I have performed my Promise of discovering what it was
which led the ancient Historians, Geographers, and others, so generally into a
belief of these frequent Changes betwixt Sea and Land; and 'twas this.

They observed, almost wherever they cast their eyes, vast multitudes of
Sea-shells, at Land, in their Fields, and even at very great distance from any
Sea. This, Eratasthenes, Herodotus, Xanthus Lydus, Strabo, Pausanias, Pomponius
Mela, Theophrastus, Strato the Philosopher, Plutarch, and others of them assure
us. They found them upon the Hills, as well as in the Valleys and Plains: they
observed that they were immersed in the Mass of the Stone of their Rocks,
Quarries, and Mines, in the same manner as they are at this day found in all
known Parts of the World.

Nay in those Elder Times, and which were so much nearer to the Deluge than
ours are, they found these Marine Bodies more frequently, and in much greater
plenty than we now do; and most, if not all of them, fresh, entire, and firm.
The whole crustaceous kind, and the lighter ones of the testaceous, which
together would be a vast number, subsiding last, fell upon the Surface of the
Earth; Page 29, etc. supra, and Part 2. Cons. 3.
whilst the heavier, which settled down before, were entombed in the bowels of
it. Those therefore must then lie everywhere strewed upon the ground; whereas
now very few, if any, of them appear; Cons. page 28. and Part 2. Cons. 3.
the Shells which we find at present upon the face of the Earth being
principally of the heavier sorts, which were at first lodged within it, and
since disclosed and turned out, by what means we shall see herea^^er Part 5.
Cons. 4.
And indeed, it is not conceivable how the generality of them could endure ^o
many Hundreds of Years as have since part: how they could lie so long exposed
to the Air, Weather, and other Injuries, without vast numbers of them, and
especially the siner and tenderer Species, being, long e're this, perished and
rotten, some of them quite dissolved and vanished, and the rest so damaged,
many of them, and altered by time, as not to appear the things they then were,
and so create a doubt amongst some of us whether they are really Shells or not.

This was a Scruple that never entered into their Heads. The Shells, being then
fair, sound, and free from decay, were so exactly like those they saw lying
upon their Shores, that they never made any question but that they were the
Exuviae of Shellfish, and that they once belonged all to the Sea. But the
Difficulty was how they came thither, and by what means they could ever arrive
to places oftentimes so remote from the Ocean.

The Ages that went before knew well enough how these Marine Bodies were
brought thither. But such were the Anxieties and Distresses of the then again
infant World: so incessant their Occupations about Provision for Food, Raiment,
and the like, that (even after Letters were discovered) there was little
leisure to commit any thing to Writing; and, for want thereof, the memory of
this extraordinary Accident was in great measure worn out and lost. It Is true
there was a general and loud Rumor amongst them of a mighty Deluge of Water
that had drowned all Mankind except only a very few Persons. But there had also
happened very terrible Inundations of later date, and which were nearer to the
Times when these Authors lived. Such was that which overflowed Attica in the
days of Ogyges: and that which drowned Thessaly in Deucalion's time. These made
cruel Havoc and Devastation amongst them: their own native Country, Greece,
was the Theater whereon these Tragedies were acted: and their Progenitors had
seen and felt their Fury. And these happening nearer home, and their Effects
being fresh, and in all Men's mouths, they made so sensible and lasting
Impressions upon their Minds, that the old great Deluge was eclipsed by that
means, its Tradition mightily obscured, and the Circumstances of it so
interwoven and confounded with those of these later Deluges, that 'twas even
dwindled into nothing, and almost buried in the Relations of those Inundations.

In their Enquiries therefore into this Matter, scarcely a Man of them thought,
or so much as dreamed, of the Universal Deluge. They concluded indeed
unanimously, that the Sea had been there, wherever they met with any of these
Shells, and that it had left them behind. And so far they were in the right:
this was an Inference rational and natural enough. But when they began to
reason about the means how the Sea got thither, and a way back again, there
they were perfectly in the dark; and, both Tradition and Philosophy failing
them, they had recourse to Shifts, and to the best Conjectures they could think
of; concluding that it was either forced forth, as in particular Inundations,
such as those lately mentioned: or that those Parts, where they found the
Shells, had been formerly in the Possession of the Sea, and the place of its
natural Residence, which it had since quitted and deserted.

Upon this they began to seek out by what means, most probably, the Sea might
have been dispossessed of those Parts, and constrained to move into other
Quarters. And if 'twas an Island where they found the Shells, they straitways
concluded that the whole Island lay originally at the bottom of the Sea: and
that 'twas either hoisted up by some Vapor from beneath: or that the Water of
the Sea, which formerly covered it, was in time exhaled, and dried up by the
Sun, the Land thereby laid bare, and these Shells brought to light. But if
'twas in any part of the Continent where they found the Shells, they concluded
that the Sea had been extruded and driven off by the Mud that was continually
brought down by the Rivers of those parts.

That I may not be over-tedious here, I will only add, that I shall clearly
show, from plain Passages of their own Writings yet extant, that 'twas merely
the finding these Sea-shells at Land that occasioned this Stir, and raised all
this Dust amongst the Ancients; and upon which principally they grounded their
Belief of the Vicissitudes and Changes of Sea and Land, wherewith their
Writings are so filled. But how little reason they had for it: and how far
those have been over-seen who have followed them herein, has been intimated
already, and will appear farther from the following part of this Essay, to the
Account of which I now hasten.

PART II. Concerning the Universal Deluge. That these Marine Bodies were then
left at Land. The Effects it had upon the Earth.
THE Consectaries of the former part of this Discourse are all negative; that
being only introductory, and serving but to clear the way to this second part:
to free the Enquiry from the Perplexities that some Undertakers have encumbered
it withal: and to set aside the false Lights they used in quest of the Agent
which transposed these Sea-shells to Land.

Having therefore discharged my hands of that Task, and, from Observation of
the present state of the Earth, and of the site and condition of the Marine
Bodies which are lodged within and upon it, shown that they could not possibly
be reposed in that manner by particular Inundations: by the Seas receding and
shifting from place to place: nor by any of the other means there proposed: I
pass next on to search out the true means: and to discover the Agent that did
actually bring them forth, and disposed them into the Method and Order wherein
we now find them. To which purpose I have recourse again to the Observations;
for by their Assistance this Matter may be rightly and fully adjusted. So that
I shall only proceed, as hitherto, to make Inferences from them; which
Inferences, in this Part are all Affirmative. Of these, the first is,

Confer. Part 3. Sect. 2. Cons. 2, 3.
of the Sea by the Universal Deluge: and that, upon the ret^^n of the Water
back again from off the Earth, they were left behind at Land.

This is a Proposition of some weight and consequence; upon which Account I
shall be somewhat prolix and particular in the Establishment of it: careful and
exact in conferring every Circumstance of these Marine Bodies, to see how they
square with it: and shall not dismiss it till I have evinced that those which I
pressed, in the precedent Part, as Objections against the several ways there
propounded, all fall in here, and are the clearest and most convincing
Arguments of the truth hereof: that this, and this alone, does naturally and
easily account for all those Circumstances: and fairly takes off all
Difficulties. Which Difficulties I propose at large, and particularly those
which have of late been urged, by some Learned Men, as proofs that these Bodies
were not left behind by the Deluge; showing of how little Validity they are.

Which being dispatched, I return back to my Observations; and proceed upon
them to represent the Effects that the Deluge had upon the Earth, and the
Alterations that it wrought in the Globe; some whereof were indeed very
extraordinary. These I distribute into two Classes; the first of which will
contain those that are only probable, and of which we have some reasonable
Intimations, but not an absolute and demonstrative Certainty, the Proofs
whereon they depend being more remote. And these I shall wholly wave at
present, and not crowd this shorter Treatise with the Relation of them,
reserving that room for those of the second Class, which are those whereof we
have a plain and undeniable Certainty: those which flow directly and
immediately from the Observations: and which are so evident, that it is
impossible these Marine Bodies could have been any ways lodged in such manner,
and to so great depths, in the Beds of Stone, Marble, Chalk, and the rest, had
not these Alterations all happened. Namely,

parts of Vegetables, Trees, Shrubs, Herbs: and, to be short, all Bodies
whatsoever that were either upon the Earth, or that constituted the Mass of it,
if not quite down to the Abyss Vid. Part 3. Sect. 1. Consect. 1.
, yet at least to the greatest depth we ever dig: I say all these were assumed
up promiscuously into the Water, and sustained in it, in such manner that the
Water, and Bodies in it, together made up one common confused Mass.

That at length all the Mass that Confer. p. 29.etc.
: that Matter, Body, or Bodies, which had the greatest quantity or degree of
Gravity, subsiding first in order, and falling lowest: that which had the next,
or a still lesser degree of Gravity, subsiding next after, and ^ettling upon
the precedent: and so on in their several Courses; that which had the least
Gravity sinking not down till last of all, settling at the Surface of the
Sediment, and covering all the rest. That the Matter, subsiding thus, formed
the Strata of Stone, of Marble, of Cole, of Earth, and the rest; of which
Strata, lying one upon another, the Terrestrial Globe, or at least as much of
it as is ever displayed to view, does mainly consist. That the Strata being
arranged in this order merely by the disparity of the Matter, of which each
consisted, as to Gravity, that Matter which was heaviest descending first, and
all that had the same degree of Gravity subsiding at the same time: and ihere
being Bodies of quite different Kinds, Natures, and Constitutions, that are
nearly of the same specific Gravity, it thence happened that Bodies of quite
different kinds subsided at the same instant, fell together into, and composed
the same Stratum. That for this reason the Shells of those Cockles, Escalops,
Perewinkles, and the rest, which have a greater degree of Gravity, were
enclosed and lodged in the Strata of Stone, Marble, and the heavier kinds of
Terrestrial Matter: the lighter Shells not sinking down till afterward, and so
falling amongst the lighter Matter, such as Chalk, and the like, in all such
parts of the Mass where there happened to be any considerable quantity of
Chalk, or other Matter lighter than Stone; but where there was none, the said
Shells fell upon, or near unto, the Surface: and that accordingly we now find
the lighter kinds of Shells, such as those of the Echini, and the like, very
plentifully in Chalk, but of the heavier kinds scarcely one ever appears; these
subsiding sooner, and so settling deeper, and beneath the Strata of Chalk. That
Humane Bodies, the Bodies of Quadrupeds, and other Land-Animals, of Birds, of
Fishes, both of the Cartilaginous, Squamose, and Crustaceous kinds; the Bones,
Teeth, Horns, and other parts of Beasts, and of Fishes: the Shells of
Land-Snails: and the Shells of those River and Sea Shellfish that were lighter
than Chalk etc. Trees, Shrubs, and all other Vegetables, and the Seeds of them:
and that peculiar Terrestrial Matter whereof these consist, and out of which
they are all formed: I say all these (except some Mineral or Metallic Matter
happened to have been affixed to any of them Part 4. Cons^ct. 2.
, whilst they were sustained together in the Water, so as to augment the weight
of them) being, bulk for bulk, lighter than Sand, Marl, Chalk, or the other
ordinary Matter of the Globe, were not precipitated till the last, and so lay
above all the former, constituting the supreme or outmost Stratum of the Globe.
That ^hese being thus lodged upon the rest, and consequently more nearly
exposed to the Air, Weather, and other Injuries; the Bodies of the Animals
would suddenly corrupt and rot: the Bones, Teeth, and Shells, would likewise
all rot in time, except those which were secured by the extraordinary Strength
and Firmness of their Parts, or which happened to be lodged in such places
where there was great plenty of bituminous or other like Matter to preserve,
and, as it were, embalm them: that the Trees would in time also decay and rot,
unless such as chanced to be reposed in, and secured by the same kind of
Matter: that the other more tender Vegetables, Shrubs, and Herbs, would rot
likewise and decay: But the Seeds of all kinds of Vegetables, being by this
means reposed, and, as it were, planted near the Surface of the Earth, in a
convenient and natural Soil, amongst Matter proper for the Formation of
Vegetables, would germinate, grow up, and replenish the face of the Earth: And
that vegetative terrestrial Matter, that fell, along with these, into this
uppermost Stratum, and of which principally it consists, has been ever since,
and will continue to be, the standing fund and promptuary out of which is
derived the Matter of all Animal and Vegetable Bodies, and whereinto, at the
Dissolution of those Bodies, that Matter is restored back again successively
for the Constitution and Formation of others.

That the Strata of Marble, of Stone, solid Matter, attained their Solidity, as
soon as the Sand, or other Matter whereof they consist, was arrived at the
bottom, and well settled there: And that all those Strata which are solid at
this day, have been so ever since that time.

That the said Strata; whether of and spherical: that they were continuous, and
not interrupted, or broken: and that the whole Mass of the Water lay then above
them all, and constituted a fluid Sphere environing the Globe.

Strata were broken, on all sides of the Globe: that they were dislocated, and
their Situation varied, being elevated in some places, and depressed in others.

Strata, was seated within the Earth.

Grotto's in Rocks, and those Intervals of the Strata, which, in my
Observations, I call the Perpendicular Fissures, are nothing but these
Interruptions or Breaches of the Strata. That the more eminent Parts of the
Earth, Mountains and Rocks, are only the Elevations of the Strata; these,
wherever they were solid, rearing against and supporting each other in the
posture whereinto they were put by the bursting or breaking up of the Sphere of
Earth Conf. Conf. 5. supra.
: and not falling down again, nor returning to their former and more level
site, as did the Strata of Earth, and other Matter that was not solid, and had
no Strata of Stone, or other consistent Matter, interposed, amongst their
Strata, underneath, to uphold them in the posture they were then raised into.
For which reason'tis, that Countries which abound with Stone, Marble, or other
solid Matter, are uneaven and mountainous: and that those which afford none of
these, but consist of Clay, Gravel, and the like, without any Stone etc.
interposed, are more champaign, plain, and level. That the lower parts of the
Earth, Valleys, the Chanel of the Sea, and the rest, are nothing but
Depressions of the Strata. That Islands were formed and distinguished by the
Depression or sinking down of the Strata lying betwixt each of them, and
betwixt them and the Continent. In one word, that the whole terraqueous Globe
was, by this means, at the time of the Deluge, put into the Condition that we
now behold.

Here was, we see, a mighty Revolution: and that attended with Accidents very
strange and amazing: the most horrible and portentous Catastrophe that Nature
ever yet saw: an elegant, orderly, and habitable Earth quite unhinged,
shattered all to pieces, and turned into an heap of ruins: Convulsions so
exorbitant and unruly: a Change so exceeding great and violent, that the very
Representation alone is enough to startle and shock a Man. In truth the thing,
at first, appeared so wonderful and surprising to me, that I must confess I was
for some time at a stand; nor could I bring over my Reason to assent, until,
by a deliberate and careful Examination of all Circumstances of these Marine
Bodies, I was abundantly convinced that they could not have come into those
Circumstances by any other means than such a Dissolution of the Earth, and
Confusion of things. And were it not that the Observations, made in so many,
and those so distant, places, and repeated so often with the most scrupulous
and diffident Circumspection, did so establish and ascertain the thing, as not
to leave any room for Contest or Doubt, I could scarcely ever have credited it.

And though the whole Series of this extraordinary Turn may seem at first view
to exhibit nothing but Tumult and Disorder: nothing but hurry, jarring, and
distraction of things: though it may carry along with it some slight show that
'twas managed blindly and at random: yet if we draw somewhat nearer, and take a
closer prospect of it: if we look into its retired Movements, and more secret
and latent Springs, we may there trace out a steady Hand, producing good out of
evil: the most consummate and absolute Order and Beauty, out of the highest
Confusion and Deformity: acting with the most exquisite Contrivance and Wisdom:
attending vigilantly throughout the whole Course of this grand Affair, and
directing all the several Steps and Periods of it to an End, and that a most
noble and excellent one; no less than the Happiness of the whole race of
Mankind: the Benefit, and universal Good, of all the many Generations of Men
which were to come after: which were to inhabit this Earth, thus moduled anew,
thus suited to their present Condition and Necessities.

But the Presidence of that mighty Power in this Revolution: its particular
Agency and Concern therein: and its Purpose and Design in the several Accidents
of it, will more evidently appear, when I shall have proved,

That, although one Intention of the Deluge was to inflict a deserved Punishment
upon that Race of Men, yet it was not solely levelled against Mankind, but
principally against the Earth that then was; with design to destroy and alter
that Constitution of it, which was apparently calculated and contrived for a
state of Innocence: to fashion it afresh, and give it a Constitution more
nearly accommodated to the present Frailties of its Inhabitants.

That the said Earth, though not indifferently and alike fertile in all parts of
it, was yet generally much more fertile than ours is. That the exterior Stratum
or Surface of it, consisted entirely of a kind of terrestrial Matter proper for
the Nourishment and Formation of Plants, and this in great Plenty and Purity;
being little, or not at all, entangled with an Intermixture of mere Mineral
Matter that was unfit for Vegetation. That its Soil was more luxuriant, and
teemed forth its Productions in far greater plenty and abundance than the
present Earth does. That the Plough was then of no use, and not invented till
after the Deluge; that Earth requiring little or no Care or Culture; but
yiedling its increase freely, and without any considerable Labor and Toil, or
assistance of Humane Industry; by this means allowing Mankind that time, which
must otherwise have been spent in Agriculture, Plowing, Sowing, and the like,
to far more divine and noble Uses: to Purposes more agreeable to the Design of
their Creation; there being no hazard, whilst they continued in that state of
Perfection, of their abusing this Plenty, or perverting it to any other end
than the sustenance of Nature, and the necessary support of Life.

That when Man was fallen, and had abandoned his primitive Innocence, the Cafe
was much altered, and a far different Scene of Things presented; that generous
Virtue, masculine Bravery, and prudent Circumspection which he was before
Master of, now deserted him, together with that Innocence which was the Basis
and Support of all: and a strange imbecility immediately seized and laid hold
of him: he became pusillanimous, and was easily ruffled with every little
Passion within: supine, and as openly exposed to any Temptation or Assault from
without. And now these exuberant Productions of the Earth became a continual
Decoy and Snare unto him: they only excited and fomented his Lusts, and
ministered plentiful Fuel to his Vices and Luxury; and the Earth requiring
little or no Tillage, there was little occasion for Labor; so that almost his
whole time lay upon his hands, and gave him leisure to contrive, and full swing
to pursue his Follies; by which means he was laid open to all manner of
Pravity, Corruption, and Enormity; and we need not be much surprised to hear
That the wickedness of Man was great in the Earth, and that every imagination
of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually G^n. vi. 5.
: no^ more, that that Generation of Men was more particularly addicted to
Intemperance, Sensuality, and Unchastity: that they spent their time in
Gluttony, in Eating and Drinking, in Lust and Wantonness, or, as the sacred
Writer cleanly and modestly expresses it, in marrying, and giving in marriage
Matthew. xxiv. 38.
, and this without Discretion or Decency: without regard to Age or Affinity:
but promiscuously, and with no better a Guide than the Impulses of a brutal
Appetite, They took them Wives of all which they chose Genesis vi. 2.
; Plenty and Abundance, Idleness and Ease, so naturally cherishing and
promoting those particular Vices: nor lastly, that the Apostasy was so great,
the Infection so universal: that the Earth was filled with violence, and that
all flesh had corrupted his way Genesis vi. 11, 12.
; the Cause of this Corruption, the Fertility of that Earth, being so
universal, so diffusive and epidemical. And indeed, 'twould be very hard to
assign any other single Cause, besides this, that could ever possibly have had
so spreading and general an Effect as this had. The Pravity of humane Nature is
not, I fear, less than it was then: The Passions of Men are yet as exorbitant,
and their Inclinations as vicious: Men have been wicked since the Deluge: they
are so still: and will be so, but not universally; there are now bounds set to
the Contagion, and it is restrained by removing the main cause of it; but there,
the Venom manifested it self on all hands: spread far and near: and scarcely
stopped till 'twas insinuated into the whole mass of Mankind, and the World was
little better than a common fold of Phrenticks and Bedlams.

That to reclaim and retrieve the World out of this wretched and forlorn state,
the common Father and Benefactor of Mankind seasonably interposed his hand: and
rescued miserable Man out of the gross Stupidity and Sensuality whereinto he
was thus unfortunately plunged. And this he did partly by tying up his hands,
and shortning the power of sinning: checking him, in the Career of his Follies,
by Diseases and Pains: and setting Death, the King of Terrors, which before
stood aloof off, and at the long distance of eight or nine hundred Years, now
much nearer to his view, ordaining Confer. Part 6. Dis. 3.
that his days shall be but an hundred and twenty years Genesis 6.3.
: and partly by removing the Temptation, and cause of the Sin: by destroying
Genesis vi.13. And behold I will DESTROY them with THE EARTH. And again, at the
Covenant made with Noah, after the Deluge, more distinctly Genesis ix.11. Neither
shall all flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a flood: neither shall
there any more be A FLOOD TO DESTROY THE EARTH; the latter part whereof is
rendered somewhat more expressly by the Septuagint (...) i.e. And there shall
not be any more a-Deluge of Water to destroy the WHOLE EARTH. And the vulg.
Lat. Neque erit deinceps Diluvium dissipans terram, i. e. Neither shall there
be hereafter a Deluge to dissipate [or dissolve] the Earth. And of this
Dissolution of the Earth there was a Tradition amongst the Ancients, both Jews
and Gentiles.
that Earth which had furnished forth Maintenance in such store unto it: by
changing that Constitution of it, and rendering it more agreeable to the lapsed
and frail state of Mankind. That this Change was not wrought by altering either
the form of the Earth, or its Position in respect of the Sun, as was not long
ago surmised by a very Learned Man Dr. Burnet. Theory of the Earth.
, but by dissolving Vid. Cons. 2. supra.
it: by reducing all the Matter of it to its first constituent Principles: by
mingling, and confounding them: the Vegetative with mineral Matter, and the
different kinds of mineral Matter with each other Part 4. Cons. 3.
: and by retrenching a considerable quantity of the vegetable Matter, (which
lay in such plenty and purity at the Surface of the Antediluvian Earth, and
rendered it so exuberantly fruitful) and precipitating it, (at the time of the
subsidence Vid. Cons. 3. supra.
of the general Mass of Earth and other Bodies, which were before raised up
into the Water) to such a depth as to bury it, leaving only so much of it near
the Surface as might just sufficiently satisfy the Wants of humane Nature, but
little or no more; and even that not pure, not free from the inter-mixture of
mere steril mineral Matter, and such as is in no wise fit for the Nutrition of
Vegetables; but so that it should require Industry and Labor to excite it, and
not yield a competent Crop without Tillage and Manure. That by this means, a
great part of that time, which the Inhabitants of the former Earth had to
spare, and whereof they made so ill use, was employed, and taken up in Digging
and Plowing, in making provision for bread, and for the Necessities of Life:
and the Excess of Fertility, which contributed so much to their Miscarriages,
was retracted and cut off.

That had the Deluge been aimed only at Mankind: and its utmost design merely
to punish that Generation, and thereby to deterr Posterity from the like
Offenses; this might have been brought about by means much more compendious,
and obvious too, and yet equally terrifying and exemplary. Mankind, I say,
might have been taken off at a far cheaper rate: without this ransacking of
Nature, and turning all things topsie-turvy: without this battering of the
Earth, and unhinging the whole frame of the Globe. The Business might have been
done as effectually by Wars; the Heart of every Man of them was in the hand of
God, and he could easily have made them Executioners of his Wrath upon one
another. He had the command of Famine, of Pestilence, and a thousand other
Disasters, whereby he could have carried them off by sholes, yea swept them all
clear away. Besides, he had the whole Artillery of the Sky in his power, and
might presently have Thunder struck them all, or destroyed them by Fire from
Heaven. But none of all these were used, though it is most apparent that any of
them would have been as fatal and pernicious to Man as the Deluge was, for the
Design lay a great deal deeper, and these would have fallen short of it: these
would never have reached the Earth, nor affected that in the least: they could
never have touched the Head, or stopped the source of these unhappy
misdemeanors, for which the Punishment was sent. That was what nothing but a
Deluge could reach; and as long as the Cause remained: as long as the old
Temptation was still behind, every Age would have lain under fresh Inducements
to the same Crimes: and there would have been a new necessity to punish and
reclaim the World: to depopulate the Earth, and reduce it again to a vast
Solitude, as constantly as there succeeded a new Age and Race of Men. For the
terror of the Calamity would not have extended it self much farther than the
Men which suffered under the weight of it: and a few Years would have worn out,
in great measure, the Impressions it made. This we see even from the Example of
the Deluge it self. As formidable as this was to those who lived at, or near,
the time of it: who saw the prodigious Devastations it made: the horrible
Methods by which 'twas brought about: and the Reason why 'twas inflicted; and
to their Posterity, for a few Generations; yet the Fright was not lasting:
'twas not long e're the Sting of it was worn out. And though the Elder Ages
knew full well that there had been such a Deluge: and had some Tradition of the
cruel Desolation it made; yet by degrees the Particulars of it were dropped, and
the most frightful Passages bore the least share in the Relation; being
probably so strange as to be hardly credible; and carrying rather an appearance
of Figment and Invention, in those that handed down the memory of it, than of
Truth and Reality. So that upon the whole it is very plain that the Deluge was
not sent only as an Executioner to Mankind: but that its prime Errand was to
reform and new-mold the Earth.

That therefore as much Harshness and Cruelty as this great Destruction of
Mankind seemingly carries along with it: as wild and extravagant a thing as
that Dissolution of the primitive Earth appeared at first sight, yet all the
Severity lay in the Punishment of that Generation, (which yet was no more than
what was highly just, yea and necessary too:) and the whole of the Tragedy
terminated there. For the Destruction of the Earth was not only an Act of the
profoundest Wisdom and Forecast, but the most monumental proof that could ever
possibly have been, of Goodness, Compassion, and Tenderness, in the Author of
our Being; and this so liberal too and extensive, as to reach all the
succeeding Ages of Mankind: all the Posterity of Noah: all that should dwell
upon the thus renewed Earth to the End of the World; by this means removing the
old Charm: the Bait that had so long bewildred and deluded unhappy Man: setting
him once more upon his Legs: reducing him from the most abject and stupid
Ferity, to his Senses, and to sober Reason: from the most deplorable Misery and
Slavery, to a Capacity of being happy.

That notwithstanding that this Remedy struck as deep at the Intellectuals, as
at the Morals of Mankind: that Ignorance and Rudeness would be as necessary a
Consequence of it, as Reformation of Life: and that this so general Employ and
Expense of their time would as assuredly curtail and retrench the ordinary
means of Knowledge and Erudition Confen. p. 55. and seq.
, as 'twould shorten the Opportunities of Vice: And so accordingly it fell out;
An universal Rusticity presently took place, spread on all hands, and stopped
not till it had overrun the whole stock of Mankind. Those first Ages of the
new World were simple, and illiterate to Admiration; and 'twas a long time e're
the Cloud was withdrawn: e're the least spark of Learning (I had almost said of
Humanity) broke forth, or any Man betook himself to the promotion of Science.
Nay the Effects of it are visible to this hour: a general Darkness yet
prevails, and hangs over whole Nations, yea the far greater part of the World
is still barbarous and savage. I say, tho 'twas most evident that this Remedy
must needs have this Consequence also as well as the other, yet it was not
suspended or changed upon that account; An egregious and pregnant instance how
far Virtue surpasses Ingenuity: how much an honest Simplicity, Probity of Mind,
Integrity and Incorruptness of Manners, is preferable to fine Parts, profound
Knowledge, and subtle Speculations. I would not have this interpreted an
invective against Humane Learning, or a decrying any commendable
Accomplishments either of Body or Mind, (that is what no Man will, I hope,
suspect me of) but only an intimation that these are not of any solid use, or
real advantage, unless when aiding and serviceable to the other.

Nor does this grand Catastrophe only present us with Demonstrations of the
Goodness, but also of the Wisdom and Contrivance of its Author. There runs a
long train of Providence thro^ the whole: and shines brightly forth of all the
various Accidents of it. The Consolidation of the Marble, and of the Stone,
immediately after their Settlement to the bottom: the disruption of the Strata
afterward: their Dislocation, the Elevation of some, and Depression of others
of them, did not fall out at random, or by chance, but were managed and
directed by a more steady and discerning Principle; for proof whereof, this is
indeed the proper place: but, in regard that there are some things advanced in
the succeeding, or third, Part of this Discourse, which give some farther light
to this matter, I shall beg leave to break off here, and to deferr it a while,
until I have first proposed them.

Thus have I drawn up a brief Scheme of what befell the Earth at the Deluge:
and of the Change that it then underwent. I have, by comparing its Antediluvian
Conf. Part 6.
with its present state, found where chiefly the Difference lay; viz. in degree
of Fertility. I have endeavored also to discover the Reason why this Change
was made in it. For since that the Process of it was so solemn and
extraordinary: that there were so many, and those so strange things done: that
the first Earth was perfectly unmade again, taken all to pieces, and framed
anew; and indeed, the very same Method that was used in the original Formation
of it, used likewise in this Renovation; our Earth standing the first step
after its Dissolution, in the same posture that the Primitive Earth did the
first step after its Rise out of Nothing; which the Reader will easily find by
conferring the fifth Proposition of this Part with Genesis i. v. 2. and 9: since
likewise there was so mighty an Hand Conf. Part 3. Sect. 2. Con^. 7.
concerned, and which does not act without great and weighty Reasons, there
could be no doubt but that there was some real and very necessary Cause for the
making that Alteration. Nor was such a Cause very hard to be found out. The
first Earth was suited to the first state of Mankind; who were the Inhabitants
of it, and for whose use 'twas made. But when Humane Nature had, by the Fall,
suffered so great a Change, 'twas but necessary that the Earth should undergo a
Change too, the better to accommodate it to the Condition that Mankind was then
in: and such a Change the Deluge brought to pass.

But least that the Br^vity which I have above used, and which indeed I am tied
up to, in my Representation of this matter, should render it liable to
Misconstruction: or that any one should suspect, that what I have delivered
concerning the Fertility of that Earth, does not well square with the Mosaic
Description of it, I must beg leave to make a Digression here, that I may
explain my self a little more upon that Head. And that the Reader may himself
be Judge in the Case, I shall fairly lay down Moses's sense of it in his own
words. Ver. 17. And unto Adam he said, Genesis iii.
because thou have hearkened unto the Voice of thy wife, and have eaten of the
Tree of which I commanded thee, saying, thou shall not eat of it: Cursed is the
ground for thy sake; in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life.

Ver. 18. Thorns also and Thistles shall it bring forth to thee: and thou shall
eat the herb of the field.

Ver. 19. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou return unto
the ground; for out of it wast thou taken: for dust thou art, and unto dust
shall thou return.

Ver. 23. Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the Garden of Eden, to
till the ground from whence he was taken.

Ver. 2. Cain was a tiller of the ground. Genesis iv.




All which may be well reduced to two plain and short Propositions, 1. That
Adam's Revolt drew down a Curse upon the Earth. 2. That there was some sort of
Agriculture used before the Deluge.


As to the former, the Curse upon the Earth, I shall not in the least go about
to extenuate the Latitude of it: or to stint it only to the Production of
Weeds, of Thorns, Thistles, and other the less useful kinds of Plants: but
shall give it its full scope, and grant that no less than an universal
Restraint and Diminution of the primitive Fruitfulness of the Earth was
intended by it; this indeed seeming to be the plain and genuine meaning of the
words. But the Question is, whether this Curse was presently inflicted or not:
whether it was succeeded with an universal Sterility, and the Earth's native
and original Exuberance all straitways checked, and turned to as general a
Desolation and Barrenness. And here I entreat it may be taken notice, that this
was but one, and that much the lesser, part of the Sentence past upon Adam. The
other was Death Conf. Romans v. 12. and 1 Cor. xv. 21, 22.
; which, it is most certain, was not immediately inflicted. And yet this was
pronounced at the same time and with the same breath, that the other was: Unto
dust shall thou return. Nay and much more emphatically a little before Genesis ii.
17.
, In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely dye. This was
exceedingly peremptory: and the very day fixed likewise. Notwithstanding,
through the Clemency and Goodness of God, Execution was delayed for a long
time; Adam being reprieved for eight or nine hundred years Genesis v. 5.
. The Dominion of Death over him commenced indeed not only the same day that
Sentence was past, but the very minute that he tasted the forbidden Fruit: and
Mortality went hand in hand with the Transgression: but 'twas a long time
before it had raised any Trophies, or made a final and absolute Conquest.

Why therefore may we not as well suppose the other part of the Sentence, the
Sterilizing the Earth, was also suspended for some time, and deferred till the
Deluge happened, and became the Executioner of it? It Is certainly very hard to
imagine that God should destroy the Work of his hands almost as soon as he had
finished it: that all things should be unhinged again by such time as they were
well ranged and put in order: and that the Fragrancy and lovely Verdure which
then appeared every where, and which had but just showed it self, should be
nip'd in the bud, and blasted all of a sudden. To be short, it is, I think, most
apparent, that as on the other part Mortality did presently enter and take
place, but got not full possession of many Ages after: so here, Thorns,
Thistles, and other the like Consequences of this Curse, immediately sprung out
of the Ground, and manifested themselves on every side, but it had not its full
effect, nor was the Earth impoverished, or its Fertility, sensibly curbed, till
the Deluge. And for proof of this I appeal to the Remains of that Earth: the
Animal and Vegetable Productions of it still preserved; the vast and incredible
Numbers whereof notoriously testify the extreme Luxuriance and Foecundity of
it; and I need but produce these as Evidences that at the time that the Deluge
came, the Earth was so loaded with Herbage, and thronged with Animals, that
such an Expedient was even wanting to ease it of the burden, and to make room
for a succession of its Productions. For this also I appeal to Moses himself,
who openly acknowledges that this Curse did not take place effectually till
the Deluge. For he tells us, that, after the Deluge was over, and Noah and his
Family come forth of the Ark, He builded an Altar unto the Lord, and offered
burnt-offerings on the Altar: and the lord smelled a sweet savor, and the Lord
said in his heart, I will not again Curse the Ground any more, neither will I
again smite any more every thing living as I have done Genesis viii. 20, 21.
. Wherein he plainly refers to the Curse denounced above, at the Apostasy of
Adam: implying that it was not fulfilled till the Deluge. And a little after he
as plainly intimates, that the fulfilling of it lay in the Destruction of the
Earth then wrought. For, speaking again of the same thing, instead of the
Expression [ Curse the Ground] here used, he makes use of [ Destroy the Earth]
The whole Passage runs thus; And I will establish my Covenant with you, neither
shall all flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a flood: neither shall
there any more be a Flood to destroy the Earth Genesis ix. 11.
.

Nor is it indeed in any wise strange that this Curse had not it is Effect
sooner: especially since 'twas not limited to any time. There are so many
Presidents on Record in Holy Writ of this way of proceeding, that no one can be
well ignorant of them; so that I shall not need to charge this place with more
than one, and that shall be the Case of Ham, for which we are likewise beholden
to the same Author, Moses. This Person, by his indiscreet and unnatural
Irrision and exposing of his Father, incurrs his Indignation, and Curse. But,
which is very remarkable, Noah does not lay the Curse upon Ham, who was
actually guilty of the Crime, whether out of greater Tenderness* he being of
the two nearer allied unto him, or for what other reason I shall not here
enquire, but transferrs it to Canaan: Cursed be Canaan, a Servant of Servants
shall he be to his Brethren: Gen ix. 25, 26, 27.
to Shem and to Iaphet. Nay, which is still more, this was never inflicted upon
Canaan in person, but upon his Posterity; and that not till many Generations
afterward, at such time as the Israelites returning out of Egypt, possessed
themselves of the Country of the Canaanites, and made them their Servants. The
Story is so well known, that I shall not need to point it out to the Reader,
who may peruse it at his leisure. 'Twas well onwards of a thousand Years before
ever this Curse began to take effect: before the Canaanites were brought under
Servitude by the Israelites, who were descended from Shem: and a great many
more before 'twas finally accomplished, and they subjected unto the Posterity
of Iaphet. To conclude, 'twas really a longer time before this, than it was
before the other, the Curse upon the Earth, was fully brought about.

To proceed therefore to the other Point, the Tillage of the Earth before the
Deluge. That there was Tillage bestowed upon it Moses does indeed intimate in
general and at large: but whether it was bestowed on all, or only upon some
parts of that Earth: as also what sort of Tillage that was, and what Labor it
cost, is not expressed; so that for all this we are at liberty, and may use our
Discretion. For the present I must pass by the Enquiry: but in due place I hope
to give some Satisfaction in it, and to show that their Agriculture was nothing
near so laborious, and troublesome, nor did it take up so much time as ours
does. That Is a Consequence of the Proof of the greater Fertility of that Earth;
it being plain that the more it exerted that Fertility, the less need there was
of Manure, of Culture, or Humane Industry to excite and promote it. Nor can any
Man reasonably suspect, because of this mention of Tillage, that the Curse upon
the Ground was come on, or that the primitive Exuberance of the Earth was
lessened and abridged, before the Deluge; for Moses makes mention of Tillage
before ever Adam was created: There was not, says he Genesis ii.5.
, a man to till the ground: and consequently, there would have been requisite
such a Tillage as this which he speaks of in these three Chapters, though the
Curse had never been denounced, or Man had not fallen. But it is highly probable
that upon Adam's Disobedience, Almighty God chased him out of Paradise, the
fairest and most delicious part of that Earth, into some other the most barren
and unpleasant of all the whole Globe; the more effectually to signify his
Displeasure, and to convince that unhappy Man how great a Misfortune and
Forfeiture he had incurred by his late Offense. And here, above all other Parts
of the Earth, there would be Work and Employ for him, and for his Son Cain.

And thus much may serve for the present, to show that my Account of the
Antediluvian Earth is so far from interfereing with that which Moses has given
us, that it holds forth a natural and unforced Interpretation of his Sense on
this Subject. There are a few other Passages in the same Author which may
require some Explication: but they are none of them such that a Reader of
moderate Understanding may not easily clear them, without my Assistance, so
that I shall not crowd this Piece with them; for I fear 'twill be thought that
I have already taken too great a liberty. The Compass that I am confined unto,
by the Rules of this kind of Writing, is so narrow, that I am forced to pass
over many things in silence, and can but just touch upon others. To lay down
every thing at length, and in its full light, so as to obviate all Exceptions,
and remove every Difficulty, would carry me out too far beyond the Measures
allowed to a Tract of this Nature. That Is the Business of the Larger Work, of
which this is only the Module or Platform. In that Work I hope to make amends
for these Omissions, and particularly shall consider*

What was the immediate Instrument or Means whereby the Stone, and other solid
Matter of the Antediluvian Earth was dissolved, and reduced to the Condition
mentioned Consect. 2. of this Part.

Why the Shells, Teeth, Bones, and other parts of Animal Bodies: as also the
Trunks, Roots, and other parts of Vegetables, were not dissolved, as well as
the Stone, and other Mineral Solids of that Earth. Of this I shall assign a
plain and Physical Reason, taken merely from the Cause of the Solidity of these
Mineral Bodies; which I show to be quite different from that, whereunto
Vegetables and Animals owe the Cohaesion of their parts: and that this was
suspended, and ceased, at the time that the Water of the Deluge came forth;
which the other (I mean the Cause of the Cohaesion of the Parts of Animals and
Vegetables) did not; with the reason of this.

What was the Reason that (in case the Terrestrial Globe was entirely
dissolved, and there be now, and was then, a Space or Cavity, in the Central
parts of it, so large as to give reception to that mighty Mass of Water which
covered the Earth at the Deluge Vid. Part 3. Sect. 1. Consect. 1. and Sect. 2.
Cons. 2, 3
) the Terrestrial Matter which first subsided, (as in Consect. 3. supra) did
not fill the said Cavity, and descend quite down to the Center, but stopped at
that distance from it, forming an arched Expansum, or rather a Sphere around
it; which is now the lowest Stratum, and Boundary of that vast Conceptacle of
Water. As also how this Water was raised at the Deluge; by what Issues or
Outlets it came forth: what succeeded into the room of it, whilst absent: and
which way it returned back again.

By what means the Strata of Stone, and Marble, acquired such a Solidity, as
soon as the Matter, whereof they consist, had subsided, and was well settled to
the bottom, as in Consect. 4. of this Part.

What was the immediate Agent which effected that Disruption of the Strata, and
their Dislocation afterward; whereof in Consect. 6. of this Part.

And because there have been some Conjectures formerly started by Learned Men
about the Formation of Sand-Stone, the Origin of Mountains, and of Islands,
that are repugnant to what I have here advanced upon those Subjects, I am
obliged to look a little into the Reasons of them; and, that they may not
remain as Obstacles to those who are less skillful in these things, I shall
weigh their Arguments, detect the Invalidity of them, and prove, against them,

That the Sand-Stone now in being is not as old as the Earth it self: nor has
it been consolidated ever since the Creation of the World, as some Authors have
believed.

That Sand-Stone does not now grow by Iuxtaposition, as they speak; that is by
continual Addition of new Matter; in like manner as the Bodies of Animals and
of Vegetables grow, and are augmented; as others were of Opinion.

That Sand-Stone does not still consolidate: i.e. that Matter which was, a few
Years ago, lax, incoherent, and in form of Earth, or of Sand, does not become
daily more hard and consistent, and by little and little acquire a perfect
Solidity, and so turn to Stone; as others have asserted.

That the Mountains of our Earth have not had being ever since the Creation:
and stood as long as the Earth it self; as some Writers have thought.

That the said Mountains were not raised successively, and at several times,
being flung up or elevated by Earthquakes, some at one time, and some at
another, as those Earthquakes happened. That these are so far from raising
Mountains, that they overturn and fling down, some of those which were before
standing; and undermine others, sinking them into the Abyss underneath Confer.
Part 3. Sect. 1. Cons. 12.
. That of all the Mountains of the whole Globe, which are very numerous, and
many of them extremely large, and consequently cannot be supposed to have been
all thus raised without the Notice of Mankind, yet there is not any authentic
Instance, in all History, of so much as one single Mountain that was heaved up
by an Earthquake. That the new Mountain in the Lucrine Lake, not far from
Pozzuolo in Italy, called Monte di Cinere, which is alleged by the Fautors of
this Opinion, as an instance in behalf of it, was not raised thus; the Relators
of that Accident, as well those who were then living, as they who wrote since,
unanimously agreeing that this Tumulus, or Hill, is no other than an huge heap
of Stones, Cinders, Earth, and Ashes, which were spued up out of the bowels of
the Earth, by the Eruption of a Volcano, which happened there, in the Year
1538. And though this Eruption was preceded by several Earthquakes (the Country
all round having been frequently shaken for almost the space of two years
before) as those of AEtna, Vesuvius, and Hecla usually are, yet this Hill was
not elevated or heaved up by any of those Earthquakes, but the Matter, whereof
it is compiled, discharged out of the Volcano, as af^^^said; in like manner as
AEtna, Vesuvius, and the rest, fling forth Stones, Cinders, etc. upon any
extraordinary Eruption of them.

That there have not been any Islands of note, or considerable extent, torn and
cast off from the Continent by Earthquakes, or severed from it by the
boisterous Allision of the Sea. That Sicily, Cyprus, the Negropont, and many
more, which have been supposed by some to be only dismembered parcels of the
Main-land, and anciently parted from it by one or other of these means, yet
really never were so; but have been Islands ever since the time of the Noetick
Deluge.

Unto this Second Part I shall annex,

A Discourse concerning the Trees, which are commonly called Subterranean
Trees, or Fossil Wood, and which are found in great plenty buried amongst other
Vegetable Bodies in Mosses Moss is the Name used all over the North of England
instead of Fen.
* Fens, or Bogs, not only in several Parts of England, but likewise in many
Foreign Countries; wherein I shall show, from Observations made upon the Places
where these Trees are dug up: upon the Trees themselves: their Position in
the Earth, and other Circumstances, that they were lodged thus by the Deluge,
and have lain here ever since. That there are found great numbers of these
Trees, and many of them very large, so buried in several Islands where no Trees
at all do, or will, now grow: the Winds being so fierce, and the Weather so
severe, as not to suffer any thing to prosper or thrive beyond the height of a
Shrub, in any of all those Islands, unless it be protected by Walls, as in
Gardens, or other like Coverture. That the said Trees are in some places found
enclosed in the Stone of Quarries and of Rocks: buried amongst Marle, and other
kinds of Earth, as well as in this Peat or Moss^Earth. That they were
originally lodged indifferently amongst all sorts of Earth, or other Matter,
which lay near the Surface of the Earth Conf. Cons. 3. sup^a.
: and that they are at this day found very seldom unless in this Peat-Earth, is
merely accidental; this Earth being of a bituminous and mild Nature; so that
the Trees lay all this while, as it were, embalmed in it, and were by that
means preserved down to our times; whilst those which chanced to be lodged in
other Earth, that was more lax and pervious, decayed in tract of time, and
rotted at length, and therefore do not now appear at all, when we dig and
search into those Earths; or if any thing of them do appear, it is only the
Ruins, or some slight Remains of them; there being very rarely found any Trunks
of Trees, in these laxer Earths, that are entire, or tolerably firm and sound.
To conclude, from several of the aforesaid Circumstances I shall evince that
these Trees could never possibly have been reposed thus by any other means than
the Deluge: neither by Men: nor by Inundations: nor by Deterations Confer. Part
5. Consect. 2.
: nor by violent and impetuous Winds: nor by Earthquakes; which are the several
ways whereby Learned Men have thought they were thus buried.

PART III. Concerning the Fluids of the Globe.
SECT. I. Of the great Abyss. Of the Ocean. Concerning the Origin of Springs,
and Rivers. Of Vapors, and of Rain.
HAving thus done with the more bulky and Corpulent Parts of the Globe, the
next place in course is due unto Metalls and Minerals, which are the only
remaining part of the Terrestrial Matter of it not yet treated of And
accordingly I should now pass on to these; but the present Economy and
Disposal of some of them being wholly owing to the Motion and Passage of Water
in the interior parts of the Earth, I have for that reason chosen rather, that
I may be as brief as possible, and avoid all needless Repetitions, to wave them
for a while, till I have first offered what I have to say about that.

The Water therefore of the Globe, as well that resident in it, as that which
floats upon it, is the Subject which I purpose here to prosecute. In order
whereunto, I shall sub-divide this third Part into two Sections; the former
whereof will comprehend what relates to the present and natural State of the
Fluids in and upon the Earth: the other, what concerns that extraordinary
Change of this State which happened at the Deluge, and how that Change was
wrought.

At the Head of the first of these Sections I prefix a new set of Observations
touching the Fluids of the Terraqueous Globe: the Sea, Rivers, and Springs: the
Water of Mines, of Cole-pits: of Caves, Grotts, and the like Recesses: as also
concerning Vapors, Rain, Hail, and Snow.

And because this is a Subject of that vast Latitude that the Strength of one
single Man will scarcely be reckoned sufficient effectually to cultivate and
carry it on, I have taken in the joint Assistance of other Hands, and
superadded, to my own, all such Relations as I could procure from Persons whose
Judgment and Fidelity might safely be relied upon, about the Sea, Lakes,
Rivers, Springs, and Rain, not only of this Island, but many other Parts of the
World besides. Nor do I neglect those which are already extant in the Published
Discourses of diligent and inquisitive Men.

From all which Observations, joined with those made by my self, I prove,

That there is a mighty Collection of enclosed in the Bowels of the Earth,
constituting an huge Orb in the interior or central Parts of it; upon the
Surface of which Orb of Water the terrestrial Strata are expanded. That this is
the same which Moses calls the Great Deep, or Abyss: the ancient Gentile
Writers, Erebus, and Tartarus.

That the Water of this Orb communicates Ocean, by means of certain Hiatus's or
Chasmes passing betwixt it and the bottom of the Ocean. That they have the same
common Center, around which the Water of both of them is compiled and arranged;
but in such manner, that the ordinary Surface of this Orb is not level with
that of the Ocean, nor at so great a distance from the Center as that is, it
being for the most part restrained and depressed by the Strata of Earth lying
upon it; but wherever those Strata are broken, or so lax and porose that Water
can pervade them, there the Water of the said Orb does ascend: fills up all the
Fissures whereinto it can get Admission or Entrance: and saturates all the
Interstices and Pores of the Earth, Stone, or other Matter, all round the
Globe, quite up to the level of the Surface of the Ocean.

Circulation of Water in the Atmosphere: it arising from the Globe in form of
Vapor, and falling down again in Rain, Dew, Hail, and Snow. That the quantity
of Water thus rising and falling is equal; as much returning back in Rain, etc.
to the whole terraqueous Globe, as was exhaled from it in Vapors: and
reciprocally as much mounting up again in Vapor as was discharged down in
Rain. That though the quantity of Water thus rising and falling be nearly certain
and constant as to the whole, yet it varies in the several Parts of the Globe;
by reason that the Vapors float in the Atmosphere, sailing in Clouds from
place to place, and are not restored down again in a Perpendicular upon the
same precise Tract of Land, or Sea, or both together, from which Originally
they arose, but any other indifferently; so that some Regions receive back more
in Rain than they send up in Vapor: as, on the contrary, others send up more
in Vapor than they receive in Rain: nay, the very same Region at one Season
sends up more in Vapors than it receives in Rain, and at another receives more
in Rain than it sends up in Vapor; but the Excesses of one Region and Season
compensating the Defects of the others, the quantity rising and falling upon
the whole Globe is equal, however different it may be in the several Parts of
it.

That the Rain which falls upon the Rivers, and thence into the Sea: and partly
sinks down into the Earth, insinuating it self into the Interstices of the
Sand, Gravel, or other Matter of the exterior or uppermost Strata; whence some
of it passes on into Wells, and into Grotts, and stagnates there, till it is by
degrees again exhaled: some of it glides into the perpendicular Intervalls of
the solid Strata; where, if there be no Outlet or Passage to the Surface, it
stagnates, as the other: but if there be such Outlets, it is by them refunded
forth together with the ordinary Water of Springs and Rivers: and the rest,
which, by reason of the compactness of the terrestrial Matter underneath,
cannot make its way to Wells, the perpendicular Fissures, or the like Exits,
only saturates the uppermost Strata: and in time remounts up again in Vapor
into the Atmosphere.

Rains do thus fall into, and augment Springs and Rivers, yet neither the one
nor the other do derive the Water, which they ordinaririly refund, from Rains;
notwithstanding what very many Learned Men have believed.

Springs and Rivers do not proceed from Vapors raised out of the Sea by the
Sun, borne thence by Winds unto Mountains, and there condensed, as a modern
ingenious Writer is of Opinion.

That the abovementioned great subterranean Abyss, with its Partner the Ocean,
is the Standing Fund and Promptuary which supplies Water to the Surface of the
Earth: as well Springs and Rivers, as Vapors and Rain.

That there is a nearly uniform and Heat and Fire differ but in degree: and
Heat is Fire only in lesser quantity. Fire I shall show to be a fluid
consisting of Parts extremely small and light, and consequently very subtle,
active, and susceptive of Motion. An Aggregate of these Parts in such number as
to be visible to the Eye, is what we call Flame and Fire: a lesser, thinner,
and more dispersed Collection, Heat and Warmth.
disseminated throughout the Body of the Earth, and especially the interior
Parts of it; the bottoms of the deeper Mines being very sultry, and the Stone
and Ores there very sensibly hot even in Winter, and the colder Seasons. That
it is this Heat which evaporates and elevates the Water of the Abyss, buoying it
up indifferently on every side, and toward all parts of the Surface of the
Globe: pervading not only the Fissures and Intervals of the Strata, but the
very Bodies of the Strata themselves, permeating the Interstices of the Sand,
Earth, or other Matter, whereof they consist: yea even the most firm and dense
Marble and Sand-stone; for these give Admission to it, though in lesser
quantity, and are always found saturated with it; which is the reason that they
are softer, and cut much more easily, when first taken out of their Beds and
Quarries, than afterward, when they have lain some time exposed to the Air,
and that Humidity is evaporated.

That this Vapor proceeds up directly toward the Surface of the Globe on all
sides, and, as near as possible, in right Lines, unless impeded and diverted by
the Interposition of Strata of Marble, the denser sorts of Stone, or other like
Matter, which is so close and compact that it can admit it only in smaller
quantity, and this very slowly and leisurely too.

That when it is thus intercepted in its passage, the Vapor, which cannot
penetrate the Stratum diametrically, some of it glides along the lower Surface
of it, permeating the horizontal Interval which is betwixt the said dense
Stratum and that which lies underneath it: the rest passing the Interstices of
the Mass of the subjacent Strata, whether they be of laxer Stone, of Sand, of
Marle, or the like, with a Direction parallel to the Site of those Strata, till
it arrives at their perpendicular Intervalls.

That the Water being thus approached to these Intervalls, in case the Strata,
whereby the ascending Vapor was collected and condensed into Water (as we
usually speak) in like manner as by an Alembick, happen to be raised above the
level of the Earth's ordinary Surface, as those Strata are whereof Mountains
consist, then the Water, being likewise got above the said level, flows forth
of those Intervalls or Apertures, and, if there be no Obstacle without, forms
Brooks and Rivers: but where the Strata, which so condense it, are not higher
than the mean Surface of the Earth, it stagnates at the Apertures, and only
forms Standing Springs.

That though the Supply from this great Receptacle below be continual, and
nearly the same at all Seasons, and alike to all parts of the Globe, yet when
it arrives at or near the Surface of the Earth, where the Heat (the Agent which
evaporates and bears it up) is not so constant and uniform as is that resident
within the Globe, but is subject to Vicissitudes and Alterations, being at
certain Seasons greater than at others: being also greater in some Climates and
Parts of the Earth than in others: it thence happens that the quantity of Water
at the Surface of the Earth, though sent up from the Abyss with an almost
constant Equality, is various and uncertain, as is the Heat there; at some
Seasons, and in some Countries, the Surface abounding, and being even drowned
with the plenty of it, the Springs full, and the Rivers high: at other Seasons,
and in other Countries both Springs and Rivers exceeding low, yea sometimes
totally failing.

That when the Heat in the exterior Parts of the Earth, and in the ambient
Air, is as intense as that in the interior Parts of it, all that Water which
passes the Strata directly, mounting up in separate Parcels, or in form of
Vapor, does not stop at the Surface, because the Heat there is equal both in
quantity and power to that underneath, which brought it out of the Abyss. This
Heat therefore takes it here, and bears it up, part of it immediately out at
the Surface of the Earth: the rest, through the Tubes and Vessels of the
Vegetables which grow thereon, Herbs, Shrubs, and Trees, and along with it a
sort of vegetative terrestrial Matter, which it detaches from out the uppermost
Stratum wherein these are planted; this it deposes in them, for their
Nutriment, as it passes through them Vid. Cons. 10. infra.
; and issuing out at the tops and extremities of them, it marches still on, and
is elevated up into the Atmosphere to such height that, the Heat being there
less, it becomes condensed, unites and combines into small Masses or Drops, and
at length falls down again in Rain, Dew, Hail, or Snow. And for the other part
of the Water, which was condensed at the Surface of the Earth, and sent forth
collectively into Standing-Springs and Rivers, this also sustains a Diminution
from the Heat above, being evaporated, more or less, in proportion to the
greater or lesser Intenseness of the Heat, and the greater or lesser Extent of
the Surface of the Water so sent forth.

That as these Evaporations are at some times greater, according to the greater
heat of the Sun, fo wherever they alight again in Rain; it is as much superior
in quantity to the Rain of colder Seasons, as the Suns power is then superior
to its power in those Seasons. This is apparent even in these Northern Climes,
where the Suns power is never very great, our Rains in June, July, and August,
being much greater than those of the colder Months: the Drops larger, and
consequently heavier: falling thicker, faster, and with greater force: striking
the ground, at their fall, with violence, and making a mighty noise: beating
down the fruit from the Trees, prostrating and laying Corn growing in the
Fields: and sometimes so filling the Rivers as to make them out-swell their
Banks, and lay the neighboring Grounds under Water. But much more apparent is
it in the more Southern Regions: in Abassinia, Nigritia, Guinea: in the
East Indies: in Brasil, Paraguay, and other Countries of South America, to
instance in no more. In these the Sun shows a much greater force: and their
Rains (which are periodical, happening always much about the same time, and
lasting several Months) fall in such quantities as to be more like Rivers
descending, than Showers; and by these are caused those mighty periodical
Inundations of the Nile, the Niger, the Rio da Volta: the Ganges: the Rio de
las Amazonas, the Rio de la Plata, and other Rivers of those Countries; to
which Inundations Egypt, through which the Nile flows, the Indies, and the
rest, owe their extraordinary Fertility, and those mighty Crops they produce
after these Waters are withdrawn from off their Fields; Rainwater, as we have
already noted Page 47.
, carrying along with it a sort of terrestrial Matter that fertilizes the Land,
as being proper for the Formation of Vegetables.

That when the Heat in the exterior Parts of the Earth, and in the ambient
Air, is less than that in the interior, the Evaporations are likewise less;
and the Springs and Rivers thereupon do not only cease to be diminished Conf.
page 12^.
, proportionably to the Relaxation of the Heat, but are much augmented; a great
part of the Water, which ascends to the Surface of the Earth in Vapor,
stopping there, for want of Heat to ^ount it thence up into the Atmosphere, and
saturating the superficial or uppermost Strata with Water; which by degrees
drains down into Wells, Springs, and Rivers, and so makes an Addition unto
them. And this is the reason that these abound with Water in the colder Season
so much more than they do in the hotter.

Water, which is thus dispensed to the Earth and Atmosphere by the Great Abyss,
being carried down by Rains and by Rivers into the Ocean, which, as we have
said, communicates, and stands at an AEquilibrium with that subterranean
Conservatory, is by that means restored back to the Abyss; whence it returns
again, in a continual Circulation, to the Surface of the Earth, in Vapors, and
Springs.

final Cause of this Distribution of Water, in such quantity, to all parts of
the Earth indifferently in Springs, Rivers, and Rain: and of this perpetual
Circulation and Motion of it, is the Propagation of Bodies, Animals,
Vegetables, and Minerals, in a continued Succession. That for Animals, they
either feed upon Vegetables immediately: or, which comes to the same at last,
upon other Animals which have fed upon them; so that Vegetables are the first
and main Fund, and fit Matter being supplied unto these, Provision is thereby
made for the Nourishment of Animals; these Vegetables being no other than so
many Machines serving to derive that Matter from the Earth, to digest and
prepare it, for their food, leisurely and by little and little, as they can
admit and dispose of it, and as it is brought to them by the Ministration of
this Fluid. That Vegetables being naturally fixed and tied al^ays to the same
place, and so not able (as Animals are) to shift, and seek out after Matter
proper for their Increment, 'twas indispensably necessary that it should be
brought to them: and that there should be some Agent, thus ready and at hand in
all places, to do them that Office, and so carry on this great and important
Work. For this Matter being impotent, sluggish, and inactive, has no more
power to stir, or move it self to these Bodies, than they themselves have to
move unto it; and therefore it must have lain eternally confined to its Beds of
Earth, and then none of these Bodies could ever have been formed, were there
not this, or the like, Agent to educe it thence, and bear it unto them. Nor
does the Water, thus hurried about from place to place, serve only to carry the
Matter unto these Bodies, but the parts of it being very voluble and lubricous,
as well as fine and small, it easily insinuates it self into, and placidly
distends the Tubes and Vessels of Vegetables, and by that means introduces into
them the Matter it bears along with it, conveying it to the several Parts of
them; where each Part, by a particular Mechanism in the Structure of it,
detaches and assumes those Particles of the Mass so conveyed which are proper
for the Nutrition and Augmentation of that Part, incorporating these with it,
and letting all the rest pass on with the Fluid; those Particles which are
either superfluous, and more than the parts of the Plant can admit and manage
at one time: or that are not suitable and proper for the Nourishment of any of
the parts of a Plant of that kind, passing out at the Extremities of it along
with the Water Confer. page 125.
And this latter Office it does likewise to Animals; Water, and other Fluids,
serving to convey the Matter, whereby they are nourished, from their Stomachs
and Guts, through the Lacteals and other finer Vessels, to the several parts of
their Bodies. But the Formation of Animals and Vegetables, being a thing
somewhat foreign to my present purpose, I shall adjourn the fuller
Consideration of it to another Occasion. How far Water is concerned in the
Formation of Minerals, will appear more at large in the succeeding Part of this
Work.

That it is this Vapor, or subtle Fluid, pervading the Strata of Gravel, Sand,
Earth, Stone, and the rest, by degrees rots and decays the Bones, Shells,
Teeth, and other parts of Animals: as also the Trees, and other Vegetables,
which were lodged in those Strata at the Deluge Part 2, Cons. 3.
; this Fluid, by its continual Attrition as it passes successively by them,
fretting the said Bodies, by little and little wearing off and dissipating
their constituent Corpuscles, and at length quite dissolving and destroying
their Texture. That yet it has not this Effect indifferently upon all of them;
those which happened to be reposed in the firmer and compacter Strata, e.g. of
Marble, the closer kinds of Sand-stone, Chalk, and the like, being thereby
protected in great measure from its Attacks; it passing through these only in
lesser quantity, and that slowly and with difficulty Vid. Cons. 8. Supra.
; so that its Motion here being more feeble and languid, the Shells and other
Bodies enclosed in these are usually found very firm and entire, many of them
retaining even their natural Colors to this day, though they have lain thus
above four thousand years; and may doubtless endure much longer, even as long
as those Strata, to which they owe their Preservation, shall themselves endure,
and continue entire and undisturbed: whilst those which were lodged in Marle,
Sand, Gravel, and the like, more loose and pervious Matter, are so rotted and
decayed, that they are now not at all, or very difficultly, distinguishable
from the Marle, or other Matter in which they lie. Not but that there are
sometimes found, even in these laxer Strata, Shells, Teeth, and other Bodies
that are still tolerably firm, and that have escaped pretty safe; but these are
only such as are of a more than ordinary robust and durable Constitution,
whereby they were enabled the better to withstand the repeated Assaults of the
permeating Fluid, and to maintain their Integrity, whilst the other tenderer
kinds perished and were destroyed.

That this same subtle Fluid exerts the same power upon the Surface of the
Earth, that it does in the Bowels of it: and as it is instrumental to the
Formation of Bodies here Conser. Cons. 10. supra.
, so is it likewise (by a different Operation, which I have not room to
describe in this place) of the Destruction of them; and that Corrosion and
Dissolution of Bodies, even the most solid and durable, which is vulgarly
ascribed to the Air, is caused merely by the Action of this Matter upon them;
the Air being so far from injuring and preying upon the Bodies it environs,
that it contributes to their Security and Preservation, by impeding and
obstructing the Action of this Matter: and were it not for the Interposition of
the Air, they could never be able to make so long and vigorous Resistance as
now they do.

That this Subterranean Heat or Fire, Abyss, being in any part of the Earth,
stopped, and so diverted from its ordinary course, by some accidental Glut or
Obstruction in the Pores or Passages through which it used to ascend to the
Surface: and being by that means preternaturally assembled, in greater quantity
than usual, into one place, it causes a great Rarifaction and Intumescence of
the Water of the Abyss, putting it into very great Commotions and Disorders:
and at the same time making the like Effort upon the Earth, which is expanded
upon the face of the Abyss, it occasions that Agitation and Concussion of it,
which we call an Earthquake.

That this Effort is in some Earthquakes so vehement that it splits and tears
the Earth, making Cracks or Chasmes in it some Miles in length, which open at
the instants of the Shocks, and close again in the Intervalls betwixt them:
nay, it is sometimes so extremely violent, that it plainly forces the
superincumbent Strata: breaks them all throughout, and thereby perfectly
undermines and ruins the Foundations of them; so that these failing, the whole
Tract, as soon as ever the Shock is over, sinks down to rights into the Abyss
underneath, and is swallowed up by it, the Water thereof immediately rising up,
and forming a Lake in the place where the said Tract before was. That several
considerable Tracts of Land, and some with Cities and Towns standing upon them:
as also whole Mountains, many of them very large, and of a great height, have
been thus totally swallowed up.

That this Effort being made in ad Directions indifferently: upwards,
downwards, and on every side; the Fire dilating and expanding on all hands, and
endeavoring, proportionably to the quantity and strength of it, to get room,
and make its way through all Obstacles, falls as foul upon the Water of the
Abyss beneath, as upon the Earth above; forcing it forth which way soever it
can find vent or passage: as well through its ordinary Exits, Wells, Springs,
and the Outlets of Rivers: as through the Chasmes then newly opened: through
the Camini or Spiracles of AEtna, or other near Vulcanoes: and those Hiatus's
at the bottom of the Sea Vid. Cons. 2. supra.
, whereby the Abyss below opens into it, and communicates with it.

That as the Water resident in the Abyss is, in all Parts of it, stored with a
considerable quantity of Heat, and more especially in those where these
extraordinary Aggregations of this Fire happen, so likewise is the Water which
is thus forced out of it; insomuch that, when thrown forth, and mixed with the
Waters of Wells, of Springs, of Rivers, and the Sea, it renders them very
sensibly hot.

That it is usually expelled forth in vast quantities, and with great
Impetuosity; insomuch that it has been seen to spout up out of deep Wells, and
fly forth, at the tops of them, upon the face of the ground. With like rapidity
comes it out of the Sources of Rivers, filling them so of a sudden as to make
them run over their Banks, and overflow the neighboring Territories, without
so much as one drop of Rain falling into them, or any other concurrent Water to
raise and augment them. That it spues out of the Chasmes, opened by the
Earthquake, in great abundance: mounting up, in mighty Streams, to an
incredible height in the Air, and this oftentimes at many Miles distance from
any Sea. That it likewise flies forth of the Volcanoes in vast floods, and with
wonderful violence. That it is forced through the Hiatus's at the bottom of the
Sea with such vehemence, that it puts the Sea immediately into the most
horrible Disorder and Perturbation imaginable, even when there is not the least
breath of Wind stirring, but all, till then, calm and still: making it rage and
roar with a most hideous and amazing Noise: raising its Surface into prodigious
Waves, and tossing and rolling them about in a very strange and furious manner:
oversetting Ships in the Harbors, and sinking them to the bottom; with many
other like Outrages. That it is refunded out of these Hiatus's in such quantity
also that it makes a vast Addition to the Water of the Sea: raising it many
Fathoms higher than ever it flows in the highest Tides, so as to pour it forth
far beyond its usual Bounds, and make it overwhelm the adjacent Country; by
this means ruining and destroying Towns and Cities: drowning both Men and
Cattle: breaking the Cables of Ships, driving them from their Anchors, bearing
them along with the Inundation several Miles up into the Country, and there
running them a-ground: stranding Whales likewise, and other great Fishes, and
leaving them, at its Return, upon dry Land.

That these Phoenomena are not new, or peculiar to the Earthquakes which have
happened in our times, but have been observed in all Ages, and particularly
these exorbitant Commotions of the Water of the Globe. This we may learn
abundantly from the Histories of former Times: and 'twas for this Reason that
many of the Ancients concluded, rightly enough, that they were caused by the
Impulses and Fluctuation of Water in the Bowels of the Earth; and therefore
they very frequently called Neptune (...), as also (...), and (...); by all
which Epithets they denoted his Power of Shaking the Earth. They supposed that
he presided over all Water whatever, as well that within the Earth, as the Sea,
and the rest upon it: and that the Earth was supported by Water, its
Foundations being laid thereon; on which account it was that they bestowed upon
him the Cognomen (...), or Supporter of the Earth, and that of (...), or The
Sustainer of its Foundations. They likewise believed that he, having a full
Sway and Command over the Water, had Power to still and compose it, as well as
to move and disturb it, and the Earth, by means of it; and therefore they also
gave him the Name of (...), or The Establisher; under which Name several
Temples were consecrated to him, and Sacrifices offered whenever an Earthquake
happened, to pacify and to appease him; requesting that he would allay the
Commotions of the Water, secure the Foundations of the Earth, and put an end to
the Earthquake.

That the Fire it self, which, being thus assembled and pent up, is the Cause
of all these Perturbations, makes its own way also forth, by what Passages
soever it can get vent: through the Spiracles of the next Vulcano Conf.
Consect. 13. infra.
: through the Cracks and Openings of the Earth abovementioned: through the
Apertures of Springs, especially those of the Thermae Vid. Cons. 14. infra.
: or any other way that it can either find or make; and being thus discharged,
the Earthquake cease, till the Cause returns again, and a fresh Collection of
this Fire commits the same Outrages as before.

That there is sometimes in Commotion a Portion of the Abyss of that vast
Extent, as to shake the Earth incumbent upon it for so very large a part of the
Globe together, that the Shock is felt the same Minute precisely in Countries
that are many hundreds of Miles distant from each other, and this even though
they happen to be parted by the Sea lying betwixt them: nay, there want not
Instances of such an universal Concussion of the whole Globe as must needs
imply an Agitation of the whole Abyss.

That though the Abyss be liable to these Commotions in all parts of it, and
therefore no Country can be wholly exempted from the Effects of them; yet these
Effects are no where very remarkable, nor are there usually any great damages
done by Earthquakes, except only in those Countries which are mountainous, and
consequently stoney, and cavernous underneath Vid. Part 2. Cons. 8.
; and especially where the Disposition of the Strata is such that those Caverns
open into the Abyss, and so freely admit and entertain the Fire, which
assembling therein, is the Cause of the Shock; it naturally steering its course
that way where it finds the readiest Reception, which is toward these Caverns;
this being indeed much the case of Damps in Mines, whereof more by and by.
Besides that those Parts of the Earth which abound with Strata of Stone, or
Marble, making the strongest Opposition to this Effort, are the most furiously
shattered, and suffer much more by it than those which consist of Gravel, Sand,
and the like laxer Matter, which more easily give way, and make not so great
resistance; an Event observable not only in this, but all other Explosions
whatever. But, above all, those Countries, which yield great store of Sulphur
and Nitre, are by far the most injured and incommoded by Earthquakes; these
Minerals constituting in the Earth a kind of Natural Gunpowder, which, taking
fire, upon this assembly and approach of it, occasions that murmuring noise,
that subterranean Thunder (if I may so speak) which is heard rumbling in the
bowels of the Earth during Earthquakes, and, by the assistance of its explosive
Power, renders the Shock much greater, so as sometimes to make miserable Havoc
and Destruction. And it is for this reason that Italy, Sicily, Anatolia, and
some parts of Greece have been so long and so often alarmed and harassed by
Earthquakes; these Countries being all Mountainous, and Cavernous, abounding
with Stone and Marble, and affording Sulphur and Nitre in great Plenty. But for
a more particular History of the several Phenomenon which precede, which
accompany, and which follow after Earthquakes: for the Causes of those
Phenomenon: and for a more exact Account of the Origin, and the Economy of
this subterranean Fire, I must beg the Reader's Patience till the larger Work
be made public.

AEtna, Vesavius, Hecla, and the other Volcanoes, are only so many Spiracles,
serving for the discharge of this subterranean Fire, when it is thus
preternaturally assembled. That where there happens to be such a Structure and
Conformation of the interior Parts of the Earth as that the Fire may pass
freely and without impediment from the Caverns, wherein it assembles, unto
these Spiracles, it then readily and easily gets out, from time to time,
without shaking or disturbing the Earth; but where such Communication is
wanting, or the Passages not sufficiently large and open, so that it cannot
come at the said Spiracles without first forcing and removing all Obstacles, it
heaves up and shocks the Earth, with greater or lesser Impetuosity, according
as the quantity of the Fire thus assembled is greater or less, till it has
made its way to the Mouth of the Vulcano; where it rusheth forth, sometimes in
mighty Flames, with great Velocity, and a terrible bellowing noise. That
therefore there are scarcely any Countries, that are much annoyed with
Earthquakes, that have not one of these Fiery Vents; and these are constantly
all in Flames whenever any Earthquake happens; they disgorging that Fire,
which, whilst underneath, was the cause of the Disaster; and were it not for
these Diverticula, whereby it thus gains an Exit, 'twould rage in the Bowels of
the Earth much more furiously, and make greater havoc than now it does. So
that though those Countries, where there are such Vulcano's, are usually, more
or less, troubled with Earthquakes; yet, were these Vulcano's wanting, they
would be much more troubled with them than now they are: yea in all probability
to that degree, as to render the Earth, for a vast space around them, perfectly
uninhabitable. In one word, so beneficial are these to the Territories where
they are, that there do not want Instances of some which have been rescued and
wholly delivered from Earthquakes by the breaking forth of a new Vulcano there;
this continually discharging that Matter, which, being till then barricaded up,
and imprisoned in the Bowels of the Earth, was the occasion of very great and
frequent Calamities. That most of these Spiracles perpetually and at all
Seasons send forth Fire, more or less; and though it be sometimes so little
that the Eye cannot discern it, yet even then, by a nearer Approach of the
Body, may be discovered a copious and very sensible Heat continually issuing
out.

Thermae, Natural Baths, or Hot Springs, do not owe their Heat to any
Colluctation or Effervescence of the Minerals in them, as some Naturalists have
believed: but to the beforementioned Subterranean Heat or Fire. That these
Baths continually emit a manifest and very sensible Heat: n^y some of them have
been observed at some times to send forth an actual and visible Flame. That not
only these, but all other Springs whatever, have in them some degree of Heat It
is ind^e^ by this very heat that their Water is borne unto them from our the
Abyss. Vid. Cens. 8. supra.
, (none of them ever Freezing, no not in the longest and severest Frosts) but
more especially those which arise where there is such a Site and Disposition of
the Strata within the Earth as gives free and easy Admission to this Heat, and
favors its Ascent to the Surface; where perspiring forth at the same Outlets
with the Water of the Spring, it by that means heats it, more or less, as it
chances to be dispensed forth in greater or lesser quantity. That as the Heat
of all Springs is owing to this subterraneous Fire, so wherever there are any
extraordinary Discharges of this Fire, there also are the neighboring Springs
hotter than ordinary; witness the many Hot-Springs near AEtna, Vesuvius, Hecla,
and all other Vulcanoes. That the Heat of the Thermae is not constant, and
always alike; the same Spring suffering at some times a very manifest Failure
and Remission of its Heat: at others as manifest an Addition and Increase of
it; yea sometimes to that Excess as to make it boil and bubble with extreme
Heat, like Water when boiling over a common Fire. That particularly during
Earthquakes, and Eruptions of Vulcano's Vid.Cons. 12. and 13. supra.
, when there is a more copious Accession of this subterraneous Fire, the
Thermae all thereabouts become much hotter than before: yiedling also a far
greater supply of Water than they were wont to do: and a murmuring Noise is
usually heard, below them, in the Bowels of the Earth; all which is occasioned
merely by the then rapid Motion, and Ascent of the Fire, in greater plenty than
before, to the Apertures of these Springs.

I have now finished the Account of this Section: and was just going to take
off my hand here; but recollecting that in the foregoing Part of this Work Page
96.
I promised some further Proofs of Contrivance in the Structure of the Globe we
dwell upon: and such too as may satisfy any fair and unbiased Spectator that
the framing and Composition of it out of the Materials of the former Earth was
a work of Counsel and Sagacity: a Work apparently above the highest reaches of
Chance, or the Powers of Nature; and this being a proper place wherein to
produce those Proofs, I shall give such Hints of them as the Brevity I am tied
up to will permit me, and then conclude.

I am indeed well aware that the Author of the Theory of the Earth Lib. 1. c.
9. to 12.
differs very much from me in Opinion as to this matter. He will not allow that
there are any such Signs of Art and Skill in the Make of the Present Globe as
are here mentioned: or that there was so great Care, and such exact Measures
taken in the re-sitting of it up again at the Del^uge. He reckons it no other
than an huge disorderly Pile of Raines and Rubbisb: and is very unwilling to
believe that it was the Product of any Reasoning or Designing Agent. The Chanel
of the Ocean appears to him the most ghastly thing in Nature, and he cannot at
all admire its beauty or elegancy: for it is, in his judgment, as deformed and
irregular as it is great. And for the Caverns of the Earth, the Fissures and
Breaches of the Strata, he cannot fancy that they were formed by any work of
Nature, nor by any immediate Action of God, seeing there is neither use, that
he can discover, nor beauty in this kind of Construction. Then for the
Mountains, these, he says, are placed in no order one with another, that can
either respect Use or Beauty, and do not consist of any proportion of Parts
that is referable to any Design, or that has the least footsteps of Art or
Counsel. In fine, he thinks there are several things in the Terraqueous Globe
that are rude and unseemly: and many that are superfluous. He looks upon it as
incommodious, and as a broken and confused heap of Bodies, placed in no order
to one another, nor with any correspondency or regularity of Parts: and it
seems to him nothing better than a rude Lump, and a little dirty Planet. I have
given his Opinion in his own Words, though I have upon all like Occasions taken
a shorter Course, and contented my self with giving only the sense of others;
but this I have done here, least any Man should suspect that I mistake the
Author's Sentiments, or do not represent them fairly.

Now though it were really so, that there were some such Eye-sores in our Earth
as are here suggested: and that we could not presently find out all the
Gayeities and Embelishments that we might seek for in it, the matter would not
be great: and we might very well be contented to take it as we find it. But
after all the thing is in truth quite otherwise, and there are none of all
these wanting: nor any such Deformities as are here imagined; but, on the
contrary, so very many real Graces and Beauties, that it is no easy thing to
overlook them all. Even this very variety of Sea and Land, of Hill and Dale,
which is here reputed so inelegant and unbecoming, is indeed extremely charming
and agreeable. Nor do I offer this as any private Fancy of my own, but as the
common Sense of Mankind, who are the true and proper Judges in the Case, both
the Ancients and Moderns, giving their Suffrages unanimously herein; and even
the Heathens themselves, have esteemed this variety not only ornamental to the
Earth, but a Proof of the Wisdom of the Creator of it, and alleged it as such;
whereof more in due place.

And, as I cannot admit that there is any thing unhandsome or irregular: so
much less can I grant that there is any thing incommodious and Artless, or
useless and Superfluous, in the Globe. Were I at full Liberty to do it here,
'twould be no hard thing to make appear that there are no real Grounds for any
such Charge. For how easy were it, by taking a minute and distinct Survey of
the Globe, and of the very many and various Limbs and Parts of it, to show that
all these are ordered and digested with infinite Exactness and Artifice; each
in such manner as may best serve to its own proper End, and to the use of the
whole? How easy were it to show, that the Rocks, the Mountains, and the
Caverns, against which these Exceptions are made, are of indispensible Use and
Necessity, as well to the Earth, as to Man and other Animals, and even to all
the rest of its Productions? That there are no such Blemishes, no Defects:
nothing that might have been altered for the better: nothing superfluous:
nothing useless, in all the whole Composition? and so finally trace out the
numerous Footsteps and Marks of the Presence and Interposition of a most wise
and intelligent Architect throughout all this stupendous Fabric? But I must
reserve this for the larger Work, and content my self for the present with only
giving some brief Hints of it in the following Propositions. Namely,

That 'twas absolutely necessary for the well-being both of the Earth it self,
and of all terrestrial Bodies, that some of the Strata should consolidate, as
they did, immediately after the Subsidence of their Matter at the Deluge: that
these should afterward be broken in certain places: and lastly, that they
should be dislocated, some of them elevated, and others depressed.

That had not the Strata of Stone and Marble become solid AsPart 2. Cons. 4.
, but the Sand, or other Matter whereof they consist, continued lax and
incoherent, and they consequently been as previous as those of Marle, Gravel,
and the like, the Water which rises out of the Abyss, for the Supply of Springs
and Rivers, would not have stopped at the Surface of the Earth, but marched
directly, and without impediment, up into the Atmosphere, in all parts of the
Globe wherever there was Heat enough in the Air to continue its Ascent, and
buoy it up; so that there then must needs have been an universal failure and
want of Springs and Rivers all the Summer-Season, in the colder Climes: and all
the Year round in the hotter and those that are near the Equator, where there
is much the greatest need of both the one and the other; and this merely for
want of the Interposition of such dense and solid Strata, to arrest the
ascending Vapor to stop it at the Surface of the Earth: and to collect and
condense it there.

That though the Strata had become solid, so as to have condensed the rising
Vapor, yet if they had not been broken also, As Part 2. Cons. 6.
the Water must have lain eternally underneath those Strata, without ever
coming forth; so that there then could have been neither Springs nor Rivers for
a very considerable part, or indeed, almost the whole Earth; the Water, which
supplies these, proceeding out at those Breaches Cons. 8. supra.
. This Water therefore would have been wholly intercepted, all locked up within
the Earth, and its Egress utterly debarred, had the Strata of Stone and Marble
remained continuous, and without such Fissures and Interruptions. That these
Fissures have a still further use, and serve for Receptacles of Metalls, and of
several sorts of Minerals; which are arrested by the Water in its passage
thither through the Strata wherein the single Corpuscles of those Metalls and
Minerals were lodged Part 4. Cons. 5.
, and borne along with it into these Fissures; where, being by this means
collected, they are kept in store for the use of Mankind.

That though there had been both solid Strata to have condensed the ascending
Vapor: and those so broken too as to have given free Vent and Issue to the
Water so condensed; yet had not the said Strata been dislocated likewise Part
2. Cons. 6, 7, 8.
: some of them elevated, and others depressed, there would have been no Cavity
or Chanel to give Reception to the Water of the Sea: no Rocks, Mountains, or
other Inequalities in the Globe; and without these, the Water, which now arises
out of it, must have all stagnated at the Surface, and could never possibly
have been refunded forth upon the Earth: nor would there have been any Rivers,
or running Streams, upon the face of the whole Globe, had not the Strata been
thus raised up, and the Hills exalted above the neighboring Valleys and
Plains; whereby the Heads and Sources of Rivers, which are in those Hills, were
also borne up above the ordinary Level of the Earth, so as that they may flow
upon a Descent, or an inclining Plane, without which they could not flow at all
Conf. Cons. 8. supra.
.

That this Affair was not transacted unadvisedly, casually, or at random: but
with due Conduct, and just Measures. That the quantity of Matter consolidated:
the Number, Capacity, and Distances of the Fissures: the Situation, Magnitude,
and Number of the Hills, for the condensing, and discharging forth the Water;
and, in a word, all other things were so ordered as that they might best
conduce to the End whereunto they were designed and ordained: and such
provision made that a Country should not want so many Springs and Rivers as
were convenient and requisite for it: nor, on the other hand, be overrun with
them, and afford little or nothing else; but a Supply every where ready,
suitable to the Necessities and Expenses of each Climate and Region of the
Globe. For example, those Countries which lie in the Torrid Zone, and under or
near the Line, where the Heat is very great, are furnished with Mountains
answerable: Mountains which both for Bigness and Number surpass those of colder
Countries as much as the Heat there surpasses that of those Countries. Witness
the Ande^, that prodigious Chain of Mountains in South America: Atlas in
Africa: Taurus in Asia: the Alps and Pyrenees of Europe, to mention no more:
By these is collected and dispensed forth a quantity of Water proportionable to
the Heat of those Parts; so that although, by reason of the Excess of this Heat
there, the Evaporations from the Springs and Rivers are very great, yet they,
being, by these larger Supplies, continually stocked with an Excess of Water as
great, yield a Mass of it for the use of Mankind, the Inhabitants of those
Parts, of the other Animals, and of Vegetables, not much, if at all, inferior
to the Springs and Rivers of colder Climates. That besides this, the Waters
thus evaporated and mounted up into the Air, thicken and cool it, and, by their
Interposition betwixt the Earth, and the Sun, skreen and fence off the ardent
Heat of it, which would be otherwise unsupportable: and are at last returned
down again in copious and fruitful Showers to the scorched Earth; which, were
it not for this remarkably Providential Contrivance of Things, would have been
there perfectly uninhabitable: labored under an eternal Drought: and have been
continually parched and burnt.

To this former Section I shall add, by way of Appendix,

Flux and Reflux of the Sea: and its other Natural Motions; with an Account of
the Gause of those Motions: as also of the End and Use of them: and an Enquiry
touching the Cause of the Ebbing and Flowing, and some other uncommon
Phenomenon of certain Springs.

Saltness of the Sea.

Wind: the Origin, and Use of it in the Natural World.

PART III.
SECT. II. Of the Universality of the Deluge. Of the Water which effected it.
Together with some further Particulars concerning it.
IN the precedent Section I consider the present and natural State of the
Fluids of the Globe. I ransack the several Caverns of the Earth: and search
into the Storehouses of Water; and this principally in order to find out where
that mighty Mass of Water which overflowed the whole Earth in the days of Noah,
is now bestowed and concealed: as also which way it is at this time useful to
the Earth and its Productions, and serviceable to the present Purposes of
Almighty Providence.

Such a Deluge as that which Moses represents, whereby All the high Hills that
were under the whole Heaven were covered Genesis 7. 19.
, would require a portentous quantity of Water; and Men of Curiosity, in all
Ages, have been very, much to seek what was become of it, or where i^ could
ever find a Reservatory capable of containing it. It Is true there have been
several who have gone about to inform them, and set them to rights in this
Matter; but for want of that Knowledge of the present System of Nature: and
that insight into the Structure and Constitution of the Terraqueous Globe,
which was necessary for such an Undertaking, they have not given the
Satisfaction that was expected. So far from it that the greatest part of these,
seeing no where Wa^er enough to effect a General Deluge, were forced at last to
mince the Matter, and make only a Partial one of it; restraining it to one
single Country: to Asia, or some lesser portion of Land; than which, nothing
can be more contrary to the Mosaic Narrative.

For the rest, they had recourse to Shifts which were not much better; and
rather evaded than solved the Difficulty; some of them imagining that a
quantity of Water, sufficient to make such a Deluge, was created upon that
Occasion, and, when the business was done, all disbanded again and annihilated.
Others supposed a Conversion of the Air and Atmosphere into Water, to serve the
turn. Many of them were for fetching down I know not what supercoelestial
Waters for the purpose. Others concluded that the Deluge rose only fifteen
Cubits above the Level of the Earth's ordinary Surface, covering the Valleys
and Plains, but not the Mountains: all equally wide of Truth, and of the Mind
of the Sacred Writer.

One of the last Undertakers of all seeing this, began to think the Cause
desperate; and therefore, in effect, gives it up. For considering how
unsuccessful the Attempts of those who were gone before him had proved: and
having himself Theory of Earth, l. 1. c. 2.
also employed his l^st and utmost endeavors to find out Waters for the Vulgar
Deluge: having mustered up all the Forces he could think of, and all too
little: The Clouds above, and the Deeps below, and in the bowels of the Earth;
and these, says he, are all the Stores we have for Water, and Moses directs us
to no other for the Causes of the Deluge: he prepares for a Surrender,
asserting, from a mistaken and defective Computation, that all these will not
come up to near the quantity requisite: and that in any known parts of the
Universe, to find Water sufficient for this effect, as it is generally
explained and understood, is, he thinks, impossible: that is, sufficient to
cause a Deluge, to use his own Words, overflowing the whole Earth, the whole
Circuit, and whole Extent of it, burying all in Water, even the greatest
Mountains: which is, in plain terms, such a one as was explained and understood
by Moses, and the Generality of Writers since.

Having therefore thus over-hastily concluded that such a Deluge was
impossible: and that all Nature could not afford Water enough to drown the
whole Globe, if of the Circuit and Extent that now it is: he flies to a new
Expedient to solve the Matter, and supposes an Earth of a Make and Frame much
like that imaginary one of the Famous Monsieur Des Carts Princ. Pbilos. 1. 4.
which he makes to fall all to pieces, at the Deluge, and to contract it self
into a lesser room, that the Water might the better surround and encompass it.

The sober and better sort of the Standers-by, and those who were Well-wishers
to Moses, began to be under some Concern and Uneasiness to see him thus set
aside only to make way for a new Hypothesis: and so serious and weighty a
Matter, as is this Tradition of the Universal Deluge, placed after all upon so
very unsteady a Bottom. But that Concern increased when they further heard him
so zealously decrying all former Notions of a Deluge: refusing to grant one
upon any Terms but his own: and so peremptorily declaring, That all other ways
assigned for the Explication of Noah's Flood are false or impossible. This was
to reduce the Thing to a very great Straight: and surely an exposing and
venturing of it a little too far. For if all the other Ways be false and
impossible, should this, the only one left, prove at last so likewise, the
Opinion of a Deluge would be left very precarious and defenseless, and we might
either believe or disbelieve it at pleasure; nay the negative part would of the
two have much the Advantage, there being no reasonable Foundation to believe
that the Deluge did come to pass this way.

Some Men there are who have made a very untoward use of this, and such a one
that I am willing to persuade my self he never intended they should; yet it
were to have been wished that he had been somewhat more wary. These cried up
this Computation of the Water as indisputable and infallible: and then boldly
gave out that such a Deluge as that described by Moses was altogether
incredible, and that there never was nor could be any such Thing. Nothing was
talked of amongst them under Mathematical Demonstrations of the Falsehood of it;
which they vented with all imaginable Triumph, and would needs have it that
they had here sprung a fresh and unanswerable Argument against the
Authentickness of the Mosaic Writings; which indeed is what they drive at, and
a Point they very fain would gain.

For my part, my Subject does not necessarily oblige me to look after this
Water: or to point forth the place whereinto it is now retreated. For when, from
the Sea-shells, and other Remains of the Deluge, I shall have given undeniable
Evidence that it did actually cover all Parts of the Earth, it must needs
follow that there was then Water enough to do it, wherever it may be now hid,
or whether it be still in being or not. Yet the more effectually to put a stop
to the Insults and Detractions of these vain Men, I resolved to enter a little
farther into the Examination of this Matter; and that produced the former
Section of this 3d Part; wherein I enquire what proportion the Water of the
Globe bears to the Earthy Matter of it; and upon a moderate Estimate and
Calculation of the Quantity of Water now actually contained in the Abyss, I
found that this alone was full enough, if brought out upon the Surface of the
Earth, to cover the whole Globe to the height assigned by Moses; which is,
fifteen Cubits above the Tops of the highest Mountains Genesis vii. 20.
; the Particulars of which Calculation, shall be laid before the Reader at
length in the Larger Work; for any one will easily see that there is so great
an Apparatus of Things only Previous, which must needs be adjusted before I can
come to the Calculation it self, that to descend to Particulars here, further
than I have already Conf. Sect. 1. Cons. 12.
done, would not only carry this Discourse out beyond all reasonable Bounds,
and make the Parts of it disproportionate to each other, but, which is not less
to be thought of, would be an Anticipation of the Other Work.

This done, I again set aside the Observations about the Fluids of the Globe,
introduced upon this Occasion in the other Section, as now of no further use:
and reassume the Thread of the other Observations which I propose at the
Beginning of this Work; and from them I show,

Del^ge was Universal, and laid the whole Earth under Water: covering all, even
the highest, Mountains, quite round the Globe.

Ocean was first born forth upon the Earth: That it was immediately succeeded
by that of the Abyss; which likewise was brought out upon the Surface of the
Globe.

Strata: and the Elevation of some, and Depression of others of them, which
followed after that Disruption, toward the latter end of the Deluge Part 2.
Cons. 6.
, this Mass of Water fell back again into the deprest and lower parts of the
Earth: into Lakes and other Cavities: into the Alveus of the Ocean: and through
the Fissures whereby this communicates with the Ocean Sect. 1. supra. Cons. 2.
, into the Abyss; which it filled till it came to an AEquilibrium with the
Ocean.

That there must have passed a considerable Years betwixt the Creation and the
Deluge: and most probably about so many as Moses has assigned.

That the Deluge commenced in the Spring-season: the Water coming forth upon
the Earth in the Month which we call May Confer. Part 6. Sub finem.
.

That not only Men, Quadrupeds, Fish likewise, the Inhabitants of the Sea, of
Lakes, and of Rivers, suffered under the Fury of the Deluge, and were killed
and destroyed by it.

That the Deluge did not happen Theory of the Earth. l.1.c.6.8. etc.
. That very many Things were then certainly done, which never possibly could
have been done without the Assistance of a Supernatural Power. That the said
Power acted in this Matter with Design, and with the highest Wisdom. And that,
as the System of Nature was then, and is still, supported and established, a
Deluge neither could then, nor can now, happen naturally.

I close up this Section with two additional Discourses.

The first concerning the Migration of Nations: with the several Steps whereby
the World was re-peopled after the Deluge by the Posterity of Noah, and
particularly that mighty Tract of America. Wherein I shall make out, 1. Who
they were that first peopled it. 2. When they departed thitherwards. 3. What
Course they took: and by what means both Men and Beasts, as well Serpents and
the other noxious and more intractible kinds of them, as the more innocent and
useful, got thither. 4. Whether there remain any certain Vestigia of a
Tradition, in the Writings of the Ancients, about these Americans: and what
Country they intended under the Name of Atlantis. 5. Whether the Phaenicians,
or any other Nation of the old World, maintained anciently any Commerce or
Correspondence with them. 6. How it happened that both the Inhabitants of that,
and of our World, lost all memory of their Commigration hence. 7. Whence came
the Difference in Person, or in the external Shape and Lineaments of the Body:
in Language: in Diet, and manner of Living: in Clothing: in Arts and Sciences:
in Customs Religious, Civil, and Military, betwixt these Americans, and their
old Relations in Asia, Europe, and Africa. With Animadversions on the Writings
of Grotious, De Laet, Hornius, and others, upon this Subject.

The Second concerning the unanimous* Tradition of an Universal Deluge amongst
all the most ancient Gentile Nations: particularly the Scythians, the Persians,
and Babylonians: the Bithynians, Ph^ygians, Lydians, Cilicians, and other
People of Asia Minor: the Hierapolitans, Phaenicians, and other Inhabitants of
Syria: the Egyptians, Carthaginians, and other African Nations: the most
ancient Inhabitants of the several Parts of Greece: and of the other Countries
of Europe: the old Germans: the Gauls: the Romans: the ancient Inhabitants of
Spain, and even the Britains themselves, the first Inhabiters of this Island:
Proving that the great Devastation and Havoc the Deluge made, both of the
Earth it self, of the Generality of Mankind, of Brutes, and all Animals, had
wrought a deep and very sensible Impression upon the Minds of these ancient
Nations, who lived nearer to the time of it. That they had not only a Memory
and Tradition of it in general and at large: but even of several the most
remarkable particular Accidents of it likewise; which they handed downwards, to
the succeeding Ages, for some time, with Notes of the greatest Terror,
Amazement, and Consternation expressible. That it was commemorated chiefly by
certain Religious Rites and Ceremonies used by them in the Worship of the
EARTH: which Superstitious Adoration was first instituted upon this Occasion in
those simple and ignorant Ages Vi^. page 55. and seq. ut and page 95.
, and addressed to the Earth, not only expressly and by Name, but also under the
feigned and borrowed Names of Alargatis, Derceto, Astarte, Dea Syria, Herthus,
Isis, Magna Matter, Cybele, and Rhea, with several more; by all which, they
intended the Earth. That at length the Tradition, for want of Letters, which
were not then invented, or some other like means to preserve it, wearing out,
and the reason of the Institution of this Worship being by degrees forgot, the
After-Ages perverted it to a somewhat different Sense and Intention: supposing
that this was only a reverential Duty and Gratitude paid to the Earth as the
Common Parent of Mankind, and because both Man, and all other Creatures proceed
out of it; by which means the true Notion of the Institution being lost, the
Tradition of the Deluge, which was couched under it, was also thereupon at
length suspended and lost; none of all these many Nations, in the latter Ages
of the World, having any Memory or Knowledge of it, besides what they
afterward recovered from the Jews and ancient Christians, who had it from the
Writings of Moses. In Greece indeed there were some other Accidents which
perplexed and impeded the Tradition of it in that Country, whereof I have
already Part 1. page 68.
given such Hints as this Discourse will bear.

PART IV. Of the Origin and Formation of Metalls and Minerals.
WHat I can advance, with competent Certainty, about the Fluids of the Globe:
the Sea, Springs, Rivers, and Rain, I propose in the immediately foregoing, or
Third Part of this Essay: As in the Second Part of it I dispatch the Solids:
Stone, Marble, Gravel, and all the other Terrestrial Matter of it, which is
digested into Strata. That Part therefore comprehends the far greater share of
that Matter; and indeed all, excepting only Metalls and Minerals; which are
found much more sparingly and in lesser Parcels; being either enclosed in those
Strata (lying amongst the Sand, Earth, or other Matter whereof they consist) or
contained in their perpendicular Fissures. And these remaining still to be
considered, I have allotted this Fourth Part to that Purpose.

To write of Metalls and Minerals intelligibly and with tolerable p^rspicuity,
is a Task much more difficult than to write of either Animals or Vegetables.
For these carry along with them such plain and evident Notes and Characters
either of Disagreement, or Affinity with one another, that the several Kinds of
them, and the subordinate Species of each, are easily known and distinguished,
even at first sight; the Eye alone being fully capable of judging and
determining their mutual Relations, as well as their Differences.

But in the Mineral Kingdom the Matter is quite otherwise. Here is nothing
regular, whatever some may have pretended: nothing constant or certain:
insomuch that a Man had need to have all his Senses about him: to use repeated
Trials and Inspections, and that with all imaginable Care and Wariness, truly
and rightly to discern and distinguish Things, and all little enough too. Here
is such a vast variety of Phoenomena, and those, many of them, so delusive,
that it is very hard to escape Imposition and Mistake. Color, or outward
Appearance, is not at all to be trusted. A common Marcasite or Pyrites shall
have the Color of Gold most exactly: and shine with all the Brightness of it,
and yet upon trial, after all, yield nothing of worth, but Vitriol, and a
little Sulphur: whilst another Body, that has only the Resemblance of an
ordinary Peble, shall yield a considerable quantity of Metallic and valuable
Matter. So likewise a Mass, which, to the Eye, appears to be nothing but mere
simple Earth, shall, to the Smell or Taste, discover a plentiful Admixture of
Sulphur, Alum, or some other Mineral.

Nor may we with much better Security rely upon Figure, or external Form.
Nothing more uncertain and varying. It Is usual to meet with the very same
Metal or Mineral, naturally shot into quite different Figures: as it is to find
quite different kinds of them all of the same Figure. And a Body, that has the
shape and appearance of a Diamond, may prove, upon* Examination, to be nothing
but Crystal, or Selenitis: nay perhaps only common Salt, or Alum, naturally
crystallized and shot into that Form.

So likewise if we look into their Situation, and place in the Earth; sometimes
we find them in the perpendicular Intervalls: sometimes in the Bodies of the
Strata, being interspersed amongst the Matter whereof they consist: and
sometimes in both; even the gemmeous Matter it self, (if I may so speak) with
this only difference, that those Gemms, e. g. Topazes, Am^thysts, or Emeralds,
which grow in the Fissures, are ordinarily crystallized, or shot into angulated
Figures: whereas in the Strata they are found in rude Lumps, and only like so
many yellow, purple, and green Pebles. Not but that even these that are thus
lodged in the Strata are also sometimes found crystallized The Crystallized
Bodies found in the perpendicular Intervalls are easily known from those which
are lodged in the Strata, even by one who did not take them thence, or observe*
them there. The former have always their Root, (as the Iewellers call it) which
(...) only the Abruptness at that end of the Body whereby it adhered to the
Stone, or sides of the Intervalls, which Abruptn^ss is caused by its being
broke off from it. Those which are found in the Strata of Earth, Sand, or the
like, (having lain loose therein) are entire, ^^d want that Mark of Adhesion:
but those which are enclosed in Stone, Marble, or such other solid Matter,
being difficulty separable from it, because of its Adhesion to all sides of
them, have commonly some of that Matter still adhering to them, or at least
Marks of its Abruption from them, on all their sides; wherein these differ from
those found in the perpendicular Intervalls, they adhering, (...) we have
noted, by only one end. Vid. Cons. 6.etc. infra.
, and in form of Cubes, Rhombs, and the like Vid. Cons. 2. infra.
. Or if we have respect to the terrestrial Matter wherein they lie in those
Strata, here we shall meet with the same Metal or Mineral embodied in Stone,
or lodged in Cole, that elsewhere we found in Marle, in Clay, or in Chalk Vid.
Consect. 3. infra.
.

As much Inconstancy and Confusion is there in their Mixtures with each other,
or their Combinations amongst themselves; for it is rare to find any of them
pure, simple, and unmixt: but Copper and Iron together in the same Mass: Copper
and Gold: Silver and Lead: Tin and Lead: yea sometimes all the six
promiscuously in one Lump. It Is the same also in Minerals; Nitre with Vitriol:
Common Salt with Alum: Sulphur with Vitriol: and sometimes all five together.
Nor do Metalls only sort and herd with Metalls in the Earth: and Minerals with
Minerals: but both indifferently and in common together: Iron with Vitriol,
with Alum, with Sulphur: Copper with Sulphur, with Vitriol, etc. yea Iron,
Copper, Lead, Nitre, Sulphur, Vitriol, and perhaps some more in one and the
same Mass. In a word, the only standing Test, and discriminative
Characteristick of any Metal or Mineral must be sought for in the constituent
Matter of it: and it must be first brought down to that before any certain
Judgment can be given. And when that is once done, and the several kinds
separated and extracted each from the other, an homogeneous Mass of one kind is
easily distinguishable from any other: Gold from Iron: Sulphur from Alum: and
so of the rest. But without this, so various are their Intermixtures, and so
different the Face and Appearance of each, because of that Variety, that
scarcely any thing can be certainly determined of the particular Contents of
any single Mass of Ore by mere Inspection. I know that by Experience and
Conversation with these Bodies, in any Place or Mine, a Man may be enabled to
give a near Conjecture at the Metallic or Mineral Ingredients of any Mass
commonly found there; but this merely because he has before made trial of
other like Masses, and thereby learned what it is they contain. But if he
remove to another place, though perhaps very little distant, it is ten to one
but he meets with so different a face of Things, that he will be there as far to
seek in his Conjectures as one who never before saw a native Ore, until he
has here made his trials as before, and so further informed himself in the
matter.

Metalls being so very useful and serviceable to Mankind, great Care and Pains
has been taken, in all Ages, in searching after them, and in separating and
refining of them. For which reason it is that these have been accurately enough
distinguished, and reduced to six kinds, which are all well enough known. But
the like pains has not been taken in Minerals; and therefore the Knowledge of
them is somewhat more confused and obscure. These have not yet been well
reduced, or the number of the simple original ones rightly fixed; some, which
are only Compounds, the Matter of two or more kinds being mixed together, and,
by the different Proportion and Modulation of that Matter, variously disguised
and diversifyed, having been reputed all different kinds of Minerals, and
thereby the Number of them unnecessarily multiplied. Of this we have an
Instance in the Gemm-kind; where, of all the many sorts reckoned up by
Lapidaries* there are not above three or four that are Original; their
Diversities, as to Luster, Color, and Hardness, arising from the different
Admixture of other adventitious Mineral Matter. But the farther and clearer
Adjustment of this Affair I am constrained to adjourn to the larger Treatise.

In the mean time it is sufficient for my present* Design, to remark in general,
that those Minerals and Ores of Metalls which are reposited in the Bodies of
the Strata, are either found in Grains, or small Particles, dispersedly
intermixed with the Corpuscles of Earth, Sand, or other Matter of those Strata:
or else they are amassed into Balls, Lumps, or Nodules. Which Nodules are
either of an irregular and uncertain Figure, such as are the common Pyritoe:
Flints, Agat^s, Onyx's: Pebles, Cornelions, Iaspers, and the like: or of a
Figure somewhat more regular and observable, such as the Belemnites: the
several sorts of Mineral Coral, of the Stelechites, and of the Lapis Mycetoides
Vulgarly called Fungites.
: the Astroites, or Starry-Stone, as well that sort with the Prominent, as that
with the Conc^ve Stars: the Selenites: the Echi^ated Crystalline Balls, with
many more analogous Bodies.

Those which are contained in the Perpendicular Intervalls of the Strata are,
either such as are there accumulated into a rude Heap, without any particular
Form or Order, being only included betwixt the two opposite Walls or Sides of
the said Intervalls, which they wholly or partly fill, as there is a greater or
less quantity of them; in which manner Spar is usually found here in; and other
Minerals, as also the common Ores of Lead, Tin, Iron, and other Metals: or else
such as ^re of some observable Figure; of which sort are the Sparry Stiri^, or
Iceycle^ called Stalactit^ Or rather Stagonitae.
:the Native Saline Ic^ycles, or Sal Stalacticum: the Vitriolum S^at^cticum
Nativum: the Vitriolum Capillare: the Alumen Stalacti^um, and Capillare: Minera
ferri Stalac^ica, which, when several of the Cylindri^k Stirlae are contiguous,
and grow together into one Sheaf, is called Br^sh*Iron*Ore: Argentum
Arboresce^^, and Capillare^* as also the Crystallized Ore^ and Miner^ls, e. g.
the Iron-Rhombs, the Tin Grain^* the M^ndick-Grains: Cryst^lli^ed Native S^lt,
Alum, Vitri^l, and Sulp^^^: of which sort likewise are the Gemms or Stones that
are here shot into Cubes, into Pyramidal Forms, or into angulated Columns,
consisting of six Sides, and mucronated or terminating in a Point: being either
opake, or pellucid: or partly pellucid, and partly opake, and colored, black,
white, gray, red, purple, blue, yellow, or green: e. g. Crystal, the
Pseud^-Adamantes, the Cor^is^-Stones, the Bristow-Stones, Crystallized Sparrs*
the Iris, the Amethyst, the Sapphire, the Topaz, the Em^rauld, and several
others*

My Business here is to enquire into the Origin and Production of these
Metallic and Mineral Bodies: to enquire how they came into this condition, and
attained these Figures. And as my Observations have been the light whereby I
have hitherto steered my Course, so I here betake my self unto them again; and
it is from them that I prove,

That as the more gross and massive Strata of Stone, Marble, Earth, and the
rest, owe their present Frame and Order to the Deluge Vid. Part 2.
: so likewise do Metalls and Minerals too; the far greater part of them, I mean
all those which we now find lodged in those Strata amongst the Sand, Earth,
etc. being actually reposed therein during the time that the Water covered the
Earth: and the Earth it self then put into such a condition that the rest, I
mean those we now find in the perpendicular Intervalls, should be collected
thither by degrees, and be formed almost of course, merely by the ordinary
Motion of the Water, and its Passage to and fro in the Earth Vid. Cons. 4. and
5. infra.


Part 2. Consect. 2.
; after some time, that the violence of the Hurry and Commotion was over, and
the Water come to a state somewhat more calm and sedate, such of those
Corpuscles, as happened to occurr or meet together, affixed to each other: and,
many of them convening, uniting, and combining into one Mass, formed the
Metallic and Mineral Balls or Nodules which we now find.

That all Metallic and Mineral Nodules whatever: as well those which are in
rude Lumps, such as the common Pyritae, Flints, Agates, Onyxes, Pebles,
Jaspers, Cornelions, and the like: as those which are of a more regular and
observable Shape, such as the Selenites, Belemnites, Stelechites, Mineral
Coral: and, in one word, all others whatsoever, were formed at this time and by
this means.

That in such parts of the Water where the Corpuscles so sustained chanced to
be all of the same kind Vid. Part 5. Cons. 1.
* or, at least, where there were fewer kinds or varieties of them, the Nodules,
which were thus formed out of them, were more simple, pure, and homogeneous, as
are the Selenites, and some kinds of Pebles and Flints, to name no more: But
where (as indeed it generally fell out) there happened to be a greater variety
of Corpuscles, as suppose of Sulphur, of Vitriol, of Alum, of Iron, of Copper,
or whatever else, sustained promiscuously together, there the Nodules, formed
out of them, were mixed, and consisted of a greater variety of Matter confusedly
associated into the same Lump. Of this the Pyrit^ may serve for an Example;
whereof some yield Iron, Sulphur, and Vitriol: others Copper and Alum: yea some
of them contain all these, and several more, in the same Nodule.

That the Bones, Teeth, Shells, and other like Bodies, being sustained in the
Water together with these Metallic and Mineral Corpuscles Part 2. Cons. 2.
, and the said Corpuscles meeting with, and hitting upon those Bodies, they
affixed unto them, and became conjoined with them: some of them (though this
very rarely) passing into their Pores and Interstices: others adhering in
Lumps, or Masses, to their Outsides, and indeed oftentimes combining in such
numbers upon the exterior Surface of the Shell, Tooth, etc. as wholly to cover
and involve it in the Mass they together constituted: and others of them
entering into the Cavities of the Echini, Cochleae, Conchae, and other Shells,
till they had quite filled them up; those Shells, by that means, serving as
Proplasmes, o^ Moulds, to the Matter which so filled them, limiting and
determining both the Dimensions and Figure of it. That accordingly we at this
day find some few of these fossil Shells, and other Animal Substan^es, with
Iron-ore, Spar, Vitriol, Sulphur, and the like, intruded into their Pores: but
far greater numbers of them with Lumps of Flint, Ores of Metalls, and Minerals,
growing firmly to the Outsides of them, and oftentimes in such quantity as
that the Shell or Tooth is wholly covered by those Minerals, being immersed or
included in the Mass they constitute; insomuch that it is very usual, upon
breaking Flints, Pyrit^, etc to find Pectines, Conchae, and the like, enclosed,
even in the very middle of them. As common is it to find Echini, Cochleae,
Conchae, and other Shells, having their Cavities filled up with Ores of
Metalls, Flint, Spar, Native Vitriol, Sulphur, and other Minerals. Not but that
these Minerals many times survive the Shells which gave them their Forms, and
are found even after they are rotted and disappeared; for though, when lodged
in Chalk, or the like close Matter, which preserves and secures them against
external Injuries, these Shells are constantly found upon, and actually
investing the Flint, Spar, or other Mineral, and are commonly as fair and
entire as any of their fellow Shells at Sea: yet when they happened to be
lodged amongst Sand, Gravel, or the like laxer Matter, the Shells are usually
perished and gone Vid. Part 3. Sect. 1. Cons. 11.
, and so the Flint, Spar, etc. left uncovered. In which case the said Flint,
Spar, or other Mineral, is of a constant, regular, and specific Shape, as is
the Shell whence it borrows both that Shape, and indeed its Name; these being
the Bodies which are called, by Naturalists, Echinitae, Cochlitae, and Cochitae
Conf. Part 5. Cons. 5.
, as resembli^g the Shells of those names: and truly many of them very nearly,
they having taken the Impresses of the Insides of these Shells with that
exquisite Niceness as to express even the smallest and finest Lineaments of
them: insomuch that no Metal, when melted and cast in a Mould, can ever
possibly represent the Concavity of that Mould with greater Exactness than
these Flints, and other Minerals, do the Concavities of the Shells wherein they
were thus molded.

concreted into Nodules, subsided down to the bottom: at the same time that did
the Shells, Teeth, and other like Bodies, as also the Sand, Cole, Marle, and
other Matter whereof the S^rata of Sand-stone, Cole, Marle, and the rest are
for the most part composed Conf. Part 2. Cons. 3.
, and so were included in, and lodged amongst, that matter.

That in regard that both the ordinary Terrestrial Matter, and the Mineral and
Metallic Matter which was assumed up into the Fluid was different in different
parts of it, being in some places all chiefly of one kind, suppose Sand: in
others of a different kind, e.g. Chalk: and in others of several kinds
together, as Sand, Chalk, and many more: and there being no other Place or
Apartment in the Globe assigned to any of this Matter than that whereinto its
own natural Gravity bore it, which was only directly downwards, whereby it
obtained that place in the Globe which was just underneath that part of the
Fluid where it was sustained when the Subsidence began; it thence happened that
the Strata, which were afterward constituted by this Matter thus subsiding,
are also different in different places: in some all, or most of them, of
Sandstone: in others of Chalk: and in others of both Sand-stone and Chalk, and
perhaps many more, lying each upon other. And the Case of Metalls and Minerals
being the same, it is for that reason that in some places we now get Iron, or
Vitriol; but no Copper, or Alum: in others we find these, but not those: and in
others both these, and those, and perhaps many more.

That the Place, both of the several sorts of Terrestrial Matter, and of
Metalls and Minerals, whilst sustained in the Fluid, being thus contingent and
uncertain, their Intermixtures with each other, and with the Terrestrial
Matter, in the Sediment, or Strata, which subsiding they together composed,
must consequently be uncertain likewise; that Metal or Mineral, of whatever
kind it chanced to be, which was sustained in any part of the Fluid, settling
only directly downwards, was lodged amongst the Terrestrial Matter which
chanced to be sustained together with it in the same part, of what kind soever
that Matter was. And accordingly we now find them uncertainly mixed: the same
Metal or Mineral lodged, in some places, in Stone: in others, in Cole: and in
others, in Clay, Marle, or any other Matter indifferently Vid. Page 174 supra.
. And as we find the same Metal or Mineral lodged amongst different sorts of
the common Terrestrial Matter, so do we, for still the same reason, also find
different kinds of Metalls and Minerals, Copper, Iron, and Sulphur, Tin, Lead,
and Vitriol, with several more, lodged all confusedly together in the very same
fort of Terrestrial Matter Vid. Page 174. supra.
.

That the quantity of the Metallic or Mineral Matter taken up into the Fluid
was various and uncertain: there being in some parts little or perhaps none of
it: in others a very great abundance. And so we at this day find it; in some
places, little, or none: in others, in such plenty as to exceed even the
ordinary Terrestrial Matter, and of it self to compose whole Strata, without
any considerable Admixture of Sand, Clay, or other common Matter. Thus we
sometimes see whole Strata compiled of Metallic and Mineral Pyrite: others of
Pebles, and of Flints, without the Interposition of any other Matter: that
finer Matter commonly found amongst these, and vulgarly called Sand, being
really no other than very small Pebles; as may appear to any one who shall
carefully examine* and observe it, especially with a good Microscope. Thus
likewise we find Strata consisting almost entirely of Common Salt: others of
Ochre: and others of several Metalls and Minerals, Tin, Lead, Vitriol, Nitre,
and Sulphur, promiscuously, without any considerable Intermixture of coarser
Terrestrial Matter.

Strata, was all of it originally, and at the time of the Deluge, lodged in the
Bodies of those Strata: being interspersed or scattered in single Corpuscles,
amongst the Sand, or other Matter, whereof the said Strata mainly consist. That
it was educed thence, and transmitted into these Intervalls, since that time;
the Intervalls themselves not existing till the Strata were formed, and the
metallic and mineral Matter actually lodged in them; they being only Breaches
of the Strata, and not made till the very conclusion of the Catastrophe, the
Water thereupon immediately withdrawing again from off the Earth Conf. Part 2.
Cons. 3. and 6. and Part 3. Sect. 2. Cons. 3. uti and Part 4. Cons. 3.
.

That the Water which ascends up out of the Abyss, on all sides of the Globe,
toward the Surface of the Earth Part 3. Sect. 1. Cons. 8.
, incessantly pervading the Strata, I mean the Interstices of the Sand or other
Matter whereof they consist, detaches and bears along with it all such
metallic, mineral, and other Corpuscles which lie loose in its way, and are
withal so small as to be able to pass those Interstices: forcing them along
with it into the perpendicular Intervalls; to which it naturally directs its
course, as finding there a ready Exit and Discharge Ibid.
, being partly exhaled thence up into the Atmosphere, and partly flowing forth
upon the Surface of the Earth, and forming Springs and Rivers.

That the Water which falls upon the Surface of the Earth in Rain, bears also
some, though a lesser, share in this Action; this, soaking into the Strata
which lie near the Surface, straining through the Pores of them, and advancing
on toward their perpendicular Intervalls Part 3. Sect. 1. Cons. 4.
, bears thither along with it all such moveable Matter as occurrs in those
Pores, in much the same manner as does the Water which arises out of the Abyss;
with this only difference, that this passes and pervades none but the
superficial and uppermost Strata, whereas the other permeates also those which
lie lower and deeper.

That the metallic and mineral Corpuscles, being thus conveyed into these
Intervalls; and the Water there having more room and freer passage than before,
whilst it only penetrated the Pores of the Stone, it deserts the said
Corpuscles, leaving them in these Intervalls; unless it flow forth with a very
rapid and precipitate Motion; for then it hurries them out along with it, till
its Motion becomes more languid and remiss, when it quits and abandons them
Conf. Cons. 12. and 13. infra.
.

Vid. Page 178. supra.
, in which manner the far greatest part of it is found, and particularly the
common Ores of Metalls, Iron, Tin, Lead, and the rest, as also Spar, Alum,
Vitriol, Sulphur, and other Minerals ^punc; as that which is disposed and
formed into some observable Figure, such as the metallic and mineral
Stalactita, the angulated or Crystallized Metalls and Minerals Vid. Page 178.
supra.
, and, to be short, all others whatever.

That there is not, whatever some Stalactites, Lapis Stillatitius, or
Dropstone, which consists principally of Spar, and is frequently found, in form
of an Icycle, hanging down from the tops and sides of Grotto's, and of the
lesser perpendicular Intervalls, was formed by the Water which continually is
passing through the Strata into these their Interv^lls; this taking the Sparry
Particles as they lay dispersedly mingled with the Sand, or other Matter
whereof those Strata consist, and bearing them on with it to the said
Intervalls; where issuing leisurely out of the Strata, and having now free
passage, it deserts these Particles, falling down from the tops and sides of
the Grotto's, to which the Particles affixing by little and little, incrust
them over with a Sparry Cover, and also from these Stalactitae, from which the
Water is continually falling and distilling drop by drop; which gave occasion
to that Mistake of those who suppose these Bodies to be only Water petrified,
as they speak, or converted into these Sparry or Stony Iceycles, in the same
manner as it is by Frost congealed into the Icy ones which hang down from the
Eaves of Houses, from Pipes, or other conveyances of Water. That the Iron, and
other metallic Stalactitae: the Aluminous, and the Vitriolick Stalactitae: the
Saline ones, or those which consist of common Salt, and all others, are found
suspended in the same manner, and their Matter conducted out of the Strata to
their Fissures by the same means.

That the Iron-Rhombs, Tin-Grains, e. g. Crystal, the Pseud-Adamantes, the
Amethyst, Emerauld, and the rest: I say these, and all other natural metallic
and mineral Crystallizations, were effected by the Water, which first brought
the Particles whereof each consists out from amongst the Matter of the Strata,
into these their Intervalls, in much the same manner that the common, or
artificial, Crystallizations of Alum, Vitriol, and the like, are now effected
in the Water wherein they were before dissolved: and as are the Chemical
Crystallizations of other Minerals and Metalls in their several Menstrua;
whereof more in its place.

That the Corpuscles of Metalls and smaller than those of Sand and of the other
common Terrestrial Matter, and consequently the Pores of the Strata which
consist mainly, or at least contain in them a considerable quantity of these
Confer. Consect. 3. Page 188. supra.
, being lesser and narrower than those of the Strata of Sand-stone, and the
like common and crasser Matter, the Water which ascends from beneath toward
the Surface of the Earth is admitted into them, if at all, only in lesser
quantity, passes them slowly and difficultly, and therefore has not Scope and
Power sufficient to dislodge the Corpuscles, and bear them off with it into the
perpendicular Intervalls, as it does in those Strata which consist chiefly of
Stone, and the like grosser Matter, where the metallic and mineral Corpuscles
lie thinner, and so the Pores are more wide and open. That, for this reason, in
the Intervalls of those Strata which abound plentifully with Iron, Tin, Spar,
common Salt, Alum, or the like, we ordinarily find a lesser quantity of these
Metalls and Minerals resident, than we do in the Intervalls of some other
Strata which now show little, or perhaps nothing in the Bodies of them besides
Sand and such like coarser Matter; there being so admirable a Contrivance in
this Affair, that the Water does not disturb and remove that metallic or
mineral Matter which lves in the Strata in great plenty, and so is there ready
collected to the hand of Man: but only that which needs such an Agent to
collect it: that which is so sparingly and dispersedly intermixed with the
common Terrestrial Matter, as not to be discoverable by humane Industry, or, if
discoverable, so diffused and scattered amongst the crasser and more
unprofitable Matter, that 'twould never be possible to separate and extract it:
or, if 'twas, it would not defray the Charge and Labor of the Extraction, and
therefore must needs have been all irretrievably lost, and useless to Mankind,
was it not here by this means collected and brought into one Mass.

That therefore the Metalls and Minerals which are lodged in the perpendicular
Intervalls of the Strata, do still grow, (to speak in the Mineralists phrase)
or receive additional Increase from the Corpuscles which are yet daily born
along with the Water into them: and have grown so ever since the time of the
Deluge, in all such places where those Intervalls are not already so filled,
that they cannot receive any more; or where the Stock of metallic and mineral
Corpuscles, originally lodged in the Strata, is not quite exhausted, and all
borne thither already. That yet this Increase is not now any where very great;
the Corpuscles, which were capable of being stirred and removed, being, by the
continual Passage of the Water for so many Ages, in most places exhausted,
educed forth of the Strata, and transmitted into these their Fissures.

Bodies of the Strata does not now grow: nor has it ever received any Addition
since 'twas first reposed in those Strata at the time of the Universal Deluge:
but, on the contrary, has been diminished and lessened by so much as has been
conveyed into their perpendicular Intervalls, and as has been brought forth
upon the Surface of the Earth by Springs, Rivers Vid. Cons. 12. infra.
, and Exhalations Vid. Cons. 14. Infra.
from the Abyss, ever since that time. That notwithstanding there have, and do
still, happen, Transitions and Removes of it, in the solid Strata, from one
part of the same Stratum to another part of it, occasioned by the Motion of the
Vapor toward the perpendicular Intervalls of these Part 3. Cons. 8.
: and, in the laxer Strata, such as those of Sand, Clay, and the like, from the
lower ones to those which lie above them, and even to the very Surface of the
Earth, occasioned by the Motion of the Vapor directly toward the Surface, it
pervading these looser Strata diametrically Ibid.
. But of this I have not room to enlarge more particularly in this place.

That the Bitumen which is found in Springs; and which is, in others, found
floating in form of an Oil upon the Surface of the Water; when it is called by
Naturalists Naphtha, and Petroleum: the Salt wherewith the Salinae, or
Salt-Springs, abound: the Vitriol, Alum, Nitre, Sulphur, Spar, and other
Minerals, wherewith the Acidulae, or Medicinal-Springs are saturated: I say,
all these Minerals were originally lodged in the Strata of Stone, Cole, Earth,
or the like: that they were educed thence, and conveyed into these Springs, by
the Water pervading those Strata in its passage from the Abyss toward the said
Springs Conf. Part 3. Sect. 1. Cons. 8. and Part 4. Cons. 5.
.

Rivers issues out of the Apertures of them with more than ordinary Agitation
and Rapidity, it usually bears forth along with it such Particles of Spar,
Argilla, or other loose and moveable Matter as it met with in its Passage
through the Stone, Marble, or other solid Strata: that it sustains these
Particles, and carries them on together with it'till such time as its Motion
begins to remit and be less rapid than it was at, and near its Source; when by
degrees it lowers them, and lets them fall, deposing and affixing them upon any
thing which occurrs in the way, as Stones, Shells, Sticks, or other like
Bodies; especially those which lie in the Sinus's or Creeks of those Rivers
where the Motion of the Water is more sluggish and languid than in the Stream,
or middle of the Chanel. That some Rivers do thus bring forth Spar, and other
mineral Matter in great quantity, so as to cover and incrust the Stones,
Sticks, and other Bodies lying therein, to a very considerable Thickness. That
sometimes the Water of Standing-Springs does the same: precipitating the
mineral Matter which it brought forth of the Strata, upon the Stones at the
bottoms and sides of the said Springs: and affixing it upon Sticks, Straws, and
other Bodies, and upon the Moss, or other Plants which happen to grow therein,
incrusting them over, in like manner as does the abovementioned Water of Rivers.

That when the Heat at, and upon, Part 1. Page 47. and Part 3. Sect. 1. Cons. 8.
, but likewise the very mineral Matter it self, Sulphur, Nitre, Vitriol, and
the like; the Atoms, or single Corpuscles whereof being detached from their
respective Beds in the Earth, it bears quite to the Surface of it, and the
light and more active sorts of them up into the Atmosphere, (together with the
Vapor, which, when condensed, falls down again in Rain) in greater or lesser
plenty, and to a greater or lesser height, answerably to the greater or lesser
quantity or Intenseness of the Heat.

That wherever there happen to be any extraordinary Discharges of the
Subterranean Heat: either Vulcano's, or lesser Spiracles, such as those about
Naples, Pozzuolo, and in other Parts of the World: Thermae, or Hot-springs: or
fiery Eructations, such as burst forth of the Earth during Earthquakes: I say
wherever there are such or the like Discharges of this Subterranean Fire, there
likewise is mineral Matter, more or less, hurried up along with it. That even
the Heat of the Sun, and indeed any other, though but an accidental Heat, has
the same Effect, and contributes to the raising of mineral Matter out of the
Earth.

That AEtna, Vesuvius, and the other Vulcano's discharge forth, together with
the Fire, not only metallic and mineral Matter in great quantity, but Sand
likewise, and huge Stones, tossing them up sometimes to a very great height in
the Air.

That the Heat, which arises out of the lesser Spiracles, also brings forth
along with it mineral Matter, and particularly Nitre, and Sulphur; some of
which it affixes to the tops and sides of the Grotto's as it passes, which
Grotto's are usually so hot as to serve for natural Stoves, or Sweating-Vaults:
some it deposes near unto, and even upon, the Surface of the Earth; insomuch
that in some places the Flores Sulphuris are gathered in considerable plenty
near these Spiracles: some it bears in Steams up into the Air, and this in such
quantity too as to be manifest to the Smell, especially the Sulphur, that
Mineral so particularly affecting this Sense.

That the Heat which is continually passing up toward the Thermae, brings
thither along with it Particles of Spar, Alum, Sulphur, Nitre, and other
Minerals in such quantity, that these ordinarily as much exceed the common
Acidulae Vid. Cons. 12. supra.
in plenty of this mineral Matter as they do in Heat. That this Heat, ascending
out of the Thermae, bears up with it not only Water, in form of Vapor, but
likewise mineral Matter; some whereof it affixes to the Sides and Arches of the
Grotto's, where these Thermae arise in such: or, if they be covered with
Buildings, to the Walls and Roofs of those Buildings: to the Pipes through
which the Water is conveyed, or the like. That Sulphur is in some places
collected very plentifully adhering to the Stone of these Grotts, and
Buildings: yea sometimes Spar, and other crasser Minerals, are thus mounted up,
and affix to the Walls and Roofs, incrust them over, and, being stopped and
reverberated thereby, form Stalactitae, or Sparry Iceycles hanging down from
the Arches of the Grotto's, from the Capitals of the Pillars, and Roofs of the
Buildings. That where these Thermae are not thus covered and vaulted over, so
that the mineral Matter is not stopped and hindered in its Ascent, a great part
of it advances directly up into the Atmosphere.

That the Heat which is discharged out of the Earth at the time of Earthquakes
Part 3. Sect. 1. Cons. 12. page 139. and 141. supra.
brings forth Nirre, Sulphur, and other mineral Matter along with it. That the
Water also which is at the same time spued out Ib. page 135.
, through the Cracks or Chasmes opened by the Earthquake, and through the
Apertures of Springs and Rivers, is turbid and stinking, as being highly
saturated with mineral Matter. That the Acidulae, or Medical Springs emit then
likewise a greater quantity of their Minerals than usual: and even the ordinary
Springs, which were before clear, fresh, and limpid, become thick and turbid,
and are impregnated with Sulphur and other* Minerals as long as the Earthquake
lasts. That these Minerals do not issue out only at these larger Exits, but
steam forth likewise through the Pores of the Earth, occasioning those
sulphurous and other offensive Stenches which usually attend Earthquakes, and
are the Cause of the Fevers and other malignant Dis^empers which commonly
succeed them: bringing on oftentimes great Mortalities, not only amongst Men,
but even the very Beasts and Fishes. That these mineral Eructations arise in
such quantity up into the Atmosphere as to thicken, discolor, and darken it
sometimes to a very great degree.

That any Heat whatsoever, even an accidental one, such as is that which
proceeds from the Bodies of Animals, and from their Excrements, promotes the
Ascent of mineral Matter, but more especially of that which is subtle, light,
and active, and is consequently moveable more easily, and with a lesser Power.
That by this means Nitre (wherever there happens to be any in the Earth
underneath) is raised in Stables, Pigeon-Houses, and other like Receptacles of
Animals: and in those places where their Dung lies heaped up. That 'twas this
which occasioned, in some, an Opinion that Nitre proceeds forth of those
Animals, and their Excrements; whereas it is found raised up, and convened or
collected indifferently and as well in Buildings where Animals rarely or never
come, as in those they ordinarily frequent; not to mention that which is found
sometimes in considerable plenty at great depths in the Earth: in the Water of
Springs, of Rivers, of Lakes, and, in some Parts, even of the Sea it self;
whereof more largely hereafter. That, in such places where the Earth contains
Nitre within it, though there be no such adventitious Heat, if that Heat which
is almost continually steaming out of the Earth be but preserved, its
Dissipation prevented, and the Cold kept off by some Building or other like
Coverture, this alone is ordinarily sufficient to raise up the Nitre, and bear
it out at the Surface of the Earth, (unless its Egress be impeded by Pavements,
or the like Obstructions) and mount it up into the Air, as far as those
Buildings will permit. For, the Cielings and Walls stopping it in its Ascent,
it usually affixes, unto them, and settles there. And accordingly it is
frequently found thus affixed to the Walls and Cielings of Ground-Rooms,
Cellars, and Vaults; and this sometimes in such quantities as to form nitrose
Stalactitae Confer. Page 202. supra.
, hanging down from them in form of Iceycles, especially from the Tops and
Arches of Cellars and Vaults.

That the Heat of the Sun in the hotter Seasons being very intense, and
penetrating the exterior or superficial parts of the Earth, it thereby-excites
and stirs up those mineral Exhalations, in subterraneous Caverns, in Mines, and
in Cole-pits, which are commonly called Damps. That it is for this reason that
these seldom or never happen but in the Summer time; when, the hotter the
Weather is, the greater and more frequent are the Damps. That besides this of
the Sun, they are also sometimes raised by the Accession of other Heat, and
particularly by the Fires which the Miners use in the Grooves, for breaking the
Rocks, and for other Ends. That the Quantity of mineral Matter thus raised is
according as there is more or less of it in those Mines, especially of Sulphur,
Nitre, and the like subtle and easily moveable Minerals: and as the Heat is
there more or less intense. That this mineral Matter being sustained in the Air
there, and floating about in the Mines, and Pits, it hits upon, and affixes it
self unto, the Workmens Tools, to their Clothes, Candles, or any other bodies
that occurr. That where there is any considerable quantity of Sulphur in the
Exhalation thus floating too and again, it takes fire at the Candles, burns
with a blue Flame, and emits a strong sulphurous Smell. That these Damps
differ in their Effects according to the different Minerals that are the Cause
of them; ours in England being generally reducible to two kinds; whereof one is
called the Suffocating, the other the Fulminating Damp. That the former of
these extinguisheth the Candles, makes the Workmen faint, and vertiginous, and,
when very great, suffocates, and kills them. The Fulminating Damp will take
fire at a Candle, or other Flame, and, upon its Accension, gives a Crack or
Report like the Discharge of a Gun, and makes likewise an Explosion so forcible
as sometimes to kill the Miners, break their Limbs, shake the Earth, and force
Coals, Stones, and other Bodies, even though they be of very great Weight and
Bulk, from the bottom of the Pit or Mine, up through the Shaft, discharging
them out at the Top or Mouth of it, sometimes striking off the Turn which
stands thereon, and mounting all up to a great height in the Air; this being
succeeded by a Smoke, which both in Smell, and all other respects, resembles
that of fired Gunpowder; and is, as may appear from these and other Phenomenon
of it, nothing but an Exhalation of Nitre and Sulphur, which are the principal
Ingredients of that Composition we call Gunpowder. That as these Damps are
caused by Heat, so they are remedied by withdrawing that Heat, and by conveying
forth the mineral Steams; which the Miners effect by Perflations with large
Bellows: by letting down Tubes, and sinking new Shafts; whereby they give free
passage and motion to the Air, which ventilates and cools the Mines, purges and
frees them from these mineral Exhalations.

That at such time as the Sun's power is so great as thus to penetrate the
exterior Parts of the Earth: to disturb these mineral Particles: and raise
them from out the Strata wherein they lay, it does not only sustain them in the
Air of Grotto's, Mines, and other Caverns under ground, but likewise bears them
out through the Mouths of those Caverns, and through the ordinary Cracks and
Pores of the Earth, mounting them up, along with the watery Exhalations, into
the Atmosphere Vid. Part 3. Sect. 1. Cons. 8.
, especially Sulphur, Nitre, and the other more light and active Minerals;
where they form Meteors; and are particularly the Cause of Thunder, and of
Lightning. That, this mineral Matter requiring a considerable degree of Heat to
raise it, the most Northern Climes, and the Winter Seasons are, for that
reason, little or not at all troubled with Thunder; it seldom happening, in any
great measure, but in the hotter Months, and in the Southern Countries, as in
Congo, Guinea, and other Parts of Africa, and in the Southern Parts of Asia and
America; where it is, during the Season of their great Rains Vid. Page 126.
supra.
, horribly loud and astonishing, and as much exceeds the Thunder of these
Northern Climes, as the Heat there exceeds that of these Climes. That the
mineral Matter which is discharged forth of Vulcano's, and other like
Spiracles: and out of the Thermae, ascends up into the Air, and contributes to
the Formation of these Meteors. That likewise the Nitre and Sulphur, which are
belched forth of the Earth at the time of Earthquakes (the Countries which are
most obnoxious to this Malady abounding, as I have already intimated Vid. page
141. supra.
, with these two Minerals particularly;) in such plenty as to thicken and
darken the Air, constitute there a kind of AErial Gunpowder, and are the Cause
of that dismal and terrible Thunder and Lightning which commonly, if not
always, attend Earthquakes; even when all was till then calm and clear, and not
the least Sign or Presage of any such thing before the Earthquake began.

That as the mineral Eruptions which happen during Earthquakes Vid. page 203.
supra.
: and the Steams and Damps of Mines Vid. page 206. supra.
are detrimental to Health, hurtful and injurious to the Bodies of Men and
other Animals, so likewise are the Mineral Exhalations which are thus raised by
the Sun out of the Body of the Earth up into the Atmosphere: but more
especially in those Parts of it where there are Arsenical, or other like
noxious Minerals lodged underneath. That these mingling with, and being
disseminated in, the Air, and passing together with it into the Lungs in
Respiration, are by them transmitted into the Body, where they infect the Mass
of Blood, create Perturbations and disorderly Motions therein, and lay the
Foundation of Pestilential Fevers, and other malignant Distempers. That it is
for this reason that the Southern Countries are more frequently molested and
incommoded by these Distempers than the Northern are: and that they are more
rise and stirring in the hotter Months, in July and August, than in the colder,
December, January, and the rest. That it is indeed true, that in September and
October, which are none of the hottest Months, these Diseases are oftentimes as
epidemical as in the precedent and warmer Season: and do not abate and remit in
proportion to the remission of the Sun's Heat in those Months; but this is
purely accidental, and happens merely because the Heat within the Surface of
the Earth is not liable to so sudden Vicissitudes, or so quickly spent and
dispersed, as is that which is upon it, and in the Air. This therefore, the
Pores of the Earth remaining still as free, and open, as ever, continues to
send out the mineral Steams as before, but in lesser and lesser quantity,
answerably to the gradual Diminution of this Heat. Which Steams, though now
sent up to the Surface of the Earth only in lesser plenty, may be much more
offensive and mischievous than in the hotter Months when it came forth in far
greater. For the Sun's power being in those Months also greater, it then
straitways hurries these Steams up into the Atmosphere: whereas in the colder,
its power being lessened, it cannot bear it up so fast; so that it stays and
stagnates near the Surface of the Earth, swimming and floating about in that
Region of the Air wherein we breath; where it must needs be much more
pernicious than when born up to a greater height, and so farther out of the
way. And this is indeed much the Case of Foggs: particularly of those which we
frequently observe after Sunsetting, even in our hottest Months. These being
nothing but a Vapor, consisting of Water, and of such mineral Matter as this
met with in its passage, and could well bring up along with it. Which Vapor
was sent up in greater quantity all the foregoing Day, than now in the Evening;
but the Sun, then being above the Horizon, taking it at the Surface of the
Earth, and rapidly mounting it up into the Atmosphere, it was not discernible,
as now it is; because, the Sun being now gone off, the Vapor stagnates at and
near the Earth, and saturates the Air till it is so thick as to be easily
visible therein. And when at length the Heat there is somewhat further spent,
which is usually about the middle of the Night, it falls down again in a Dew,
alighting upon Herbs and other Vegetables, which i^ cherishes, cools, and
refreshes, after the scorching Heat of the foregoing Day. But if it happens, as
sometimes it does, that this Vapor bears up along with it any noxious mineral
Steams, it then blasts Vegetables, especially those which are more young and
tender: blights Corn and Fruits: and is sometimes injurious even to Men who
chance to be then abroad in the Fields. It Is also the Case of Water at the
Surface of the Earth Conf. Part 3. Sect. 1. Cons. 8.
; where the Springs and Rivers are very low, yea some of them cease to yield
any Water at all, in the Summer Months, because the Sun's Power is then so
great as easily and speedily to bear up into the Atmosphere, in small and
invisible parcels, and in form of an extremely fine and thin Vapor, a very
great part of the Water which is sent up out of the Abyss: whereas in the
Wintertime the Sun is withdrawn farther off, and its power lessened, so that
it cannot then buoy it up as before; for which reason it is that so much more of
it then stands at the Surface of the Earth, and stagnates there. So likewise
for Rain; we learn from Experiment that there commonly falls in England, in
France, and some other Countries, more Rain in June and July, than in December
and January; but it makes a much greater Show upon the Earth in these Months
than in those, because it lies longer upon it; the Sun now wanting power to
exhale and bear it up so quickly and plentifully as then it did. It Is also the
Case of the Halitus emitted forth of the Lungs of Men and other Animals. In a
Physiological Treatise, which I have by me, concerning the Structure and Use of
the Parts of Animals, discoursing of the Lungs, I show that they are the grand
Emunctory of the Body: that the main End of Respiration is continually to
discharge and expel an excrementitious Fluid out of the Mass of Blood: and
prove from several Experiments that there passes out of the Body a greater
quantity of Fluid Matter this way, I mean upwards, and through the Lungs, than
there does of Urine, by the Kidneys, downwards. Now the Fluid, which is thus
secreted, and expired forth along with the Air, goes off with it in insensible
parcels, in the Summer Season, when the ambient Air contains Heat enough to
bear it quickly away, and so disperse it. But in the Winter, when the Heat
without is less, it oftentimes becomes so far condensed as to be visible,
flowing out of the Mouth in form of a Fume, or crasser Vapor* and may, by
proper Vessels, set in a strong freezing Mixture, the better to condense this
Vapor, be collected in considerable quantity. But to return. That it is not
without a very extraordinary Providence that there so constantly happens, in
the Month of September (the time when chiefly these mineral Steams stagnate
thus at and near the Surface of the Earth) a very nipping and severe Season of
Cold, far beyond what might, from the Sun's height and power, be then expected:
beyond that of October and November: and sometimes equal to that of January and
the coldest Months: as also that there then so constantly happens very
blustering and turbulent Winds; the Cold serving to check and put a stop to the
Ascent of this mineral Matter: and the Wind to dissipate and convey away that
which was before raised out of the Earth; which, was it not thus carried off,
would be infinitely more fatal and pernicious to Man and other Animals than now
it is. But I must be contented here to give only short Hints of these, as of
other, Things: and to write but obscurely and reservedly, until I have
opportunity to express my Sentiments of them with greater Copiousness, Freedom,
and Perspicuity.

Thus much of the Scheme of my Design in this Part have I run over: and lead my
Reader a long and tedious Jaunt in tracing out these metallic and mineral
Bodies: in pursuing them through their several Mazes and Retreats: through the
Earth, the Water, and the Air. And yet, long as it is, we are not got much
further than the Borders of the Mineral Kingdom, and have done little more yet
than settled and adjusted Preliminaries; so very ample is this Kingdom, so
various and manifold its Productions. For the foregoing Conclusions relate only
to the Origin and Growth of these Bodies; the Natural History of each
particular Metal and Mineral, with the Observations whereon that History is
grounded, being still to come. But I must be forced wholly to wave and
supersede the Detail of these; for I perceive, do what I can, this Abstract
will swell much beyond the bounds which I at first designed.

This Fourth Part will be followed by several Treatises, serving to confirm,
and to illustrate some Passages in it: whereof I shall at present only mention
the four following.

1. Rules and Directions for the Discovery of Metalls and Minerals la^ent in
the Earth: with an Enquiry why these lie sometimes so near the Surface, and did
not, (because of their greater Gravity) at the General Subsidence in the Deluge
Part 2. Cons. 3. and Part 4. Cons. 3.
, fall to a much greater depth than we now find them: even to such a depth as
to have lain quite out of humane reach, and so have been all buried, and
irrecoverably lost.

2. An Examination of the Common Doctrine about the Generation of Metalls and
Minerals: and particularly that of the Chemists; with an Appendix, relating to
the Transmutation of Metalls: detecting the Impostures and Elusions of those
who have pretended to it: and evincing the Impossibility of it from the most
plain, simple, and Physical Reasons: proving likewise that there are no such
natural Gradations, and Conversions of one Metal and Mineral into another, in
the Earth, as many have fancied. As also an Account of the Mineral Iuyces in
the Earth, which some Writers have imagined to be I know not what Seeds of
Minerals, showing that they are, for the far greatest part, nothing but Water
strongly impregnated with Mineral Matter, which it derives from the Strata as
it passes through them Cons. 5. etc. supra.
.

3. Relations, obtained from several Hands, concerning the State of Metalls and
Minerals in Foreign Countries: in diverse Parts of Asia, Africa, and America, as
well as in Hungary, Germany, Sweden, and other Parts of Europe: and
particularly of those which are not found in England; showing that the
Condition of these Bodies in those remoter Regions is exactly conformable to
that of ours here: and that they were all put into this Condition by the very
same means Conf. Cons. 1. supra.
.

4. Observations concerning English Amber: and Relations from abroad, about the
Amber of Prussia and other distant Places: with a Discourse founded upon them,
proving that Amber is not a gummons or resinous Substance drawn out of Trees by
the Sun's Heat; and coagulated and hardened by falling down into Rivers, or the
Sea, as the Ancients generally believed: but is a Natural Fossil, as Pebles,
Flints, Pyritae, and the like, are: formed at the same time, and by the same
means that they were: and all of it originally reposed in the Strata of Earth,
Sand, etc. together with them. That it is indeed found in some places lying
upon the Shores of the Sea, and of Rivers: but it is also found at Land, and dug
up (sometimes at very great depths) in the Earth; and this as well in Places
very remote from any Sea, or River, as in those which are nearer unto them.
That it is dug out of even the highest Mountains, and indeed all other Parts
of the Earth contingently and indifferently, as the Pyritae, Agates, Jaspers,
Pebles, and the rest, are. That wherever it is found upon the Sea-Shores, there
also is it as certainly found at Land, up in the neighboring Country: and
particularly in Prussia, upon whose Shores so great a quantity of Amber is
yearly collected, it is dug up almost all over the Country. That even that which
now lies loose upon the Sea-Shores, was all of it originally lodged in the
Earth: in the Strata of Sand, Marle, Clay, and the like, whereof the
neighboring Land, and the Cliffs adjacent to those Shores, do consist; and
wherever it is so found scattered upon the Shores, there is it as constantly
found lodged in the Cliffs thereabouts. That when the Sea, at High Water, comes
up unto, and bears hard upon, the said Cliffs, and is agitated by Winds and
Storms, it frequently beats down huge pieces of Earth from them; which Earth,
falling into the Water, is, by its continued Agitation and Motion dissolved,
and borne by degrees down into the Sea, being loose, and light, and so easily
reduced into lesser Parcels, dissolved, and washed away: but the Pebles,
Pyritae, Amber, or other like Nodules, which happened to be reposed in those
Cliffs, amongst the Earth so beaten down, being hard, and not so dissoluble,
and likewise more bulky and ponderous, are left behind upon the Shores, being
impeded, and secured, by that their bulk and weight, from being born along with
the Terrestrial Matter into the Sea. That therefore the Sea is no ways
concerned in the Formation of these Bodies: no more in the Formation of Amber,
than of the Pyritae, Flints, and other mineral Masses that are found together
with it: but only dislodges and discovers them, bears away the Earth wherein
they were buried, washes off the Soil and Sordes wherein they were involved and
concealed, and thereby renders them more conspicuous, apparent, and easy to be
found. That this is so known and experienced amongst the People who are
employed to gather the Amber, that they always run down to the Seaside after a
Storm, for that purpose; and, if it has been so great as to beat down part of
the Cliffs there, they assuredly find Amber, more or less, upon the Seas Ebb
and Retirement, and after every Retreat of the Sea for some Tides after; the
Sea not bearing down the Earth immediately and all at once, but washing it off
by little and little, and so discovering the Amber by degrees, some after one
Tide, and some after another. That particularly the Amber, Vitriolick Pyritae,
and other like Bodies, that are found upon the Shores of Kent, Essex,
Hampshire, and elsewhere, all came first from the bordering Cliffs, and were
dislodged by this means; and are found in the Earth, as well as upon the
Shores, whenever it is laid open, as in sinking Wells, Pits, and the like. That
not only the Sea, but Rivers and Rains also, are instrumental to the Detection
of Amber; and other Fossils, by washing away the Earth and Dirt that before
covered and concealed them. Thus the Golden Pyritae, or, as they are commonly
called, Gold-grains, Amethystine Pebles, Amber, and other Stones of Worth, are
uncovered by such Rivers as chance to run through the Grounds which contain
those Bodies in them. Thus likewise Rains, by their washing the Earth down from
off the Hills Part 5. Cons. 2.
, clear, and disclose such Pyritae, Selenitae, or other Bodies that happen to
be lodged, near the Surface of the Earth, in those Hills: and it is by this
means chiefly that the Grain-Gold, upon all the Golden Coast (as it is called)
in Guinea, is displayed; the Rains falling there in great Abundance, and with
incredible Force, thereby the more powerfully beating off the Earth. This the
Negrues, Natives of those Parts, know full well; and therefore do not expect to
find much of it unless after the Season of their Rains Vid. Part 3. Sect. 1.
Cons. 8. Page 126.
; when they never fail to find of it, no more than the Amber-Gatherers fail of
finding that upon the Seacoasts after a Storm. And if those Persons who are
curious in collecting either Minerals, or the Shells, Teeth, or other Parts of
Animal Bodies that have been buried in the Earth, do but search the Hills after
Rains, and the Sea-Shores after Storms, I dare undertake they will not lose
their Labor. But to return. That Amber is not only lodged in the Strata of
Earth, and of Sand together with the other mineral Nodules, but is sometimes
found actually growing unto, and combined into the same Mass Vid. Cons. 2.
supra.
with the Pyrites, and others of them. That it likewise sometimes contains in
it pieces of Straws, Flies, Shells, and other heterogeneous Bodies, in like
manner as the Pyritae, Flints, and all other analogous Fossils do Ibid.
. That although Amber be most commonly of a yellowish Color, and therefore not
unlike some kinds of Gums, yet there is found of it also of several other
Colors, as black, white, brown, green, blue, and purple, to name no more. Yea
the very same Lump is frequently of different Colors. That these Colors are
all accidental, even the yellow it self, and owing to the Intermixture of
foreign Matter, which concreted into the same Mass with the proper Matter of
this Stone, and with the heterogeneous Bodies which are included in it, at the
time of its Coalition Ibid.
. That this is the Case of Agates, of Cornelians, of Topazes, and many other
colored Stones; the Colors of several whereof, and even that of Amber it
self, may by a very easy process, be in great measure, if not wholly,
extracted, and taken from them: and the Bodies of these Stones rendered almost,
if not quite, as pellucid as Crystal, without sensibly damaging the Texture of
them. That even the most obvious and ordinary Minerals are not free from this
Contagion of adventitious Matter: Common Salt it self, when found naturally
crystallized amongst other Minerals and Metalls, in the perpendicular
Intervalls of the Strata of Stone, being, not only pellucid, as it naturally is
when pure and simple, but white also, and like the white crystallized Spar:
yellow, and nearly resembling the Topaz: blue, and not unlike the Sapphire; and
yet these specious Bodies, and Gemms as to outward show, upon trial, yield
nothing but mere Salt, with an extremely small Admixture of other Matter, which
gave them their Tincture. Which may serve for a further Instance of the
confused state of Minerals in the Earth: and of the Uncertainty of their
Colors and Figures Conf. Page 172. and Page 174.
.

PART V. Of the Alterations which the Terraqueous Globe has undergone since
the time of the Deluge.
IT now remains that we take a view of the Postdiluvian State of this our
Globe: that we examine how it has stood for this last four thousand years:
that we enquire what Accidents have befallen it, and what Alterations it has
suffered since that wonderful Change it underwent at the Deluge.

There have been some who have made a mighty Outcry about Changes and
Alterations in the Terraqueous Globe. The Pretenses and Pleas of each I
consider in the first Part of this Essay: showing that they are without any
just ground: and that there are no Signs or Footsteps, in all the whole Globe,
of any such Alterations. And indeed it is well for the World that there are not;
for the Alterations which they have fancied are such as turn all the wrong way:
such as are without use, and have no end at all, or, which is worse than none,
a bad one: and tend to the damage and detriment of the Earth and its
Productions.

Notwithstanding, some Alterations there are which it has, and does still
undergo. This is what we may pronounce with Certainty: and there want not
Instances enough sufficiently to vouch and attest it. But these Alterations are
of a quite different Strain: these are as amicable and benificent to the Earth
and Terrestrial Bodies, as the other, were there really any such, would be
pernicious and destructive to both. I have already Part 4. Cons. 4.
given some Intimations of the Changes which happen in the interior parts of
the Earth, I mean the Transitions and Removes of Metalls and Minerals there:
and shown of what use and advantage those Changes are to the World Ibid. Cons.
9.
. So that I may now pass freely on to consider those which befall the
exterior* or Surface of it. And these are brought about silently and
insensibly; and, which is the constant Method of Nature, with all imaginable
Benignity and Gentleness. Here is none of the Hurry and Precipitation: none of
the Blustering and Violence: no more than any of the direful and ruinous
Effects, which must needs have attended those Supposititious Changes. And as
these Alterations are not great, so neither are they numerous. I have made
careful search on all hands, and canvass'd the Matter with all possible
Diligence, and yet there are none that I can advance from my own Observations,
but

Stratum of Earth: that Stratum whereon Men and other Animals tread, and
Vegetables grow, is in a perpetual Flux and Change; this being the common Fund
and Promptuary that supplies and sends forth Matter for the Formation of Bodies
upon the face of the Earth. That all Animals, and particularly Mankind, as well
as all Vegetables, which have had Being since the Creation of the World,
derived all the constituent Matter of their Bodies, successively, in all Ages,
out of this Fund.

That the Matter which is thus drawn out of this Stratum for the Formation of
these Bodies, is at length laid down again in it, and restored back unto it,
upon the Dissolution of them; where it lies ready to be again assumed, and
educed thence for the fitting forth of other like Bodies in a continual
Succession.

That the constituent Matter of any one Body being proper, and turning thus
naturally, when again refunded into this Stratum, to the Constitution of
another like Body, there is a kind of Revolution or Circulation of it; so that
the Stock or Fund can never possibly be exhausted, nor the Flux and Alteration
sensible.

That as the Bodies which arise out of this Fund are various, differing very
much, not only from one another, but the Members, Organs, or Parts of each
individual amongst themselves: so likewise is the Matter of this Fund whereof
they all consist. For though when confusedly blended and mingled, as it is
whilst lying in this Stratum, it may put on a Face never so uniform and alike,
yet it is in reality very different, and consists of several Ranks, Sets, or
kinds of Corpuscles.

That all the Corpuscles that are of the same Set, or Kind, agree in every
thing, and are most exactly like unto each other in all respects: but those
that are of diverse kinds, differ from one another, as well in Matter or
Substance, in Specific Gravity, in Hardness, in Flexibility, and several other
ways, as in Bigness and Figure. That from the various Composures and
Combinations of these Corpusoles together, happen all the Varieties of the
Bodies formed out of them: all their Differences in Color and outward
Appearance, in Taste, in Smell, in Hardness, in specific Gravity, and all
other Regards; in much the same manner as that vast variety we see of Words
arises from the various Order and Composition of the twenty four Letters of the
Alphabet. But of this Matter, and of the Process and Method of Nature in the
Formation of Bodies out of it, I shall treat more at large in the Discourse it
self: wherein I shall also consider the Opinions of Others, particularly the
Ancients, and, amongst the rest, of Thales and Pythagoras, about the Elements
or Principles of Natural Things: for I now hasten to propose the other
Alterations that happen in the Terraqueous Globe.

That Rocks, Mountains, and the grow lower and lower; the superficial parts of
them being by little and little washed away by Rains, and born down upon the
subjacent Plains and Valleys. That even the Stone it self (whether naked and
uncovered as in Rocks, or invested with a Stratum of Earth as is that in our
ordinary Hills) is not, by its Solidity, priviledg'd and secured against them,
but is dissolved by degrees, and washed also down, in its turn, as well as the
looser Earth.

That the Matter which thus devolves raise and augment them; a great part of
it, viz the vegetative and lighter Terrestrial Matter, being either mounted up
into the Atmosphere by the ascending Vapor Vid. Part 3. Sect. 1. Cons. 8.
, or carried along with the Rainwater into Rivers, and, by them, into the Sea
Confer. Page 47. and seq. u^i and Page 128. and seq.
; whence it is returned back again to the Earth dispersedly by Rain Confer. Page
47. and seq. u^i and Page 128. and seq.
, and serves for the Nutriment and Formation of the Plants which grow thereon:
and the rest of it, being more crass and ponderous, does not move far, but
lodges in the Clefts, Craggs, and sides of the Rocks or Mountains, and at or
near the Roots or Bottoms of them.

Shells, and other Marine Bodies which were originally included therein Part 2.
Cons. 3.
, are by that means let loose, turned out, and exposed upon the Surface of the
Earth. That it is for this reason that these Marine Bodies are now most commonly
found upon Hills, and the higher Grounds; those few which are found below and
at the bottoms of them, being for the most part only such as have fallen down
from above, and from the tops of them; those which were, at the time of the
Deluge, reposed upon the Surface of the Earth, being most of them perished and
gone Vid. Page 65. and 66. supra.
: and indeed these, which are yet existent, only accidentally preserved by
their being at first enclosed in the Strata of Stone, and so secured by it as
long as it was it self secure, I mean, until it was thus dissolved, and so
could not any longer contribute any thing to their Preservation.

That these Shells and other Bodies, worn, fretted, and broken to pieces.

That the Shells being so broken, struck off, and gone, the Stone included in
them is thereby disclosed and set at liberty; which Stone consists of the Sand
wherewith the Cavities of those Shells were filled when they were sustained
together with it in the Water at the Deluge Part 2. Cons. 2. and 3.
, and which at length subsided in them, and was lodged with them in the Strata
of Sand-stone; the Sand contained within the Shell becoming solid and
consistent at the same time that the ambient, or that of the Stratum without
it, did Part 2. Cons. 4.
.

That therefore the Shells served as Plasms or Moulds to this Sand; which, when
consolidated, and afterward in tract of time by this means freed from its
investient Shell, is of the same shape and size as is the Cavity of the Shell,
of what kind soever that Shell happened to be. That this is the true Origin of
those Stones (consisting of Sand Those which consist of Spar, Flint, etc. I
have considered above, Part 4. Cons. 2.
) which are called, by Authors, Cochlitae, Conchitae, M^it^, Ostracitae,
Ctenitae Vulgarly Pectinitae.
, etc. and which are of constant, regular, and specific Figures; as are the
Cochleae, Conchae, and the other Shells in which they were molded, and from
which, by reason of their so near resemblance of the insides of them, they
borrow their several Denominations.

formed Stones being by this means despoiled of their Shells, and exposed
naked, upon the Surface of the ground, to the Injuries before recited, do also
themselves in time decay, wear, and moulder away, and are frequently found
defaced and broken to pieces: in like manner as the Strata of Stone wherein
they were originally lodged first did: and afterward the Shells wherein these
Stones were enclosed and formed.

This Deterration, as it is called, or Devolution of Earth and Sand from the
Mountains and higher grounds, is not in equal quantity and alike in all places,
but varies according to the different height of those Mountains, and to the
extent of the Plane at top of them: to the different consistence and
durableness of the Strata whereof they consist: and according as they are more
or less disturbed by Showers Which are much more violent in some Countries than
in others. Vid. Part 3. Cons. 8.
, Ploughing, or other Accidents. Nay this Deterration varies in different parts
of even the same Mountain; those which lie nearer to the Brink or Margin of it
suffering a quicker and greater Decrement than those which are more remote
therefrom, and toward the middle of it. But though this Devolution be thus
different, it is no^ any where, even where greatest, very considerable; and
therefore does not make any great Alteration in the Face of the Earth. This I
have learned from Observations purposely made in several Parts of England; and
when I shall, in the larger Work, propose the Standard whereby I give Judgment
of it, any one may presently and easily inform himself of the quantity and
measure of it, either here, or in any other part of the World.

There are indeed some other Casualties that the Globe is obnoxious unto; such
as Earthquakes, and the burning Mountains, or Vulcanoes. But of these, I thank
God, and the good Constitution of this happy Island, I have not had any
opportunity of Observation. Yet something I have to offer concerning these, and
the Causes of them, from the Observations of others. Not that the Thing is so
very material, or that they make such havoc of, and Alterations in, the Globe
as some Men fancy. We have assurance from History, that AEtna and Vesuvius have
sent forth Flames, by fits, for this two or three thousand years, and no doubt
but they have done so much longer; and yet we see both Sicily and Campania, the
Countries wherein those two Mountains stand, are still where they were: nay the
very Mountains themselves are yet in Being, and have not suffered any
considerable Diminution or Consumption, but are at this day the two highest
Mountains in those Countries. What they have really suffered: by what means
both these, and Earthquakes, are occasioned: and what are their Effects upon
the Globe, shall be fully and carefully considered in due place; from which
Considerations it will appear, that even these have their uses: and that,
although they do make some lesser Alterations in some few Parts of the Earth,
and sometimes molest and incommode the Inhabitants of those Parts, yet the
Agent, whereby both the one and the other is effected, is of that indispensible
Necessity and Use both to the Earth it self, to Mankind, and to all other the
Productions of it, that they could not subsist without it. I have already given
some brief Intimations that Winds and Hurricanes at Land Part 4. Cons. 14. page
215.
, Tempests and Storms at Sea Part 1. Page 49.
, (things that have always been looked upon with as evil an eye as Earthquakes,
and pointed at as only disastrous and mischievous to the World) are yet not
without a very necessary and excellent Use: the same have I also done
concerning Vulcano's Part 3. Sect. 1. Cons. 13.
; but I must not dwell upon these things too long, wherefore I shall only now
dispatch what is further necessary to be hinted here about this Decrement of
Mountains, and then conclude this Part.

And this, as it does not make any great Alteration, so neither does that,
which it really does make, any ways end^mage or disorder the Globe: nor is it
any the least Detriment or Disadvantage to the Productions of it, to
Vegetables, to Animals, and particularly to Mankind: nor does it thwart and
interfere with the grand Design of Providence, viz. the Conservation of the
Globe, and the Propagation of Bodies upon it, for the use of Man. So far from
this, that it is very highly beneficial and serviceable to both; which will
further appear if we consider,

That in the first Ages after the Deluge, when the number of Mankind, of
Quadrupeds, and of the other Animals was but small, the Valleys and Plains were
more than sufficient for their Habitation and Use. And, by such time as that
Stock of them was enlarged, that they were further spread and multiplied, and
thereby the Earth so far peopled and replenished that the Hills and higher
Grounds began to be needed; those Rocks and Mountains which in the first Ages
were high, steep, and craggy, and consequently then inconvenient and unfit for
Habitation; were by this continual Deterration brought to a lower pitch,
rendered more plain and even, and reduced nearer to the ordinary Level of the
Earth; by which means they were made habitable by such time as there was
occasion for them, fit for Tillage, for the Production of Vegetables, of Corn,
and other Necessaries, for the use of their Inhabitants.

That although the Principal Intention in the Precipitation of the Vegetative
Terrestrial Matter Part 2. page 89, 90.
, at the Deluge, and the burying it in the Strata underneath amongst the Sand,
and other mineral Matter, was to retrench and abridge the Luxury and
Superabundance of the Productions of the Earth, which had been so ingratefully
and scandalously abused by its former Inhabitants, and to cause it to deal them
forth for the future more frugally and sparingly; yet there was a still further
Design in that Precipitation: and the Matter so buried was to be brought up
upon the Stage once more; being only reserved in store for the benefit of
Posterity, and to be, by this Deterration, fetched out to light again to supply
the Wants of the latter Ages of the World. For had these Strata of Stone, and
other mineral Matter, which lay then underneath, been altogether destitute of
this Vegetative Intermixture, and had not contained some, though a smaller and
more parsimonious Supply of it in them: had there not been also vast numbers of
Shells, Teeth, Bones, and the like, lodged in them, which are, when rotted and
dissolved, Vid. Consect. 5. supra.
a proper and natural Manure to the Earth, as all Parts whatsoever of Animals,
as well as Vegetables, are; they consisting of such Matter as the upper and
Vegetative Stratum it self contains, and therefore such as is fit for the
Constitution of Plants and of Animals Confer. Cons. 1. supra.
; I say, had it not been for this, when the upper and Vegetative Stratum was
once washed off, and born down by Rains, the Hills would have become all
perfectly barren, the Strata below yielding only mere steril and mineral
Matter, such as was wholly inept and improper for the Formation of Vegetables.
Nay, the Inconvenience would not have stopped there, but have spread it self
much further. For, the Vegetative Stratum being carried off, and the Devolution
still continuing, the Matter of the lower or mineral Strata being likewise by
degrees borne down successively to the Roots and Bottoms of the Hills, and upon
the neighboring parts of the Valleys and Plains, it would, as far as it
reached, have covered and buried the upper and vegetative Stratum that was
expanded over those Valleys and Plains, and rendered as much of them as it so
covered also frustrate, steril, and unfruitful. So that by this means, in the
latter Ages of the World, when the Earth should be fully peopled, and all
Quarters and Corners of it stocked with Inhabitants, and when consequently
there would be the greatest need and occasion for its Productions every where,
for supply of the Necessities of these its numerous Inhabitants, there would
have been then much less than ever, a great part of the Earth being rendered
entirely barren; so that they might have even starved, had it not been for this
Providential Reserve: this Hoord, if I may so say, that was stowed in the
Strata underneath, and now seasonably disclosed and brought forth.

PART VI. Concerning the State of the Earth, and the Productions of it, before
the Deluge.
THE Thread of this Discourse draws now near to an End; and I have reason to
fear that, by this time, the Reader, as well as my self, thinks it high time
that it were quite spun out. For which reason I shall not any longer presume
upon his Patience farther than needs I must.

In the five foregoing Parts of this Essay I lay down what I have to propose
relating to the Condition of the Earth during the time of the Deluge, and ever
since that time. And here I am to make a Stand: to look a great way back: and
make some Reflections upon the Posture of Things before the Deluge.

The Method I take may perhaps be censured by some as preposterous, because I
thus treat last of the Antediluvian Earth, which was first in order of Nature.
But they will, I hope, let fall that Censure, when they are acquainted that
it is a thing of Constraint, and not of Choice: and that 'twas for want of
Footing, and good ground to go upon, that I did not take that Earth under
Consideration sooner. The truth is, there was no way for me to come to any
competent Knowledge of it, or to give any sure Judgment concerning it, but
merely by Induction: and by Contemplation of the Shells, Bones, and other
Remains of it, which are still in being. Now before I could infer any thing
from these, it lay upon me to make out that they all belonged to the Earth, and
were the genuine Products of it: to show likewise how they became buried and
disposed in the manner we now find them: and by what means they were preserved
till now. And that is what I have been hitherto about; so that this is indeed
but the proper place for this Disquisition concerning the Antediluvian Earth:
and it could not well have been brought in before.

Had there not been still remaining a great many Animal and Vegetable Bodies
that were the legitimate Offsprings of that Earth, 'twould have been an
extravagant and impracticable Undertaking to have gone about to have determined
any thing concerning it; and the more so because the Earth it self was
dissolved and destroyed Part 2. Cons. 2.
. But I prove that there are such Remains of it, enclosed in great plenty in
the Marble, Stone, and the other compacter Strata of the present Earth; whereby
they have been preserved, through so many Ages, quite down to our Times: and
are like to endure, many of them, much longer; even as long as the Strata
themselves continue in the Condition they now are; and so will be a sure and
lasting Monument and Witness of the Truth of that extraordinary Accident (the
Destruction of the Earth and of Mankind by the Deluge) to Posterity, quite down
to the End of the World.

Now because the Observations which I make use of in the former Parts of this
Work give an Account of the said Productions thus preserved, I proceed upon
those Observations, as hitherto, and, by Inferences which easily, clearly, and
naturally flow from them, show what was the Condition and State of that Earth,
and wherein it differed from this we now inhabit.

And in regard that, from a Theory which, how much soever it may relish of Wit
and Invention, has no real Foundation either in Nature or History, the Author
so often mentioned already has set forth an imaginary and fictitious Earth:
whose Posture to the Sun he supposes to have been much different from that
which the Earth at present obtains, and such that there could be no Alteration
of Heat and Cold, Summer and Winter, as now there is, but a constant Uniformity
of Weather and Equality of Seasons Theory of the Earth, l. 1. c. 6. and l. 2.
c. 3.
: An Earth without any Sea: without Mountains, or other Inequalities L. 1. c. 5.
: and without either Metalls or Minerals Ibid. l. 2. c. 6.
: in few words, one perfectly unlike what the Antediluvian Earth was in truth
and reality: and perfectly unlike that which Moses has represented; I shall
therefore interpose some Consectaries which would have been otherwise needless
and superfluous: which are directly levelled against these Mistakes: and evince
that wherever he has receded from the Mosaic Account of that Earth, he has
at the same time also receded from Nature, and Matter of Fact; and this purely
from the aforesaid Observations; from which I shall prove,

not smooth, eaven, and uniform: but unequal, and distinguished with Mountains,
Valleys, and Plains: also with Sea, Lakes, and Rivers.

Quantity of Water upon the Surface of the Globe was nearly the same as now:
the Ocean of the same Extent, and possessed an equal share of the Globe;
intermixing with the Land so as to checquer it into Earth and Water, and to
make much the same Diversities of Sea and Land that we behold at present.

Salt, in like manner as now it is: that it was agitated with Tides, or a Flux
and Reflux: with Storms, and other Commotions.

replenished with Fish of all kinds: as well of the cartilaginous and
squammose, as of the testaceous and crustaceous kinds: and that the Lakes and
Rivers were as plentifully furnished with Lake and River-Fish of all sorts.

That the Earth was very exuberantly Trees, Shrubs, and Herbs: and stocked with
Animals of all sorts, Quadrupeds, Insects, and Fowls: and this on all sides,
and in all parts of it, quite round the Globe.

That the Animal and Vegetable Antediluvian Earth did not in any wise differ
from those of the present Earth. That there were then the very same kinds of
Animals and Vegetables, and the same subordinate Species under each kind that
now there is. That they were of the same stature and size, as well as of the
same shape: their Parts of the same Fabric, Texture, Constitution, and Color,
as are those of the Animals and Vegetables at this day in being.

That there were both Metalls and Minerals in the Antediluvian Earth.

That the Terraqueous Globe had same Site and Position in respect of the Sun
that it now has. That its Axis was not parallel to that of the Ecliptic, but
inclined in like manner as it is at present: and that there were the same
Successions of Heat and Cold, Wet and Dry: the same Vicissitudes of Seasons,
Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter, that now there is.

It has been already noted, that these Propositions are founded on
Observations made upon the Animal and Vegetable Remains of the Antediluvian
Earth. From those Remains we may judge what sort of Earth that was: and see
that it was not much different from this we now inhabit Conf. Page 84. and seq.
. Now though it is not to be expected that I here formally lay down those
Observations, that being not the Business of this Tract, yet until I have
Opportunity both of doing so, and of showing in what manner the foregoing
Propositions flow from them, it may be very convenient that I give some short
Directions how the Reader, for his present Satisfaction, may, of himself, and
without my Assistance, make out the principal Articles of these Propositions
from the Observations already delivered in the several Parts of this Discourse,
and from one or two more that I shall add upon this Occasion. And that he may
at one View discover how consonant the Account which Moses has left us of the
Primitive Earth, is to this which we have from Nature, and how much the late
Theory of the Earth differs from both, I will set down that Writer's Sense of
the Matter under each Head as we pass along.

To begin therefore with the Sea; That there was one before the Deluge, there
needs not, I think, any other Proof than the Productions of it yet in being:
the Shells, the Teeth, and Bones of Sea-Fishes Conf. Part 2.
. And for Moses, he is not at all averse hereto; but as expressly asserts that
there was then a Sea, as the Theory does, that there was none. Take it in his
own words. Genesis 1.9, 10.
And God said, Let the Waters under the Heaven be gathered together unto one
place, and let the Dry-land appear: and it was so. And God called the Dry-land
Earth, and the gathering together of the Waters called he SEAS: and God saw
that it was good. And though the Theorist flatly denies that there was then any
such thing, yet he does not go about to dispute the Translation of this
Passage, but readily owns L. 1. c. 7.
, that Moses has here used a word that was common and known to signify the
Sea. According to him therefore, we see the Sea was formed at the beginning of
the World, and after its Formation approved of as good^ that is, very necessary
and serviceable to the Ends of Providence in the Kingdom of Nature; and this
indeed it is so many ways, that it must needs be granted that that would have
been a very wild World had it been without any Sea. The separating of the Sea
and Land, and determining the set Bounds of each, is here Verse. 13.
reckoned part of the Work of the third Day: as the stocking of the Sea with
Whales and other Fishes, is Verse. 21, 22.
of the fifth. And God created great Whales, etc. and blessed them, saying, be
fruitful and multiply, and fill the Waters in the SEAS. And when on the sixth
Day the finishing Hand was set to the Work, and Man created, God gives him
Dominion over the Fish of the SEA Verse. 28.
. 'Twould have been but a scanty and narrow Dominion, and Adam a very mean
Prince, had there then been neither any Fish existent nor Sea to contain them.
Nay, this had been little better than a downright illusion and abusing of him:
and what is more, that World had been so far from excelling ^^rs in the
Abundance of its Productions, which is what the Theorist contends for on
another Occasion, that 'twould have fallen far short of it: have wanted a very
noble and large share of the Creation which we enjoy: been deprived of a most
excellent and wholesome Fare, and very many delicious Dishes that we have the
use and benefit of. But the Case was really much otherwise: and we have as good
proof as could be wished that there were not any of all these wanting. The
things many of them yet extant speak aloud for themselves: and are backed with
an early and general Tradition. For Moses is so far from being singular in thus
relating that the Sea is of as old a Date and Standing as the Earth it self is,
that he has all, even the first and remotest Antiquity of his side; the Gentil
Account of the Creation making the Ocean to arise out of the Chaos almost as
soon as any thing besides. But we have in store a yet further Testimony that
will be granted to be beyond all Exception. It Is from the mouth of God himself,
being part of the Law promulgated by him in a most solemn and extraordinary
manner. Exodus 20.11. In six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the SEA, and
all that in them is. It Is very hard to think the Theorist should not know this:
and as hard that, knowing it, he should so openly dissent from it.

Then for the Dimensions of the Sea; that it was as large, and of as great
extent as now it is, may be inferred from the vast* Multitudes of those Marine
Bodies which are still found in all Parts of the known World Conf. Page 6. and
Part 2.
. Had these been found in only one or two places: or did we meet with but some
few Species of them, and such as are the Products of one Climate or Country, it
might have been suspected that the Sea was then, what the Caspian is, only a
great Pond or Lake, and confined to one part of the Globe. But seeing they are
dug up at Land almost every where, (...) at least as great variety and plenty
as they are observed at Sea: since likewise the fossil Shells are many of them
of the same kinds with those that now appear upon the neighboring Shores, and
the rest such as may well be presumed to be living at the bottom, or in the
interior and deeper Parts of the adjacent Seas Conf. Page 26. supra.
, but never any that are peculiar to remoter Seas or to the Shores of distant
Countries, we may reasonably conclude, not only that the Sea was of the same
bigness and capacity before the Deluge, but that it was of much the same form
also, and interwoven with the Earth in like manner as at this time: that there
was Sea in or near the very same places or Parts of the Globe: that each Sea
had its peculiar Shells, and those of the same Kinds that now it has: that
there was the same diversity of Climates, here warmer and more agreeable to the
Southern Shells, there colder and better suited to the Northern ones: the same
variation of Soils, this Tract affording such a Terrestrial Matter as is proper
for the Formation and Nourishment of one sort of Shellfish, that of another:
in few words, much the same Appearance of Nature, and Face of Things that we
behold in the present Earth. But of this more by and by.

That the Water of the Sea was salt, as now it is, may be made out likewise
from those Shells and other the Productions of it; they being of the same
constitution, and consisting of the same sort of Matter that do the Shells at
this day found upon our Shores Vid. page 22. and 23. supra.
. Now the Salt wherewith the Seawater is saturated, is part of the Food of the
Shellfish residing therein, and a main Ingredient in the Make of their Bodies;
they living upon this, and upon the Mud and other Earthy Matter there.

And that the Sea Ebbed and Flowed before the Deluge, may be inferred, not so
much from the Necessity of that Motion, and the many and great Uses of it in
the Natural World Conf. page 48. and 156.
, as from certain Effects that it had upon the Shells, and other like Bodies
yet preserved. It Is known that the Sea, by this Access and Recess, shuffling
the empty Shells, or whatever else lies exposed upon the Shores, and bearing
them along with it backward and forward upon the Sand there, frets and wears
them away by little and little, in tract of time reducing those that are
concave and gibbose to a flat, and at length grinding them away almost to
nothing. And there are, not uncommonly, found Shells so worn enclosed, amongst
others, in Stone.

As the Sea-shells afford us a sure Argument of a Sea, so do the River-ones of
Rivers in the Antediluvian Earth. And if there were Rivers, there must needs
also have been Mountains; for they will not flow unless upon a Declivity, and
their Sources be raised above the Earth's ordinary Surface, so that they may
run upon a Descent Part 3. Sect. 1. Page 153. and 154. The Theorist, I know,
supposes both the Antediluvian and the present Earth to be of an Oval Figure,
and protended toward the Poles, as thinking that such a Figure would afford
him a Plane so much inclined toward the Equator, that the Rivers might flow
upon it though there were no Mountains. But it is plain they could not. Nor are
there any the least Grounds to believe that the first Earth was of that Figure.
If he had had any thing that had looked like a Proof of it, he had done well to
have produced it. But it is manifest though we imagine the Earth formed that way
he proposes, it would not have fallen into any such Figure. And for the present
Earth, it is of a Figure as different from that which he assigns as it well
could be; it being a Sphaeroides Prolatus, as appears from the late Discoveries
concerning it.
; the Swiftness of their Current, and the Quantity of Water refunded by them,
being proportioned generally to the height of their Sources, and the Bigness of
the Mountains out of which they arise. Mountains being proved, nothing need be
said concerning Valleys; they necessarily following from that Proof, as being
nothing but the Intervalls betwixt the Mountains. But let us see what Moses
has on this Subject Genesis vii. 19. and seq.
. And the Waters (he is treating of the Deluge) prevailed exceedingly upon the
Earth; and all the HIGH HILLS that were under the whole Heaven were covered.
Fifteen Cubits upwards did the Waters prevail; and the MOVNTAINS were covered.
And all flesh dyed: -- all in whose Nostrils was the breath of Life. The
Theorist averrs, that there were no Mountains in the first Earth. I am not
willing to suppose that he charges a Falsehood or Mistake upon the Passage, but
rather that he would have this to be understood of those Mountains which were
raised afterward. Which yet cannot be; for the Historian here plainly makes
these Mountains the Standards and Measures of the Rise of the Water; which they
could never have been had they not been standing when it did so rise and
overpour the Earth. His Intention in the whole is to acquaint us that all
Land-Creatures whatever, both Men, Quadrupeds, Birds, and Insects, perished and
were destroyed by the Water, Noah only excepted, and they that were with him in
the Ark. And at the same time, to let us see the Truth and Probability of the
Thing: to convince us that there was no way for any to escape, and particularly
that none could save themselves by climbing up to the tops of the Mountains
that then were, he assures us that they, even the highest of them, were all
covered and buried under Water. Now to say that there were then no Mountains:
and that this is meant of Mountains that were not formed till afterward, makes
it not intelligible, and indeed hardly common Sense.

The extreme Fertility of both Sea and Land before the Deluge, appears
sufficiently from the vast and almost incredible Numbers of their Productions
yet extant Vid. Part 2.
; not to insist upon those which are long ago rotted and gone Conf. Page
32.66.77. and Part 3. Sect. 2. Cons. 11.
. Nor need we much wonder at this their abundant Fruitfulness, when we know
from what Source it proceeded; which our Historian has opened to us in very
significant words Genesis i. 20. and seq.
. And God said, let the Waters bring forth abundantly the moving Creature that
has life, etc. -- And God blessed them, saying, be fruitful and multiply, and
fill the Waters in the Seas: and let Fowl multiply in the Earth, etc. Here was
we see a Blessing, handed out with the first Pairs of Animals at the moment of
their Creation, very liberal and extensive; and it had effect with a Witness, A
Man that does but behold the mighty Sholes of Shells, to take them for an
Instance, that are still remaining, and that lie bedded and cumulated in many
places heap upon heap, amongst the ordinary Matter of the Earth, will scarcely
be able to believe his Eyes, or conceive which way these could ever live or
subsist one by another. But yet subsist they did: and, as they themselves
testify, well too; an Argument that that Earth did not deal out their
Nourishment with an over-sparing or illiberal Hand.

That these Productions of the Original Earth, differ not from those of the
Present, either in Figure, in Magnitude, in Texture, or any other respect, is
easily learned by comparing of them. The exact Agreement betwixt the Marine
Bodies I have shown already Page 22, 23. Conf. Genesis i. 11, 12, 21, 24, 25. and
vi. 20.
: and shall in due place show the same of the Terrestrial ones.

And as there were such great Numbers of Animals and Vegetables in the
Primitive Earth, so that there were also Metalls and Minerals, and these in no
less plenty than in ours, is very clear from what has been delivered in the
Fourth Part of this Essay, which need not be repeated here. Nor is Moses
defective in this Point Genesis iv. 22.
. And Zillah, she also bare Tubal-Cain, an Instructor of every Artificer in
Brass and Iron. The Theorist, quite contrary, says, As for Subterraneous
Things, Metalls and Minerals, I believe they had none in the first Earth; and
the happier they; no Gold, nor Silver, nor coarser Metalls. Amongst these
coarser Metalls are Copper, or Brass, and Iron. Now if there were none of
these, it is a great Mystery to me, I confess, how Tubal-Cain, who certainly
died either before or at the Deluge Con^er. Genesis vii. 23. and 1 Pet. iii. 20.
, could ever have taught the Workmanship and Use of them. And yet if this
Theory be true, there neither was nor could be any within their reach, or that
they could ever possibly come at. For the truth of the Theory I am in no wise
concerned: the Composer of it must look to that; but that there were really
both Metalls and Minerals before the Deluge, is most certain. For besides the
Testimony that we have of the Thing from Nature, and the Passage already
alleged out of Moses, there is another for which we are also obliged to the
same Author, that acquaints us there were both even in Paradise it self. It Is
in his second Chapter Genesis ii. 11, 12.
. The name of the first River is Pison: that is it which compasses the whole
Land of Havilah, where there is Gold. And the Gold of that Land is good: there
is Bdellium and the Onyx-stone. He speaks here, I grant, only in the Present
Tense, there is Gold: but must mean not only that there was Gold and Gemms
there in his time, but that there was so likewise from the beginning of the
World, of which he is giving an Account in these two Chapters, or, with
Submission, I conceive 'twould not be any thing to his purpose. He is here
speaking of Paradise; which he represents as a most charming and delightful
Place: besett with every Tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food
Verse. 9.
: watered with refreshing Streams and excellent Rivers: and abounding with
Things not only useful and convenient, but even the most rare and valuable, the
most costly and desirable: particularly Gold, Precious Stones, and Perfumes;
which were all much esteemed and admired by the Jews, to whom he wrote this.
Nor is it any Paradox, notwithstanding that Dissolution of the Earth which
happened at the Deluge Part 2.
, to suppose there was this or that Metal or Mineral in the same Part of the
Globe afterward where it was before that happened. The Water of the Abyss
indeed changed its Place, during the time: So did the Sea, and bore the Bodies
it contained, many of them, out along with it. But for the Terrestrial Parts of
the Globe, Metalls, Minerals, Marble, Stone, and the rest, they, though
dissolved, and assumed up into the Water, did not flitt or move far, but, at
the general Subsidence, settled down again in or near the same Place from which
they were before taken up. For the Water was all out upon the Face of the Earth
before ever these stirred, or were fetched up out of their native Beds: and
they were all sunk down into the same Beds again, before the Water began to
shift away back to its old Quarters; so that it could not contribute any thing
to the Removal of them. Even the very Vegetables, and their Seeds, which were
many of them naturally lighter than the Water, assisted by the heavier
Terrestrial Matter that had in this Jumble and Confusion fastened and stuck to
them, fell all to the bottom: and the Water was in great measure clear, and
disengaged from the Earthy Mass, before it went off. And 'twas well it was so;
for had the Mineral Matter of the Globe not been held to its former Station,
but hurried about and transposed from place to place, it is scarcely to be
conceived how many and great Inconveniences it would have occasioned. The same
likewise for Vegetables. Had the Seeds of the Pepper Plant, the Nutmeg, the
Clove, or the Cinnamon Trees, been born from Iava, Banda, the Moluccoes, and
Ceylon, to these Northern Countries, they must all have starved for want of
Sun: or had the Seeds of our colder Plants shifted thither, they would have
been burnt up and spoiled by it. But Things generally kept to their proper
Places: to their old natural Soil and Climate; which had they not done, all
would have been confounded and destroyed. It Is true, the Vegetables, being
comparatively lighter than the ordinary Terrestrial Matter of the Globe,
subsided last Confer. P^r^ 2. C^ns^ct. 3.
; and consequently lying many of them upon the Surface of the Earth, those
which were of considerable Bulk, as the bigger sorts of Trees, which had large
and spreading Heads, would lie with their Branches stretched up to a great
height in the Water, (and, when that was withdrawn in the Air In which Posture
it is probable the Olive Tree lay from which the Dove plucked off the Leaf that
she brought unto Noah, Genesis viii. 11.
,) and so being very much in the Waters way, when it began to depart and retire
back again, would be apt to be removed and driven forward along with it,
especially those which lay in such places where the Current happened to run
strong. Accordingly we now find of these Trees in Islands, and the other
bleaker and colder Parts of the Earth, where none now do, or perhaps ever did,
grow Conf. page 113. supra.
. And there they are of mighty use to the Inhabitants, affording them a Supply
of Timber which their own Country does not yield, and which they employ not
only for Fuel, which yet is much needed in those cold Countries, but for
Building likewise, and many other Purposes; whereas in the Places whence they
were thus driven they would have been useless, yea but an Incumberance, and
might be easily spared, for as long as the Seeds remained behind, lodged in a
natural and agreeable Soil, all was safe enough: they would soon vegetate, and
send forth a new Set of Trees there, so that 'twas not much matter what became
of the Old ones. But to the Parts whereunto they were thus removed, they are of
great advantage. And, which is in truth very remarkable, and an Argument that
there was something more than mere Chance in this Affair, there are hardly any
Countries that are destitute of Timber of their own growth, which have not a
very large Supply of these Stray-Trees, if I may so call them. But to proceed.
After that the Terrestrial Matter was once sunk down into its several Beds, and
well settled there, the Mountains were cast up, and the Springs and Rivers
burst forth, in such Numbers, and at such Distances from one another, in all
Parts of the Globe, as best answered the Necessities and Expenses of each: and
therefore undoubtedly in much the same Places that they were before the Deluge.
All Things were so contrived and ordered in the re-sitting up the Globe at this
time, that they might best execute and perform each their several Ends and
Offices. There were the same Measures taken, and the same Process used in this
Re-formation of it, that were when 'twas first built: and much such an Earth
arose out of the Deluge, as at the Creation, sprung out of Nothing Vid. page
97. supra.
. But the Reader will more clearly discover all this, with the Reasons of it,
if he give but himself the trouble to compare Part 2. Cons. 2. and seq. Part 3.
Sect. 1. page 154. and seq. and Sect. 2. Cons. 2, 3, and 7. Part 4. Cons. 3.
and Part 6. Cons. 9. This premised, 'twould be, I think, not strange should we
find Paradise at this Day where Adam left it: the same Rivers: the same Face of
the Ground: the same Metalls and Minerals, that then there were. And I the
rather Note this, because I see there are some so earnest in quest of it.
Learned Men have been now a long time a searching after the happy Country from
which our first Parents were exiled. If they can find it, with all my heart:
and there have been some that have sought it with that Industry that I think
they deserve it for their pains whenever they make the Discovery. To deal
freely, I am of opinion there is no part of the present Earth that does come up
fully to the Mosaic Description of Paradise. The Country about Babylon, or
Bagdet, bids fairest for it: and I am persuaded that it was thereabouts. But if
so, whoever shall compare this Country, as now it stands, with that
Description, will find that it sustained some Alterations from the Deluge,
perhaps more than any Part of the Earth besides. And there is an obvious Reason
why it should. There was a Paradise before, but was to be none after the
Deluge. The Case was altered, and the Reason of the thing ceased. So that all
that denominated it Paradise, and that distinguished it from the rest of the
Globe, was lop'd off by the Deluge, and that only left which it enjoyed in
common with its neighbor Countries. Upon the whole, it is, I think, apparent
that what I offer in this Discourse is so far from doing any Diskindness to the
Cause these Gentlemen are, and have been so long, engaged in, that it does them
a real Service, and helps them out with the main thing whereat they stuck:
fairly solving all Difficulties in the Mosaic Relation of Paradise. Wherefore
now to proceed to the last Head to be discussed, the Vicissitude of Seasons,
Summer and Winter, Hot and Cold, in the Antediluvian World.

And that there really was such a Vicissitude we need not go any further for
proof than to the aforesaid Animal and Vegetable Bodies still preserved; the
general Tenor of them speaking it out so plainly as to leave no room for
doubt. There are, we know, some sorts of Vegetables which consist of Particles
very fine, light, and active: and which therefore require only a smaller degree
of Heat to raise them Vid. Part 3. Sect. 1. Cons. 8. Page 125.
from out the Earth up into the Seeds, Roots, or Bodies of those Vegetables,
for their growth and nourishment. So that for the raising of these, the Suns
Power, when only lesser, is sufficient. And therefore they begin to appear in
the earlyer Months, in February and March; when they first peep forth of the
Ground: after a while they display themselves, showing their whole Tire of
Leaves: then their Flowers: next their Seeds: and lastly when, in the following
Months, April and May, the Sun is further advanced, and (to speak in the Phrase
of the Vulgar, which I choose all along for the sake of plainness) has gained
a greater strength, the Heat becomes too powerful and boisterous for them; it
now mounting up the Terrestrial Matter with such force and rapidity, that the
Plants cannot assume that part of it which is proper for their Nourishment, as
it passes through them, nor incorporate it with them, as before they were wont
when it passed more gently and leisurely. Nay the Heat at length grows so
great, that it again dissipates and bears off those very Corpuscles which
before it brought; the Parts of these Plants being very tender, as consisting
of Corpuscles which are extremely small and light, and therefore the more
easily dissipable. So that then these Plants dye away, shrink down again into
the Earth, and all, save only their Roots and Seeds, vanish and disappear. But
when the Sun's Heat is thus far advanced, it is but just come up to the pitch of
another Set of Vegetables; and but great enough to excite and bear up the
Terrestrial Particles, which are more crass and ponderous. And therefore those
Plants which consist of such, begin then to shoot forth, and display
themselves. So that the Months of April and May present us with another Crop
and Order of Plants. For the same reason also, June, July, and August go
farther, and exhibit a still different Show of Vegetables, and Face of Things.
But when, in the Months of September and October, the Sun's Power is again
diminished, and its Heat but about equivalent to that of March and April, it
again suits the Plants which were then in season, so that they many of them
spring up afresh in these Months, and flourish over anew, in like manner as
before they did in those; till being checked by the Cold of the succeeding
Winter, the Sun being gone0off, and having now no longer Power great enough to
bring up and supply them with fresh Matter, they presently begin to decline for
want thereof, and at length quite dwindle away and disappear, until the
Arrival of the Spring Season, when they take their Turns over again as
formerly. Yea the more tender and frigitive Parts, the Leaves, and the like, of
many of the more sturdy and vigorous Vegetables, Shrubs, and Trees, suffer the
same Fate, and fall off for want of the Supply from beneath; those only which
are more tenacious, consistent, and hardy, enduring the Brunt, and making a
shift to subsist for the time without such Recruit and Reparation. It Is
therefore, we see, most apparent that this Succession of Things upon the Face
of the Earth, is purely the Result and Effect of the Vicissitude of Seasons:
and is as constant and certain as is the Cause of that Vicissitude, the Sun's
Declination: so certain, that were a Man kept for some time blindfold, in such
manner that he could have no Notice how the Year passed on, and were at length
turned forth into the next Field or Garden, he would not need any other
Almanac to inform him what Season of the Year it then was.

But if instead of this Variation of Heat, we suppose that there was an
Equality or constant Temperature of it before the Deluge, which is what the
Theorist contends for, the Case would be very much altered, and that altogether
for the worse. A Man can hardly at first imagine what a Train of ill
Consequences would follow from such a Condition and Posture of Things; of which
'twould not be the least that such a Mediocrity of Heat would deprive the World
of the most beautiful and the most useful Parts of all the whole Creation: and
would be so far from exalting the Earth to a more happy and Paradisiacal State,
which is what he brought it in for, that 'twould turn it to a general
Desolation, and a mere barren Wilderness, to say no worse. Such an Heat would
be too little for some sorts of Vegetables, and too great for others. The more
fine and tender Plants, those which will not bear a degree of Heat beyond that
of April, would be all burnt up, and destroyed by it: whilst it could never
reach the more lofty and robust, nor would there be near Heat enough to ripen
their Fruits and bring them to Perfection. Nothing would suit and hit* all, and
answer every End of Nature, but such a gradual Increase and Decrease of Heat as
now there is. I must not descend to the Animal World, where the Inconveniences
would be as many and as great as in the Vegetable: and such a Situation of the
Sun and Earth as that which the Theorist supposes, is so far from being
preferable to this which at present obtains, that this has infinitely the
Advantage of it in all respects.

Be that how it will, for I have no need to insist upon it, but may take the
thing in his way, and suppose that such a Temperature would have all the happy
Effects that he expects from it; yet there is one very considerable Phenomenon
of the Vegetable Remains of that Earth, which affords us a sure and plain
Indication that there was not then any such Temperature. From these it clearly
appears that there was the same Order and Succession of Things upon the Face of
the Earth that there is at this time. Now this Succession being, as we have
seen, caused merely by the Variation of the Sun's Heat, it must needs follow,
that there was then the same Variations of it, and consequently the same
Alternations of Seasons, that now there is. Had there been an Equality of Heat,
if we grant that it could have produced all the Plants in Nature, which it is
impossible it ever should, it must have done it indifferently and uncertainly.
There could be no reason why they should flourish at any one set time rather
than another; that is peculiarly the Effect of the Sun's Variation. So that they
must needs have been all in Confusion, and this Succession of Things would have
been quite overturned. The Plants which now appear in the most different and
distant Seasons, would have been all in Prime, and flourishing together at the
same time: so that they would have had February and May, July and September,
all in one Scene. Nay, the several Individuals of the same kind must have been
as greatly at odds: one arrived to Seed, and that fully ripe, and ready to
shed, whilst another was not so much as come to Flower, but in as differing a
State and Hue as can be. In brief, there would have been all the Diversity,
Uncertainty, and Disorder, in the Vegetable Kingdom that can well be conceived.
Which indeed is no more than what he freely owns: telling us that then Every
Season was a Seed-time to Nature, and every Season an Harvest. This is what he
does, and must grant: and this is as much as is needful for the overturning his
Hypothesis. For the Vegetable Remains of that Earth say no such thing: they
give not any the least Countenance to these Conjectures, but the quite
contrary: and these, being many of them enclosed in very fine and close Stone,
are preserved to this day very curiously and entire to Admiration. By them we
may easily judge how Things then stood. And there is so great an Uniformity,
and general Consent amongst them, that from it I was enabled to discover what
time of the year it was that the Deluge began Genesis vii. 11. In the second
Month, the seventeenth day of the Month, -- were all the Fountains of the great
Deep broken up, and the windows of Heaven were opened. Moses* writing to the
Jews his* Countrymen, makes use of the Form of the Year then received amongst
them, which was indeed the first and most ancient, but had been disused during
the time of their Abode in Egypt, and but newly reestablished when this was
wrote [Exod. xii. 2.] In this, Nisan, or; as 'twas also called, Adib was the
first Month: and Ijar the second, upon the 17th day whereof the waters of the
Deluge came forth, according to this Relation. And truly the time (which is not
d little remarkable) falls within the Compass here chalked out by Nature so
very punctually, that one can scarcely forbear concluding that th^se Strokes
and Lines of Nature, and those of that Relation, came both from the same Hand;
but this only by the by. The Particulars of the Computation I here use shall be
given at fall elsewhere, they being too bulky for this place.
; the whole Tenor of these Bodies thus preserved clearly pointing forth the
Month of May Conf. Part 3. Sect. 2. Conf. 5.
; nor have I ever met with so much as one single Plant, or other Body, amongst
all those vast multitudes which I have carefully viewed, that is peculiar to
any other Season of the Year: or any thing that happens earlier or later: any
of them short, or any further advanced in Growth, Seed, or the like, than they
now usually are in that Month; which surely I must needs have done, had there
really been such an equality of Seasons, and constant temperature of Heat as is
imagined by the Theorist. There are some Phenomenon of the Animal Remains of
that Earth which afford us more Arguments to the same purpose, and those not
less concluding than the others; but these I shall wholly wave for the present,
there being indeed no occasion to make use of them here.

I shall now only look a little into the Mosaic Archives, to observe what they
furnish us with upon this Subject, and I have done; for I perceive I have,
before I am aware, much exceeded the Measures I designed, which on so copious a
Subject 'twas hard not to do. Genesis 1.14. And God said, let there be LIGHTS in
the Firmament of the Heaven, to divide the Day from the Night: and let them be
for Signs, and for SEASONS, and for Days and Years. This Passage, we see, does
not at all favor the Opinion that there was no Variation of Seasons before the
Deluge: so far from it, that should a Man go about with never so set Study and
Design to describe such a Natural Form of the Year as is that which is at
present established, he could scarcely ever do it in so few Words again that
were so fit and proper, so full and express; especially if, by Signs, in this
place, Months are intended, for then we have here first the Year: and that
subdivided into its usual Parts, the four Quarters or Seasons, the twelve Signs
or Months, and Days; nay at the same time, from the 19th Verse, we learn that
this Establishment is, within four days, as old as the World. But further, Genesis
viii. 21, 22. And the Lord said in his heart, I will not again curse the
ground, -- neither will I again smite any more every thing living as I have
done. While the Earth remains, Seed-time and Harvest, and Cold and Heat, and
Summer and Winter, and Day and Night, shall not cease. This was pronounced upon
Noah's Sacrificing, at his coming forth of the Ark, after the Deluge was over:
and implies, that there had indeed then lately been a mighty Confusion of
Things, for the time: an Interruption and Perturbation of the ordinary Course
of them: and a Cessation and Suspension of the Laws of Nature: but withal
gives Security and Assurance that there should never be the like any more to
the End of the World: that for the future they should all run again in their
old Chanel: and that particularly there should be the same Vicissitudes of
Seasons, and Alternations of Heat and Cold that were before the Del^ge.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Richard Wilkin at the King's-Head in S. Paul's Churchyard.
LEtters concerning the Love of God, between the Author of the Proposal to the
Ladies, and Mr. John Norris; wherein his late Discourse, showing that it ought
to be entire and exclusive of all other Loves, is farther cleared and
justified, Octavo.

A Proposal to the Ladies for the Advancement of their true and greatest
Interest. By a Lover of her Sex. Twelves. The Second Edition.

A Vindication of the Truth of Christian Religion against the Objections of all
Modern Opposers. By James Abbadie, D. D. Octavo.

A second Part of the Enquiry into several remarkable Texts of the Old and New
Testament, which contain some Difficulty in them: with a probable Resolution of
them. The second Edition. Octavo.

A Discourse concerning the Authority, Style, and Perfection of the Books of
the Old and New Testament; with a continued Illustration of several difficult
Texts of Scripture throughout the whole work. Both by John Edwards, B. D.
sometime Fellow of St. John's College in Cambridge. Octavo.

The Glorious Epiphany, with the Devout Christians Love to it. The Second
Edition. Octavo.

Search the Scriptures. A Treatise showing that all Christians ought to read
the Holy Books; with Directions to them therein.

A Discourse concerning Prayer, especially of frequenting the daily Public
Prayers. All three by the Reverend Sim. Patrick, D. D.

The Old Religion demonstrated in the Principles, and described in the Life and
Practice thereof. By I. Goodman, D. D. The Second Edition. Twelves.


