A WORD in SEASON: OR, A DISCOURSE OF THE Three Estates: TO WIT, The Truly
Civil, Truly Spiritual, AND FALSE Ecclesiastical Estate: SHOWING, That this
Last, or Third Estate, is a Remainder of Popery, and ought to be taken away.

Presented to the King and Queen's most Excellent Majesty, Together with the
Right Honorable the LORDS and COMMONS Assembled at Westminster.

Printed in the Year 1689.

TO THE King and Queens Most Excellent Majesty: Together With The Right
Honorable THE Lords and Commons Now Assembled at WESTMINSTER.
May it Please Your Most Excellent Majesty's, and You Right Honorable
Patriots,
THE Civil State being the Power and Sword of the Lord, to do his Commandments:
Therefore when GOD commanded King Saul utterly to Destroy Amalek, (...) did it
not fully, but spared Agag their King, and the best of the Cattle to Sacrifice
to the Lord: The evil effect that befell Saul for doing the Lords Command
negligently; was first to himself; God Rent the Kingdom from him; and then to
the whole house of Israel, Haman one of the seed of Agag the Amalekite, sought
the Destruction of all Israel, had not the Lord by a miraculous Providence
prevented it.

Now, Why must Amalek be utterly destroyed? Because when God had Delivered his
People out of Old Egypt, and they were Traveling Peaceably, Faint and Weary,
through the Wilderness, to the Promised Rest, the Land of Canaan, a Type of
Heaven; Amalek destroyed some of them: Even so the very reason is, why the Lord
has said, The Kings of the Earth shall hate the Whore, eat her Flesh, and burn
her with Fire, even these Spiritual Amalekites, the destroyers of the Lords
People, that are come out of the Spiritual Egypt, Traveling to the Heaven of
Everlasting Happiness and Rest with Christ in Glory, through the Wilderness of
this World.

Now then, because when this Work was begun by former Kings in this Nation, as
after is showed, and not yet fully done (in utterly destroying these Spiritual
Amalekites, not in their Persons, but out of Church and State, so that they
might bear no Office of Trust there,) but have Retained them still; see what
had like to have been the effects thereof; their Elder Brethren were coming in
a pace to possess their old Places, and had so far prevailed with the King (to
his great ruin) to destroy the Nation out of their Rights and Privileges, and
perhaps out of their Lives at length, if the Lord had not by his miraculous
Providence wrought our Deliverance; so that the Lord has once more put into
the hands of You the Supreme Powers of this Nation, to do the work the Lord
has commanded, fully: Pardon my boldness, There is a time to speak, if fitly
spoken, how good it is; which may serve but as a Candle to your Sun-light, in
the due sense of these things; therefore this may only serve to stir up your
minds by way of Remembrance, That if this work be fully done by You, a Blessing
will be upon all your good works, in settling this Nation in Peace; as says the
Scriptures, When the Lord gives Quietness, who can make Trouble? And when he
hides his Face, who can behold him? whether it be done against a Nation or a
Man only, Job. 34.29.

A WORD in SEASON: OR A DISCOURSE OF THE Three Estates.
THE Lord God Creator of the Heavens and the Earth and Sea, with all the plenty
therein, has made of one Blood all Mankind to dwell one the face of the Earth,
and has disposed unto them the bounds of their Habitations; according to his
Wisdom has appointed but two State-Pillars or Legs for the Nations to stand
upon, the one Civil, the other Spiritual; the Civil State is God's Ordinance of
Magistratical Government under diverse Titles, as the Lord disposes, and the
Civil State see best, as Princes, Senators, Judges, Kings, for all Powers are
of God, whatsoever be their Titles, Dignities or Forms of Government: In
respect whereof, they are called humane Creations or Ordinances, and are to be
submitted unto for the Lord's sake, for as much as there is given them an
Excellent Majesty, being next under God, Head of the Commonwealth, the Lords
Lieutenants on Earth, and for their perfect Rule and Guide in Government is
given them the second Table of the Royal Law of God, as a most sure Foundation
to square all their Laws by to govern their people, who are not to judge for
Man, but for the Lord, so shall they not bear the Sword in vain, but use it to
the Glory of God, in punishing Evildoers (without respect of Persons) and for
the praise of them that do well, of which Trust or Stewardship committed unto
them, they must shortly give an account to the great Judge, the Lord Jesus, at
the last day.

The other State or Pillar, is the Spiritual Rule or Government of the Lord
Jesus now in the Kingdom of his Mediatorship in his Church on Earth, whose
Kingdom is not of this World, neither are the Weapons thereof Carnal, but
Spiritual, and mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, casting
down Imaginations, and every high thing that Exalts it self against the
Knowledge of God, bringing into Captivity every thought to the Obedience of
Christ; so differs it from the Civil State: Unto this Spiritual Government is
given the first Table of the Royal Law; according thereunto, are all the Laws
given by Christ to his Subjects in his Kingdom, his Church; in all things they
are to do, or keep in the Worship and Service of God his Father, written in his
last Will and Testament, sealed with his precious Blood, unto which nothing may
be added to, or taken from by any mortal upon pain of all the Curses written in
the Book of God.

These being the two only States ordained of God on Earth, for all mankind to
be subject unto in the Lord, and the nature of them being so different the one
from the other, as the nature of a thing Civil and Spiritual, so that they may
not be mixed together in their Offices nor Administrations; therefore the Lord
constituted the Civil State in the Tribe of Judah, and the Spiritual State in
the Tribe of Levi, so that it is and ever was a Sin of High Nature, for the
Civil States Office to do the Work which properly belongs to the Spiritual
States Office; but when King Vzziah presumed to break Gods Order, in doing the
Work which belonged to the Spiritual States Office to do, the Lord smote him
with Leprosy to the Day of his Death, and Dethroned him from his Kingly
Office, and separated him from Communion with his Church or People.

Therefore, the Lord Jesus, (who only without Blasphemy, can bear that Title of
Archbishop, or Chief Bishop of our Souls; who is the only Lord Spiritual, and
Overseer of his Churches, walking in the midst of his Golden Candlesticks)
would not meddle with the Work which properly belonged to the Civil States
Office, to give Judgment on a Woman taken in Adultery, no nor divide Temporal
Inheritances between Brethren; so that when there arose Strife among his
Apostles, which of them should be accounted the Greatest; Christ the Lord
reproved them, and said unto them, the Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship
over them, and they that exercise Authority upon them, are called Benefactors,
but ye shall not be so; That is, to take on you the Title of Politic Princes,
neither to be Lords Spiritual in nor over Churches: Thus we may clearly see,
why the Lord divided his Law into Two Tables, because the One appertains to
the Spiritual State in those things which belong to the Kingdom of Christ in
his Worship and Government, and the Other is as a perfect Rule to all Civil
States Government, teaching all thereby, that the Civil and Spiritual States,
neither in their Offices nor Administration, may be joined together in One
Person; so that the Offices being so different, they may not meddle with the
Work in Government, that belongs to the Other, because it is forbidden, not
only by Gods Word, but also it is against the very light of Nature, as the
Philosopher says: It cannot stand with the Actions of these Two Offices,
namely the Civil and Spiritual; so different the One from the Other, that one
Man should perform both Works together, but must needs fall out; when both
Duties are to be done, the one would be omitted; so either God is not duly
Served, or the Civil State must suffer Damage.

Seeing then that these are the Two States ordained of God, and that they may
not be mixed together without the breach of Gods Order; How comes it to pass,
that there is a Third State in the Nations never Ordained of God, nor found to
be approved of God by his Word, which is a State partly Civil, and partly
Spiritual; under the Tides of Arch Bishop, Lord-Bishop, who fit in the Civil
States Privy Councils, and in their great Council of Parliaments, and also they
sit as Lords Spiritual, in and over many Churches or Congregations? Now from
whence took this State its Original or Beginning, who sit as Lawmakers in the
Civil States Councils, and also do sit as Lawmakers in Worship to God in their
Ecclesiastical Assemblies? surely this is a Monster of a State, partly Civil
and partly Spiritual, yet neither really Civil nor Spiritual, but a counterfeit
compound of both, first brought forth in its infancy among the old Heathenish
Egyptians, who would have their Priest Princes, and the Scripture is witness to
it, as it is written Priest of On, Prince of On, Genesis 41.45. so when the Church
of God at Rome fell into deep Apostasy from Christ soon after she was delivered
from the cruel rage of the Heathen Roman Emperors, Constantine the Emperor
being converted to the Faith, under whom great comfort and peace was enjoyed by
the Church of God, so that then the Bishops were Bishops of particular
Congregations as their name signified, so was their charge, an Overseer to so
many as could meet in one place, and communicate together in partaking of the
Ordinances of the Gospel; but in a short time, about the middle of the fourth
Century, Bishops of particular Congregations, were not contented to be an
Overseer to One, no nor to Two nor Three Cities, but Diotrephes-like, strove to
have the Preeminence over all the Congregations, which at last was obtained by
Sylvester the first, Pope; and hereupon says John, There arose another Beast
out of the Earth, having two horns like a Lamb; So as Horns signifies Power,
so this beastly third State, the Pope, the head of the Clergy, of his own
making, was proclaimed, as Writers say, for a Vice God, the Invincible Monarch
of the Commonwealth, and vehement Conserver of the Popish Omni-potency: So
that although by his two Horns like a Lamb (he pretended Power from Christ) he
began to speak like a Dragon against the sealed number of Gods Elect, which
departed from the iniquity of his invention in Worship and Ministry, and so
refused to receive this Beasts mark in their right hand or forehead, that is
privately or publicly to submit to his decrees in Worship; so that the Beasts
decree was so hot against the Godly, as by the like High Commission Court in
England of the same Authority, some time past, that no man might buy or sell,
save he that had the mark of this beastly Clergy, or the name of the Beast, or
the number of his name; now what is the Beasts name or mark, but his Law,
Decrees and Orders he commanded to be obeyed in Worship, for so the name of
Christ is his Law and Power, that all his People are commanded by their
Obedience, to set their seal, that Christ is the True God, and the only
Lawgiver in Worship: so that hereupon we read, that the Dragon was wroth with
the Woman, and went to make War with the remnant of her Seed, which keep the
Commandments of God (in worship) and have the Testimony of Jesus; yea, so
enraged was one of the Limbs of this beastly Clergy, as he raileth against the
Laws and Ordinances of Christ in his Testament, which Christ has commanded to
be observed in the Worship of God to the Worlds end; namely, T. C. the then
esteemed Bishop of Winchester, in his answer to Martin Marprelate, says, That
the Orders and Ordinances Christ has in his Testament left to his Church, were
but temporary, while the Church was under heathen Tyrants; and where the Gospel
is embraced by a Christian Prince, they are not only not necessary, but
inconvenient, yea intolerable, as bringing in the subversion of the Land,
raising up tumults and uproars, and withdrawing the People from obedience to
their Magistrates; by this we see how this beastly Clergy inveigheth against
Christ's holy Orders and Ordinances in Worship; and do not the same Clergy in
this our day, by their actions speak the same words; so long as the
Service Book, taken out of the Popes Mass Book, is obeyed, and the Holy Orders
and Commands the Primitive Christians obeyed in the Worship of God, is not
suffered to be practiced in Protestant Churches according to Christ's Testament;
so that as the Civil State has their Books, Statutes and Records, ( Esther
6.1.) Charters, together with the Second. Table of the Moral Law, to instate
themselves in their Civil Rights and Privelidges, under their Supreme Head and
Governor: The true Ecclesiastical State have Laws and Statutes contained in
the Old and New Testament, to be observed under the Government of Christ their
Supreme Head, in these the Charter of the Rights and Privileges of the
Citizens in the New Jerusalem are found.

The false Eclesiastical State under their head the Pope, Apollion, that
Destroyer, together with their Arch and Lord Bishops, they have Books of
Cannons and Articles, Book of Ordination, Book of Homiles, and Book of
Common Prayers; so that the Citrizens under this State, are strictly commanded
to keep and observe them; so that as one of their Clergy complained in their
second Admonition to the Parliament in Queen Elizabeth's time, no Preacher may
without danger of the Laws utter all the Truths comprised in the Book of God;
it is so circumscribed within the compass of such Statutes, Advertisements,
Articles, Cannons; the Book of Common Prayer, the Bishops Cannons, every
Bishops Articles in his Diocese may not be broken or offended against, but with
more danger than to offend against the Bible.

Now, shall we ever live to see the day when there shall be obeyed but one
Lawgiver in Worship, and the Word of God, the only Judge to teach who is this
only Lawgiver, namely, the Lord Jesus, as it is written, The Lord is our
Lawgiver (or Statute-maker) in Worship; and again, says the Apostle, There is
one Lawgiver who is able to save, and to destroy; to wit, Christ, who has all
Power in Heaven and in Earth given unto him, therefore he commands his
Servants, the Apostles, to Teach all Nations; only what he has commanded to be
obeyed in Worship; and hereupon says the Apostle Paul, He that is a Prophet,
or Spiritual, let him acknowledge the things I have written to you; namely, to
the Churches, are the Commandments of the Lord; and he that will pot hear that
Prophet Christ Jesus, shall be destroyed from among his People: And again,
says the Lord Jesus, Bring these mine Enemies that would not that I should
reign over them, and slay them before me.

Now therefore be Wise, O ye whom the Lord has put in Authority, kiss the Son
least he be angry; give no longer your Power to the Beast aforesaid, and no
longer let the Romish Service and devised Worship, be confirmed by Law in
Worship; but let the commands of the Lord Jesus be Exalted only, remembering
God's Promise, that you may do his Work, as he has said; The Horns or Powers
that did support the Whore, shall hate her, and shall make her Desolate and
Naked; Eat her Flesh, and burn her with Fire: This Work was well began by King
Henry the 8th. and King Edward the 6th. when they abolished out of their
Dominions, the Popes Supremacy, the Lord Abbots, Cardinals, Monks and Friars;
and dried up a great part of the River Euphrates, which brought in the Gain to
these spiritual Babylonians, and convened their Revenues to civil Uses, and
gave much thereof to charitable Uses; and because these Kings did not the work
of the Lord thoroughly, as God has commanded to be done, and was done on Old
Babylon, a figure of the Spiritual Babylon; as it is written, The Lord would
cut off from Babylon the name and remnant, Son and Nephew, and sweep it with
the besom of Destruction; and this is not fully done yet on the Spiritual
Babylon as it must be done, so long as the Office of Arch and Lord Bishops,
Archdeacons, Parsons, Vicars, Curates, and many other of that Brood, remain in
Office in Church and State, which Christ's Testament makes no mention of: And
that this must be done, is showed by a Mighty Angel, who took a stone, like a
great Millstone, and cast it into the Sea; saying, Thus with violence shall
this great City Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more, because in
her was found the Blood of the Prophets and of Saints, and of all that were
slain upon the Earth:

Now, this City Babylon, Mystery-Babylon, the Mother of Harlots and Abomination
of the Earth, which Reigns over the Kings of the Earth; is not contained
within the natural walls of Rome's City, but this City reaches so far, as her
Rules and Orders and Commands in Worship is obeyed, in what Nation soever; so
then Babylon the City, will not be destroyed out of England, so long as by Law,
her Ministry which is derived from the Pope and his service in Worship, is
Obeyed, Practiced, or Observed in England.

Now, therefore has the Lord by his wonderful Providence put an opportunity in
the hand of the Supreme Authority of this Nation, to Abolish all that has but
the scent of Romish Invention in Worship; when as by the example of the Godly
Kings of Judah, You are called upon by the Lord to do as they did, to wit,
Jehosaphat, Ezekiah, but more especially, that young King Josiah; who so soon
as he heard of the Judgments of God denounced against his Land and People,
called for the Book of the Law to be read before him, and by it comparing the
acts of his Forefathers, and present state of his Kingdom, Rent his Clothes;
and for fear of the Judgments of God, in the Sixteenth year of his Age, and
Eighth year of his Reign, begun to seek the Lord, and in the Twelf year begun
to purge out of his Dominions the Relics of Idolatry, to wit, all the Devices
or Inventions of Men set up by former Kings in the Worship of God, and
Abolished the false Ministry called Chemarims* so called, either for the black
Garments they wore, or for being smok'd in offering Incense to the Idols (See
the Margent in the Bible in Folio in 1 King 22.5. and Zeph. 1.4.) Now the like
must be done in removing the remaining part of the Popish Ministry out of
Office, either in Church or State, in the Nations, together with all the
devised Service in Worship; so shall the Kings or Civil State, dry up the
remaining part of the River Euphrates, and take the Lordly Prelatical Revenues
into their hand, to be converted to Civil Use; and likewise to make void that
Law which confirms the decree of Pope Pascales, that Tithes should be given
to the Priest, that so Tithe (that Jewish Heav-Offering under the Law) may no
more be imposed upon the Conscience of the People of God in this Nation, which
Law has undone many thousand Families, that in Conscience to God could not pay
Tithes, because the paying of Tithes, is to deny Christ to become in the Flesh,
who was the end of the Ceremonial Law, the paying of Tithes being a part
thereof; no man that Truly fears God, ought to pay it, so that the Tithes may
return to every Owner, unjustly exacted from them whose they are, as well that
as the rest of their Estate, out of which the Tithes was exacted, by Pope
Pascales decree; so that as the Gospel is Free, Gods gift to poor Sinners,
apprehending Christ by Faith therein to be their Redeemer, Prophet and King,
may by a free and willing Covenant join themselves to the Lord, to walk in his
ways, and as God shall bestow his gifts on them, they may by a free choice
among themselves choose such for to be Pastors, Teachers, Elders and Deacons,
as they judge meet; who are to be fed by the free gift of the Flock they feed,
while they watch for their Souls, and by the Vineyard they dress, while they
see the garden of his Church be weeded, that no Briers or Thorns grow there;
but all live in the unity of the Spirit, and bond of Peace, standing fast in
the Liberty, that Christ has made them free, and be no more entangled with the
Yoke of Bondage.

Now, to help forwards this glorious Work in this day of so great Deliverance
already begun, that God would be pleased to put into the hearts of the Supreme
Power in this Nation to make the People Free, Freeing them from the Yoke of
Spiritual Bondage, that we may see in this our day, that word fulfilled, that
Kings shall be Nursing Fathers, as was King Jehosaphat, King Ezekiah, and that
young King Josiah, and in so doing will bring their Glory and Honor to Christ
in his Church, which is Christ's Mystical Body; who has the Sun for her
Clothing, the Moon for her Footstool, and the Twelve Stars for a Crown upon
her; She having by Faith and Holiness put on Christ the Son of Righteousness
that is risen unto her, as she has learnt him of his Apostles, so is she
hereby advanced to heavenly Dignity, her Conversation being in Heaven, She
loves no more this world, of which her self is not, but Travelleth with pains
of Childbirth, that Christ may be formed in his Elect, calling them out of
Babylon, this false Ecclesiastical State of Egyptian Darkness, into his
Mavelous Light, to show forth the Praises of the Lord in Sion, where the Lord
God is a Sun and Shield, the Lord will give Grace and Glory, and no good thing
will he withold from them that walk Uprightly.

Therefore, Oh that all would lay to heart these things, and examine
themselves, whether they are in the Broad Way that leads to Destruction, or
the Strait and Narrow Way, that leads to Everlasting Life; seeing how many
sorts of People do plead that they are worshipers of the living God, not
considering (as every one ought) by whose appointment and directions they do
worship God; for the Turks boast, how that they worship the Living God, and
concerning Christ (as one says) the Turks are well contented, that Christ be a
Holy Prophet and a most Worthy Creature, yea, the Word of God, the Soul of God,
and the Spirit of God conceived of the Holy Ghost, and Born of Mary the Virgin,
but will in no case grant him to be the Son of God, therefore no Lawgiver to
them in Worship; so that they worship God, by the directions or appointment of
Mahomet, according to his wicked Alcaron; therefore both they and their Service
or Worship is not accepted of God.

Secondly, The Papal Religion boast, That they are Worshipers of the Living
God, and do in word, Profess Jesus to be the Son of God; yet they by no means
will acknowledge in Works, that Christ is the Son of God, Lawgiver to them in
Worship, but do Worship God, by the Counsel and Direction of sundry Popes and
Prelates, as Lord-Bishops; so that for this reason among others, neither
themselves, nor their Worship can be accepted of God.

Thirdly, And will not Protestants consider then, that as aforesaid, there is
but one Lawgiver in Worship, that is, Jesus Christ, the Prophet, Priest and
King in his Church, who was Faithful as a Son over his own House; if he be so,
why then is the Service Book, the whole form of Worship in Protestant Churches,
which Christ has not given for directions in Worship in his Testament, but is
taken out of the Popes Mass Book, as when it was translated into English, the
Men in Devonshire Rebelled, supposing their Service was altered, to whom King
Edward answered, If the Service in the Church was good in Latin, it remained
good in English; for nothing is altered, but to speak with knowledge that which
was spoken in Ignorance; and to this agrees the words of the Papists in their
Supplication to King James the First, Anno. 1604. Reasons of Religion.

They insult against Protestants, faying. That from their Treasure-house, the
Religion now Established has learned the form of Christening, Marrying,
Churching of Women. Visiting the Sick, Burying, and sundry other like, as the
Bocks Translated out of theirs, do declare.

These being so gross, that the Lord Jesus should be so despised, who is the
Wisdom of God, that Protestants should despise-the Holy Order of Worship in
Christ's Testament, and so deny him to be the Son of God, Lawgiver in Worship,
which the Primitive Christians walked in for the first three hundred years,
un^ill about the middle of the fourth Century, until Pastors or Bishops sought
after Dignities to be Church Princes as aforesaid, they about that time begun
to take upon them the office of Christ, to be Lawmakers in Worship; Oh
therefore that the Lord would open the Eyes of all Protestants to consider
these things before it be too late, and c^st off from them the Romish
Service Book, together with that Prelatical Priesthood, whose Ordination
successively they have received from the Pope, as well as that Jewish and
Ceremonial Heav Offering of the Law of Tithes, remembering what the Lord said to
Israel, when they came out of old Egypt, left Written for our Admonition, that
are come out of the Spiritual Egypt, After the doings of the Land of Egypt
wherein ye dwelt, shall ye not do, neither walk in their Ordinances; my
Judgments shall ye do, my Ordinances shall ye keep to walk in them, I am the
Lord your God. Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the
World, are ye Subject to Ordinances, touch not, taste not, handle not, which all
are to perish with the using after the Commandment and Doctrine of Men, and as
a warning to all, Christ says, In vain do such Worship God, whose fear toward
God is taught by the Precept of Men; so then the sure Rule is given by Christ,
who says, Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have right
to the Tree of Life, and enter in through the Gates into the City.

Seeing then all men's Traditions in Worship it Idolatry, and no Idolator shall
inherit the Kingdom of God, etc. as there is Men Idols, as well as Idols made
of other matter: For when Israel had made to themselves a new Ministry in
Worship to God, not mentioned in the Law of Moses: These were called by the
Word of the Lord, Hol-Shepherds, Zach. 11.17. even so, whatsoever People shall
make to themselves now in days of the Gospel, if another Ministry than Christ
has appointed in his Testament, in the Breach of the second Commandment, they
are Idol Shepherds; so that hence it is, says John, Many Deceivers are entered
into the World, and the World hears them; so that after many Exhortations to
the Churches of God, one was, Little Children, keep your selves from Idols,
Amen, 1 John 5.2.

FINIS.

