A WORD OF Advertisement and Advice TO THE GODLY IN SCOTLAND.

By a Scotch Man, and a Cordial VVelwisher to the Interest of the Godly in
Scotland, both in CIVILS and SPIRITUALS.

Words in season are like apples of gold in pictures of silver. Open rebuke is
better then secret love: Faithful are the wounds of a Friend, but the kisses
of an enemy are deceitful. Edinburgh, Printed by Evan Tyler, 1651.

Dear Friends,
BEing desirous (in this hour of Darkness and sad trial and trouble) to be
useful to you, my dear Friends in the Lord, being amazed and astonished to see
you after twelve or fourteen years Remonstrating, Petitioning, and these backed
with your sw rds in your hand, against King, Parliament and Committees and
indeed the whole Authorities of the Land for your just freedom and Liberties
in Spiritual and Civil things; I say, to see the result of such a business to
be as it is this day; Is that which should put all the People of God in this
Land, upon the trial and enquiry after the causes of this (I may say) your
being so strangely deserted of God. And that I may, as your Christian Friend,
be helpful to you in this, I shall go back to the beginning of these great
Transactions, and shall go along with you in so much of the Progress of
business to this day, as I have either been a witness unto, or can truly inform
my self of, at least so much of them as may make it appear, what has been your
former practices, and the principles and ends carrying you on in these; and
because the business is soweighty, and you so much concerned, and I so unfit to
meddle therewith, I shall therefore beg of the Lord (that where I may mistake
matter of Fact, or shall come short of the full representing thereof) that ye
(who may be better acquainted with the whole of Affairs then my self) may deal
so ingenuously with your selves, as to follow out your own knowledge and
experiences in these; And more to consider what I drive at, than what I speak
in particulars, which, I say, is to be helpful to you in your search.

Dear Friend, Ye may remember that in the beginning of this weighty business,
that which did engage you the people of God (for to you only I speak) was your
being oppressed in your consciences in spiritual things by the King, and those
employed by him, and the connivance and concurrance of these that were the
Representative of Church and State, together with the Tyranny and Oppressions
exercised over your Persons and Estates in several things; to be freed of
these, the attaining, establishing and increase of just Freedom in both these,
was that which chiefly did engage you in the Work: There were many that did go
on upon corrupt principles and ends, whom the Lord made use of for the time,
and discovered many of them since (and will more) that they were not, nor are
suitable Instruments for carrying on of such a Work: And though many of your
selves did not distinctly and particularly conceive what was the interest of
the business you were engaged for at first; yet these who saw a far off, knew
much of it in the time: And these who were the people of God indied, found and
held it forth as their duty, to be carried on by the Providence of the Lord,
to many things in which they were matterially engaged, that they did not at
first clearly apprehend in particulars: And so all along every new discovery of
duty, in the taking away of any thing that did appear to be inconsistant with
the being or wel-being of that which ye had primarily engaged your selves unto
(or the establishing of any thing that might advance it) did make manifest the
rottenness of more or fewer mers principles in engaging therein, by their
falling off, or becoming Enemies to it: And how often have I heard it preached,
That this work would have none to follow it, but such as were truly godly, and
that every corrupt man would fall off from it, when the true interest of the
work did not consist with his corrupt interest?

Dear Friends, Be pleased to consider the rise of this great business; Were not
many of you panting after, praying for it, years before it came? Were there not
private persons in the beginning that did own it against the King, and the
Authorities of the Nation? The state of the cause being as it was, could any be
friends to it, but such as were truly godly? Or could any first or last own it,
without a contradiction, but such? And has not your experience all along made
this evident unto you, that both Persons and Interests which (at first) you
thought might be suitable for the business, and might consist with it, have
proved otherwise? Have not they either left you, or you them?

In the beginning, it was thought by some, that it was enough to be afraid of
the Service Book; But how miserable had you still bin, if the Lord had suffered
you to rest there, or had inclined the Kings heart to grant it; and how far
short had it been of those farther degrees of just freedom, the Lord has since
carried you out to the owning of, and adventuring for, let your consciences
tell you: And so all along adhering to this foundation, to wit (the freeing
your selves from Oppressions in your Consciences, Persons and Estates, and the
establishing and carrying on your just freedom in these, not (so much) as Scots
men, as the people of God) ye have been carried on in ways ye have not known
nor foreseen, looking always upon it as your duty (and practicing it) and for
it abandoning (or declaring against) every person, interest, power, or
authority in less or more, as they did prove inconsistant with the work or
enemies to it, or retarders thereof, or insuitable instruments: And I do appeal
to your experience, (what ever thoughts you might have in the beginning) if it
be cosistant with, that which is really and indeed the work of God either with
its being or well being, Not to be in the hands of suitable Instruments (I mean)
such as are really Godly, and minds it upon that account: And if so? how much
less can it be consistant with it, to be managed by a number of men, who are
enemies to the Work, haters of you and the power of godliness, minding nothing
but themselves and their own interest, being underminers of the things they
profess to maintain, and cannot be otherways: And indeed to my understanding,
that which has bin the contest for some years bygone, has much differed from
(or rather let me say, exceeded) what it was in the beginning: at first the sum
of your Petitioning was to be freed from the Service Book, and Book of Canons,
afterward ye slew so high as to strike at the root, Episcopacie and all that
Roman Hierarchy; and for a long time the supplicating against these, the
Coveranting against these, the defending your selves against such as would
continue these yokes upon you (with some smaller things which had relation to
Civil Privileges) seemed chiefly (if not wholly) to be the state of the
quarrel: Afterward you were carried on further and further in owning what was
necessary for advancing the great business you were engaged into, and
dis-owning what you saw destructive to it, as the Kings Negative Vote in
Parliament and General Assemblies, the uncertainty of the calling of
Parliaments, and establishing a Committee of Estates in the Intervales of
Parliament, etc.

But after all these were obtained by a wonderful Series of Providence,
carrying you along, and countenance you, being freed from the Service Book,
Episcopacy and the rest, your Enemies being vanquished, the powers of the
Nation (in appearance) friendly to you, and countenancing the business; the
King, the great opposer thereof made in a manner to approve you in all you had
done, by his ratifying all in Parliament; so that you could desire nothing of
him outwardly but you had it, Ordinances in purity, none to manage the business
but such as were professed Friends to the work; yet for all this were you not
still at a loss, all you had gotten every day ready to be betrayed, every
farther degree of freedom opposed.

Dear Friend, consider (I conceive the stresse of the matter lies here) that
which has bin your hurt and hinderance all along, has been not so much open
enemies as dissembling profane men among you, haters of godliness and the
Godly, and of any appearance of God (in discovering of duties in order to the
carrying on of the great Work, or in abandoning what was discovered to be
inconsistent or incongruous therewith) engaged in the business upon corrupt
accounts, ready always to betray it into the hands of enemies, and while avowing
themselves, and continuing professed Friends, opposing and retarding good
motions, raising Factions against you, and the true interest of the cause, and
by these great pretenses and professions of being for the Covenant and Work of
God becoming so numerous in Judicatories, that they have carried all before
them: I shall instance the year 1648. Did not that Parliament then become so
highly Malignant, that many (if not all) that were Godly in the Parliament,
(though I do not say that all who went along with them in the Protestation, did
it upon a right account, as has appeared since) were forced to protest and
leave the House, and yet all the while none pretending more for the Cause of
God and Covenant then they, while they were carrying on their Malignant
Designs, and persecuting all the Godly in Scotland, who did not go along with
them. And indeed can you say but all along (though sometimes you have been more
at one in carrying forward some outward thing) there has been real and visible
distances and heart burnings betwixt you the Godly, and such as were engaged in
the business upon a wrong account, they sometimes whispering that good motions
coming from you, did smell of Sectarisme and new light, or by raising Factions
against you, to the dividing of Judicatories, and so at best clogging you in
the way, and making the Work halt, to the sadding of the Spirits of all honest
men, that were looking on. So that I say, the great contest of late, and that
which has had a great influence upon all the late transactions, these five or
six years, has been by whose hands that so generally professed, should be
managed, and who could justly and rightly claim an Interest in it as Friends,
or suitable instruments thereto, and who were enemies; I appeal to your own
experience what was in this before the year 1648. how honest men were
under-mined by a Faction, that partly had engaged with them in the beginning,
and partly had crept in by professing themselves to go along with them in the
Work, by taking the Covenant (which by the way I desire you to take notice,
whether it has not been to large a rule in so searching a business) did they not
see themselves undermined a long time before it came to so direct a breach as
afterward it did, and yet they professing themselves Friends to the Covenant
and Work, they could not be rid of them, till themselves were shuffled to the
door: And though these that did then protest, seemed to be unanimous in what
they did in their ends moving them to it, and their principles carrying them on
in it, and all that did follow thereupon, yet I dare appeal to such of you as
were then acquainted with business, if many of these that did protest were not
in their judgments for an engagement at that same time, and that their searing
from it, was their seeing it chiefly carried on by such as they judged to be
enemies to their ruling of matters though professed friends to the Work; the
power of managing businesses being likely to be established in their hands.
This I can aver from some of the Protesters themselves, that at a close
Committee of the chief of the Protesters, it was resolved to possess Berwick,
and Carlisle, long e're it was surprised by Duke Hamilton, and that party.

And though the way you were then necessitated to (you owning your selves at
first, but as private men, and the party in Scotland risen in Arms and
standing for the Covenant and interest of the people of God) was an
extraordinary remedy, you being expressly tied in the Covenant to maintain the
Privileges of Parliament, yet under that notion, and upon that account that
you were the People of God, and them that had only the true interest to
profess your selves Friends to the Cause, Covenant, and interest of the People
of God, and such as only could rightly challenge a privilege to manage these
and places of trust in the Kingdom, and yet all this while you were nothing but
private men, there being a Committee of Estates appointed, that you could not
say, but they were lawfully constituted: they having established the foresaid
Committee as the Authority of the Kingdom, in the interval of the Parliament;
upon the foresaid account and of their evil managing of business, through their
becoming enemies to the Work and people of God as you then thought you did rise
in Arms against them, and did not only oppose their Authority, but did break
them so, as to be no. Authority at all; and moreover, did constrain them to
condescend that you should be a Committee of Estates: Being thus a Committee,
you did set down Rules for calling a new Parliament, you did (contrary to the
Fundamental Laws of Scotland, whereby every Freeholder, having a Forty shilling
Land holden of the King, has the privilege to vote in choosing Commissioners,
and to be chosen) debar any from voting in Elections, or being Elected, that
had voted in Parliament to the Engagement, 1648. or in the Committee of
Estates, had taken the Oath for carrying on thereof, or had subscribed the Bond
for promoving the same, or had taken the Oath in Committees of shires for the
advancing of it, or had given obedience in an active way, to the Acts enjoining
the Levies, etc. for carrying on the said Engagement. I insist the longer upon
this, and do make all these digressions, that it may appear that it was only
by private men all this was done. It is said, that they were protestors in
Parliament, yet I think it is obvious to any that understands, that though your
Protestation was a testimony, and gave you the greater clearness to act against
that against which you had born your testimony, yet it did not enstate you in
any condition of being a Judicatory, or Public Persons, you having lest the
Parliament upon your Protestation; and though some of you were appointed
Members of the Committee of Estates, yet that same Parliament in that same Act
did declare, That all who were nominated to be of that Committee, should, at
their first sitting, take the Oath for the faithful carrying on of that
Engagement, and otherwise, not to sit or vote, nor have any place therein;
moreover, those that then you looked upon as your Enemies, having got by you to
Sterling, and having taken in the Town, and routed your Forces there, and you
being at Fawkirk, and your men daily leaving you, and you becoming more and
more inconsiderable, you did (that I may omit nothing so far as I can remember,
that was matter of Fact, it being the chief part of my design to help you in
your search, by remembering you of all the several Transactions about and since
that time) judge it necessary to invite the English Army to your assistance;
and this (as I am informed) by the advice of the Kirk, though they had
formerly, in their Pulpits and Remonstrances, declared them to be an Army of
Sectaries; And how useful their incomming was to you, and how they did carry
themselves, you may remember; and what was the nature of their desires to the
Committee of Estates (notwithstanding what they had met with from the
Parliament of Scotland, yea and from many of your selves, as you may know in
particulars) neither desiring recompense from you for the injuries England and
themselves had received, nor desiring greater security from you, but that you
should establish the power of the Kingdom in the hands of honest and godly men,
however prejudiced against them, and for the others, that they should not be
employed without Englands consent.

And notwithstanding you were a party separated from the rest, upon so honest
an account, and had taken such extraordinary ways; yet since it has evidently
appeared that some, if not many, if not the greatest part, did protest in
Parliament, and rise in Arms, and proceed in the business upon unsound ends and
principles, which did appear to such of you as were acquainted with the
business, and did see a far off, not long after they were re-established in
power, by their jealousies of honest men, their laboring to get such into
Judicatories, and Armies, and places of Trust, as would serve their corrupt
interest, and their discountenancing and opposing of godly men; And ever since
your divisions and jealousies have grown, the seed of the Serpent and of the
women, has distinctly appeared, even in that little handful, that seemed to be
separated for the Lord, and for his peoples interest; and how these have
retarded you in your Progress (after solemn acknowledgements of miscarriages in
Omissions, and Commissons, and solemn Engagements to duties) of advancing the
power of godliness, in countenancing of it, and establishing the power of the
Kingdom in the hands of such as were godly, and discountenancing and purging
out such as were otherwise. How they have labored to entangle you into the Yoke
of Bondage you had formerly been serving under, how they have made you fall
backward, and how they have entangled and ensnared you and themselves, and the
Kingdom, in many sorrows, is apparent this day to these that runs by, I chiefly
mean in the whole business with the King: These men, though they were as busy
and forward for bringing in the English Army as any, and had as much intimacy
with them, yet seeing their way which they did walk into in England, to be
inconsistent with their interest (the chief of them being Lords) and being
apprehensive that the godly in Scotland might comply with that Interest of
Levelling, at least the Arbitrary and absolute way of great men; and withal,
the Ministers being possessed with prejudices against them, as appehending them
to be Enemies to them as Ministers, though indeed, (as appears only to their
Arbitrary way) in spiritual things, and there too much meddling in Civil things,
or at least, that they are no great friends to these, together with the
Commissioners carrages at London; all these did concur to procure, that
notwithstanding of all the former courtesies received from them, within a few
weeks after the English Armies going out of Scotland, there was nothing almost
to be heard in Pulpits but the Army of Sectaries, the perfideous Murderers,
filthy Dreamers, Contemners of Authority, Razers of the foundations of
Government, Alterers thereof contrary to the Covenant, and therefore perfideous
Covenant-breakers; the Kirk must put out a Declaration to this, and the State
approve it; and these that were looked upon as Instruments of your deliverance,
whose assistance the Kirk themselves thought fit to take in a few weeks before,
may not be spoken of but with Indignation: Whereas when these things are
examined which they did after they went out of Scotland, I suppose it will be
found their necessity was as great, that put them on to do these things, and
the hazard as eminent to the interest of all the Godly in England, yea Scotland
also, and of all they had been fighting for the foregoing year, as that which
put you to rise in Arms, and to do all that followed upon it in 1648. I shall
for this only instance, the Letter written by the chief Rulers in Scotland to
the Principal Leaders of the English Army, presently after their departure out
of Scotland, pressing them to break the Treaty with the late King at the Isle
of Wight, and that unless it were broken, all the Godly in England and Scotland
would be ruined. And moreover, was there any more irregularitie in their
proceedings then in yours, yea I offer it to your serious consideration from
what has been, and might be said, if there were not more in yours then in
theirs; Things being thus carried on, upon, and by the corrupt interest of
Lords and Gentlemen their dependers, and the interest of the Ministers, you the
Godly were entangled and ensnared, and made to go along upon fair pretenses of
duty and conscience, not seeing the design of those whose interest lay in the
business. Upon the pretense of duty, the outing some members of the Parl. of
England, is taken notice of as a breach of Covenant, notwithstanding that the
same Party had broken the Committee representing the Parl. of Scotland, as is
before expressed: And that our own Commissioners had written home, that the
Parliament of England were going on in a Treaty with the King, and were likely
to close in a way, wherewith they were dis-satisfied, and that they had left
out Scotlands interest. The proceedings against the King, and the taking of his
life must be also protested against, notwithstanding his continued and
confirmed obduredness in his ways, and all the Justice the Covenant ties to
against Delinquents, and the execution of Justice upon severals of our own
acting only by virtue of his Commissions, and that he were himself often by us
declared a Murderer, the grand Murderer, guilty of all the Innocent blood had
been shed in the three Kingdoms, and that we had no ty upon us for the
preservation of his Person by the Covenant, otherwise then as in the defense
and preservation of Religion and Liberty. If it be objected, that they were
not a free constituted Judicatory that did the thing, and so upon that account
it was murder: Let it be considered upon the same consideration, if it may not
be as strongly cleared, that James Grahame, and all that died upon a Scaffold
since 1648. were murdered, since it may be made appear, that according to the
strict account of the Laws of this Nation, there has not been a free nor right
constituted Parliament since 1648. as appears by what is aforesaid concerning
the constituting of the Parliament that sat down the fourth of January 1649. As
a duty the King that now is, behooved to be proclaimed immediately, though then
engaged and running headlong in his Fathers steps, Commissioning Prince
Rupert, James Grahaem, Ormond, making an open and avowed Peace with the Irish
Rebels, to which height his Father never came: Commissioners are sent to him,
and though at that time through the strength of his passion to the way his
heart was engaged unto, and the apparent hopes in Ireland (whether he also sent
his goods) he was kept from any seeming condescendence to their desires, Yea
though they were exceedingly baffled and slighted; yet the Lords seeing no
consistencie at all betwixt those in England, and their Prerogative Interest as
Lords, and finding a spirit of levelling (as they named it) beginning to break
out, honest men beginning to think, and to make it appear they thought the
Lords interest to be exorbitant and tyrannical, and that the most of them were
enemies to Piety and pious men, and to motions tending to the countenancing of
both, and that they were friends to the getting in, and keeping in naughty men
in places of trust, with a design to uphold their interest and greatness, and
beginning then to look after their liberty in those things that great men had
encroched upon them, these considerations though so slighted, as aforesaid, did
move them under the notion of duty to press a second address. In which many
Godly men were ensnared by condescending unto it upon this attempt, that they
were desirous to shun the scandal of being complyers with these they called
Sectaries, who had declared against Monarchy: how that business was carried
on many of you know better then my self. An Express being sent to the Isle of
Iarsey to the King, by his return a Treaty was desired at Breda; the King
writing to the Committee of Estates (naming them so) which he had not formerly
done, (though then only with a Proviso in order to that Treaty:) The same day
and place that the King wrote to the Committee of Estates, he did write to
James Graham, relating the former Commission given him to come into Scotland,
giving him an account of all passages between him and them in Scotland, and
pressing him vigourously to prosecute the business, and the rather, because he
thought his coming to Orkney had occasioned the sending of that second address
unto him, and he was hopeful his vigourous prosecuting of that which he had
entrusted him with, should be a means to make the Committee fall lower in their
conditions. And though the Copy of this Letter came to Scotland, and was known
by the Committee of Estates before they fell upon their Instructions,
notwithstanding of all this, these who had projected the business would go on,
and did prosecute it with so much heat and earnestness, that the business, both
in Instructions and Commissioners, was concluded by the Committee of Estates,
although the Parliament were to sit down within four or five days after.
Those of you that were upon public business, may remember how the whole
matter was carried, being hudled over, and over-hasted, so as might have
rendered the business suspicious to any that were not much left of God; to some
it did clearly appear to be carried on by way of design. Though the shenning
of scandal made some honest men go along in it; yet I think that which partly
did entangle severalls, was the expectation they had that the King would not
agree to the Instructions. As for the carrying on of the Treaty, and the
managing of it in Holland, I refer that to the causes of the Commissions Fast
appointed when they sat at Sterling, and to the Westland Remonstrances of Kirk
and Army.

My design in all this is, that you may take notice how a party and faction,
even of those whom the Lord had separated from the rest of the Nation
(pretending as highly as ever) has carried aside and entangled the Godly, and
undermmed you. And when in part your snare is discovered unto you (though with
the price of many sorrows to your selves and much misery to the Land) now they
begin to appear in their own colors.

My dear Friends, Give me leave in a Christian freedom to expostulate with you,
and from what I have laid down before you, either as matter of Fact, or as your
received principles, to speak freely my own heart unto you, what my thoughts
reach unto, concerning your present low condition, as what may have had a great
hand in the Providence of God to make your condition as it is. I think it may
appear unto you from what has been said (though I should add nothing) that
there is a distinct interest of the People of God, from all worldly interests;
that it does also clearly appear, that your mingling yours therewith, and your
complying and joining with Malignant and carnal Instruments, in prosecution
thereof has had no small influence in bringing you to so low a condition as
you are at this day. Yea, and which is a greater abomination, and also
exceedingly tending thereto, when you and your brethren in England did fall
into mistakes and differences together, have you not strengthened the hands of
your and their enemies by declaring one another Infirmities to the world, and
not only so; Have not you, the people of God, sided with the men of the world,
in their way of reproaching your Brethren, Yea, have not you made them Judges
of the differences between you and them, which is contrary to that of the
Apostle, even in Civil things betwixt such as are Saints indeed, that they
should not bring their causes before the Heathen Judges, much less their
spiritual differences? And whether the generality of the Parliament and General
Assembly of Scotland has been any other, upon a true account, but heathen
Judges (in respect of the appearances of God in them in their public actings
or private walkings) I leave it to your serious consideration. And I appeal to
your selves, whether you have not in an implicit way, for the most part, f
llowed their Judgments, especially the Kirk, and how (by so doing) you have
been entangled and ensnared (if you will not see) you shall see.

Consider how the Lord condiscends to your weakness, by writing in great
Letters your sin and your snare in these, by discovering to you what I have
asserted both of Kirk and State: You are not strangers to proceedings at St.
Johnston, how these men are now not ashamed to profess their ways before the
Sun, all their fair pretenses, whereby they have ensnared you, are now coming
out in their own colors: I need not name the particulars, they being so
evident; these men that have heightened prejudices between you and your
Brethren in England upon fair pretenses, who were Judges and Parties, whose
guilty conscierces told them, they deserved to be so dealt with, as their
brethren had been dealt with by the Godly in England, whom the Lord had so
strangely raised up for that Work, and did clearly see they should be so dealt
with by you, when you should come to understand your own interest, and the true
interest of that which you had primarily engaged your selves unto: And
therefore notwithstanding they did make use of you, and did entangle you with
good pretenses, yet your selves know they were always jealous of you, and did
hate you in their hearts; and for the Kirk, what they are become (I mean the
generality of them) how great Traitors to their own Professions and
Declarations, Preachings, Warnings, and Remonstrances, and to the interest of
all the Godly in Scotland) is evident (passing all other things) by their sense
of the Westland Remonstrance, and their going along with that Parliament at St.
Iohnston, and by their late Warnings, Remonstrances, Declarations and Acts, and
all these under the pretense of good Patriots, which is an evidence, that their
interest is worldly, and not Spiritual, and has the Mark of the Beast upon it.

Dear Friends, I humbly suppose it does not become you to be implicit in
receiving any thing of consequence from the best of men, much less from such as
these have been and are, ye who have Jesus Christ to be your Light and
Councellor, and the anointing from above, and should know that all men are
liars, and ready to be biased with Interest, How unbeseeming is it for you,
especially in these days, to be implicit in your belief, or in receiving any
thing off man's hand, without examination: How much this has prevailed amongst
you, and how ye have loved tohave it so, is obvious, and how these lords over
the conscience, have pursued its being so, as has also appeared in their
peremptoriness in acts questionable in themselves, their naming all the English
Army Sectaries and Blaspemous, without exceptions, Enemies to the People of God
and to godliness, Their bitter way of expressing of this, without (clearly or
scarce at all) refuting their Error, or showing what they held, their laboring
to wrest every thing to the worst sense, or to put such a construction, for the
which there was not the least shadow of a ground, their giving it as the note
of a Sectary in him that should question their way in these, or should forbear
to go along with them, or should question the matter, or whether that which
they did assert to be Error, was so or no, calling these problematique
questions, tending to rend the Church: and for Professors, notwithstanding it
be a duty prescribed unto, and commended in the people of God, especially into
a day of darkness and difficulty, to speak often one to another, to exhort, to
rebuke, to be free one with another; yet I appeal to one and all of you, if
their has not been, and is such a spirit even amongst you, that you could not,
nor cannot bear any thing differing from your own opinion (or rather the
opinion of the Kirk) whether in Doctrine, Discipline, or the business of the
time, notwithstanding the most of you (give me leave in Christian freedom to
speak without offense) could not give a reason for what you held or practiced,
especially in these things relating to the times, but were implicitly led by
other men's judgments, which is your reproach, your sin and your snare this
day, and has not had (I dare confidently say it) the least hand in bringing
you into the posture you are at present: Does not the language of all these,
call upon you to separate from worldly interests and carnal men as much as you
can, and from an implicit, carnal blind way of fearing or trusting man? Is it
not evident, that it has been the design of God from the beginning of this
work to have it so? Have not all his dispensations from time to time signified
this? yea, does not (as has been said) your own principles and practices hold
out so much? Has not your opposing of this (by your laboring to join the seed
of the Woman and of the Serpent together, and to mingle their Interests) again
and again brought contempt and disappointment upon you? Have they not
constantly (pretend what they will) laid you by, and set up themselves? (and if
this hold in Civil things, how much more in Spiritual) And do not you clearly
see it cannot be otherwise? Is it not as clear as the light, that if this
Parliament at St. Johnston were desolved, and another called according to the
Laws of the Kingdom, I dare say, and it is known to you, it might well be
worse, it could not be better, the result of so many years professing and
fighting for a Covenant (chiefly relating to Religion) a Nation wholly almost
overgrown with Malignants, Enemies to you, and to what the Covenant chiefly
drives at.

And for the Kirk, I offer it to your consideration, whether the generality of
them be not godless, self-seeking men, I do not only mean this Commission that
goes along with the present State, but any Assembly that has been, or is
likely to be in haste; and for such as are godly, I shall wish that too many
(even of these) have not more an eye to the upholding of an Arbitrary Power,
unto their meddling in Civil matters, then to the holding forth of Jesus Christ,
and the interest of the People of God: Has it not been a snare to themselves,
and to all honest men in Scotland, especially to such as were in Iudicatories
and Armies, Ministers (though good men) meddling so much in the business of the
time, their way being when they were disaffected with the State, to declare out
of the Pulpits their faults, as also to put forth Declarations thereanent,
which at the best did tend to nothing but to make the State Hypocrites, and to
the deceiving of themselves and all honest men, for the State seeing their way
(in preaching and declaring against them) to tend much to the weakening of their
Authority and Designs, did study how to carry on their Designs with the fairest
outside that might be: I shall give one particular instance, which is this,
their forcing of the King to subscribe (passing all their former and late
proceedings with him, and with the State) that Declaration, wherein he declares
all the friends of the Covenant to be his friends, and the enemies thereof to
be his: What a strange way that was for them to draw up a Declaration of that
nature, and to compel him to subscribe it, by a Declaration of abandoning his
interest, if he should refuse to do it, I leave to the serious consideration of
all godly Ministers and Professors; and what has been the sad consequencies of
proceedings in this kind, and I hope it will not be understood as if I spoke
against good men, whom I honor, or against the Ministry, my desire being only
to take notice of those things whereby they have wronged themselves and the
people of God.

My dear Friends, It does more then evidently appear, that upon all the
considerations spoken of, you must either abandon your own Interest, and all
you have been fighting, wrestling and praying for, or else you must (as the
people of God) and only upon that account, own what is your own Interest, and
the true Interest of that which is the Work indeed, in following the Lamb in
his quarrel against the Beast, in crushing, opposing, dashing in pieces,
laying aside, and treading upon every thing that stands in the way of his
exalting in the midst of his People, or would uphold false Christ's in more or
less the power of the Beast, whether it be King or Kingness or Parliaments, or
Interests of Nations, or Governments, or be it what it will: Oh if you were
once joined together upon this account, how should you be made to revive, and
your reproach taken away? let it not be a stumbling block in your way, that
thus did the Sectaries (so called) in England, I do not question, but the Lord
in his present dispensations is letting you see your sin and error in
condemning your Brethren in England, for that which materially (at least) was
and is your Duty: what better was their condition there, or in probability
would have been then yours, had not the Lord raised up their Spirits to the
consideration of the continual hazard they were exposed to, by suffering their
Interest to be managed by a number of men, who minded not the Interest of the
People of God, nor the true Interest of the Nation, and were upon the closing
of a Treaty, wherein they were to give up the Interest of the Godly, and what
they had been fighting for, to the will and power of him who was the greatest
Delinquent in the three Kingdoms, till (I say) the Lord raised up their
Spirits to be isntrumental, in laying aside those unsuitable dangerous
Instruments, and to persecute all that has followed upon it, wherein how they
have been countenanced and carried through, is obvious: And truly I am
persuaded, that ill the Lord shall be pleased to open your eyes (as I hope he
will) to see it your duty to take the like course, and to see yours and their
Interest to be one, and your Enemies one, (though your differences in some
things should continue) till something of both these, ye shall be haunted with
sorrows, and distresses, and disappointments, and disasters one after another,
(let me say this without offense) I am far from justifying those in England, in all the circumstances either of their way there, or of their coming into
Scotland, and shall not say, but that there has been not only an offense taken
by you, but also an offense given, especially in the way of their coming into
Scotland, though they have this to say for themselves; First, that a Treaty
was denied, unless they would deny the capacity they stood into, and the
resolved desperate carrying on the Treaty with the King, notwithstanding all
the discoveries of him and of his designs; and our example eleven years ago,
who entered England with an Army for matters merely concerning Scotland,
without any call from any Public Judicatories, and yet were owned by the
Godly in England, and that during the time of the Treaty, an about, and after
the close of it, Prince Rupert was at Sea robbing their Ships, destroying their
Trade by virtue of this Kings Commissions, Ormond in Ireland in the Head of the
Popish Army, and several Commissions issued forth to severals in England.

Dear Friends, If you can look upon them as Brethren (as I am sure they are at
least the generality of the leading, counselling Party, and such as are Godly
that adhere to them) It is your duty to forgive and forget, though they have
done you an Injury. They say, you have wronged them, and yet they profess
themselves not only willing to forgive you, but to follow you with all kindness
and respect, and to be useful to you, though it were by laying their Bones in
the dust for you. If there be Differences amongst you, can there be no mids but
to destroy one another? this seems to be a strange Paradox and device of
Satan, that you think you cannot stand except they fall, they do not think so,
they profess themselves not only willing, but desirous, that your interest,
as the Godly in Scotland should stand, though you should differ in judgment
from them: Can Christ's Kingdom be divided against it self, truly it is
nothing of Christ that would labor to divide his People in affections, and
will plead their destroying one of another.

Dear Friends, remember their professions of love to you when they came into
this Nation, and what a bitter return was made to them in your name: what a
Christian reply from them, what a meeting from you, and how unwilling they were
the Business should be decided by blood, and how blood-thirsty you were (bear
the expression) none more earnest upon fighting then you, notwithstanding all
their continuing their professions of love, and their moderate carrying of
themselves in the Country, and their returning in their way toward England,
how eager were even you the Godly in their pursuit, how did you long for their
ruin (whose preservation I dare say, as Instruments, was and is yours) and did
conclude them all men ruined and broken, whom the Lord would in an outward way
own no more: after the Lord had made you flee before them, (they being
necessitated to fight, being environed upon All hands) yet notwithstanding all
the advantage they had, did they not follow you as much as ever, and ra her
more? And the Lord having in a singular way separated you from that Crew ye
were entangled with, and ye beginning to see the errors of former vvays in
some things at least, and being in a Capacity to own your Interest, and
dis-satisfied in what had formerly bin the state of the Quarrel, and with the
State and the Treaty at Breda, and your Brethren in the English Army having
renewed their Professions of love to you, and their desire to confer with
you, and to have a cessation of Arms, and to some of you, having gone a great
length in particulars, to evidence the realitie of their Professions of Love,
and after the State and Kirk had in such a way declared against your
Remonstrance, and though in it you had taken away that which was positively and
unquestionably the state of the Quarrel, and had (to my nderstanding) put
nothing in the room of it, yet your desire to fight with them was so great,
notwithstanding of all these, that before you should miss an opportunity, ye
would rather fall in upon their Quarters upon the Lords day morning: And how
strangely ye were broken, and what were the particular remarkable passages,
they know best that were there only it is generally remarked, that at
Musleburgh, at Dunbar and at Hamilton, the honest men got the saddest blows.
However, they continue their professions of Love to you, even to this day,
notwithstanding of all they have met with from you then, and I dare say from
knowledge, that since Hamilton, if it had pleased the Lord to have opened your
eyes to have known what was truly your interest and your duty, it might have
been in the power of the Godly of Scotland, not only to have preserved their
own interest, but the interest of the Nation: and if it should yet please the
Lord to open your eyes, I am very confident it should not only tend to your
good, but to the good of the Land, and to the rectifying and composing present
differences and distances, and perhaps the Lords design is to make each of you
useful in convincing one another in the extremes that either of you (it may
be) has been inclining to, if ye were once together as Brethren, Conferring
Exhorting, Reproving, and Watching over each other, and Forbearing, Forgiving,
and Loving each other, and not as Enemies, reproaching, contemning, smiting,
taking advantage, raising and fomenting prejudices one against another. Dear
Friends, I hope you will not be offended with my Freedom, which is, not to lay
open your nakedness, but to show the kindness and tendernss of these whom ye
have looked upon as your Enemies, that ye maybe persuaded to meet them with the
like: Sure I am it is the Design of God, to have his People one, and to cause
them follow him together with one heart, at least it is his promise it shall be
so; And that the Whore that sits upon the many waters shall be destroyed, and
that the Kingdoms of the world shall become the Kingdoms of his Son, and I hope
he will not loose you, even to make you isntrumental in this great Work he is
about, for it is his time to build up Zion, not to destroy her, nor no part of
her, and if it were not for this, I should have been laid by from meddling into
any business so weighty as this is: I know it is such a way, as the wayfaring
man, though a fool cannot err therein.

FINIS.

