An Account of the SOCIETIES FOR Reformation of Manners, IN LONDON and
WESTMINSTER, And other Parts of the Kingdom.

WITH A PERSUASIVE TO Persons of all RANKS, TO BE Zealous and Diligent in
Promoting the Execution of the Laws against Profaneness and Debauchery, For
the Effecting A National Reformation.

Published with the Approbation of a Considerable Number of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal.

Who is on the Lord's side, let him come unto me? Exodus 32. 20. Who will rise
up for me against the Evildoers? Who will stand up for me against the workers
of Iniquity? Psalm. 94. 16. LONDON: Printed for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons
in Cornhill; and are to be Sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster. M
DC XC IX.

GULIELMUS D: Gratiae Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, et Hiberniae, REX Fidei
Defensor etc.



By the King, A PROCLAMATION, For Preventing and Punishing Immorality and
Profaneness.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas We cannot but be deeply Sensible of the great Goodness and Mercy of
Almighty God, in putting an End to a Long, Bloody and Expensive War, by the
Conclusion of an Honorable Peace, so We are not less touched with a
Resentment, that notwithstanding this and many other great Blessings and
Deliverances, Impiety, Profaneness and Immorality do still abound in this Our
Kingdom: And whereas nothing can prove a greater Dishonor to a well ordered
Government, where the Christian Faith is Professed, nor is likelier to provoke
God to withdraw His Mercy and Blessings from Us, and instead thereof, to
inflict heavy and severe Judgments upon this Kingdom, than the open and avowed
Practice of Vice, Immorality and Profaneness, which amongst many Men has too
much prevailed in this Our Kingdom of late Years, to the high Displeasure of
Almighty God, the great Scandal of Christianity, and the ill and fatal Example
of the rest of Our Loving Subjects, who have been Soberly Educated, and whose
Inclinations would lead them to the Exercise of Piety and Virtue, did they not
daily find such frequent and repeated Instances of Dissolute Living,
Profaneness and Impiety, which has in a great Measure been occasioned by the
Neglect of the Magistrates not putting in Execution those good Laws which have
been made for Suppressing and Punishing thereof, and by the ill Example of many
in Authority, to the great Dishonor of God, and Reproach of our Religion:
Wherefore, and for that We cannot expect Increase or Continuance of the
Blessings We and Our Subjects Enjoy, without Providing Remedies to prevent the
like evils for the future, We think Our Selves bound by the Duty We owe to God,
and the Care We have of the People committed to Our Charge, to proceed in
taking effectual Course, that Religion, Piety and Good Manners may, according
to Our hearty Desire, Flourish and Increase under Our Administration and
Government; and being thereunto moved by the Pious Address of the Commons in
Parliament Assembled, We have thought fit, by the Advice of Our Privy Council,
to Issue this Our Royal Proclamation, and do Declare Our Royal Purpose and
Resolution to Discountenance and Punish all manner of Vice, Immorality and
Profaneness in all Persons from the highest to the lowest Degree within this
Our Realm, and particularly in such who are Employed near Our Royal Person; and
that for the greater Encouragement of Religion and Morality, We will, upon all
Occasions, Distinguish Men of Piety and Virtue by Marks of Our Royal Favor.
And We do expect that all Persons of Honor, or in Place of Authority, will to
their utmost contribute to the Discountenancing Men of Dissolute and Debauched
Lives, that they being reduced to Shame and Contempt, may be enforced the
sooner to Reform their ill Habits and Practices, that the Displeasure of Good
Men toward them, may supply what the Laws (it may be) cannot wholly Prevent.
And for the more Effectual Reforming these Men, who are a Discredit to Our
Kingdom, Our further Pleasure is, and We do hereby strictly Charge and Command
all Our Judges, Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and all other Our
Officers and Ministers, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, and other Our Subjects,
whom it may Concern, to be very Vigilant and Strict in the Discovery and the
Effectual Prosecution and Punishment of all Persons who shall be Guilty of
Excessive Drinking, Blasphemy, Profane Swearing and Cursing, Lewdness,
Profanation of the Lords Day, or other Dissolute, Immoral or Disorderly
Practices, as they will answer it to Almighty God, and upon Pain of Our Highest
Displeasure. And for the more Effectual Proceedings herein, We do hereby Direct
and Command Our Judges of Assizes and Justices of Peace, to give strict Charges
at the respective Assizes and Sessions, for the due Prosecution and Punishment
of all Persons that shall presume^ to Offend in any the Kinds aforesaid, and
also of all Persons that, contrary to their Duty, shall be Remiss or Negligent
in Putting the said Laws in Execution, and that they do at their respective
Assizes and Quarter Sessions of the Peace, cause this Our Proclamation to be
publicly Read in Open Court immediately before the Charge is given. And We do
hereby further Charge and Command every Minister in his respective Parish or
Chapel, to Read or cause to be Read this Our Proclamation, at least Four times
in every Year, immediately after Divine Service, and to incite and stir up
their respective Auditories to the Practice of Piety and Virtue, and the
Avoiding of all Immorality and Profaneness. And to the end that all Vice and
Debauchery may be Prevented, and Religion and Virtue Practiced by all Officers,
Private Soldiers, Mariners or others, who are Employed in our Service, either
by Sea or Land, We do hereby strictly Charge and Command all Our Commanders and
Officers whatsoever, That they do take Care to Avoid all Profaneness,
Debauchery and other Immoralities, and that by the Piety and Virtue of their
own Lives and Conversations they do set good Examples to all such as are under
their Authority, and likewise to take Care and Inspect the Behavior and
Manners of all such as are under them, and to Punish all those who shall be
Guilty of any the Offenses aforesaid. And whereas several Wicked and Profane
Persons have presumed to Print and Publish several Pernicious Books and
Pamphlets, which contain in them Impious Doctrines against the Holy Trinity and
other Fundamental Articles of Our Faith, tending to the Subversion of the
Christian Religion, therefore for the Punishing the Authors and Publishers
thereof, and for the Preventing such Impious Books and Pamphlets being
Published or Printed for the future, We do hereby strictly Charge and Prohibit
all Persons that they do not presume to Write, Print or Publish any such
Pernicious Books or Pamphlets, under the Pain of Incurring Our High
Displeasure, and of being Punished according to the utmost Severity of the Law.
And We do hereby strictly Charge and Require all Our Loving Subjects to
Discover and Apprehend such Person and Persons whom they shall know to be the
Authors or Publishers of any such Books or Pamphlets, and to bring them before
some Justice of Peace or Chief Magistrate, in order that they may be Proceeded
against according to Law.

Given at Our Court at Kensington the Four and twentieth Day of February, 1697.
In the Tenth Year of Our Reign.
God save the KING.
HER LATE MAJESTY'S GRACIOUS LETTER (In the Absence of the KING,) To the
Justices of the Peace in the County of Middlesex, July 9. 1691. For the
Suppressing of Profaneness and Debauchery.
MARIE R.

TRusty and Well-Beloved, We Greet you well. Considering the great and
indispensable Duty incumbent upon Us, to promote and encourage a Reformation of
the Manners of all our Subjects, that so the Service of God may be Advanced,
and those Blessings be procured to these Nations, which always attend a
Conscientious discharge of our respective Duties, according to our several
Relations; We think it necessary, in order to the obtaining of this Public
Good, to recommend to you the putting in Execution, with all fidelity and
impartiality, those Laws which have been made, and are still in fo^^^ against
the Profanation of the Lord's Day, Drunkenness, Profane Swearing and Cursing,
and all other Lewd, Enormous, and Disorderly Practices, which, by a long
continued neglect, and connivance of the Magistrates and Officers concerned,
have universally spread themselves to the dishonor of God, and scandal of our
Holy Religion, whereby it is now become the more necessary for all Persons in
Authority to apply themselves with all possible care and diligence to the
suppressing of the same. We do therefore hereby charge and require You, to take
the most effectual Methods for putting the Laws in Execution against the Crimes
abovementioned, and all other Sins and Vices, particularly those which are
most prevailing in this Realm, and that especially in such cases where any
Officer of Justice shall be guilty of any of those Offenses, or refuse or
neglect to discharge the Duty of his Place for the suppressing them, that so
such Officer, by his Punishment, may serve for an Example to others. And to
this end, We would have you careful and diligent in encouraging all Constables,
Churchwardens, Headboroughs, and all other Officers and Persons whatsoever, to
do their part in their several Stations, by timely and impartial Informations,
and Prosecutions against all such Offenders, for preventing of such Judgments
which are solemnly denounced against the Sins abovementioned. We cannot doubt
of your Performance hereof, since it is a Duty to which you are obliged by
Oath, and are likewise engaged to the discharge of it, as you tender the Honor
of Almighty God, the flourishing condition of his Church in this Kingdom, the
continuance of His Holy Religion among Us, and the Prosperity of Your Country:
And so We bid you Farewell.

Given at Our Court at White Hall, the Ninth Day of July, One Thousand Six
Hundred Ninety One, in the Third Year of Our Reign. By Her Majesty's Command,
Nottingham.

To Our Trusty and Well-Beloved, the Justices of the Peace for Our County of
Middlesex at Hicks's- Hall.
THE HUMBLE ADDRESS OF THE House of Commons TO THE KING, For the Suppressing of
Profaneness and Vice.
May it Please Your MAJESTY,
WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Commons in Parliament
Assembled, Do, with great Joy and Comfort, remember the many Testimonies which
Your Majesty has given us of Your Sincerity and Zeal for the True Reformed
Religion, as Established in this Kingdom: And in particular, we beg leave to
present to Your Majesty, our most Humble and Thankful Acknowledgments, for the
late Gracious Declaration Your Majesty has made to us from the Throne; That You
would effectually discourage Profaneness and Immorality, which chiefly, by the
Neglect and ill Example of too many Magistrates, are, like a general Contagion,
diffused and spread throughout the Kingdom, to the great Scandal and Reproach
of our Religion, and to the Dishonor and Prejudice of Your Majesty's
Government.

Therefore, in Concurrence with Your Majesty's Pious Intentions, we do most
humbly Desire, That Your Majesty would Issue out Your Royal Proclamation,
Commanding all Your Majesty's Judges, Justices of the Peace, and other
Magistrates, to put in speedy Execution, those good Laws that are now in Force,
against Profaneness and Immorality; giving due Encouragement to all such as do
their Duty therein: And that Your Majesty would be Pleased, to Require from
Your Judges and Justices of Assize, from time to time, an Account of such their
Proceedings.

And since the Examples of Men in High and Public Stations, have a Powerful
Influence upon the Lives of others; we do most humbly beseech Your Majesty,
That all Vice, Profaneness and Irreligion, may in a particular manner be
Discouraged in all those who have the Honor to be Employed near Your Royal
Person; and in all others who are in Your Majesty's Service, by Sea and Land;
Appointing Strict Orders to be given to all Your Commanders, That they not only
show a Good Example themselves, but also Inspect the Manners of those under
them; And that Your Majesty would, upon all Occasions, distinguish Men of Piety
and Virtue, by Marks of Your Royal Favor.

We do further, in all Humility, beseech Your Majesty, That Your Majesty would
give such Effectual Orders, as to Your Royal Wisdom shall seem fit, for the
Suppressing all Pernicious Books and Pamphlets, which contain in them Impious
Doctrines against the Holy Trinity, and other Fundamental Articles of our
Faith, tending to the Subversion of the Christian Religion; and that the
Authors and Publishers thereof, may be Discountenanced and Punished.

And we do also most humbly beseech Your Majesty, That Your said Proclamation
may be Ordered to be Read at least Four times in the Year, in all Churches and
Chapels, immediately after Divine Service; and at the Assizes and
Quarter Sessions of the Peace, just before the Charge is given.

We present to Your Majesty, this our most Humble ADDRESS, proceeding from our
Duty and Zeal for the Glory of God, and to the end that all our Counsels may be
blessed by his Divine Assistance, and may produce Honor, Safety and Happiness,
with all the Blessings of a Lasting Peace, to Your Majesty, and Your People.

To the AUTHOR.
SIR,
WE have perused the Book you sent us, Entitled, An Account of the Societies
for Reformation of Manners; the Design of which is so truly Great and Noble, so
much for the Honor of God, the Advancement of Piety and Virtue, and the
public Good both of Church and State, that it cannot fail of being approved by
all good Men. The Method likewise proposed, in order to the Promoting and
Accomplishing complishing the said Design, is, We conceive, most proper, and
(by the Blessing of God attending it) most likely to prove effectual. And that
Pious Men of all Ranks and Qualities may be excited by this good Book to
contribute, in their respective Places and Stations, their best Endeavors
toward a National Reformation of Manners, is the most Humble and Hearty Prayer
of,

SIR, Your very Loving Friends Lords Temporal, Pembroke, P Lonsdale. Leeds.
Bedford. Lindsey.
Lords Spiritual, T. Carliol. H. Bangor. N. Cestriens. E. Gloucestr. S. Eliens.
Lords Temporal, Kent. Bridgwater. Thanet. Radnor. Abingdon. Portland.
Falconberg. Warington. Rochford. Say and Sele. Longvile. Bergavenny. Eure.
Willoughby of Parham. Brook. Maynard. Berkley of Stratton.
Lords Spiritual, J. Bristol. R. Bath and Wells. J. Cicestriens. J. Oxon.
Lords Temporal. Dartmouth. Guilford. Haversham. Barnard. Digby. Allington.
Cutts.
Judges, Ed. Ward. Ed. Nevill. Nic. Lechmere. Tho. Rokeby. John Turton. John
Blencowe. Hen. Hatsell.



An Account of the SOCIETIES FOR Reformation of Manners, IN LONDON and
WESTMINSTER, And other Parts of the Kingdom, etc.
IT may be hoped, That this plain Discourse will meet no other Enemies than
such as are likewise Enemies to Religion and Virtue, and are lost to the Sense
of Good and Evil, since the only Design of it is evidently to promote the true
Interest of Religion; and it does not oppose any one Man's honest Advantage, or
encounter any common Opinion, that I know of, among us: The Observation having
been long since made, That how many Disputes soever there have been raised
among the too various Denominations of Christians, concerning the Power of the
Magistrate in Matters of Religion, with respect either to Faith or Worship, it
has never been a Dispute, Whether the Magistrate has Power to Punish
Immoralities: The Prosecution of Men for their Vices has never been reckoned
Persecution. It being as plainly the Duty of the Magistrate, from the Word of
GOD, which Romans 13 4.
obliges him to Execute Wrath upon those that do Evil, as it is evident, from
the dismal Effects of Vice and Wickedness in all Ages, that Laws against
Profaneness and Debauchery are necessary for the Preservation of Communities,
as that Piety and Virtue are requisite to their Well-being; and that
unrestrained Vice and Profaneness are as fatal to Public Societies, as they
are destructive to Private Persons.

But though LAWS are necessary to the very Being of Communities, and Good Laws
to their Happiness; yet they cannot be supposed, by any Rational Man, to be any
more sufficient of themselves, to procure the Welfare of the Body Politic,
without Execution, than the best Medicines can procure the Health of the
Natural Body, without the Use and Application of them.

If therefore the Execution of Good Laws be necessary, as is proved, to the
Welfare of Communities; and those that concern Matters of Religion, as do those
for the Punishment of Profaneness and Debauchery, are allowed, in a Christian
Country, to deserve the greatest regard; the Interest of Religion, and the
Welfare of the Community being so deeply concerned therein, it cannot be a
matter of Dispute, whether it becomes Men that call themselves Christians, to
promote the Execution of such Laws: Nay, it cannot be well imagined, how Men
can have a Zeal for the Service of the Great GOD of Heaven and Earth, or can
have a due Love to Mankind, who have no regard to the Honor of God, or Welfare
of their Country; as shall hereafter more fully appear.

Now, what becomes all Men, in their several Capacities, to do, in the
Promoting of the Execution of our Laws against Profaneness and Debauchery, my
Business, in the first place, is to show is Practicable, and that it may be
done by us of this Nation; Admonetur omnis aetas id fie^i posse, quod aliquando
factum est.
and that not only from what was done some Years ago, in the Times of
Usurpation, but what has been done within Eight Years past, in and about this
City, and other Parts of the Kingdom.

It is very well known, that in the late times Profane Swearing and Cursing,
Drunkenness, Open-Lewdness, and Profanation of the Lord's Day, were generally
discouraged, and suppressed. And it is as well known, to our Shame, that those
Sins have not only since revived among us, by reason of the Impunity of
Offenders, the Countenance and Preserment they have met with, and the Contagion
of great and ill Examples, but have been committed with great Impudence, and
without Control; without either Shame, or the Fear of the Laws; so that they
were seen and heard at Noonday, and in our Open Streets; and as if we were
resolved to outdo the Impieties of the very Heathens, Profaneness, and even
Blasphemy, was too often the Wit and Entertainment of our Scandalous
Play Houses, and Sincere Religion became the Jest and Scorn of our Courts in
the late Reigns.

And thus Debauchery diffused it self throughout the whole Body of the Nation,
till, at last, our Morals were so corrupted, that Virtue and Vice had with too
many changed their Names; it was reckoned Breeding to Swear, Gallantry to be
Lewd, good Humor to be Drunk, and Wit to despise Sacred things; and it was
enough to have rendered one suspected of Phanaticism, or an abjectness of
Spirit, and a matter of Reproach, not to suffer ones self to be carried away
with this Torrent of Wickedness, and not to glory in those fashionable Vices.
Nay, it was thought an unpardonable Rudeness, even for a Clergyman or
Magistrate, to reprove or punish one that was Guilty of them, notwithstanding
the Solemn Obligations of their Oaths and Vows to do it. And even after the
Accession of His present Majesty to the Crown, though Popery immediately
vanished, Immorality and Profaneness still kept their ground, as if they
expected an Establishment with our Liberties, after so long and Peaceable a
Possession.

Reformation was indeed talked of by some Persons as an Excellent thing, and as
a proper way of Expressing our Thankfulness to Almighty God for his Mercies to
this Nation, and to procure a Continuance of them to us, and to our Posterity:
But Vice was looked upon as too formidable an Enemy to be provoked, and Public
Reformation was thought so difficult an Undertaking, that those that gave it
very good Words, judged it not safe to set about it in the time of War, whilst
there were so many in Arms on the other side; and therefore they seemed to
decline the Thoughts of it till we should see the End of the uncertain War we
were engaged in; though they were, I conceive, otherwise instructed by God's
express Command to the Jews. When the Host Deuteronomy. 23. 9.
goes forth against thine Enemy, then keep thy self from every evil thing.
When things were in this dismal and almost desperate State, it came into the
Hearts, it seems, of Five or Six private Gentlemen of the Church of England, to
engage in this difficult and hazardous Enterprise; who considering that the
higher the Tide of Wickedness was, the more need there was of Opposing it; that
our crying Sins were our greatest Enemies, and most threatened our Ruin; that we
have Laws in Force against them; and that they should have the Laws of God,
with the Prayers of good Men on their side, resolved, whatever Difficulties
they met with, to make their Efforts for Promoting the Execution of our Laws
against Profaneness and Debauchery, and the Suppressing of them by advisable
Methods.

This was such an Undertaking as we might well believe would soon alarm the
Enemy, but which the Patrons of Vice would make no doubt to deseat, before any
Progress could be made; and which the Prudent and Wise Men of the World, who
rely on second Causes, with too little regard to the first, the Almighty
Creator and Governor of the World, with whom, as King Asa expresses it in his
Prayer, it is nothing to help, whether ^ Chron. 14. 10.
with many, or with those that have no power, would look on with Pity, if not
with Derision; and so it proved, that the Champions and Advocates of Debauchery
put themselves in Array to defend their wretched and infamous Liberties; they
set themselves to Ridicule, to Defame, and to Oppose this Design, and to
Overthrow the Hopes and Expectations of the Undertakers: And some others, whom
in Charity we would not look on as Enemies of Religion and Virtue, though we
cannot easily esteem them our Friends, whose Conduct has so greatly obstructed
the Progress of this Design, consulting Human Prudence, or rather Worldly
Policy, too much, and perhaps their own Obligations too little, were very
forward to censure these Attempts as the Effect of an imprudent and an
unseasonable Zeal: But notwithstanding a furious Opposition from Adversaries,
the ill Offices of those from whom better things might have been expected, and
the unkind Neutrality of Friends, these Gentlemen, who in a little time began
to add some others to their Number, not only kept their Ground, but made
farther Advances; for our late Excellent QUEEN, of Glorious Memory, having this
Affair laid before Her, in the Absence of the King, by a Prelate of great
Learning and Fame, (the late Lord Bishop of Worcester) She had just Sentiments
of it, and therefore thought it became Her to give it Countenance; She
Graciously condescended to Thank those who were concerned in it, and readily
promised them Her Assistance; and afterward, upon this Application made to Her
Majesty, She was pleased to send Her Letter to the Justices of Middlesex,
commanding them to put the Laws against Profaneness and Vice in Execution with
all Fidelity and Impartiality; and to this end, that they should be careful and
diligent in encouraging all Persons to do their part in giving Informations
against Offenders, as they were obliged by their Oath, as Magistrates, to do;
and when there was further Occasion, She showed She was in earnest to promote
this Design, by taking other more effectual Methods for that purpose. But as it
may well be supposed, That the Queen's patronizing of these Endeavors could
not but give Credit and Strength to them; so the Affair, by Her Death (it may
as easily be imagined) must lose a great Advantage: But yet the Loss (though it
appeared exceedingly great) did not discourage those that were engaged in this
Enterprise. For as they first set about it with little or no Expectation of
such a Patroness, because they thought it would be an acceptable Service to the
King of Kings, and that it would promote the true Interests of Religion, and
the Welfare of their Country: So the same Considerations obliged them to pursue
their Design with equal Vigor and Zeal, though they were deprived of so great a
Friend and Protector. And Divine Providence had by this time seemed to favor
their Endeavors, by the great and remarkable Success that had attended them;
for Multitudes of Offenders had been by their means brought to Punishment. The
Public Opposition that was at first made to their Undertaking was broke
through, (which the Lord Bishop of Gloucester, who has been a great Encourager
of this Undertaking, gave an Account of in his Vindication of it, which, it may
be wished, there may never be any further Occasion to remember) and the Honesty
of it had recommended it to the Virtuous and Unprejudiced part of the Nation,
whom the Account of these Matters had reached; the Enemy, after a severe
Examination, having not been able to discover, that any illegal Methods had
been used, or that any secular Interest was pursued by those, who bestowed
their Time and their Pains in carrying on so ungrateful and hazardous a Work,
as that of Reformation will be always found, since it is the Opposing of ill
Men, in their sinful Indulgencies, which are often more desirable to them than
their very Lives. With these Encouragements they prosecuted their Business,
increasing their Number by the Addition of Persons of considerable Note, and of
the best Character; some of whom, though they were of different Opinions from
those of the Established Church, as to some Points concerning Religion, were
willing to unite their Strength in the common Cause of Christianity, and engage
in so Noble a Design, that had done so much Good: By whose joint Endeavors,
great Advances have been made toward a Reformation of Manners, which is every
Day getting ground, Persons of various Ranks, of considerable Fortunes, and of
the clearest Character, offering Assistance to it, not only in and about the
City of London, but from several Parts of the Kingdom.

But since it has been long desired, that a more distinct and clear View may
be given to the World of this Undertaking, and of the Advances of it, which
those that have been principally concerned in it (so industriously consulting
Privacy) have not hitherto been prevailed on, by any Temptations, either of
Vanity or Resentment, to make public; being more desirous that it should be
known by the good Effects it produces, than by any History or Narrative; I ask
leave to present the World with a short Scheme of the Design, and some Account
of the Managers of it, that the well-disposed part of the Nation that have
hitherto been Strangers to it may, by the Knowledge thereof, be induced to join
in so good a Work, and now especially, since this Conjuncture is so favorable
to it, beyond our Expectation.

There is a very large Body of Persons, composed of the Original Society
beforementioned, with the Additions that have been since made of Persons of
Eminency in the Law, Members of Parliament, Justices of Peace, and considerable
Citizens of London of known Abilities and great Integrity, who frequently meet
to consult of the best Methods for carrying on the Business of Reformation, and
to be ready to advise and assist others that are already engaged, or any that
are willing to join in the same Design.

This Society is at a considerable Yearly Charge for the effectual managing
their Business; but takes no Contributions of any but their own Members, by
whose Endeavors, as was said before, Thousands of Offenders, in London and
Westminster have been brought to Punishment for Swearing, Drunkenness, and
Profanation of the Lord's Day; and a great part of the Kingdom has been
awakened, in some measure, to a sense of their Duty in this respect, and
thereby a very hopeful Progress is made toward a General Reformation.

A Second Society is of about Fifty Persons, Tradesmen and others, who have
more especially applied themselves to the Suppression of Lewdness, by bringing
the Offenders to legal Punishment: These may have actually suppressed and
rooted out about Five Hundred Disorderly Houses, and caused to be punished some
Thousands of Lewd Persons, besides Swearers, Drunkards, and Prophaners of the
Lord's Day, as may appear by their Printed Lists of Offenders. These Persons,
by their prudent and legal Management of their Business, have received great
Countenance and Encouragement in our Courts of Judicature, and very particular
Encouragement and Assistance, for several Years past, from the Lord Mayor and
Court of Aldermen, who are sensible of the great Service that is done by them,
which they express upon proper Occasions.

A Third Society, is of Constables, (of which sort of Officers Care is taken to
form Yearly a new Body in this City) who meet to consider of the most Effectual
way to discharge their Oaths, to acquaint one another with the Difficulties
they meet with, to resolve on proper Remedies, to divide themselves in the
several Parts of the City, so as to take in the whole to the best Advantage,
for the inspecting of Disorderly Houses, taking up of Drunkards, Lewd Persons,
Prophaners of the Lord's Day, and Swearers, out of the Streets and Markets, and
carrying them before the Magistrates; and I must observe, that this is found a
very successful Method for Constables to take, for the Suppressing of the
abominable Sin of Swearing, when Private Persons are negligent in giving of
Informations, and the Magistrate is careless of his Duty.

A Fourth Rank of Men, who have been so highly Instrumental in this
Undertaking, that they may be reckoned a Cornerstone of it, is of such as have
made it some part of their Business to give Informations to the Magistrate, as
they have had Opportunity, of such Breaches of the Laws as were before
mentioned. Many of these Persons have given the World a great and almost
unheard of Example, in this corrupt Age, of Zeal, and Christian Courage, having
underwent, at the beginning more especially of these Proceedings, many Abuses,
and great Reproaches, not only from exasperated and hardened Offenders, but
often from their lukewarm Friends, Irreligious Relations, and sometimes from
Unfaithful Magistrates, by whom they have been Reviled, Brow-beaten, and
Discouraged from performing such important Service, so necessary to the Welfare
of their Country. And herein these brave Men have acted with so great Prudence,
as well as Zeal, that foreseeing it might one day be the Policy of the Enemy of
all Goodness, and the Business of wicked Men, who are his Instruments, and who
could not generally be brought to Shame and Punishment for their infamous
Practices but by their means, to raise Prejudices in the Minds of bad and
unthinking People against them, and to disparage their Proceedings, by
whispering of Jealousies of their being influenced in what they did by Worldly
Considerations, That the World may be challenged to make appear, That these
Societies have been so much as treated with, by any Person whatsoever, to give
Informations with any Promise of a Reward, or that they have ever received the
least Advantage by any Convictions upon these Statutes against Profaneness and
Debauchery, the Money arising thereby being wholly appropriated to the Poor,
except the third part of the Penalty upon the Statute against Profanation of
the Lord's Day, which, in some Cases, the Magistrate has a bare Power to
dispose of; but was never, that we know of, received by any one of these
Persons; which I thought fit to observe, as a lasting Answer to any Objection
of this kind, in Justice to them who have gone through Frowns and Reproaches
for the sake of doing so much Good; and that all Men may see with how great
Reason it is, both from the Character of the Persons concerned in the
Discharging of this Service to Religion and their Country, as well as from the
Nature and Necessity of it, (which I shall hereafter enquire into) that the
Name of an Informer is now become much more Glorious among wise and good Men,
than it was grown Contemptible, by the ill Practices of some in our days: And
that it does therefore appear truly Honorable for Persons of the greatest
Quality to give Informations in these Cases, for the Service of the most High
God, as some among us, of greater Ranks than the World does perhaps think of,
have of late done, and which it has been observed, in diverse Discourses lately
Published, that even Princes under the Jewish Dispensation were not ashamed to
do. Now when these things were Ezra 9. 1, 2.
done, the Princes came to me, saying, The people of Israel, and the Priests
and the Levites have not separated themselves from the people of the Lands,
doing according to their Abominations, etc.

There are Eight other regulated and mixed Bodies of Housekeepers and Officers,
in the several Quarters of London, Westminster, and Southwark, who differ in
their Constitution from those beforementioned, but generally agree in the
Methods of inspecting the Behavior of Constables and other Officers, and going
along with them, and assisting them in their Searching of Disorderly Houses, in
taking up of Offenders, and carrying them before the Magistrate, and also in
giving Imformations themselves, as there is Occasion.

Besides those beforementioned, there are about Nine and Thirty Religious
Societies of another kind, in and about London and Westminster, which are
propagated into other Parts of the Nation; as Nottingham, Gloucester, etc. and
even into Ireland, where they have been for some Months since spreading in
diverse Towns and Cities of that Kingdom; as Kilkenny, Drogheda, Mannouth, etc.
especially in Dublin, where there are about Ten of these Societies, which are
promoted by the Bishops, and inferior Clergy there. These Persons meet often to
Pray, Sing Psalms, and Read the Holy Scriptures together, and to Reprove,
Exhort, and Edify one another by their Religious Conferences. They moreover
carry on at their Meetings, Designs of Charity, of different kinds; such as
Relieving the Wants of Poor Housekeepers, maintaining their Children at
School, setting of Prisoners at Liberty, supporting of Lectures and daily
Prayers in our Churches. These are the SOCIETIES which our late Gracious Queen,
as the Learned Bishop that has writ her LIFE tells us, took so great
Satisfaction in, that She inquired often and much about them, and was glad they
went on and prevailed; which, thanks be to GOD, they continue to do; as the
Reverend Mr. Woodward, who has obliged the World with a very particular
Account of the Rise and Progress of them, has lately acquainted us. And these
likewise are SOCIETIES that have proved so exeeedingly Serviceable in the Work
of REFORMATION, that they may be reckoned a chief Support to it, as our late
Great Primate Archbishop Tillotson declared, upon several Occasions, after he
had examined their Orders, and inquired into their Lives, That he thought they
were to the Church of England.

I might now give an Account of a Society of Ministers of the Church of
England, for carrying on of this Work, and another Agreement of Justices of the
Peace: But I am withheld at present by some Considerations from descending to
any further Particulars concerning them; and must content my self with saying
what will be easily allowed, That the stated Meetings of such Persons are as
proper, and may be more useful for the Promoting of this Work, than any other I
have described. For what might we not expect from the Zealous Endeavors of
these Orders of Men in this Affair? which, it is obvious, will not be employed
with so great Effect, as when they form themselves into Societies, or, at
least, have frequent and stated Times of Meeting, for the Prosecution of this
Business. It Is true, that Ministers and Magistrates have far greater
Advantages, as well as more particular Obligations, than others, (as I shall
hereafter endeavor to make appear) to be serviceable in this Work of
Reformation; but yet, when they act alone in this Contention between Virtue and
Vice tho^ they will do great good in our present Circumstances, and much more
than they will easily believe till they are heartily engaged in it; yet they
must expect to be under Disadvantage on some Occasions, as well as other single
Persons, who exert their Zeal, without a Communication with one another, and
particularly when they encounter Combinations of wicked Men, which, it is not
unlikely, will sometimes happen. Do we not see by what Methods the Men of the
World propagate Wickedness, and countermine Good Designs? Is it not by their
Clubs and Confederacies? Are we not sensible with what Advantage our Civil
Concerns are carried on by Companies and Corporations? Nay, Does not the
Account before us convince us of the great Usefulness, or rather Necessity, of
Good Men's confederaling and meeting frequently together to concert Methods, and
Encourage one another in this difficult Work of Confronting and Suppressing of
barefaced and insolent Wickedness? And that the Reason why good Men have not
sooner or more generally done it, may be, because the Children of this World
are in Mar. 16. 8.
their Generation wiser than the Children of Light. Since therefore Union and
Method seem evidently to give good Men much the same Advantage (abstracting
from the Consideration of the Goodness of their Cause, and the Divine Aid that
they may expect) in their just and brave Opposition to Profaneness and
Immoralities, against the greater Number, it is to be feared of the Wicked, as
Discipline and good Ground in War gives a small Body of Men against a very
unequal Number of those that are undisciplined, and with disadvantageous
Ground; it is highly to be wished, That not only Societies of Ministers and
Magistrates, but of all other degrees of Men, were set up in Prosecution of
this Design, in all Parts of the Kingdom, more especially in all Towns, Cities,
and Corporations. And it may charitably be hoped, that there are but few, if
any, such Places, where there are not to be found Three or Four Persons at
least, of one or other Denomination of Christians, that have a Zeal for GOD and
Religion, who may easily form themselves into a Society, which may enlarge by
degrees, and which will, probably speaking, go a great way toward the
Suppressing Public Disorders where they are; but may have a mavelous Effect,
with God's Blessing, for this End, where there is a Magistrate that makes a
Conscience of his Duty, or a Minister that incourages Reformation; as would be
manifest to any that had observed in how short a time, and to what a degree,
open Wickedness has been checked, where a zealous Minister has given himself
the Trouble, I might rather have said the Pleasure, of meeting sometimes a
Society of his Parishioners, to encourage their Zeal and Constancy in this Work
of Reformation, even where the Magistrates have been either open or secret
Enemies to it. The Advantages moreover are too many to be insisted on in this
place, for the Exercising of our own Graces, and the Confirming our Virtuous
Dispositions, by our Associating with our Fellow Christians for the Carrying on
Religious Designs, in an Age when Christian Conversation, which has an
inestimable Value with Men of Religion, is with such Difficulty met with. The
forming therefore of Good Men into such pious Combinations, for the
overbalancing those of Vice, the countermining the contrary Attempts of all
wicked Men, and recovering the Power, as well as Form of Religion, is most
earnestly recommended to all the Friends of Piety and Virtuo. And methinks it
may be expected from all, that have any sincere regard to God's Honor, their
own and their Country's Happiness, that they should exert themselves in their
several Capacities, with a noble Zeal and Emulation for the Perfecting of this
great Undertaking. And now especially the Times of Peace are returned, which we
have been told, are the Times of Reformation, surely none that carry the Face
of Christians can with Confidence offer new Excuses any longer to postpone it;
we may now hope for the Assistance of some, at least, of the Cautious and
prudent Men amongst us, who have hitherto, with great Gravity, stood Neuters in
this Affair, and that they will at last answer the Expectation of Good Men from
them, and suffer the Generations to come to call them Blessed. It Is at least to
be hoped, that if they are too Great and Wise to engage in the Work themselves,
they will not, however, obstruct it more than the open Enemies of it can do, by
their calling it an Impracticable Undertaking, whispering groundless Jealousies
of the Design, or uncharitable and disadvantageous Characters of the Persons
concerned in the Promoting it; but rather, that they will let the World see
that their Zeal is engaged in the Carrying on of wiser Methods, for the
Effecting of a National Reformation. And one would think, that the Employing
our Labor or Authority in this Noble Design, of being Instrumental in doing
Good to Multitudes of Souls, by Suppressing of National Sins, and, by
consequence, the Reviving the Power and Reputation of Religion, and thereby
Preventing National Judgments, should be more worth the Concern and Application
of Christians, and should afford a more true and solid Satisfaction than the
pursuit of our Worldly Interest or Pleasures. All indeed are not Capable of
being Serviceable in the same way; but whether it be by Executing the Laws, or
by Preaching, Discoursing, Writing, Informing, Setting up of Societies, or
otherwise contributing toward it, which way soever it be that we can further
this Glorious Work, it will, I think, be hard to find a good Excuse for any
that shall decline their Concurrence, according to their Advantages and
Opportunities, in an Undertaking which it would become the greatest Man upon
Earth to promote, which is now so far facilitated by the Schemes that are laid,
and the Methods it is put into.

We have seen some few Persons engaging in this Enterprise, before they had any
Methods to direct them, or many Examples to encourage them, encountering
Opposition in the first forming their Design, from open Enemies, and perhaps
false Friends, suffering cruel Mockings, unkind Censures, and unjust
Reproaches, and yet not giving way. We have seen them surmounting their
greatest Difficulties, so that the main brunt seems now near over, and going on
with that Resolution and Success, that the Deluge of public Wickedness is
visibly abated. We are told, that many Thousands have been brought to
Punishment for Swearing and Cursing, by their means; Seventy or Eighty Warrants
a Week having been executed on these Offenders, in and about this City only,
since the late Act of Parliament against Swearing and Cursing was made, which
has given so great and remarkable a Check to those Scandalous Sins, that our
Constables sometimes of late have found it difficult to take up a Swearer in
diverse of our Streets and Markets, where, within a few years past, horrid
Oaths, Curses, and Imprecations, were heard Day and Night; that a multitude of
Drunkards, and Prophaners of the Lord's- Day, some of whom kept, as it were,
open Markets within a few Years past, have been made Examples by their means;
that Hundreds of Disorderly Houses, which were little better than Stews, and
Nests for Thieves, Clippers and Coiners, etc. have been rooted out and
suppressed; and that some Thousands of Lewd Persons have been Imprisoned,
Fined, and Whipped; so that the Tower-End of the Town, and many of our Streets,
have been much purged of that pestilent Generation of Night-Walkers, that used
to infest them, which were a Reproach to this Noble City, and a Scandal to
Christianity; Forty or Fifty of them having been sent in a Week to Bridewell,
where they have of late received such Discipline, that a considerable Number of
them has chose rather to be Transported to our Plantations, to work there for
an honest Subsistence, than to expose themselves, by their lewd way of Living,
to Shame and Punishment, to Poverty and Disease, to all sorts of wicked
Practices, and the Danger of the Gallows, to which, in the Conclusion, they are
often, if not generally brought. And I may justly add, That far greater Things,
by the Application of the Original Society of Gentlemen, have been
accomplished, than what have yet been mentioned, and such as I am not permitted
at this time to discover. But thus much may be said, That the Endeavors of
those Gentlemen have not been consined to this City and Kingdom, but have
extended as far as Ireland, where they have had an Influence, very little, I
think, to the Honor of that Kingdom from whence it had its first Rise, of
which, since a more particular Account may be expected, I may satisfy my self,
at present, with saying in general, of my own Knowledge, That the Transactions
of Reformation here having been near Two Years since laid before some few
Persons in Ireland, and most of those (I must again observe) private Persons,
and of the lower Rank of Men, with proper Considerations to move 'em to unite
in the same Design, and Methods to pursue it with Advantage, it determined them
to engage heartily in it; and they have prosecuted it with so much Vigor, that
there are now several Societies for Reformation in the City of Dublin; which I
am assured, by diverse Accounts that I have in my Hands from thence, are
spreading into several Parts of the Kingdom, and are encouraged by his
Excellency the Earl of Galloway, one of the Lords Justices of Ireland, the
Right Reverend the Archbishop of Dublin, many of the Clergy, and the best of
the Magistrates and Gentlemen of that City: In One of which Societies, most of
the Parish-Ministers of Dublin, several of the pious Bishops, particularly the
celebrated Archbishop, and diverse other Persons of Quality, are Members; some
of whom have shown a Zeal, which if it prevailed the Three Kingdoms over, might
soon produce a Glorious Reverse of the State they are now in, and which in less
than Two Years space has succeeded, though not without such various Oppositions,
as might be expected, from Combinations of bad Men, to that degree in Dublin,
that the Profanation of the Lord's Day, by Tippling in public Houses, by
Exercising of Trade, and Exposing of Goods to Sale, is almost suppressed; that
Lewd Women are so strictly enquired after, and severely punished, that they
have Transported themselves, as in England, to our Plantations; and that
Swearing is so run down, that an Oath is rarely heard in their Streets; so that
public Disorders are remarkably cured; and, in short, Vice is afraid and
ashamed to show its head, where within a few Years past it was daring and
Triumphant.

We are likewise assured, That Scotland has concurred in these Matters, where
His Majesty's Proclamation against Profaneness and Debauchery has been issued
out in very strict terms, and His late Gracious Letter to the Parliament of
that Kingdom, takes notice of the Progress that they have made in the Forming
of Methods for the Discouraging of Vice and Irreligion, and assures them, That
it is a WORK most acceptable to him.

But to return to our own Nation. We are made acquainted, That many Societies
and Bodies of Men, of different Ranks and Persuasions, are engaged in this
Work, to which Men of Virtue, of Temper, and unblemished Reputation, may either
join themselves, according to their Quality, Circumstances, or Opportunities,
or may form themselves into new Bodies: That the public Opposition that was
made to it, which our Posterity may blush to read of, is at an end, which, it is
to be hoped, will be the last that we shall hear of in a Christian State, and
under a Protestant Government: That the City of London espouses it, where there
are Two Sermons Quarterly Preached, and diverse of them Printed, to make Men
sensible of their Obligations in this respect. And it is true also, That
Swearing is much lessened, as we have reason to believe, by the Accounts we
receive in most, if not in all Parts of the Kingdom, as other public Disorders
are in many; and that Societies for Reformation have been in diverse Places
already actually formed, and are going on in many others; as particularly in
Gloucester, Leicester, Coventry, Shrewsbury, Hull, Nottingham, Tamworth,
Newcastle, Leverpool, Chester, and several other Corporations; so that in a few
Months time, by the Methods that are now taking, there is reason to believe
that we shall hear of a very considerable Progress in this Work from all Parts
of the Nation. And now is this a Time for Men, that would be reckoned
Christians, to stand Neuters, in an Affair wherein their Religion, their
Country, and their Posterity, are so deeply concerned? Let the Men who can
contentedly see the Laws of GOD trampled upon; who can, in their ordinary
Conversation, in the Streets, and even at their own Tables, hear horrid Oaths
and Curses, nay, Men calling upon GOD for Damnation upon themselves and others;
in a word; offering high Indignities to the Glorious Majesty of their Great
Creator, consider whether the very Heathens, who would not suffer their
Artificial Deities to be affronted, or their Religion to be despised; who in
Sieges, and other Distresses from their Enemies, were more concerned for their
Images and Altars than for their own Houses, or private Affairs, do not condemn
them? Let our Learned Rabbis, the great Disputers of the World, and all that
make a Profession of Religion, but give little better account of it than by
expressing a fierce and uncharitable Heat against those that differ from them
in some things relating to Religion, but not essential to it, and wherein all
Men equally wise and good have, I doubt, never yet been fully agreed, think
seriously with themselves, whether they might not employ some share at least of
their Parts and Zeal to much better purpose, in furthering the Reformation of
Men's Lives, and of the Manners of the Nation, by the Suppressing of
Profaneness and Vice, than by raising or keeping up, with an unchristian
Temper, to the manifest Injury of the Christian Religion, which is an
Institution of Love, dangerous or unnecessary Controversies or Divisions, and
making of Proselytes to their New Opinions or Party; all Religions being, I
think, agreed, that bad Men are a Scandal to the best Religion, and that they
cannot, if they continue so, be saved in any; and consequently, that the being
instrumental in the bringing over of a few Souls to the sincere Practice of
Piety and Virtue by any Christian Methods, which those I am treating of will, I
hope, be allowed to be, is of greater Service to the Christian Religion, and
the World, than the gaining of Hundreds that are vicious to any particular
Church or Party. But can Men of Conscience satisfy themselves with complaining
of the Iniquities of the Age, and wishing for Reformation, with giving only
some good Words to these Proceedings, or even praying for God's Blessing upon
them, without doing, as they have Opportunity, what is necessary to promote
them, when, as it has been said, we have the Laws of GOD, of the Nation, and,
as we have reason to hope, the Government on our side; and moreover, so many
Examples, and so great Success, to encourage us, and have now, generally
speaking, not much more to fear than Calumnies and hard Words, and most of
those, it is to be hoped, from the Enemies of God and Goodness, which the best
of Men, and the best Designs in all Ages, have ever met with, and which, in
such a Case, it is our true Glory to suffer? No, surely this is a Time, as I
shall endeavor to make appear, for all good Men to join their Hearts and
Hands, their Interest and Authority, in this so Necessary, so Great, and so
Glorious a Work.

Having now laid before the Reader a short Scheme of this Undertaking, which
was begun with great Opposition, in a Time that was very discouraging to such
an Enterprise, and with such other circumstances of Disadvantage as new things,
be they never so wise and good, especially Attempts of this kind, generally
meet with, and yet has been advanced to such a considerable degree, from so
contemptible a Beginning, as it must appear to have had to the Wise and the
Wary among us, who do not duly consider that there is a GOD that rules in the
Kingdoms of Men, and who, as the Prophet expresses it, gives Isa. 40. 29.
Power to the faint; and to them that have no Might, increases Strength. My
next Business is to enquire, whether there are any Orders of Men among us, who
are under more particular Obligations to be Zealous, and diligent in Promoting
a public Reformation of Manners.

And, in the first place, I humbly ask leave to lay this Matter before the most
Reverend Order of the Clergy, beseeching them, with all that due Respect which
all good Men ought to have to Their High and Holy Function, to consider, if
what is endeavored to be proved to be the Common Duty of all Men, and the
Special Obligation of Kings, Governors, and Magistrates, be indeed so, it is
not the particular Province of those, who have entered into the Places of
Overseers and Watchmen, Act. 20. 28. Ezekiel. 3. 17. 18, 20.
and of whom the Blood of those that die in their Sins, if they knowingly
suffer them to sleep in them, will be required, to teach and inculcate these
Duties, as well as others. And if any of their Body, after this matter is
plainly laid before them, and they are convinced it is their Duty to be diligent
in the furthering it, wilfully neglect to excite all sorts of People,
especially those belonging to their Charge, of what Rank or Quality soever, to
do their Duty likewise in promoting, in their respective Stations, the
Execution of the Laws against Profaneness and Debauchery, they can give a good
Account of their Conduct to those of their particular Charge, who have no
concern to discharge their Duty herein, only for want of their being admonished
of it, and are not Partakers, in some degree, in the Common Guilt of the
Nation, which, as our Neglect of our Duty in this particular Instance, of not
Promoting a Reformation, will increase, so it may be a means notwithstanding
our present respite from Destruction, to draw down God's Judgments upon the
Kingdom, if we continue to make no better use of the Peace we have with our
Neighbors, than to fight with our crying Enormities against our God; which as
I think few Nations, if any, have had in these last Ages greater Reason to
dread, so, I suppose, all will grant, that none seem to have greater reason to
use all proper means to prevent, than those who expect to give Account, not
only for their own Sins, but for the Sins of so many others besides, if they
wilfully suffer them to perish in them by their refusing to use the necessary
means of preventing their living and dying in them.

I shall not, after I have humbly represented this Affair to this Sacred Order,
think sit to enquire, whether there has been any Neglect on the part of their
Body, or any one Member of it, in a matter wherein Religion is so highly
concerned: I ask leave rather to say, That I am assured, upon unquestionable
Information, that most of the Right Rever^^d the Bishops have expressed their
Approbation of the Societies of Reformation I have given an Account of; that I
have never heard of the Name of any one of these Reverend Persons that has not
done it upon an humble Application made to them for their Countenance and
Encouragement of them; and that diverse of them, to my own certain Knowledge,
have promoted them, and continue to do it, as a considerable Number of the
Clergy in and about this City, as well as in other parts of the Kingdom, have
done likewise; some of them by Preaching, and frequently meeting to consult one
another upon this Occasion; and others of them by giving Informations
themselves to the Magistrates against Profane Persons; among whom the generous
and remarkable Assistance that was given in this Affair by the two late Eminent
Divines, Dr. Horneck and Dr. Jekell, whose Deaths are so much lamented, under
the various Obstructions and Discouragements they encountered in the Prosecution
of it, which those pious Men made such dismal Reflections upon, as I shall
under our present Circumstances forbear to repeat, does demand a particular
Acknowledgement in this place, and deserves to be transmitted to after-Ages,
when the Names of such as discourage Endeavors of Reformation may either be
forgot, or be remembered with Ignominy. And I not only submit what I have said
on this Head of the Clergy, and this whole Discourse, to This Reverend Body,
which, I think, I shall never obtain of my self to Publish without the
Approbation of some of the pious Members of it; but out of a sense of my own
Defects, and the tenderest Regard I would always have to matters of Religion, I
heartily desire, if I am ever prevailed on to Publish it, a public Correction
from them of any thing I have said in these Papers through Weakness or
Inadvertency; (which, I hope, all the Advantages of the World would not have
prevailed on me, if they could have been offered me, to have said knowingly)
that may not be warranted from the Holy Scriptures, or that does give Offense
to any but those whom the Representation of their Sin, or their Duty to them,
and Religion it self offends, whose Sentiments of this Discourse as I have no
reason to ask, their Censures of it I may know how to value.

And I must the rather make this humble and solemn Address to them for a speedy
Censure of these Papers, if there is any just Occasion for it; and that at the
same time they would be pleased to put this Glorious Cause, that I have here
represented with no more skill, in a better light, which, I conceive, would
well become the most celebrated Writers of the Age to do, not only because
Errors in general, as well as Diseases, are better prevented than cured after
they are spread; but because upon a long Consideration and a full Knowledge I
have had of the Undertaking I have treated of, and of the Steps by which it
has been carried on from the very Beginning, I cannot but believe that the
Virtuous part of the Nation, when it is laid before them, will conclude that
there is abundant Reason for their Concurrence and Assistance in it, and will
think that either the Happiness or Misery of this Kingdom may with great ground
be expected from either the Success or the Discouragement that these and others
pious and just Endeavors for a National Reformation meet with. My Business in
the next place is to consider the Magistrates Obligation to be diligent in the
Execution of the Laws against Profaneness and Debauchery.

It will, I think, be allowed, That Government is of Divine Appointment, and
that the Power of Magistrates, whether it be that of the Supreme, or that of
those that are Inferior and Subordinate, is derived originally from God. St.
Paul speaking of the Magistrate, Romans 13. 4.
says, He is the Minister of God to thee for Good. There is no Power but of
God: The Romans 13. 1.
Powers that be are ordained of God. And Moses speaking to the Judges of the
People of Deuteronomy. 1. 16, 17.
Israel, says, Hear the Causes between your Brethren, and Judge righteously
between every Man and his Brother. Ye shall not respect Persons in Judgment,
but you shall hear the Small as well as the Great; you shall not be afraid of
the Face of Man, for the Judgment is God's. Take heed 2 Chronicles. 19. 6.
(said Jehoshaphat to his Judges) what ye do; for ye judge not for Man, but for
the Lord, who is with you in the Judgment. Wherefore now, let the Fear of the
Lord be upon you, take heed and do it: for there is no Iniquity with the Lord
our God, nor respect of Persons, nor taking of Gifts. Thus shall ye do in the
Fear of the Lord Ver. 9.
faithfully, and with a perfect Heart. From whence we may, I think, conclude,
without adding any further proof of what is so generally confessed, that
Magistrates do act by God's Authority, are his Ministers or Instruments, which
he makes what use of he pleases in the Governing the Natural and Rational
World; that they are to Act for his Honor, and the Good of his People; and
that He will call them to account for their Behavior in this respect.
Accordingly, for Kings, and for all that are 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.
in Authority, the Apostle does particularly direct, That Supplications,
Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made, that under them we may
lead a quiet and peaceable Life in all Godliness and Honesty For our King
therefore, and all sorts of Magistrates, does it not behove us to pray, That
God would be pleased to inspire them with Zeal for his Glory, and the Good of
his People, and particularly to direct and assist them in this necessary and
most weighty Affair of Reformation?

And as the Magistrate's Power is primarily and originally from GOD; so is the
Office and Power of Subordinate Magistrates immediately and visibly conferred
upon them as a weighty Trust, by their Prince, and their Country, which they
have an Obligation to the faithful Discharge of, in their natural Allegiance
and Fidelity; but this Obligation rises yet higher; they are bound yet closer
to the faithful Discharge of their Office by a Solemn Oath, relating to their
particular Trust, as well as by the Oath of Allegiance. Now the Obligation
being thus great and various, must, I think, necessarily draw the dreadful
Guilt of Perjury, as well as Breach of Trust, upon those, who being thus
entrusted and obliged to Execute the Laws, do wilfully neglect to do their
Duty: For a Justice of the Peace takes this Solemn Oath at his Entrance into
that Office:

That in the County of -- in all Articles in the King's Commission to him
directed, he shall do legal Right to the Poor, and to the Rich, after his
Cunning, Wit, and Power, and after the Laws and Customs of the Realm, and the
Statutes thereof made; and wherein he is first obliged to do Right, which
regards very much the Punishment of Offenders, as appears more fully in his
Commission; and this Equally reaches Rich and Poor. The whole County is
assigned in the Oath, as the Extent of his Jurisdiction, and therefore his
Authority is not confined to a part; he is not tied up to act only in any
lesser District of it; but is to issue out his Warrants against Offenders upon
Informations offered him by Persons that live never so remote from him in the
County, or for Offenses committed in any part of it; which, though it is so
obvious from the very Words both of the Oath and Commission, I thought fit to
take notice of, lest if we should have any Magistrates that should think it too
much to give themselves the Trouble to look into the Disorders of any kind that
are committed, even in their own Parishes, to suppress them when they hear or
observe them any-where else, as Swearing and Cursing, for Instance, in
Bowling-Greens, Coffee-Houses, and other public Places; Drunkenness, Lewdness,
and Profanation of the Lord's Day in the Taverns and Streets; or that should
unwillingly receive Informations from others of them, they should, in either of
these Cases, be tempted to think those worthy Magistrates too officious, and
take the Liberty to speak of them as such, who by inspecting into these
Disorders, wherever they hear of them, in any part of the County, and by
giving Encouragement to those that bring them Informations of such Offenses
(which will in consequence draw a more than ordinary Attendance upon them of
such Persons on this Occasion as live at a distance from them) will thereby
make their Unfaithfulness in their Office the more remarkable. He is obliged to
do Justice, according to the Laws, Statutes, and Customs of the Realm. He is
not then to break the Laws himself, or to suffer others with Impunity to break
them. He is to discharge his Office according to his Understanding and Ability:
But can any be supposed to be of such weak Abilities, as not to know that
Offenders ought to be punished, when legal Informations are offered them, or
when Offenses are committed before them? If then any Magistrates can discourage
those who are so much Friends to their Country, as to bring them Informations
against Offenders, can refuse to convict upon them, or can see and hear one
another break God's Laws, and the Laws of their Country, at their Diversion,
and their own Tables; What is more directly contrary to their Office and Trust?
What becomes of the Oaths that are upon them? In how many Instances do they
notoriously break them? And if the Violation of a Private Trust is justly
esteemed base and detestable, how much higher Aggravations must their Offenses
admit of, who break a Public one, so solemnly taken upon them? And certainly
Perjury, that is of so black a nature in it self, is not a less Enormity, or
less Infamous, in a Magistrate, than it is in one of an inferior Order.

The Commission for a Justice of the Peace also sets forth, That he is to
Conserve the Peace in such or such a County, and to keep, as well as cause to
be kept, all Ordinances and Statutes made for the Good of the Peace, and the
Conservation thereof, and for the Quiet, Rule and Government of His Majesty's
People, and in all and every the Articles thereof, according to the Force,
Form, and Effect thereof, to Chastise and Punish all Persons in the said County
offending against the Form of thief Ordinances and Statutes, or any of them in
the County.

It deserves our Observation, That as the Populus Romanus delegit Magistratus,
quasi Reipublicae Villicos, in quibus siqua praeterea est ars, facile patitur,
sin minus virtute eorum and innocentia contentus est, Tullii Oration cum Plan.
Roman Government, the Virtus in p^imis apud Lacedaemonios circa Magistratus
legendos ^emper spectata, quod Politicum praeceptum in quavis Republica servari
^^usu esset, Nic, Gragius de Repub, Lacedaemoniorum, p. 82, 83.
Lacedoemonian and Inter praecipuos Atheniensium Magistratus censendi sunt
annui Novemviri. Oportebat in eorum vitam inquiri, ant^quam Magistratum
capesserent, Pctitus de Legibus Atticis 236. Tantam honestatis curam his
Novemviris voluit esse Solon, ut si quis Archon vino se ingurgi^averit, capital
ei f^erit ex hac lege. (...). Jurabant in leges se esse observaturos Novemviri,
Jurisjurandum Novemvirorum. Leges observabo, quod si secus fecero, auream
statuam meam aequi ponderis pendam, Petitus de Legibus Atticis 190. (...), etc.
Herach. Pont. de Politiis Athenicnsium.
Athenian Commonwealths, provided by their Laws against ill Magistrates, kept,
when they flourished, vicious Men out of their Magistracy, and entrusted those
with the Execution of their Laws that would show such a Behavior to others as
they expected from them. So our Government hereby strictly requires the
Magistrates to give a good Example. It Is a mighty force that Example has; one
can hardly conceive any thing, on the one hand, so foolish and unaccountable;
and on the other, so difficult and brave, as that Men may not in a great degree
be led to by it. Good Example has often the advantage of Humane Precept, of
Admonition, or Reproof, and sometimes of the Exercise of public Justice, or
private Authority, which, besides that they are not always practicable, have
often too little Influence upon the Mind; but Good Example has a great and
secret Charm to draw others to Imitation. It attracts and assimilates by a
Power of which we cannot give a full Account, though by showing Virtue as it
were visibly, it has undeniably thereby a great Advantage of other Methods of
Instruction; Segnius irritant animos dimissa per aures, quam quae occulis
subjecta fidelibus.
those things being allowed to make a much deeper and longer Impression upon
our Minds that are represented to us by our Eyes, than those that are admitted
by our Ears. Precepts, though they are in the general not only highly useful,
but necessary, are not always clear, and when they are understood, the Efficacy
of them, of Admonition, and Reproof, seems often to be more or less according
to the Example of them that give them; such Persons are looked on as a Reproach
to Religion, and unquestionably do often give bad Men a further Aversion and
Prejudice to it, that do not practice themselves what they recommend in their
Discourses. As the Christian Religion does therefore strictly oblige all its
Proselytes to show a good Example, by a strict Observance of its Precepts; so
it does more especially inculcate upon those whose particular Office it is to
teach others their Duty, their endeavoring to persuade them to it by their own
good Example, as well as by their Doctrine, that they may ^ Tim 4. 16.
thereby both save themselves, and those that hear them; and when this is
wanting, when they say, but do not, how exceedingly mischievous Matt. 23. 3.
the consequences of it are, highly deserves serious Consideration. The Heathen
Moralists could observe the great Mischief that was done the World by Mercenary
Masters of Precept, (...).
by whom they meant those that endeavored to talk elegantly of just things,
but not to do them; and that it was not the Discourses, but the good Examples;
not the Schools, but the Manners of Philosophers, that made their best
Disciples what they were, and so much celebrated. I know (says Plato) Socrates
by his good Works, more than by his good Words; (...). Gorg. fol. 460.
and he makes it a necessary quality of a good Orator, that he himself be Just
and Virtuous. (...). Stobaeus, fol. 49.
And accordingly Socrates his Master being asked what he thought to be the best
Instruction, answered, Eupraxie, or well-doing. Example has indeed such a
power, that Men are in a great degree too often such as those are with whom
they converse, as even the Proverbs of many Nations have observed: So that he
that gives a good Example, though he be but a private Person, does, in truth, a
public Service, and lays an Obligation upon the Age he lives in: But the good
Examples of Governors and Magistrates, (I need not add, of Ministers) has a
far greater force of Persuasion; their Virtues are generally derived, by
Imitation, into the Manners of the People. Quales enim summi civitatis viri
fuerint, talis civitas erit, Claudianus. Ut enim vitiis and sceleribus
Magistratuum infici solet and corrumpi tota Respublica, ita corrigi and
emendari. (...), Isocrates ad Nicoclem. Nec ignores totius civitatis mores ad
exemplum Magistratuum conformari.
How fatal an Influence more especially must then the vicious Examples, which
the corrupt Nature of Man does with so much Ease comply with, of Superiors, of
Persons in Authority, whose particular Province it is to look to the Execution
of the Laws, have upon those below them? These Men carry not only those of
their Neighborhood, but a great part of the Counties they live in, after them;
many of whom, it is very obvious, are apt to think it an Excuse, if not a
Warrant, to transgress after their Example. The Commission of a Justice of
Peace does therefore with great reason tell him, That he is to keep himself, as
well as cause to be kept, all the Ordinances and Statutes, etc. As his giving a
good Example is a likely way to procure a due regard to his Office, to maintain
his Authority, and, with the Exercise of it, to reform Others; so, on the
contrary, his giving a bad Example is as effectual a course to teach others to
break the Laws, and to bring a Contempt upon his Office, and the Government it
self, as can easily be thought of. I needed not to have been thus long upon
this Head of Example, and particularly the malignant Influence of the bad
Examples of Magistrates and great Men, if most Ages did not abound with such
unhappy Instances; and if this Nation in particular had not felt so much the
fatal Effects of them, as may be some Excuse for my insisting on it. But to go
on: Besides the Mischief that is done by the vicious Examples of Magistrates,
With what Reason can we expect, that those that make no Conscience to break the
Laws, should diligently and conscientiously Execute the Laws upon others? And
supposing such Magistrates should sometimes, either out of a fear of the
Inspection of the Government into their Behavior, in the Reign of a Prince
that is zealous in the Discouraging of Vice; or out of a desire of keeping up
their Reputation with better Men, be sometimes inclined to punish such Offenses
in others, as they are themselves guilty of, consciousness of their own Faults
will, when they act upon no better and firmer Principles, deprive them of
Courage, and be very apt, upon many Occasions, to draw them back from the
Punishing of others; especially when the Offenders are either their Superiors
or Equals; whereas the Law knows no respect of Persons, and they whose Business
it is to Execute it, must do it without Distinction or Partiality. Their
Commission tells them, that they are to chastise and punish all Persons in the
said County offending. And can any that consider this, That we live under a
Christian Government, and that the Apostle acquaints us, That the Magistrate is
the Minister of God for Good; That he bears Romans 13. 3. Ver. 4.
not the Sword in vain; Is a Revenger to execute Wrath upon him that does Evil;
and that Christians should have a far greater Concern for the Honor of God,
than for the Honor of their Prince, their own Reputation or Estates, but think
that the Laws that relate to Piety and Virtue are to be chiefly regarded by the
Magistrate, that his principal Care should be applied to the restraining Men,
even those of the highest Rank, from openly breaking those Laws, by a strict
and impartial Execution of them, since the Reasonableness of the Punishing of
Men for the Violations of Religion seems to have been evident by the Light of
Nature? It being, I think, a just Observation, which I have somewhere met with,
of a Heathen Philosopher, That though several Nations do appoint several
Punishments for the Violation of Religion, yet it does not in any Country go
wholly unpunished. No Men's Quality ought to shelter them from Punishment in
this Case; Even Privilege of Parliament does not give those who are allowed it
for the Service of their Country, the mischievous Liberty to trample upon the
Laws of God and their Country, nor will excuse Magistrates from acting
according to their Oaths in these Matters. Charity and good Manners would
forbid us, if such a Case had never been heard of, or was like to happen, to
suppose that this Privilege should ever be pretended on such an Occasion by any
one of those Bodies, who as they Receptumque omnium pene Gentium, temporumque
memoria, ut ad legum latarum observantiam invitarentur inferioris sortis
homines, exemplo potentum, qui primi eas custodire cogebantur, and praesertim
illi ipsi qui eas tulissent, Tit. Live. 3. Decad. lib. 8. Magistratus,
Gubernatores, Regesque obediunt quoque ipsi legibus, id est, rectae rationi,
Diodorus Siculus. Si quid injungere inferiori velis, prius in te ac tuos
recipias, necesse est, si ipse jus statueris, quo facilius omnes obedientes
habeas, Val. Max. lib. 8. cap 6. Tit. 3. Cum leges praescripsisti aliis,
praescripsisti and tibi; leges enim Imperator fert quas ipse custodiat.

Praeceptum salubre Pittaci sapientis apud Ausonium: Pareto legi quisque legem
sanxeris.


make Laws against Debauchery and Profaneness, ought likewise to endeavor, by
their own Exemplary Behavior, to promote Piety and good Manners, to give Laws
of Civility to the rest of the Nation, and to add, That if these things do
happen, good Magistrates, it is to be hoped, will act as become them. And there
is, I think, no doubt but the bringing to legal Punishment a Man of Title or
Authority, that makes use of his Power or Interest to be more vicious, and to
do greater Mischief to the World than others, is a greater Service to Religion
and our Country, and more highly honorable among Men, than the Punishing of a
private Person, perhaps than many poor Creatures, who, as has been long
observed, generally suffer the Extremity of the Law for such Offenses as their
Necessities are a Temptation to them, though not a Reason for them, to commit,
when great Men, that cheat whole Provinces, and bid defiance to Sacred things,
go unpunished, if they are not rewarded. Si quis convictus furti esset apud
Locrenses, effodiebantur ei oculi. Contigit autem ut Zaleuci filius furti reus
convitiaretur, cui quum Locrenses poenam remitterent, non tulit id pater, sed
sibi unum, filio alterum voluit erui oculum.

Legem quandam Tenediis tulit Tennes, qua licebat, Adulterum deprehensum securi
necare: Quum itaque silius ejus esset captus, interrogante regem qui coeperat,
Quid ei faciendum? Respondebat, Lege utendum: quapropter and nummo ejus ab una
part securis excusa, ab altera facies viri and mulieris uno collo juncta.


If History can tell us of Heathens that could do and suffer so much for the
Maintenance of the Laws of their Country, shall it be supposed that the Fear of
disobliging a Man of Interest, that has a swelling Title, one that is, I
doubt, improperly called a Man of Honor, who affronts and contemns Religion,
should keep Christian Magistrates from Executing the Laws of their Country,
that are made for the Support of Religion, and to which they are Sworn. And
yet, as unworthy and unaccountable as such a Behavior may appear to be, even
by the Light of Nature, it were well, if for the Honor of Christian
Magistrates, nay, even of Humane Nature, that it could be denied, Pudet haec
opprobria nobis, and dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
that many, I am unwilling to say most of the Magistrates in the late Reigns,
lived and died with their Commissions, without putting any one of the Laws,
that our more virtuous Ancestors had left us against Profaneness and
Debauchery, in Execution, which some of the worthy Magistrates of this Reign,
making a Conscience of Discharging the Oaths they have taken, and the Trust
that is reposed in them, by their Personal Watchfulnss and Diligence, as well
as by their giving due Encouragement to those, who, without having Oaths to
oblige them, or Rewards to encourage them, bring them Informations of the
Breaches of those Laws, which were grown almost obsolete and useless, have, to
their great Honor, so successfully done, with such Opposition and Difficulty;
and not only with greater Clamor from hardened Offenders, but with more
Reflection from too many others, than they might have met with if they had been
breaking them in the most impudent manner, had been making Attempts to destroy
them. To prevent therefore, for the future, the Mischief that this Nation may
otherwise fall under, as it has done, by the Unfaithfulness of Magistrates, it
may deserve Consideration, whether it would not be highly advisable, that,
Cogunt eos qui Magistratu abierint, apud Censores edere and exprimere quid in
Magistratu gesserint, Gothofredus de duodecim Tabularum Fragmentis, p. 66, 67.
as we are told, the Romans, for this reason, ordered their Magistrates to give
an Account of their Diligence, for the Maintenance of the Laws, to their
Censorum Officium erat describere facultates cujusque Civis, observare
singulorum hominum mores and vitam, tollere quoque omnia quae probitati morum
pestem and perniciem illatura videbantur, Rosinus de Antiquitatibus Romany,
fol. 520, Censores mores populi regunto. Haec detur cura Censoribus,
quandoquidem eos in Republica semper volumus esse, Cicero de Legibus, fol. 340.
Censors, a chief part of whose Office it was, to look to a Reformation of
Manners; and as our Magistrates are, by the late Act of Parliament against
Swearing and Cursing, required to keep Lists of those Persons that they have
convicted of those Offenses, and to return them to the Sessions; our
Magistrates should be likewise further obliged to bring in to our Judges of
Assize, or to the Quarter Sessions, Lists of such as they have convicted upon
all the Statutes against Profaneness and Debauchery, which Method will, I
humbly conceive, not only be effectual for the quickening the Diligence of
Magistrates, but give a just Terror to Offenders, and will afford the
Government a means of knowing what Magistrates are Unfaithful in their Office,
and deserve Discountenance and Punishment; and on the contrary, who they are
that most Honorably discharge their Trusts, do the greatest Service to their
Country, and deserve the highest Regard from it. His autem duobus, praemiis and
poena, salus Reipublicae quamplurimum continetur.
And can any, unless they are faithful and zealous Ministers of the Gospel, be
supposed to deserve more Respect than those Magistrates that conscientiously
apply themselves to the Suppressing of Vice and Profaneness, and to the
Promoting of Religion? As the doing of this is, I conceive, the greatest
Benefit of Magistracy, and may be supposed, as has been shown, to be a great
End for which it was appointed, so it cannot, I think, be doubted, but God's
Blessing may attend his Ordinance, the Magistrates zealous and united
Endeavors for this purpose, so that they may succeed to the Spiritual good of
particular Persons, as well as to the good of the Public; that as Afflictions
are often sent by Him, to awaken Men out of their Lethargy in their vicious
Courses, and in the nature of them tend to that end, the legal Corrections of
Offenders, which may be looked on as Afflictions, may, with God's Blessing,
work the same happy Effect upon them; and the rather, since they are the
immediate and sensible Effects of their Sins; and of this, we are told, there
has been so many happy Instances since the beginning of these Transactions, as
may be sufficient, without other Considerations, to encourage the Magistrates
Diligence: But when this fails of the desired Success upon particular Persons,
yet it is a vast Advantage to the Cause of Religion in general, to keep the
Multitude, by the strict and exemplary Punishment of some Offenders, from the
public Commission of such Scandalous Sins as wast the Conscience, affront
Religion, and directly tend to bring it into Contempt, that, as the Scripture
expresses it, All Israel may hear, and fear, Deuteronomy. (...). (...).
and do no more any such Wickedness. For considering the Original Corruption of
our Nature, which is generally more depraved by our Education in a degenerate
Age; that being thus depraved and weakened, we find it no very easy work to
resist Temptations to Sins, to which we have either habituated our selves, or
have a natural propensity, when they are naked and alone; and that it is much
more difficult to encounter those Sins when Temptations to them are made
stronger by the bad and eminent Examples which are almost everywhere to be
seen in our Commerce with the World, there being but few that we meet with that
do not recommend one Vice or other by their Example to our Imitation, and
(which is, I think, still worse) most of those not such as profess themselves
Enemies of Religion, but that pretend themselves Christians, entertain hopes of
receiving the Benefits of Religion, and attend its Ordinances with Allowance,
as often as they think it for their Interest or Reputation to do so;
considering, I say, these things, have we not great reason to fear, that most
Men will continue to go over to the major Party, that triumph in Wickedness,
and that few will have the Courage and Bravery to join with the lesser and too
much despised Party of Virtue, to go against the Stream of a Debauched Age,
(which, for ought I can see, there is greater likelihood that it should still
grow more strong and furious, than that it should abate) till frequent and
public Examples of Vice are taken out of public View by either the Execution
of our Civil Laws, or by the Revival of the ancient Discipline of the Church.
Seneca could, it seems, observe, That it was enough to shake the Resolution of
a Socrates, or a Cato, to bear up against and stem Vice, when it becomes so
general and fashionable, that it presses upon us with a kind of public
Authority. And though Christians have a clearer Revelation than those Heathens
had of their Duty, higher Obligations, nobler Motives, and greater Assistances
to perform it, yet, I conceive, our Religion does not teach us, nor our own
Experience of Humane Frailty does not encourage us to make the way to our Duty
and Happiness, as difficult as we can. It Is true, as may be objected, that Men
are by no means to be supposed Religious, who are restrained from their Vices
only by sense of Shame, or fear of Humane Punishment; but yet they must be
thought to be in a much fairer way of being so under those Restraints, than
they would be without them. By their being kept, by Humane Laws, from an
Indulgence of their vicious Inclinations, they may in time find the Pleasure
and the Advantage of the Restraint: And bad Examples, that abound in most
places, which I take to be the great Occasion of Sin, being by this means taken
away, Vice will become Scandalous, and Virtue will be in proportion esteemed
fashionable; and thus, I think, very great Points are gained. For when Men that
are vicious in their Inclinations, and even those that are grown old in
Sensuality, see that Religion gives Men that Esteem and Advantage as Debauchery
and Irreligion has done within our Memory; and they find that the Stream is
turned, and bears hard against them, that they cannot commit their Disorders
with Impunity, nor without Shame; and moreover, Temptations to them are very
much taken out of the way, then they will take some pains to be Virtuous, at
least to appear in the Dress of Virtue; then may we expect that such Men will
begin to enquire into the Nature and Reasons of Religion, and when they find,
by a sober Advertence to its Proposals, (which they will now make without
Prejudice,) and by some Experience they will have of the happy Effects of it,
by their endeavoring to imitate it, that it prohibits us those things that
would be most highly injurious to us, and allows a Satisfaction to our rational
Appetites; that it has such Excellencies as outbid and put out of countenance
all the Advantages that the World can offer; that it fortifies us against the
cross Occurrences and Calamities, the Changes and Storms of Life, and the Fears
of Death, disarms it of its Stings and Terrors: to say no more, that it
silences the bitter Remonstrances and stinging Reproaches of Conscience,
delivers us from Plagues and Fears, Confusion and Sorrow, from the tormenting
Guilt, and the cruel Usurpation and Outrages of our Lusts and Passions, and
gives us in Exchange the noble Pleasure of the Victory over our selves, who are
our worst Masters, the Joys of Innocence, the Triumphs of a good Conscience,
and the Ecstasies of Heavenly Hopes, and directs us to the Regions of Bliss, to
Joys unspeakable and everlasting: Then may it be that the good Dispositions,
which we may call the Seeds of Virtue, which seemed before as it were choked
in some with ill Habits, may be awakened, and revive; and that others, who had
some weak Inclinations to Religion, but had not strength enough to bear the
Contempt that now too often, if not generally attends the sincere Practice of
it, to go in an untrodden way, against the Tyranny of Custom and Example, will
take courage: Then may we hope to see Virtue, that has been so long slighted
and oppressed, drawn out of its Obscurity, delivered from that Contempt which
the Prevalency and Insolence of Sin has flung upon it, and imbittered it, be
admired, embraced, and enthroned. So that the Magistrates taking away out of
public View Examples of Profaneness and Debauchery, by a strict Execution of
the Laws, seems as proper, if not as necessary a means for the keeping of Vice
from the further spreading its Contagion, and the retrieving of Virtue, as the
preventing of those that have the Plague upon them from mixing with those that
are not infected, and shutting of them up is necessary to the stopping the
Raging of that Distemper; and as it is not to be doubted, that where those that
have the Plague visibly upon them, are allowed to converse promiscuously with
the Sound, even to walk publicly in the Streets, it must be a certain sign
that the Distemper is Epidemical, that there is little hopes of putting a stop
to it; or that those whose proper Business it is to shut up, and take care of
the Diseased, are themselves infected with the Distemper; so it must in like
manner be thought to be when there is no care taken of the moral Diseases of a
State, when public Profaneness and Vice not only go unpunished by the
Magistrate, but are triumphant. From hence therefore it is evident, that such
Magistrates as diligently discharge their Office, are not only instrumental in
doing good to particular Persons, but to the Public, and may be so of a
General Reformation, and do therein what we have ground to believe is highly
acceptable to God; for thus says God by the Prophet, Them that honor me 1 Samuel ^. 30.
I will honor; and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed. And
accordingly we are told in the Holy Scriptures how acceptable to God the Zeal
of Phinehas was, in Executing of Judgment upon Zimri and Cosbi; Behold, I give
unto him my Covenant Numb. 25. 12, 13.
of Peace, and he shall have it, and his Seed after him, even the Covenant of
an Everlasting Priesthood, because he was Zealous for his God, etc. And the
Psalmist Psalm. 106. 31.
tells us, That it was accounted to him for Righteousness unto all Generations
for evermore.

But now since His Majesty's late Proclamation, and the Address of the House of
Commons to His Majesty, do not only give us too great reason to fear, that all
Magistrates will not duly consider this as they ought, but plainly tell our
Magistrates, That their Negligence and Unfaithfulness in their Office is the
great Cause of the Debauchery and Profaneness of the Kingdom: It may not be
indecent or improper in this place to show, in some Instances, how Magistrates
may be liable to this Imputation. And first, such Magistrates as can take such
Solemn Oaths, and accept of such Trusts, without any serious Intention to
discharge them, who, though they are not vicious themselves, can observe, without
any concern, the Breaches of God's Laws; nay, in the course of many Years do
not exercise their Authority, by any one single act, for the Punishing and
Suppressing of the horrid Indignities that are daringly and almost in all
Places offered to the Great GOD of Heaven and Earth, at the same time that they
are very sensible of, and do highly resent any Affronts that are offered their
Prince, and even their own Persons: Or those that are so wonderfully gentle and
flexible, so over run with Pity, that they can discharge Impious and Debauched
Wretches upon any common Pre-tences, their Cries or Complaints, or the
scandalous Intercessions of their powerful Advocates, though frequently brought
before them, and often with great difficulty by faithful Officers, or zealous
Informers. As the inflicting of Punishment on such Offenders is what
Magistrates are strictly obliged to, and is moreover what a just Compassion to
Criminals and the Community do loudly call for: So, on the contrary, this
Gentleness to them, which I have described, is a great Injustice, and may, I
think, be reckoned among those Mercies that Solomon tells us are cruel. Sicut
est miserico^^a puniens, ita est crudclita^ parcens.
It must at first naming appear to thinking Men a foolish and criminal Pity, a
great Cruelty to the Offenders themselves, and the Community. To the Offenders
themselves, who by being suffered to pass unpunished in their wicked Courses,
generally go on, frequently grow obstinate in them, and often bring on
themselves, with the Permission, or by the Judgment of God, far greater
Sufferings in this World than the legal Punishment of them would have amounted
to; the Ruin of their Estates, Families, Health, a sudden or a scandalous
Death by public Justice, and without Repentance, Everlasting Destruction in
the World to come; all which the timely and wholesome Punishment of them by the
Magistrate might have been a means of preventing. Clementiores Iege judices
esse non oportet.
But this Gentleness is a Cruelty and great Injustice to the Community; for
hereby public Justice is obstructed and triumphed over, Magistracy is
despised, the Government it self is disparaged Legum ac Magistratuum contemptum
sequuntur populi seditiosae voces, and adversus Principes ipsos conjurationes
ac defectiones, Bodin. Rep. Lib. 3. c. 1.
and weakened, National Guilt, which calls for National Punishment, is
contracted; those that are either already actually vicious, or that have
vicious Inclinations, are encouraged to continue or to engage in ill Courses,
which the Body of the People groan under the sad Effects of, by the continual
Sufferings of one kind or other that are by this means brought upon them: And
thus other Men's Sins seem to be made, in some sense, the Sins of Magistrates,
according to that known Saying, That he that permits Offenses to be committed,
which he has Power and Opportunity to prevent, does in some sort command them
to be done; or in Scripture Phrase, Magistrates hereby seem to be Partakers in
others Sins. Out of a sense whereof, a former Prince of this Nation is reported
to have said, upon his hearing that a Person whom he had pardoned for one
Murder, against the express Word of God, had committed another, That he
himself Murdered the second Genesis 9. 6.
Person, by Pardoning the Offender for his first Offense. Such Magistrates then
as these are plainly accessory to the Debauchery of the Nation; as, in the next
place, those must be thought to have been, if there has been any such who have
been so far from applying themselves, as their Oaths oblige them, to the
Execution of the Laws against Profaneness and Vice, that they have used their
Skill and Diligence to discourage and hinder those of their own Body in doing
their Duty, who have had the Honesty and Zeal to discharge it, by making it
troublesome and difficult to them, by mustering up, upon Occasion, fallacious
Arguments, even the common Excuses of Criminals against their Prosecution and
Punishment. As for Instance; If they should have urged against the Punishing of
Men for Swearing and Cursing, that it is too severe to make Men Examples for
Words, which, though they should not be used, may fall from them unawares,
without an ill Intention, and without Injury, no Man being supposed to be the
worse for another Man's Profanely wishing him Damnation; and if Men are
accustomed to such Language, or likewise to Drunkenness or Lewdness, it is
difficult to break Habits, especially of such Vices to which we have
Temptations from our corrupt Nature; and therefore to punish Gentlemen for
these Offenses, seems to be ill Breeding, as well as Severity, and to tend
moreover to the destroying of Conversation, and to the making of Life an
insipid thing; and to execute the Laws against Vice and Profaneness upon Men
of an inserior Rank, is to disable them to pay Taxes, for the Support of the
Government, the Restraining more especially of some of them from frequenting of
Alehouses and Taverns on the Lord's Day, and others of them from the
Permitting of Tippling in those Houses, is the direct way to lessen His
Majesty's Revenue arising by Excise, etc. If such Arguments as these should
have been made use of by Magistrates in this, or in the former Reigns, to
obstruct the Suppression of these Enormities, it will be readily confessed by
Men of any virtuous Principles, That such Men plainly fall under the Charge of
being a great Cause of the Debauchery of the Nation. But having been led
besides my Intention to name these fallacious and scandalous Arguments, and
particularly the last and most specious of them that concerns the Excise, I ask
leave of my Reader, lest we should have any such Men among us as should be so
overrun with Concern for the Supplies of the Government as to have little or
no Concern for their Duty to their God, or Regard to his Providence overruling
Kingdoms, and should not therefore be sensible of either the Impiety or
Absurdity of these Arguments, to put such in mind, That if the poorer sort of
Men are allowed to spend all, or a great part of their Money in Taverns and
Alehouses, they will not be in a very good Condition to maintain their
Families, or to pay Taxes, which such Men are, upon this Occasion, I doubt,
chiefly concerned about; or that if Men of a Superior Rank have Money enough to
maintain their Families, and discharge their other Obligations, and to spare,
and they have no better Inclinations than to carry it to those Houses, they
have time enough to spend it in them on the other six days of the Week, without
doing it upon the Lord's Day, to the Neglect of their Duty to their Families,
and the manifest Danger of the Ruin of their own Souls; or that, lastly, if a
considerable Number of such Houses, many of which are Stews or Receptacles for
High-way-Men, Coiners, and Pick-Pockets, were suppressed, as they ought to be
by Law, we should therein act agreeably to the common Reason of Mankind, as
well as to the Wisdom of our Ancestors, who, from a sense of the great Mischief
that is done the Public, by suffering an unnecessary Number of Public Houses;
the true and reasonable Design and Uses whereof are, as is observed in the
Preamble of one of our Statutes, for the Entertainment 1 Jac. Reg. cap. 9.
of Travelers, and for the Convenience of Day-Labourers, and poorer Persons,
and not for a Refuge for idle and vicious People, thought it necessary to
discourage the Increase, and to restrain the excessive Number of them by the
Laws made for this purpose: If this, I say, was 11 Hen. 7. cap. 2. 5 and 6 Ed.
6. cap. 25.
now done, there would be enough left as might be sufficient not only to answer
the reasonable Uses of them, but to ruin, as it is not, I think, to be doubted
they actually do, many more Families than are supported by them; and the
Persons that keep such disorderly Houses, as they might be much more honestly
employed, so more usefully to the Public, in some other way of Living than in
this Employment, which seems, above most others, destructive to it. From a
Consideration whereof, we may suppose it was, that our late Gracious Queen, in
the Absence of the King, did signify by the Right Honorable the Lord
Chancellor of England, to the Justices of Middlesex, whom his Lordship ordered
to wait on him upon this Occasion, (as by their printed Order made in pursuance
of it may appear) That it was Her Majesty's Pleasure that they should use their
utmost Diligence to prevent the Frequenting of Alehouses and Taverns on the
Lord's Day, as well out of time of Divine Service as in, by putting the Laws
made against Tippling 1 Jac. c. 9. 1 Jac. c. 4. 21 Jac. c. 7. 1 Car. c. 4. 4
Jac. c. 5.
in those Houses in strict Execution, which they are since put in mind of by
His Majesty's late Proclamation. But such Objections as these have so little
appearance of common sense, and less of a good meaning in them, that they do
not deserve a more particular Confutation; and as they serve as well for the
not Punishing Perjury, Bribery, etc. so they would be with much more Decency
offered, and one would hope sooner to hear of them urged, under a Heathen
Government, than in a Protestant Country, and especially under the Reign of a
Prince that has declared that he desires his Government should be supported by
the Virtues, and not the Vices of his People. If therefore such Arguments as
these should be used in this Reign, especially by Magistrates, What an
Indignity would thereby be offered to the King, and to the Nation? His Majesty
has not surely gone through so many Years Fatigues, and exposed Himself to so
many Personal Dangers by Land and Sea, and the Nation has not lost so much
Blood, and spent so many Millions for the securing of our Liberties, and the
obtaining a Peace with our Neighbors, that bad Men may have the Liberty to
Blaspheme the God of Heaven, and by their crying Sins to provoke Him to destroy
us; to fling Contempt upon Religion, and insult over our Laws, and to ruin us
as well as themselves, under the false and scandalous Pretenses that we shall
be, by their Impunity, the better enabled to pay off the Debt that is upon the
Nation; that His Majesty's Revenue will be increased by the Increase of
Drunkenness, Profanation of the Lord's Day, etc. If we should have any
Magistrates who should thus wildly argue, to hinder the Prosecution of such
Offenders; and if this Frenzy should thereby prevail, What an infatuated Nation
must we be thought to be? But supposing that we are not in danger of
Magistrates, especially in this Reign, that shall thus abuse their Authority to
the vilest Purposes, by making it a Covert for acting the basest things, what
shall we think, in the next place, of such Magistrates, if we should have any
of them, who, when their Commission tells them that they are to keep the Laws,
as well as cause them to be kept, should frequently and openly break them, by
whose bad Examples Multitudes may be led into vicious Courses, or confirmed in
them, and by it and their Unfaithfulness in their Office, (which I take to be
generally a Consequence of the other) a Nation may be drawn into Ruin, instead
of being reformed by them? May not such Magistrates be justly charged with
being a great Cruse of the Debauchery of the Nation? And what a load of Guilt
must thereby lie upon them? Unhappy Men, that when they have so many Sins of
their own, they will by this means contract so terrible an Addition to them.
History may, I think, tell them of more than one Unfaithful Magistrate who have
been flayed, and whose Skins have served to cover the Bench or Place where they
sat: But what is this Punishment to that which an Unfaithful Magistrate has
reason to fear in the next World, though he meets with none in this? Supposing
then from His Majesty's Proclamation, and the Address of the late House of
Commons, that there may have been, within our Memory, some such Magistrates as
these, does it not behove such Men speedily to lay to heart the dreadful Sin of
their having been Promoters of the Devil's Kingdom, and of public Ruin? And I
need not surely tell them, that it is not enough for them to be sensible of
their Guilt and Danger, to be sorry for the great Mischief they have done their
Country, without heartily endeavoring, as they have opportunity, to retrieve
it by their future Diligence and contrary Behavior. The Nature of distributive
Justice, which their Office acquaints them with, requires a Man to repair the
Injuries he has done to any. This is so stated a Rule among Divines, in the
various kinds of known and wilful Injuries we may do to the Souls and Bodies,
Estates and Reputation of our Neighbors; and is so generally acknowledged,
that I shall not labor to prove it. If then it is allowed, that all sorts of
wilful Injuries that we do our Neighbors, without Repentance for them, expose
us to the Justice of God; and that our Repentance is not in ordinary Cases
reckoned sound and complete, unless we endeavor, when it is in our power, to
repair the Injuries we have done; Can such Men be imagined so blindly partial
to themselves, as not to think, when they have publicly dishonored God, have
drawn, by their wicked Examples, Numbers of Men into Sin, or confirmed 'em in
it, have made use of their Authority to patronize Vice, (and perhaps to
discredit and oppose just Endeavors of Reformation) in Contempt of their Oaths
and Trusts; and have thereby done so much Injury to a Kingdom, that they are
not obliged, for the removing the load of Guilt that is upon them, the
obtaining Forgiveness from God, a well-grounded Peace in their own Minds, and
Esteem from Men, sincerely to endeavor to repair the Injuries they have done
Religion, their Neighbors, or their Country, by their future Care and
Diligence? And till they do give the World some proof of this, they will not
take it amiss if we do not think, that their late Representatives in Parliament
have put them under too heavy a Charge; and if we say that this is so very
Great, that though we are sure that the Christian Religion is the best Religion
in the World, yet it so much condemns such Practices, that such as are guilty
of them are a dishonor to their Profession, that we reckon honest Heathens are
not the worst sort of Men; or rather, that there are few, if any, worse than
corrupt and unfaithful Magistrates. And therefore, methinks, though such
Magistrates were deaf to all Counsel, were so given over to a Spirit of
Slumber, that no Motives that have been offered them from Religion will make
any such Impression upon them, as to awaken them to a sense of their Sin and
Danger, if they have yet any thing of the Modesty of Men remaining, Shame might
oblige them to a better Behavior; that they should not be able to look a Man
in the Face that has a Love to God and his Country; but more especially, that
they should be in the greatest Confusion to hear in our Churches, if they
should come there, the King's Proclamation Four times in the Year, charging
them with being the great Cause of the Increase of Profaneness and Vice in the
Nation. It has been generally thought an Indication of a good and generous
Mind to desire an honest Reputation among Men; and, on the contrary, a sign of
a base Soul wholly to despise it; on which Consideration Solon might well
presume in the Laws he gave the Athenians, That he that has no Value for his
Reputation, will have little or no Regard to the public Interest: For how can
it be reasonably imagined, that he should have a tender sense of the Honor or
Interest of his Country, who has no sense of his own Honor and greatest
Interest, but that he will sacrifice them upon Occasion? Indeed, he that has
neither regard to Conscience, nor sense of Shame, seems not only in great
danger of not being reduced to Virtue by any common Methods, but to be lost to
almost all good Purposes, to be unfit for common Intercourses with Men, but
much more unfit to be honored and entrusted with the Care of the Execution and
Maintenance of the Laws, wherein the Religion, Inter omnia quae Rempublicam
ejusque felicitatem conservant, quid utilius, quid praestantius quam viros ad
Magistratus gerendcs eligere, summa prudentia and virtute praeditos? quique ad
honores obtinendos non ambitione, non largitionibus, sed virtute and modestia
sibi parent aditum.
the Honor and Prosperity of the Nation is so highly concerned: And therefore
I submit it to the Judgment of those who are more especially concerned to
consider of these important Matters, whether it is not highly to be wished,
that effectual Care may be taken for the preventing the fatal Consequences of
such Men's obtaining, in any future Reign, Commissions of this kind,
particularly by disabling any to hold them after they are convicted a certain
number of times of the Violations of the Laws which they are entrusted to
execute. For if we enquire into the Reasons of the Happiness of most, if not
all of those Nations, who have arrived at the greatest pitch of Glory and
Prosperity, we shall, I believe, have a general Consent, That the Diligence and
Faithfulness of Magistrates have been one of the greatest Causes of it,
unquestionably far more instrumental therein than good Vere dici potest
Magistratum legem esse loquentem, legem autem mutum esse Magistratum.
Magistratibus igitur opus est, sine quorum prudentia and diligentia civitas non
potest stare, Cic. de Leg. p. 232.
Laws, which, we know, are but dead Letters without the Magistrates Execution
of them. (...). Plato de Legibus, Lib. 12. fol 951.

(...). lb. f 959.


And therefore Plato, in his Commonwealth, appointed that the Conservators of
the Laws, whose chief Care was to promote Virtue, should be such Men as were
Eminent for Virtue, and Cum leges omnes vel optimae absque probatissimis
Magistratibus mortuae sint, Magistratus autem optimi vel absque legibus
scriptis ipsi sunt divae leges, merito Plato non in condendis Legibus, sed
formandis Magistratibus omni diligentia elaboravit.
more applied himself to the Forming of Magistrates than Laws. And accordingly
'twas wisely observed by Cicero, That if Magistrates keep the Laws themselves,
they had little more to wish for. And by the Famous Athenian Lawgiver, That
Magistrates ought to Obey the Laws, as well as the People the Magistrates, that
a Government may be lasting Indeed we cannot easily conceive how any Nation can
be long happy without good Magistrates: So that it is with great Reason that our
Church directs us to pray, That all that are put in Authority may truly and
indifferently minister Justice, to the Punishment of Wickedness and Vice, and
to the Maintenance of God's true Religion and Virtue; and that we esteem those
that thus discharge their Duty as great Blessings to their Country, and may
praise God for them; and, on the contrary, that we think that those unhappy
Men, who under the Obligations of Oaths and Trusts have neglected or opposed
the Execution of the Laws for the Punishment of Wickedness and Vice, and
Maintenance of Religion, do deservedly lie under the dreadful Imputation of
having been a great Cause of the Profaneness and Debauchery of the Nation, and
the fatal Enemies of it, since we may look on that Nation, whether it be our
own, or any other, to be in a very languishing Condition, and in manifest
danger of Ruin, where the Magistrates, and the Generality of Men of greater
Ranks, who have, by their being placed in higher Stations, as Stars in higher
Orbs, so many Advantages to conduct the lower Ranks of Men by the shining
Examples of virtuous Lives, to support the Reputation and Interest of Virtue,
do, by the Abuse of their Authority, or by their vicious Behavior, scatter a
pestilential Infection wherever they come, basely make use of the Advantages
they have above others to the Dishonor of God, by whose Permission they enjoy
them; Nam licet videre, si velis replicare memoriam temporum, qualescunque
summi Civitatis fuerint, talem Civitatem fuisse. Idque haud paulo est verius
quam quod Platoni nostro placet, qui Musicorum cantibus ait mutatis, mutari
Civitatum status, ego autem Nobilium vita, victuque mutato, mores mutari
Civitatum guto, Cic. de Leg. p. 336.
instead of being Patrons of Religion, help to debauch those about them, and
ruin their Country.

Inferior Officers are likewise obliged by their Oaths, as well as by the
Design of their Offices, to be diligent in bringing Offenders to Punishment;
and therefore they are highly criminal if they are negligent therein. The
Constable's Oath tells him, That he is to use his Endeavor that Night-walkers
be apprehended. To see that the Statutes made for punishing Vagabonds, and such
idle Persons, coming within his Bounds and Limits, be duly put in Execution. To
have a watchful Eye to such Persons as shall maintain or keep any Common House
or Place where any unlawful Game is or shall be used; as also, to such as shall
frequent or use such Places, or shall use or exercise any unlawful Games there
or elsewhere, contrary to the Statutes. To present at the Assizes, Sessions of
the Peace, or Leet, all and every the Offenses done contrary to the Statutes
made to restrain the inordinate haunting and tippling in Inns, Alehouses, and
other Victualling-houses, and for Repressing of Drunkenness; and that he is
well and duly, according to his Kn^wledge, Power, and Ability, to do and
execute all other things belonging to a Constable's Office.

Whoever therefore they be that undertake this Office, and wink at Offenders,
or do not endeavor to bring them to Punishment, would do well to consider how
they can be acquitted from Perjury; but how much clearer is their Fault, if
they neglect or refuse to serve those Warrants which are brought to them
against Swearers, Drunkards, Lewd Persons and Prophaners of the Lord's Day; or
to levy the several Forfeitures for those Offenses? as too many Constables,
Headboroughs, Overseers and Church Wardens have done, which the Commission of a
Justice of the Dalt. p. 18. c. 5.
Peace tells him he is to inquire after. Their Guilt is of the same Nature with
that of those Justices, who discourage Informations, and refuse to sign
Warrants against such Offenders, whereby, besides all other Aggravations of
their Sin beforementioned, they hinder the Poor of that Relief which the Law
gives them out of the Penalties upon those Statutes, which in some Cases may
happen to be the depriving them of their Lives, Panis Pauperum est vita eorum,
and qui fraudat eos est vir sanguinis.
and ought to be a dreadful Consideration to those that have the Guilt of it
upon them; the Poor having as good and undoubted a Right to these Forfeitures,
vested in them by Law, as any Man has to his own Estate. I have said so much
of the Constable's Duty, that there is the less need of my adding much of the
Church Warden's, Sidesman's, and other Inferior Officers Obligations in this
respect, which fall in with that of the Constable's.

The Church-Warden's and Sidesmen's Oath does not run in the same terms in all
Diocesses, though their Office is, I suppose, much the same in most, if not
all. The Tenor of the Church-Warden's and Sidesmen's Oath in the Diocese of
London, is as follows:

You shall Swear truly and faithfully to execute the Office of a Churchwarden
within your Parish, and according to the best of your Skill and Knowledge
present such Things and Persons as you know to be presentable by the Laws
Ecclesiastical of the Realm. And one of the Articles of Enquiry exhibited to
the Ministers, Churchwardens, and Sidesmen of every Parish, runs thus: Are any
of your Parish known or suspected to be guilty of Incest, Adultery,
Fornication, or any other Enormous Crimes? Do any Profane the Lord's Day, or
any other great Holyday, or the Name of GOD? And if the Churchwardens and
Sidesmen neglect to Present, the Ministers are told, That they may, and ought
to present, as they have the highest Obligations to suppress Iniquity.

From hence it is plain, That the Power of Inferior Officers, as well as that of
Magistrates, is great, and would have a very remarkable Effect for the
Suppressing of public Disorders if it was generally used, and might (with
God's Blessing) go very far toward a National Reformation, with the Assistance
of the Magistrate, if private Persons would but do as, I conceive, becomes
them, in giving Informations against Swearers, Drunkards, Lewd Persons, and
Prophaners of the Lord's- Day, to the Magistrate, which shall be my next
Business to recommend to the Consideration of all that have a Love to God,
their Neighbor, or their Country.

It has been proved, That the Execution of Good Laws is requisite, in our
present Circumstances, for the Suppressing of Vice, and the Effecting a
Reformation of Manners; but Magistrates cannot put the Laws in Execution
against Offenders without they have the Knowledge of the Offenses: And they
cannot be present at all Places to observe them, though they have either such a
Sense of their Duty, or so pious a Concern to do all the good they can in their
Office, as frequently to take their Walks, to observe Disorders, as diverse of
the worthy Magistrates have here done, in the several Quarters of the County in
which they live, and in embracing all Opportunities of using their Authority
for the Suppressing them: And those Offenses that are deeds of Darkness, it may
be hoped, for the Honor of our Magistrates, are not now generally and
knowingly committed before them. One would think that the Presence of a
Magistrate should have such an Awe upon ill Men, that they should not dare to
transgress before him: That he should resent it as a high Affront to him, if a
Person of the highest Rank should discover so base an Opinion of him, as to
expect that he should be content to break his Oath, to suffer him, upon the
Account of his Quality, to go unpunished for any Offense of this kind committed
before him. It is certainly much so where Magistrates have a just Sense of
Honor, or are as Zealous and Faithful in the Discharge of their Office as they
ought. But the less this may reasonably be hoped from all Magistrates at this
day; there appears, I am sure, the more reason, or rather necessity, for
private Persons applying themselves to this Business of giving Informations to
them of our reigning Sins, without which, it is not reasonably to be expected
that Offenders will be generally brought to Punishment, especially in Cities
and Corporations, where it may be presumed, without Uncharitableness, that many
are daily either publicly or privately breaking the Laws against Profaneness
and Immorality.

Thus then our giving of Informations of these Offenses to the Magistrate seems
absolutely necessary in our present Circumstances, as we heartily desire or
expect the Suppression of Profaneness and Vice by Humane Laws. And I desire
those who would be informed whether there is any Direction or Example for this
Practice from the Word of God, to consider the following Texts of Scripture: If
there be found Deuteronomy. 17. 2.
among you within any of thy Gates which the Lord thy God gives thee, Man or
Woman that has wrought Wickedness in the sight of the Lord thy God, in
transgressing his Covenant, And he has gone and served other Ver. 3. Ver. 4.
Gods, and worshipped them, And it be told thee, and thou have heard of it, and
enquired diligently, and behold it be true, and the thing certain, that such
Abomination is wrought in Israel: Then shall thou bring Ver. 5.
forth that Man, or that Woman, (which has committed that Wicked thing) unto
thy Gates, even that Man or that Woman and shall stone them with Stones till
they die. And the Israelitish Woman's Son Blasphemed Lev. 24. 11.
the Name of the Lord, and Cursed, and they brought him unto Moses. And the
Ver. 13.
Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, Bring forth Ver. 14.
him that has Cursed without the Camp, and let all that heard him lay their
Hands upon his Head, and let all the Congregation stone him. Now when these
things were Ezra 9. 1.
done, the Princes came to me, saying, The People of Israel, and the Priests
and the Levites, have not separated themselves from the People of the Lands,
doing according to their Abominations, etc. And if he neglect Matt. 18. 17.
to hear them, tell it to the Church. Nay, they would do well to consider in
how many Instances, under the Jewish Dispensation, those who saw, or were
acquainted with such Offenses, were positively commanded to be Witnesses or
Informers against the Persons who committed them, though they were their nearest
Relations: Thus, If thy Brother, the Son of thy Mother, Deuteronomy. 13. 6.
or thy Son, or thy Daughter, or the Wife of thy Bosom, or thy Friend which is
as thine own Soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other
Gods. Thou Ver. 8.
shall not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him, neither shall thine Eye pity
him, neither shall thou spare, neither shall thou conceal him. But thou shall
surely kill him; Ver. 9.
thine Hand shall be first upon him to put him to Death, and afterward the
Hand of all the People. And all Israel shall hear, Ver. 11.
and fear, and shall do no more any such Wickedness as this is among you. Now
though this Method of giving Informations to the Magistrate against profane and
vicious Persons may appear to unthinking People to carry Severity in it, I
shall endeavor to show that it may be looked on as a comprehensive Branch of
Charity, and a Religious Office, when it is performed, as other good Acts should
be, with pure Intentions, upon proper Occasions, and in a Christian Temper.

It is, in the first place, a great Kindness to the Poor; the Money that is
raised by Convictions upon these Statutes against Profaneness and Vice being
by Law given to them, whereby they have in Fact had, for several Years past, in
London and Westminster, a considerable Supply, in the times of their great
Distress; and the Burden of the Provision for them, that has lain so heavy on
Parishes, has been eased: So that this Office, if there was no other Reason
for it, one would think should be agreeable to Men of Charity, to those
especially whose Circumstances will not permit them to give such Assistance to
the Poor as they could otherwise wish; the Good of our poor Neighbor being
hereby promoted by the same Act that prevents God's Dishonor. But the giving
of Informations against Offenders will, I conceive, be found, upon an impartial
Enquiry, to be a real Act of Charity, even toward the Persons offending, and
to the Public, as well as to those who are relieved by the Penalties levied
upon them.

It Is universally acknowledged, that we are not only to apply our selves to the
working out our own Salvation, but that we are to be concerned for the
Salvation of one another Souls, and to endeavor to further it, according to
our Advantages and Opportunities; and that this Care is an Expression of great
Charity to our Neighbor, and highly acceptable to Almighty God. For we are
told, That he Jam 5. 20.
which converteth a Sinner from the Error of his way, shall save a Soul from
Death, and shall hide a multitude of Sins; and that they that turn many to
Righteousness shall shine as the Dan. 12. 3.
Stars for ever and ever. Jam. 5. 16. 1 Timothy 2. 1. Heb. 3. 13. Romans 15. 14. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 15. Ephesians. 5. 11. Mat. 5. 16.
Prayer, Exhortation, Admonition, Reproof, and good Example, are all proper
means for this end, and are plainly inculcated in the Word of God; but when
there is but little or no hope of our Neighbor's Amendment by the use of such
means, as I conceive there often is, where the Offender is so impudent and
hardened, that he despises Counsel and Reproof, or they make no sort of good
Impression upon him, but he rather takes an Occasion to commit the more Sin, by
falling into Passion, or other Unchristian Irregularities, and he bids defiance
to all other means, as he too often does, when he is so far from being ashamed
of his Wickedness, that he values himself upon it, and makes a Mock at Sin, as
Solomon ^^ov. 14. 9.
tells us Fools do, that he calls upon his Maker to damn him, or he otherwise
glories in his Shame: And our Savior's Direction takes place, of not casting
of Pearls Matt. 7. 6.
before Swine: And we have, lastly, little or no reason to expect any help or
redress in this case from the Ecclesiastical Power, by telling his Offenses to
the Church: Is it not an Act of Charity to try what the bringing the Offender
to a legal Correction will do toward the recovering the poor Captive out of
the Snare of the Devil, and bringing him to a right mind? And does not the
neglect of doing this, the suffering him to go on in his wicked Courses, to the
manifest danger of the ruin of his Temporal and Eternal Interest, rather than
the bringing him to wholesome Punishment, seem rather an Argument of foolish
Pity, than of Love; of a cruel and treacherous Fondness, than real Kindness? We
do not think it an expression of Kindness to our dearest Relations, that are
lying under dangerous Distempers, to choose rather to see them quietly die, than
to use Medicines that will give them more Pain and Disturbance, but are proper
for the Recovering them. And it is not the less Kindness to them because in
their desperate and delirous Fits they have not a Sense of the Good we intend
them by it, but refuse the Remedy, and perhaps fly in the Face of the
Physician; nay, when Incisions are necessary, when a Member is to be cut off to
prevent a Gangreen, we tie them down, and their Cries and Reproaches of
hardship and ill usage, though they are in their Senses, do not hinder the
Operation. And have we not so much Compassion for those miserable Creatures who
have little or no true Compassion for themselves, that lie under the Lethargy
of Sin, whereby their Souls are in so great and evident danger of being for
ever lost, to endeavor, by the Magistrates Punishment of them, to scarifie and
awaken them out of their deadly Sleep, to a Sense of their dangerous Condition?
and the Consideration of it, which may have its beginning in the Fear of the
Law, that they are driven to by the Shame and Punishment that is thereby
brought upon them, may be a means of working the happiest Effects, may end in
their heartily embracing wholesome Counsels. And will not they then think, that
they that brought them to legal Correction did them a Kindness, how grievous
soever it was to them when it was upon them; and that it was happy for them
that they met with that Punishment that led them to Wisdom? and when this
Method for the good of our Neighbor's Soul fails, we may, as after the use of
other proper means for the Cure of his Body, though without Effect, reasonably
give our selves some satisfaction upon this Consideration alone: But, in the
next place, this Practice is however a high Service to the Community; for
Religion being every Man's great Interest, every one's Work or Duty, Religio
contaminata ad omnium pertinet Injuriam.
the Community, according to the Sense of the Civil Law, is injured by the
Contempt that is flung upon it, by the open Affronts and Violations of it,
which every Man, as in a common Cause, is therefore concerned to prevent. Now
the Exemplary Punishment of open Offenders is the proper way (as Reason and
Experience may convince us) to repress public Vice and Profaneness, to keep
the Generality from it, and to prevent God's Dishonor: It is, I conceive, one
way moreover to keep us from being Partakers in other Men's Sins, and to take
away National Guilt; for a Nation may then be supposed to contract public
Guilt when Wickedness is public and insolent, when the Supreme or Subordinate
Magistrates and Ministers do, by their own ill Examples, and by their not
Exercising their Power or Authority, countenance and confirm Men in it, and the
Body of the People have no concern for the Suppressing of it: But a Nation is
not thought to draw upon it that public Guilt which calls for National
Punishment by the private Sins of particular Persons, which could not be
prevented by either the Magistrates, Ministers, or the Peoples Care and
Endeavors; much of which seem to be intimated to us, as from other Texts of
Scripture, so particularly from these following: The hands of the Witnesses
shall Deuteronomy. 17. 7.
be first upon him to put him to Death, and afterward the hands of all the
People. So thou shall put the Evil away from among you. And all the People
shall hear and fear, and do Ver. 13. Deuteronomy. 21. 19.
no more presumptuously. Then shall his Father and his Mother lay hold on him,
and bring him unto the Elders of his City, and unto the Gate of his Place. And
they shall say unto the Ver. 20.
Elders of his City, This our Son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey
our Voice; he is a Glutton and a Drunkard. And all the Men of Ver. 21.
his City shall stone him with Stones that he die: So shall thou put Evil away
from among you, and all Israel shall hear and fear. Where we may observe, that
for the suppressing of Sin, and the preventing of public Guilt, even Parents
were commanded to bring their own Children to be punished with Death, if after
they were corrected by them for Gluttony and Drunkenness, etc. they were not
amended by it.

If then the Punishment of Offenders, by the Execution of the Laws against
Debauchery and Profaneness, is necessary to the Suppressing of Vice, and those
Laws will not be generally Executed, unless Persons acquaint Magistrates with
the Breaches of them; if those that do so exercise Charity to the Souls of the
Offenders, take a proper course thereby to avoid a Participation in their
Guilt, to make a Provision for the Wants of the Poor, to promote a general
Reformation of Manners, to remove National Guilt, and prevent God's Judgments
falling upon the Body of a People, can any wise and good Men, that duly
consider these things, conclude, that they that zealously, and upon proper
occasions, give informations to the Magistrates of the crying Enormities of
this Kingdom, do that which is not agreeable to their Profession, as becomes
Christians, or as good Members of the Community? nay, that considering our
present circumstances, that there is so little probability that a general
Reformation of Manners will be carried on without it, whether they are not
almost, if not altogether as necessary for this purpose as our Statute-Book, I
was like to have said, as even our Magistracy? And then, lastly, can any wise
and unprejudiced Men think, that such serviceable Persons as these, that often
expose themselves to Inconveniences in discharging this Office for
Conscience Sake, which may be perhaps the most difficult and invidious, and
therefore a highly honorable part in this arduous work of Reformation, do not
deserve great respect, and good words at least from those, who, though they have
just thoughts of the Reasonableness and Necessity of it, have not Zeal enough
themselves to discharge it? and the good words that are given them, and the
respect that is paid them upon this account, may, in many cases, be a means of
furthering this work, which are such cheap and safe things, that, it is to be
hoped, they will not be thought too much to be afforded by the most
faint-hearted Christian that is willing to contribute any Endeavors toward
it; which, it may be expected, those that deserve the Name of Christians will.
For though those brave Men are thus willing to expose themselves, often to
reproach and hardships from bad Men, for such noble purposes, it will, I think,
notwithstanding, considering the infirmities of Humane nature, and the
wickedness of this Nation, be our Prudence and Religion to endeavor, by all
proper methods, to prevent their being put too much upon the trial of
Sufferings from profligate Men, which, it is self-evident, our particular
countenance of them, and speaking well of their Actions upon all due occasions
will effectually do. Our Laws suppose such Men thus highly useful, as clear
reason tells us they are, for the promotion of Virtue, and indeed for the
preservation of any Government. Her late Majesty of Glorious Memory, in
pursuance of Her great Design of Reforming the Nation, did therefore in Her
Gracious Letter to the Justices of Middlesex, Command them to give
Encouragement to those Persons that should bring them Informations of these
Offenses; and the Justices of Middlesex, the Magistrates of London, and of
diverse other Cities of the Kingdom, from a sense of the great Service that is
done the Public by such persons giving Informations, or rather, as may be
supposed, from the absolute necessity of it, do in their Printed Orders invite
those that are Well-wishers to their Country, to bring them Informations of the
Breaches of the Laws against Profaneness and Immorality, and tell them it is
their Duty to do it, and promise to give them Encouragement. And now, lastly,
His Majesty by His Proclamation does command all Judges, Mayors, Sheriffs,
Justices of the Peace, and all other Officers and Ministers, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, and all his Subjects, whom it may concern, to be very
Vigilant and Strict in the Discovery, and the effectual Prosecution and
Punishment of all Persons who shall be guilty of Excessive Drinking, Blasphemy,
Profane Swearing and Cursing, Lewdness, Profanation of the Lord's Day, etc.
as they will answer it to Almighty God, and upon pain of his highest
Displeasure. So that those who oppose the giving of Informations in these
Cases, not only seem directly to strike at the Foundation of our Constitution,
but do oppose Reformation, and confront the Government, which are Enormities
that demand a due Resentment from all that are concerned for the honor of our
Government, our Laws, or our Religion. And if any Magistrates should discourage
those that bring them Informations on this occasion, by giving them hard words,
making their work as difficult to them as they can, by wilfully forcing them to
long and unnecessary Attendance on them in this Business, or not sheltring them
from the insults of obstinate Offenders, if any should be so insolent and
daring as to offer them, it is I think, evident, that they not only act therein
contrary to their Duty, as Christians, but to their Oaths and Trust, as
Magistrates, and to their Pretensions of Loyalty and Obedience to the
Government, as Subjects. And now, is it possible to conceive that any
Magistrates can desire the execution of those Laws; nay, that any that are not
the greatest Enemies to it, and are lost to all sense of true Honor as well as
Conscience, should, in defiance of all their Obligations, and in full
Contradiction to their printed Orders with their Names to them, publicly set
up by their direction on Churches and other public Places, not treat with
respect, and give the greatest Encouragement to those excellent Persons,
particularly by making this business as easy to them as they can, by
protecting them from any kind of Affronts and Assaults from wicked Men, and
giving them all possible dispatch, who in such a profligate Age do, for the
preventing the Indignities that are offered to the great God, and the ruin of
their Country, bring them, generally with trouble, and sometimes with great
difficulty, Informations of such Offenses? And, on the other hand, I do not
see, generally speaking, how those that are convinced that the giving of
Informations to Magistrates of these Offenses is a Christian Office, a likely
and proper, if not a necessary means of Reformation of Manners, and yet wholly
neglect the doing it at a time when they see their Fellow Christians engaging
successfully in it, can in ordinary cases easily satisfy themselves that they
have a due Zeal for God's Honor, or Charity to their Neighbors. It Is allowed,
that this will be sometimes done with some Danger and Inconvenience, Dulce est
periculum sequi Deum.
but so much the more laudable is the doing of it. A brave Man, who refuses to
live under the slavish Dominion of Custom and Example, who frequently works
against Wind and Tide, and steers in the Teeth of Danger, must expect to be
sometimes tossed and battered; but Dangers and Difficulties do often invite,
rather than discourage such a one from doing that which becomes him. Virtue
could, I think, be hardly distinguished from a kind of Sensuality, if it were
gained without any Labor. Every mean Soul can do such things as require no
Resolution or Courage, that are not attended with any trouble or inconvenience;
but though there has never been so general a corruption in any Age or Nation,
as that there have not been some conspicuous for their Piety, yet the number of
those wise and happy persons have, in most Ages of the World, been too few, who
have preferred their Duty to all other Considerations. If it is not generally
thought fashionable shionable to inform, let it be considered, whether it is
fashionable to be Religious. Don't Men usually meet with the reproachful Names
of Hypocrites, Fools, Enthusiasts, Phanaticks, or formal and precise Persons,
who lead Christian, or but modest and regular Lives? But those Men that
understand what Religion is, do not surely think this a sufficient Dispensation
for them to be Libertines. They know that Elisha and St. Paul were called
Madmen; that Holy David was derided by the People; that Christ, his Apostles,
and the Christians in the fir^^ Ages were treated accordingly. Wise Men and
Christians are not so much afraid of ill Names, as of wicked Actions: And our
Judgment of Actions must not be taken from the opinions of Men, but from the
Nature of them, otherwise the Notions of Good and Evil will be soon confounded.
Those Actions are dishonorable that carry in their Nature a Repugnancy to
Reason and Religion; but if those Actions that directly tend to preserve and
strengthen Government, to promote Religion, and the good of Mankind, be
honorable, then the giving of Informations upon these occasions, that are so
much countenanced and encouraged by the Government and the Laws, are, I
conceive, truly honorable, though corrupt Men judge otherwise; Apud quos
virtus insania and furor esse dicitur.
such, for instance, who think it more honorable to resent an Affront with the
loss of their own or their Fellow Christians Lives, and reckon, in short,
Temperance and Chastity, Meekness and Humility, Zeal for God, and
Heavenly-mindedness, contemptible Qualities, and fit for mean and base Souls.
Let it be remembered, that Christians are to walk by Faith, and not by Sight;
Non Exemplis, sed Legibus judicandum. 1 Cor. 3. 19.
by Precepts, and not by Examples; that it is to the most high GOD, Who judges
righteously, and with whom the Wisdom of this World is Foolishness, and not to
a sinful Generation (that in diverse Instances that might be mentioned, calls
Evil, Good; and Good, Evil) that we are to approve our selves. So that putting
this Case at that Disadvantage as the cowardly and formal Christian (who will
not fail to raise Objections, and start difficulties on such an occasion) would
have it, and will be sure himself to do, supposing that the giving of
Informations of these Offenses should sometimes expose Men to reproachful
Words, or rude Treatment from an ill Magistrate, or a prosligate Offender,
which it will not be for the honor of any Government to countenance, it is the
business, I think, of Christians to consider, whether they ought not to suffer
Shame, and undergo some Trouble and Loss for the Exercising an Act of Charity
to their Neighbors Souls, for the suppressing of National Sins, the preventing
of God's Dishonor, and the ruin of their Country, now especially that their
Endeavors of this kind will be so very likely to be effectual for these ends.
If the work is unquestionably good, we are told in the Holy Scriptures, That
it is good to be zealously affected always in a good Gal. 4. 18.
thing. That Christ gave himself for us, that he Tit. 2. 14.
might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar People
zealous of good Works. And we are further told by our Blessed Savior, That
because his Disciples were not of Joh. 15. 18, 19.
the World, but he had Chosen them out of the World, therefore the World hated
them, as it hated him. And by the Apostle, That all that will 2 Timothy 3. 12.
live Godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer Persecution, which, I think,
Christians in this Age experience in some degree, as well as they did in the
times of Persecution. For do we not see the faithful Servants of God
frequently suffering Injuries from wicked Men? we see them calummated, derided
and contemned by them, and exposed to many Assaults and Sufferings from them
for the sake of their Religion. Their holy Lives they are sensible do reproach
them, which is very grievous to them, and for this Cause they often, I suppose,
bear a Hatred to them, which put them upon seeking Opportunities, which they
soon enough find, to injure them, either in their Goods, in their Bodies or in
their Reputation, of which there is given us in the Book of Wisdom, a very
lively Description; Let us lie in wait for the Righteous, because he is Wisd.
2. 12.
not for our turn, and he is clean contrary to our doings: he upbraideth us
with our offending the Law. He was made to reprove our Thoughts. He is Ver. 14.
grievous unto us even to behold; for his Life is not like other Men's, his ways
are of another fashion. We are esteemed of him as Counterfeits: he abstaineth
from our Ways as from Filthiness: he pronounces the End of the Just to be
blessed, and makes his boast that God is his Father. Let us see if his Words
be true, and let us prove what shall happen in the End of him. Let us examine
Ver. 19.
him with Despitefulness and Torture, that we may know his Meekness, and prove
his Patience. Let us condemn him with a shameful Death: for by his own saying
he shall be respected. But in the fifth Chapter there is a Representation of
the different State of the Righteous and the Ungodly, among whom those that are
either for or against Reformation will find themselves one day ranked, either
to their unspeakable Comfort or Misery, that may be so much more Encouraging to
good Men, than the other Account may to any appear uncomfortable, that I shall
give the Reader at the same time some View likewise of it. Then shall the
Righteous Man Wisd. 5. 1.
stand in great boldness before the face of such as have afflicted him, and
made no account of his Labors. When they see it they shall be troubled with
terrible fear, and shall be amazed at the strangeness of his Salvation, so far
beyond all that they looked for. And they repenting, and g^^^a^ing for anguish
of Spirit, shall say within ^^^^elves, This was he whom we had sometimes
(...)sion, and a Proverb of Reproach. We (...)ounted his Life Madness, and his
End (...)out Honor. How is he numbered among (...)ren of God, and his Lot is
among the Saints? We wearied our selves in the way of Ver. 7.
Wickedness and Destruction: yea, we have gone through Deserts, where there lay
no way: but as for the Way of the Lord we have not known it. What has Pride
profited us? Or what good has Riches with our Vaunting brought us? All those
things are passed away like a Shadow, and as a Post that hasted by. For the
Hope of the Ungodly is like Dust that is blown away with the Wind: But Ver. 15.
the Righteous live for evermore, their Reward also is with the Lord, the Care
of them is with the most High. Therefore they shall receive a Glorious Kingdom,
etc.

If then Wicked Men have such an Enmity to the Righteous, and do by various
ways often injure and oppress them, it is no wonder that the giving of
Informations should, as well as other Christian Offices or Duties sometimes do,
make Men liable to Opposition and Sufferings from bad Men, who desire to
indulge themselves quietly in their Vices, because this is a downright
disturbing and confronting them in their vicious Practices: But it is, as has
been said, our Business to consider, that the Christian Life is a Warfare, that
Christians are sent into the World, as Soldiers into the Field, to fight
against it, the Flesh, and the Devil; and that as a Captain is tried in a
Battle, an expert Seaman in a Storm, so a Christian by the Temptations of all
kinds that he meets with in his Warfare, by which we are disciplined or
catechized for a happy Eternity; and that therefore he must march on through
all Difficulties and Discouragements, Per infamiam and bonam famam grassari ad
Immortalitatem.
particularly through Honor and Dishonor, through good and bad Report, to
Immortality; and therefore whether the danger of our being exposed to Reproach
and Contempt from wicked Men is a sufficient Reason for our having no regard to
this Charitable Office I am recommending? The Heathen Emperor, Marcus
Antoninus, could tell us, That in pursuit of Virtue we must expect Reproaches
and Contumelies, but that we must have little or no regard to the common
Opinions of Men, which, after Socrates, he reckoned as the common Bugbears of
the World, or the Terror of Children. And Seneca in like manner, That Men will
sometimes (which he thought the last Act of Desperation) reproach, hate, and
persecute even Virtue it self; Nemo mihi videtur pluris aestimare virtutem,
nemo illi magis esse devotus, quam qui boni viri famam perdidit, ne
conscientiam perderet, Sen. Epist. 81.
and that he seemed to have the greatest Value for, or devotedness to Virtue,
that loses the Reputation of being Virtuous, to avoid the being otherwise. In
truth, I think it is much to be feared, but being very unwilling to fall under
the too common Error of not duly considering Humane Frailties and Prejudices,
or to advance positively any Opinion that may justly bear a dispute with any
but those that bring the Reason of Mankind and Religion its self into dispute,
(as I hope will appear throughout these Sheets) I submit it to the Judgment of
the Casuists, That though the former general Negligence of good Men in this
Matter may, and indeed, I think, must in Charity be supposed to have been very
much owing to a Discouragement from Magistrates, to private Persons Ignorance
of the Methods of performing this Office, or single Persons despairing of doing
thereby much Service for the Ends beforementioned, under the dismal State this
Nation was in the two last Reigns; If this Negligence is continued, after this
Matter is plainly laid before us, the giving of Informations is now more
generally insisted on by our Clergy in their Sermons, especially at those
stated times that they are required to read the Act of Parliament against
Swearing and Cursing, with the other Statutes against Profaneness and Vice, by
His Majesty's Letter, and His late Gracious Proclamation for the enforcing the
Execution of them; and we have moreover such a change of Circumstances, and
such favorable Occurrences, as that our Diligence in giving Informations will
at this time so effectually promote a National Reformation, (as it is evident
it will do from what is already done by it) that it will be found,
notwithstanding the Objections and plausible Pretenses that will be made on
this Occasion by many for their being excused from it, to proceed frequently,
if not generally, from worse Causes, that we are either afraid or ashamed of
discharging it, from a want of Faith, or of Love to God and our Neighbor, not
duly considering the Admonition, Fear ye not the Reproach of Men, neither be
afraid of his Revilings, That the Fearful and Unbelieving are joined together
with Rev. 21. 8.
those who shall have their part in the Lake which burns with Fire and
Brimstone, nor the Extent of our Savior's Threatening, Whosoever Mar. 8. 38.
therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my Words, in this adulterous and
sinful Generation, of him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed when he comes
in the Glory of his Father, with the Holy Angels: Nor, lastly, the great
Encouragement given in the Word of God to those that suffer for discharging of
their Duty, Blessed are they Matt 5. 10.
which are Persecuted for Righteousness sake: for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven. Our light 2 Cor. 4. 17.
Affliction, which is but for a Moment, works for us a far more Exceeding and
Eternal Weight of Glory. If any Man suffer as a Christian, 1 Pet. 4. 16.
let him not be ashamed; but let him glorify God on this behalf. Wherefore let
them 1 Pet. 4. 19.
that suffer according to the Will of God, commit the keeping of their Souls to
him in welldoing, as unto a faithful Creator. And now, if notwithstanding
what has been said, or that may be urged by our Clergy with more Advantage in
their Discourses, for our giving Informations against profane and vicious Men,
and the Magistrate's Diligence and Faithfulness that was before insisted on,
this criminal Fear and Shame shall so generally prevail, as to keep private
Persons from giving Informations in these Cases, and shall likewise keep
Magistrates (who have less Color of Excuse for their Unfaithfulness, they
being under the Obligations of Oaths and Trusts, super-added to those they have
as Christians) from using their Diligence in the Execution of the Laws, and
particularly from giving all Countenance and just Encouragement to those who
bring them Informations, at the same time that Profaneness and Debauchery do
appear so shameless and fearless among us, what a weight of Guilt may be
supposed to lie upon this Nation? And in how great danger of Misery and
Destruction may it be apprehended to be, which I do not see with what Reason we
can expect will so likely be pervented by any other Means, as by the close
Conjunction, the zealous and united Endeavors of good Men, for the Retrieving
of Religion, and the Morals of the Nation, by all Christian and Prudent
Methods. For Religion in general, and the Practice of every Moral Virtue in
particular, do in their own Nature tend not only to the Felicity of every Man's
private Life, but do also conduce to the Peace, Order and Welfare of all
public Societies, and good Government over Men, as it has the greatest
Influence for these Ends upon Magistrates and Subjects. Religion teaches and
obliges Governors to overruled their Subjects in the Fear of God, to his
Glory, and for the Safety and Prosperity of those that are in Subjection to
them; and therefore, I think, to endeavor to support and encourage them in the
Exercise of Religion and Virtue, and this as well by the Use of their
Authority, (which may, for instance, be expressed by their Personally
Countenancing and Promoting Men of Virtue, and Discountenancing vicious Men, by
their taking Care that good Laws be made for the Security of Religion; and that
the Laws that are made for the Promotion of Christian Virtues, and the
Suppression of Vice, be put in Execution) as by their own Exemplary Behavior,
Non si inflectere sensus humanos edicta valent, ut vita regentis. Qui
Macedoniae regem erudit, omnes etiam subditos erudit. Delirant reges,
plectuntur Achivi.
which has a wonderful force, is as it were a living Law, and Religion
instills in Subjects such Principles and Dispositions as in their own nature
tend to make themselves happy, as well as a Government strong and prosperous:
It instructs and obliges them to obey Magistrates, not only for Fear, but out
of Conscience. And as Piety and Virtue do thus evidently conduce to the
Stability and Happiness of any Kingdom and Government; so Vice and Irreligion,
in the natural consequences of them, tend to bring Decay and Ruin upon them,
as they unqualifie Magistrates for Government, and make Homo sine Religione,
sicut equus sine fraenc.
Subjects unfit for Commands, averse to all good Order, and destructive instead
of helpful Members of a Community; from whence (...).
Plutarch might justly esteem it the Foundation or Cement of Humane Society; In
Magistratuum institutione prima sit cura de Religione. (...).
Plato conclude, That in the Institution of Magistracy the first and chief Care
should be of Religion; and the Famous Sine maenibus Civitas potest stare, sine
virtute nullo mode potest.
Scipio observe, That it was impossible any City should stand if their Manners
were depraved, though their Walls were never so firm. Accordingly, I conceive,
there have been but few, if any, amongst the ancient and celebrated Legislators
and Statesmen, whatever there have been among our Modern, who have not had the
greatest Regard to Religion in the Modelling and Governing of Civil Societies;
for how is it possible to conceive that any State should long stand and be
prosperous without Honesty or Peace? Religio neglecta maximam pestem in
Civitatem insert, omnium scelerum fenestram aperit.
Or that it should either enjoy a lasting Peace, or have a general Honesty,
without Religion? And therefore it was no weak, though a wicked Piece of Policy
which they tell us of a King of Assyria, who chose rather to endeavor to
overcome the City of Babylon, by sending in of Players, Lewd Women, etc. to
debauch it, (by which means he effectually did it, and at last obtained his
End) than to invade it with a powerful Army. Upon the whole Matter, We may
dare to challenge all the Politicians in the World to form a sound Scheme of
Government without supposing and securing Religion for the Basis of it. And as
we never heard of a Government that publicly declared for Immorality, so if we
could ever suppose there should be any such, nay, that there were such a one,
where a considerable Number of such Monsters should obtain and keep the
Ascendency in any Government, we might conclude what its Fate would sooner or
later be. Accidit Magistratuum negligentia, and vitiis Nobilium, cives paulatim
a virtute desciscunt, variisque malis rempublicam afficiunt, quibus inundatis
rempublicam fluctuare necesse est.
For when Religion is despised, and Virtue is lost in a Nation, which, as has
been proved, would in time be the consequence of a public Contempt of it, how
easy a Prey will it prove to its Neighbors? Or how unavoidably will it fall
into Divisions, Confusion and Ruin of it self?

Of such consequence therefore Religion and Virtue seem plainly to be to a
Nation, abstracting from the Consideration of a Just God that rules in the
Kingdoms of the Earth, that rewards Righteous Nations with Prosperity, and
executes Justice upon those that are Wicked, which we must believe if we have
any due regard to Sacred or Profane History, to the Experience and Suffrage of
all Ages of the World. For thus it is said in the Holy Scriptures, to this
purpose, The Nation and Kingdom Isa 60. 12.
that will not serve thee, shall perish: yea, those Nations shall be utterly
wasted. A fruitful Psalm. 107. 34.
Land he turns into Barrenness for the Wickedness of them that dwell therein.
And by the Account that is given us in the Word of God of the Divine Justice,
of God's charging Deuteronomy. 21. 1, 8, 9.
Guilt upon Nations, as well as upon particular Persons, and of his Proceeding
with the Old World, the Jewish Nation, etc. have we not sufficient Reason to
think, that in the ordinary Course of God's Providence, a Nation that is
eminently Righteous should have his Blessing in an eminent Manner; and that a
Nation that is remarkably Wicked will feel, sooner or later, the Effects of his
Displeasure? We are acquainted, that before God destroyed the Old World, He saw
that the Wickedness of Man was great in Genesis 6. 5. Ver. 12.
the Earth. That all Flesh had corrupted his Way upon Earth. And their Sin is
given as the Reason of their Destruction. And God Ver. 13.
said unto Noah, The End of all Flesh is come before me, for the Earth is
filled with Violence through them: and behold, I will destroy them with the
Earth. Accordingly we may observe, that the Providence of God toward the
Jewish Nation were very eminently suited to their Behavior: That though the
Jews were the peculiar People of God, and highly blessed, they were frequently
punished by God, and at last destroyed for their Sins. That their Kings, the
chief of their Priests, and their People, did wickedly, and after the way of
the Heathen, before they were led into Captivity, and Crucified the Lord of
Life, whose Mat. 27. 25.
Blood they called for upon themselves and their Children, before they were
finally destroyed: And as their Destruction, which our Savior Mat. 24. Mark 13.
foretold, is, I think, agreed on all hands to have been one of the most
dreadful instances of Misery that have been known to have befallen any Nation
either before or since that time: So (...). Josephus de Bello Judaico, Lib. 6.
cap. 11. F. 933.
Josephus, though a Jew, a celebrated Historian, thus says, That as he thought
no Nation ever suffered such things; so no Nation, from the beginning of the
World, did ever so abound in all manner of Impiety; to which Christians in this
Age may justly add, That by their continuing for so many Hundred Years to be a
despised and vagabond People, and scattered throughout the World, without City
or Country, without Temple or Altar that we know of, no Nation seems ever to
have been so terrible and lasting a Monument of God's Displeasure for National
Sin, as that which this People was guilty of seems to be so much greater, and
to have higher Aggravations than the Sin of any other Nation. The Holy
Scriptures give the like Account of the Destruction of Damascus; Thus says the
Lord, Amos 1. 3.
For three Transgressions of Damascus, and for four, I will not turn away the
Punishment thereof; so of Gaza, of Tyrus, of Edom, and of Ammon. Ver. 6. 9, 11,
13.
And inform us that God raised up Cyrus, calling him by his Name before he was
in being, for the Punishment of the Sins of Babylon. Thus says the Lord to his
Anointed, to Cyrus, whose Isa. 45. 1.
Right Hand I have holden to subdue Nations before him: and I will loose the
loins of Kings to open before him the two-leaved Gates, and the Gates shall not
be shut. I will go before thee, Ver. 2.
and make the crooked places straight. For Jacob Ver. 4.
my Servant's sake, and Israel my Elect, I have even called thee by thy Name: I
have surnamed thee though thou have not known me. And does not profane History
tell us, among a Multitude of other Instances that might be heaped up, That as
the Pride and Voluptuousness of the Babylonians, so the Lewdness of the
Persians, and the Luxury of the Greeks, seemed, with their other Sins, to be
the remarkable Causes of the Ruin of those Empires: And that the Romans, who
had been a People so eminent in their Morals, that Non est quod de summi and
very Dei justitia conquerantur; perceperunt mercedem suam, lib. 5. de Civ. Dei,
cap. 15.
St. Austin thought that God might allow them the Government of the World for
the Reward of their Virtue, even under the Advantages of the Christian Religion
became so very Degenerate and Debauched before the Devastations and Ruin of
their Empire by the poor Goths, Vandals, and Huns, one of whose chief Leaders
called himself Flagellum Dei, the Scourge of God, that gave Occasion to a
Father to cry out, In nobis patitur Christus opprobrium, in nobis patitur lex
Christiana maledictum, Salvian.
That the Name of Christ became a Scorn, and the Christian Religion was
reproached by the Lives of Christians. And to take some Notice of our own
Country, Do not the Historians of it acquaint us, that the Britains, the
ancient Inhabitants of it, Incolae aborigines moribus simplices integrique
existunt, long a nostrorum hominum astutia versutiaque remoti, Diodorus
Siculus.
who had been remarkable for the Uncorruptness of their Manners, were
degenerated from the Incolarum mores quod attinet; fuerunt antiqui Britanni
religionis and disciplinarum cultores maximi, Rob. Sheringham, de Anglorum
gentis ^rigine, p. 14. Gildas de Excid. Britanniae.
Simplicity and Sobriety of their Ancestors, and were, it is said, for that
Reason forewarned of their Misery before the Romans invaded them; and that
after the Romans quitted their Country there succeeded a great Licentiousness;
very many after their embracing the Christian Religion turning Idolaters,
before the Saxons Invasion of them, a poor People, but it seems of more honest
Manners, that came from the Northern Parts of Germany; and that before their
next sad Catastrophe by the Normans Conquest of this Nation, Piety and all good
Literature were grown out of fashion; that the Clergy could scarce read Divine
Service; that the Gentry were given up to Luxury, and a dissolute Life, and the
Meaner sort spent what they had in Rioting, Drunkenness, and other Vices, by
which means (says the Historian) Duke William had so great Advantage, and
gained the Conquest of them: from whence our English Writers conclude the Saxon
History almost in the same Words, and to this effect; If these (say they,
speaking of their Sins) were in all probability the Causes of God's Judgments
on our Ancestors, surely every one in this corrupt Age ought to take care to
avoid them, lest the same Judgments fall upon them. And lastly, to add no more,
are not the formerly famous Asian and Greek Churches, if not some of the
Protestant, in several Parts of the World, which are miserably oppressed, and
brought almost to Desolation within a few Years past, particularly that of
France, of whose dreadful Misery we have so many living Testimonies now among
us, looked on as sad Instances to confirm us in the Opinion of Ages, That
Religion and Virtue are the only firm Foundation for the Prosperity of any
Nation, and Irreligion the most fatal Evil to it. That where there is a general
Corruption of Manners things tend to a Dissolution and Ruin, as well by
Natural consequences, with the Permission of God, as by his righteous
Judgments; and that therefore it is not to be expected that the crying Sins of
a Nation will always escape Punishment unless prevented by Repentance; for the
same Causes produce the same Effects, Virtue and Vice do not change their
Nature, and there is no variableness with our God, whose Justice is immutable.
Did not our Fathers thus, and did not our God bring all Neh. 13. 18.
this Evil upon us, and upon this City? says the Prophet. And therefore, if
after all that our Fathers have told us of these things, and what some of us
have moreover seen with our own Eyes; I mean the late terrible Civil Wars,
which, I hope, none will believe for our Piety and Virtue broke out, and lasted
so long among us within some of our Memories, and which was soon after
succeeded with a dreadful Fire and Plague in this City, and the Misery that is
since that fallen upon our Fellow Christians in France, in Hungary and the
Palatinate, we make no better use of what we have seen and heard, and of the
various Providence we have been under, than to oppose the design of them, by
continuing impenitent, have we not great Reason to fear, that God may rescue
his Gospel from our profane Outrages, our impious Violations, and give it to
some other Nation, that may bring forth better Fruits of it, or in some other
way, agreeable to his infinite Wisdom and Justice, punish Lev. 26. 18.
us yet seven times more for our Sins? Or as Ezra expresses it on another like
Occasion; And after all that is come upon us for our Evil deeds, Ezra 9. 13.
and for our great Trespass, seeing that Thou, our God, have punished us less
than our Iniquities deserve, and have given us such Deliverance as this: Should
we again break thy Commandments, and Ver. 14.
join in Affinity with the People of these Abominations, would not thou be
angry with us, till thou had consumed us, so that there should be no remnant
nor escaping? The Almighty God cannot want Power to effect our Ruin. If we
reckon our selves secure by our present Peace, from a late powerful Enemy,
(which I shall not here inquire into the Reasons of) He can raise up new ones
to us. And if we have no Enemies from abroad. He can suffer us to become our
own greatest Enemies, to fall into Confusion and Ruin by our Unchristian
Quarrels and senseless Divisions at Home, which are too many and too high to
make this appear to thinking Men a foreign Supposition, or an unnecessary
Warning. If he stops the Influences of Heaven, or lets loose the Elements upon
us, we perish. A Pestilence, or a Deluge, an Earthquake, or a Dearth, might
soon destroy us. And if a general Relaxation of Manners, a Corruption in most,
if not all Orders and Parties; if a visible Contempt of the sincere Practice of
Religion, and barefaced, insolent and unrestrained Wickedness; if a monstrous
Debauchery in Principles as well as Practice; if Contentions and Divisions,
without reason and without end, and almost without Example; if high Ingratitude
to God for many and great Mercies, and a deep Insensibility under imminent
danger of Judgments, are sad Indications of a Nation's Degeneracy and Guilt, it
cannot, I think, be denied, but that this was too near the dismal Case of
England, in Relation to Religion, when the Endeavors of Reformation, which I
have given an Account of, began among us, about Eight Years since, how much
soever we may dislike the Representation of it, and, to speak plainly,
continues very much so still; and therefore though God may give a People a
longer or shorter time of Trial, as seems fit to his infinite Wisdom, He may
defer the Execution of his Wrath till the Iniquities of a People Genesis 15. 16.
are at the full, which the longer it is delayed, the severer it may be when it
comes: And though it is not for us rashly to say when a Nation has filled up
the Measure of its Sins, and much less to presume to know the Extent of
infinite Patience and Forbearance, yet it may, I think, be said in this Case,
with Reverence, that considering the great Advantages and Blessings we have so
long enjoyed, and what shameful Returns we have made to God for them, there
seems not much, if any thing more to be wanting, to make this Nation as guilty
as most under Heaven, if not to be ripe for Judgment, than the Discountenance
and Unsuccessfulness of pious and regular Endeavors for the Reforming us; and
nothing, I think, can be reasonably supposed sufficient to remove our Guilt,
than some considerable and remarkable Reformation, and perhaps carried through
all Ranks and Orders of Men, through all Parts of the Kingdom; such a one as
may be in some measure proportioned to the Leprosy of Vice and Profaneness
that seems to have almost overspread us. But if we do truly repent of all our
Abominations, and turn from our wicked ways; if we lay aside our unnecessary
Strifes, and our unchristian Contentions with one another, which we have so
long felt the dismal Effects of; if we express our Zeal, and unite our Strength
against the Patrons of Vice, who are the Enemies of God and Goodness, more than
against those that differ from us in some few things, and those of lesser
moment, but agree with us, I conceive, in those that are essential; if we
sincerely, and without delay, set about and further all pious and proper
Endeavors for a National Reformation, truly pursue the things that belong to
our Peace, it still seems with us a Day of Mercy, and the Scriptures give us
Encouragement to hope, that we may not perish. For thus it is said, At what
instant I shall speak concerning J^r^ 8. 7, 8.
a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to
destroy it: If that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their
Evil, I will repent of the Evil that I thought to do unto them.

Having thus endeavored to prove the Common Obligation which lies upon All
Men, as Christians, and as Members of the Community, to use their sincere
Endeavors for a General and National Reformation, and the Special Obligations
of Governors and Ministers, of Subordinate Magistrates and Inferior Officers,
from either the Nature of their Office and Trust, or their express Oaths to
this purpose; and having more largely insisted on the Reasons for private
Persons giving of Informations of the Violations of the Laws of Religion and
their Country, and the Magistrates Obligation highly to encourage those who do
so, to make this their excellent Service to their Country as safe and as easy
to them as they can, by directing their Judgments excusing their innocent
Inadvertencies, by making Examples of any obstinate Criminals that shall dare
impiously affront and obstruct them in it; and having likewise represented the
danger of God's Judgments, and of our Ruin, if we continue unreformed, and the
Blessings and Advantages we may hope to obtain to our selves, our Country, and
our Posterity, in the hearty forwarding any just and pious Designs and
Endeavors for such a Reformation; as Virtue is the way to the Happiness of
particular Persons, of private Families, and the Prosperity of Nations; and the
Suppressing of Vice and Profaneness by Humane Laws, that are agreeable to the
Laws of God, seems to be the nearest and most probable way, in our present
Circumstances, for the retrieving of the Virtue of the Nation; without which,
if we could suppose that this Kingdom would continue to be prosperous, I do not
easily conceive how wise and good Men should either take much Pleasure in
Living otherwise than in Obedience to the Will, and for the Glory of God, and
the working out their own Salvation, or in the Thoughts of leaving a Posterity
behind them in a Nation where there is no more Religion, or even common
Honesty; I intended, I say, having done this, in the next place to offer some
Arguments against those Vices that are most reigning among us, as Leudness,
Profane Swearing and Cursing, Drunkenness, etc. in hopes that the
Representation of the Baseness, the Folly and Beastiality of those Sins,
together with the various and great Mischiefs they bring upon the Public, but
more especially often upon those unhappy Men that are addicted to them, in
respect to their Estates and Reputation, their Persons and Posterity, their
Bodies and Souls, would show so much the Evil and Deformity of them, that it
might be a means to keep some at least from falling in Love with them, and of
disingaging others from them who are already ensnared in them, even as the
Sight of a Drunkard to a thinking Man is a good Lecture against Drunkenness:
But these Sheets growing to a Bulk, far beyond what I at first proposed, I
shall lay aside (perhaps for some other Occasion) the Materials which were
prepared for this purpose; and I shall the rather do so, Mat. 5. 28, 34. Matt.
15. 18, 19. Romans 1. 24. -- 27. 29. 13, 14. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. -13. 18. Gal. 5.
19. 21. Ephesians. 5. 3, 5, 6. Col. 3. 5, 6.
since these Vices are plainly condemned by the Word of God, which expressly
excludes Drunkards and Unclean Persons, etc. from the Kingdom of Heaven; and
that we find, by sad Experience, that those who are fully reconciled to their
Lusts, who are miserably abandoned to the Conduct of Custom and ill Example,
seem too generally almost deaf to the Calls of Conscience, to all
Representations of this kind, nay often even to the powerful Rhetoric of the
Gospel; at least they frequently make, for want of Consideration, and other
proper means, no great and lasting Impressions upon them. And this, I conceive,
makes the use of other Methods with such Men necessary, not only for their own
sakes, but for the public Safety, that those that are Lethargick, and almost
dead in their Sins, yet having Senses still to feel the Strokes of Justice,
may, though never so stubborn, be bowed in some measure to discipline, and
punished into a better outward Behavior, if they cannot into such a serious
Consideration of their Sin and Folly as may end in an inward and entire
Reformation of their Lives, which is by no means to be totally despaired of.
For as the allowed Habits of these Sins exclude Men from the Kingdom of Heaven,
in the Opinion of Divines they ought to shut out those who are guilty of them
from the Communion with the Church on Earth, till they give some signs of their
Repentance, as, it is allowed, they would have done if they had lived in the
first Ages of Christianity, when such Offenders, which now make too great a
part of the visible Church, were looked on as a kind of Monsters, and, like
putrefy'd Members, were cut off, as being not only extremely dangerous, but
very noisome to the Body. But till the Ecclesiastical Power, which is now so
weakened, and has, to speak justly, lost its Credit, is recovered to its
Primitive Design, and the ancient Discipline of the Church is in some measure
restored, which, it is to be hoped, we shall not always think sufficient,
especially under the present Reign, publicly to lament the loss of once a
Year, in the Office for Ash Wednesday, but shall in good earnest endeavor to
restore. There is, I conceive, evidently greater reason to engage the secular
Arm in this matter, that those upon whom the gentle Methods of Persuasion have
little or no force, and whom the Ecclesiastical Power does not and will not
take any Notice of, should be severely punished, and restrained by the Civil
Government; that they should be treated as a sort of Outlaws, and as common
Enemies to their Country: For public Immoralities are Offenses against the
Peace and Happiness of Mankind, against the Government and the Laws, as well as
against the Christian Religion, which is not only now incorporated into the Law
of the Land, but does above all other things promote the Safety and Prosperity
of Government, and of particular Persons, which Offenses of this kind directly
tend to the destroying of, even to the dissolving the band of Humane Society;
and if so, surely it behooves good Men, by all proper measures, to assist
Magistrates in their Endeavors effectually to suppress them. If bad Men don't
approve of these Methods, it is no wonder; they are Enemies to good Order, Law,
and Justice, because these things are troublesome to them. There is no doubt
but the Gallows is a great Grievance to Murderers, the Discipline of Bridewell
to Whores, the Pillory to the Perjured, and the Stocks to Drunkards: But such
Grievances as these are, I conceive, of near as long standing as Government,
and will not be thought proper to be laid aside whilst it lasts, or at least
till there is not so much Occasion for them, since, as has been proved, Facile
est imperium in bonos.
its Interest and chief Business is to cherish and support Religion, and, by
consequence, to take care that it be not treated with any disrespect,
particularly, that it be not made the Scorn of any Order or Body of Men, the
common Subject of the Profane Play Houses, or the Sport of Buffoons; and that
the open Violations of it by Profane Swearing and Cursing, Drunkenness,
Lewdness, etc. be suppressed, as all wise Nations, I conceive, have ever done,
and ever will do.

Against these Enormities therefore that are the Plagues of Government, the
Enemies of our Peace, the Dishonor of our Religion, and the Reproach of our
Nation, have the Societies of Reformation applied themselves, with so great
Success, as to give so very promising hopes as have been represented, of a
general Concurrence and Union of the Virtuous part of the Nation in the same
Design, and in consequence of a National Reformation; and their Endeavors have
been carried on, as has been observed, for above Eight Years with as little or
less occasion given to their Enemies of Objection either to the Methods of
their Proceedings, or to the Behavior of the Persons concerned in them, as
perhaps have been often known in Matters of the greatest Consequence, where
such a number of Persons have been engaged, (though if the Prudence of some
good Men, who are either already engaged, or that shall hereafter be concerned
in this Undertaking, is or should be less than their Zeal, it will, I hope, be
far from giving wise and well-meaning Men a just Prejudice to the Design it
self, or keeping them from Assisting in it.) But, blessed be God, a more
glorious Prospect has been lately given us by the Address of the late House of
Commons to His Majesty, for the Suppressing of Profaneness and Debauchery, and
His Majesty's Proclamation in pursuance of it, and His Princely Word in His
Gracious Speech to both Houses of Parliament. We have now then, it is evident,
His Majesty's positive Commands, together with the concurrent Advice in this
Matter of the late great Representative Body of the Commons of England, for
things, I conceive, not only unquestionably lawful, but highly important, and
necessary, for the strict Execution of the known Laws of the Land, against
Profaneness and Immorality, agreeably, to the Word of God, that acquaints us,
That the Magistrate bears not the Sword in Vain, That Rulers are not a Romans
13 4. Ver. 3.
Terror to good Works, but to the evil, etc. Whoever therefore they are that
in this Case oppose the King's Commands, who either openly obstruct, or
secretly undermine the Endeavors of those who act in this Affair in Obedience
to the Will of God, the Command of the King, and for the Good of their Country,
will, I think, find it somewhat difficult to acquit themselves from great
Impiety. And now can any that love their God, their Religion, or their Country,
hear of these transporting things without being affected with greater Joy than
any Success in their own secular Concerns would give them, and without thinking
themselves under high Obligations, after they have pretended to Fast, and Pray,
and Mourn for our public Sins for so many Years past, (as most, if not all
Orders of Men and Parties among us have done) to do what they are able in their
several Stations for the Suppressing of Profaneness and Immorality, and for
the perfecting of this great Work of REFORMATION, which, I conceive, it had
been our Duty to promote, if we had not met with so much Encouragement and
Assistance from our Governors? But how much stronger Obligations do now lie
upon us to do it? And how shameful and inexcusable will our Neglect of it be,
now we have such an Opportunity by His Majesty's repeated Declarations for our
Engaging in it, by the Advances that are already made, and the Methods that are
laid, as perhaps may never again be offered us if we neglect this? in
Prosecution whereof it would, I think, become us to adventure all our dearest
Interests in this World, nay, a Thousand Lives, if we had them to lose. Behold
then a glorious Opportunity for all that make a Profession of Religion, or any
pretense to Virtue, of what Rank soever, to signalize their Love and
Faithfulness to their great Lord and Master, their Neighbor, and their
Country. To all Orders of Men therefore whose Service His Majesty has required
to promote this great, this necessary Work, and who would not share in the
dreadful Guilt and lasting Infamy of neglecting to promote a Reformation of
Manners, which now seems to be put very much in our power, with God's Blessing,
to see effected, I ask leave, upon these Glorious Encouragements, with all due
respect, to address my self.

To the NOBILITY, that they would be pleased to consider, That true Greatness
does not consist in the having of swelling Titles, high Places, great Power, or
large Territories, which, though they may be sometimes the Reward of virtuous and
brave Actions as they ought to be, are often the Gifts of Nature, and it may be
too frequently the Acquests of such Crimes as deserve Punishment, instead of
Recompense: That the Persons who in all Ages have been most beloved and
reverenced when Alive, and most honored by wise and good Men when Dead, have
been those who have been most beneficent and serviceable to the World; not
those who have amassed the greatest Estates, and acquired the loftiest Titles
to themselves; the blind Heathens erected not their Altars to those that they
did not think were some way or other useful or serviceable to Mankind: That
they would therefore be persuaded that nothing will render them so much
Blessings to their Country, so truly noble and esteemed, as their being Patrons
of Religion and Virtue: That they are not in their high Stations too great for
that Employment which is the greatest Glory of Princes, to set up their
Standards for Religion, and declare War against Vice and Profaneness, Haud
difficilius est errare naturam quam principem fui dissimilem formare
rempublicam. Quaecunque mutatio in principibus extiterit, ^eandem populo
secutam. Cic.
after the Example, and under the Conduct of such a Prince and Leader as has
graciously declared, in his Speech to both Houses of Parliament, that He
esteems it one of the greatest Advantages of Peace that he is now at Leisure to
apply himself to the Suppressing of Profaneness and Immoralities; and has
thereby given us some reason to hope, that he may think it a far greater Glory
of his Reign to be an Instrument in God's Hand of delivering us from the
Slavery of our Vices, of making us a virtuous, and, by consequence, a happy
People, than in procuring us any other present and secular Felicities and
Advantages, and at last leaving us deluged in such Impieties as Infidels abhor,
and which may make God our Enemy, and draw down his Vengeance upon us: That
they would for this purpose consider the Influence of their Authority, their
Interest, their Fortunes, and their Example, and Employ, which they cannot
without high Ingratitude omit, these and the other Advantages they have above
Men of lower Ranks, for the Glory of that God by whose Permission they have
them, for the Noble purposes of Opposing and Suppressing Debauchery and
Profaneness, the retrieving the Reputation of Virtue, the furthering the
Interests of Religion, and the saving of their Country, which has seemed to
have declared in favor of Vice and Ruin, and thereby approve themselves to
the King, (as He has now assured them they will) to the Wise and Virtuous part
of the Nation to their own Consciences, to their Posterity, and, above all, to
the most High God.

To the Reverend the CLERGY, That they who are looked upon as the Ambassadors
of the Great God of Heaven and Earth, and sent upon the most important Business
of Reconciling Men to God, and Watching for their 2 Cor. 5. 18, 20. Heb. 13. 17.
Souls, and have, as I conceive, their Honor, their Dignities, and their
Revenues, given them without the common Encumbrances of other Men, in regard to
their Sacred Office, and that they may attend without Worldly Cares, and with
the greatest Advantage to their Spiritual Employment, would consider whether
they have not a more favorable Opportunity for the Work of their Ministry, and
a National Reformation, at this time, than they have had for many years past.
They cannot, I humbly presume, but be sensible of the most deplorable
Degeneracy of this Nation, that the great Decay of Religion, and the Leprosy
of Vice and Profaneness with which it is almost overspread, does threaten its
Ruin; and that they have great reason to take to heart the no greater Success
of their Endeavors for the Reforming of us; that their Discipline, which if it
had been in force, might have proved a Bank against the Flood of Wickedness
that is broken in upon us, is now so lost, that it is of little use to them for
this purpose; that there appears too great ground to fear that the Tide of
Wickedness will not be stopped whilst Religion is openly dishonored, Virtue
despised, and Vice and Profaneness are so daring and triumphant, that Men
commit them not only with Impunity, but Glory in them, so as to esteem it an
Act of Gallantry to ridicule their Sacred Office, to contemn things Sacred, and
an Ornament of Style to imprecate Damnation upon themselves. Is not this a Time
for them that are Spiritual Watchmen, and Overseers of the Flock of Christ,
Isa. 52. 8. 56. 10. Acts 20. 28.
as they have a Concern for God's Honor, and would prevent his Judgments
falling upon us; as they would consult the Honor and Interest of their sacred
Order, and their own Reputation, to concur with His Majesty's pious
Declarations for this purpose, and cheerfully to embrace the Assistance of the
Civil Power for the Vindicating of the Honor of God's Laws, the Stopping the
Avenues to notorious Enormities, the breaking the hellish Confederacies, and
the taking out of public View the contagious Examples of bad Men; and by these
Methods to prepare Men the better for the Restoration of godly Discipline, for
the greater Influence of their Doctrine, and good Examples upon their Minds? Is
not this a Time for them to favor the successful Endeavors of the Societies
of Reformation, which are levelled at the strong holds of Debauchery; and the
Religious Societies, that are now spreading through the Kingdom, that seem so
directly to tend to the Promoting the Power of Religion, so far as they carry
on those great Ends, (wherein we may, I think, appeal to the whole Christian
World whether they do not do it) and readily to accept of the Assistance that
is now, or hereafter may be given them by Christians of any Denomination, in
the common Cause of Christianity? And if they can think of any other or better
Measures than those that are recommended in these Papers, that may promote the
Glory of God, and the Good of Souls, for whom Christ died, and their own
comfortable Account of themselves to Him that will judge the Quick and Dead, to
engage in them 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2.
without delay, with united Counsels and Endeavors, with double Diligence and
Zeal, and in Conjunction with all the various Works of their Ministry, among
which their going from House to House for the enquiring into the Acts 20. 20,
21.
Spiritual State of the Souls of those that are committed to their Charge, and
the applying proper Directions, and Encouragements accordingly, in the Judgment
of the most pious Divines I have had the Honor to know, is thought to be a
very useful Method, is what one of the most Dr. Stillingfleet the late Bishop
of Worcester's Charge to the Clergy of his Diocese, p. 25.
Learned Prelates of this Age and Nation has in his printed Charge to the
Clergy of his Diocese put them in mind of; and which The Bishop of Salisbury's
Pastoral Care, p. 207.
another of our Learned Bishops has told this Sacred Order, in his Pastoral
Care, published by the particular Approbation of the late Great Primate
Archbishop Tillotson, is to be looked on as the Foundation (an Exemplary Life
being supposed) on which all the other parts of the Ministerial Office may be
well managed; and which he says will seem no hard matter to such as have a
right sense of their Ordination Vows, of the Dignity of their Function, or the
Value of Souls.

To the MAGISTRATES of all kinds, That they would make just Reflections upon
that terrible and lasting Imputation that they do now lie under by His Majesty'
s Proclamation, (which is to be read Four times a Year in all Churches through
the Nation) and the Address of the late Honorable House of Commons to the
King, of their being so great a Cause of the Debauchery and Profaneness of the
Kingdom, by their ill Example and Negligence in their Office: That they would
consider, as has been observed, how many Nations have been ruined, and Cities
brought to a heap of Rubbish for their Immoralities, which the Magistrates
Vigilance might have prevented: That their Power comes from God, the Fountain
of all Power; and that they are supposed to be entrusted with it for his
Honor, and the Good of his People: That by their faithfully Executing the Laws
against Offenders, particularly those that are made for the Honor of God, the
Suppressing of Profaneness and Immorality; they are to be a Terror to Evil
doers; and in order to this, that they would therefore remember, That as the
poorest Wretch has a Talent that he must render an Account of, they must
expect one day to appear at a Tribunal themselves, and give an Account of the
discharge of their Oaths and Trusts, of the Employment of their Authority, and
their other Advantages, and for the Deluge of Evils that either has or may
fall upon the Nation through their wilful Neglect of their Duty; for our
Blessed Savior has told us, That unto Luke 12. 48.
whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required. And the Author of
the Book of Wisdom thus expresses himself to this purpose; Hear therefore, O ye
Kings, and understand; Wisd. 6. 1.
learn ye that be Judges of the Ends of the Earth. Give ear, you that rule the
People, and glory in 2.
the Multitude of Nations; for Power is given you of the Lord, and Sovereignty
from the Highest, 3.
who shall try your Works, and search out your Counsels, because, being
Ministers of his Kingdom, 4.
you have not judged aright, nor kept the Law, nor walked after the Counsel of
God. Horribly and speedily shall he come upon you: for 5.
a sharp Judgment shall be to them that be in high Places. For Mercy will soon
pardon the Meanest, 6.
but mighty Men shall be mightily tormented.

To the GENTRY and COMMONALTY of the Nation, that they consider, That though they
have not the particular Oaths and Vows, the Trusts and Authority of any of the
Orders I have mentioned, they have notwithstanding their Baptismal Engagements
upon 'em, which they own when they come to the Holy Communion; and that if they
would acquit themselves as Christians, they must endeavor to be such in all
their Relations; to behave themselves as good Magistrates and Subjects, as good
Citizens, and Members of their Community, as well as good Masters and Servants,
good Parents and Children; but that they cannot be reasonably thought to be so
without having a Love to God, a Zeal for his Honor, or a Concern for the
Welfare of their Neighbors, and of the Community of which they are a part; and
that it may be doubted whether they can have either if they can contentedly
hear, without any Concern, Men openly affront their God, bid Defiance to his
Laws, go on with a full Career to Destruction, and bring Decay and Ruin upon
their Country, which, it is evident, they may use proper and effectual means to
prevent, as particularly by their giving of Informations of enormous Offenses
to the Magistrate, (which I have in another place more largely insisted on) and
which they have at this time so fair an Opportunity to employ as is offered
them by the Declarations of the Government, and the Assistance of such Bodies
of Christians that are not only in and about this City, but that are spreading
through the Cities and Corporations of the Kingdom. And do you think it
dishonorable for you to conceal any Offenses that endanger the Government, or
any Injuries that are done your Neighbor, when you can do him right by the
bare discovering of it to the Magistrate? Is it reckoned an Act of Bravery to
adventure your Lives in the taking of a Thief, or a Murderer? An Act of
Charity to prevent any Injury to your Neighbor in his civil Concerns, to
hinder a Fool or a Lunatic from wounding of his Body, or destroying his Life?
And is not a sincere endeavor to prevent the public Dishonor of the Name,
the Day, and the Laws of God, by acquainting the Magistrate with these high
Offenses, in order to the Suppressing of them, as is done with general
Approbation and Applause in other ordinary Cases, when Men's private Rights,
the Security of the Government, or the Welfare of the Nation is concerned, an
honorable Work, and becoming Christians? Does it become a Soldier of Christ
Jesus to see Him publicly affronted; to hear his Name and Wounds mentioned
oftener in horrid Oaths and Execrations than in serious Discourses; his Laws
trampled on; and their Fellow Christians to live in the open Commission of such
Sins as manifestly tend to bring great Calamities upon them in this World, to
destroy their Souls, and draw down National Judgments, without taking any kind
of Notice of these things, and only for fear of meeting with reproachful
Words, or rude Treatment (which yet the Magistrate, if he has a just sense of
his Duty, will not suffer) from a hardened Offender, or the Advocates of Vice;
from such whose Commendations a virtuous Man would be inclined to look on as a
real Disparagement, and their Company a Scandal, and when, in the Discharge of
what they justly apprehend to be their Duty, they may have, for their Comfort
and Support, some of the great Rewards of Religion in this World, the
Approbation of their own Consciences, and of good Men, with the hopes of an
Everlasting Reward on the other side of the Grave? Can this be imagined to be a
signification of a Zeal for God, of our loving Him with all our Hearts, etc. or
our Neighbor Matt. 22. 37, 38. 39.
as our selves? Does this Behavior adorn the Gospel? Would the Christians of
old have thought well of it? Or is it sufficient for us to call our selves the
Disciples of the Blessed Jesus, who went about doing good, without
endeavoring, Act. 10. 38.
in any degree, to follow his glorious Example?

Herein then our Gentry and Commonalty seem to have a great Opportunity of
furthering the Work of Reformation: But this is not all the Advantage they
have, if the Laws that relate to Religion are upon so many and such momentous
Considerations thus Zealously to be put in Execution, it is, I think, evident,
that not only those Persons that violate and contemn those Laws, but those that
are unconcerned for, and discourage the Execution of them, cannot, with any
Color of Reason; be esteemed Friends to their Country, but rather as unworthy
to live in it, and enjoy the common Benefits of it; Omnes quidem Magistratus in
been constituenda republica convenit esse virtute praeditos, sed maxim eos qui
senatoriae dignitatis gradum obtinent, nec est laudanda respublica in qua
peraeque bonis and malis prudentibus and stultis honores tribuantur, quare
legibus hos oportet esse descriptos ut quorum virtus industriaque fit bonorum
approbatione commendata, his honos debeatur. Unde in antiquorum rebuspub.
statuae, arcus triumphales, sepulchra publica, laudationes, and alia id genus
meritis tribuautur.
and if so, they are unquestionably much more unfit for, and unworthy of Posts
of Honor and Trust; and those that concern themselves for the Election or
Promotion of such Persons to public Places, when Men of Virtue may be easily
found to accept of them, and perhaps offer themselves to their Choice, upon the
account of their Titles or Estates, of their Relation or Friendship to them,
and I think I may further add, for their being of their Faction or Party, may
deservedly be judged to behave themselves very unbecoming good
Common-Wealths-Men and good Christians, to act therein as very mischievous
Members of the Community, and even Enemies to their Religion and Country; on
the contrary, they who are truly Religious, who not only keep the Laws
themselves, but are diligent to execute the Laws, or zealously encourage and
assist others in the furthering the Execution of them, are to be looked on, by
those that make any just pretense to Virtue, as Benefactors to the Community,
of which they are Members, as proper Persons to be honorably distinguished,
which it behooves all Men to consider, who are any ways concerned in this
Matter, and would show their sincere Regard for the Interest of Religion, or
their Country, particularly (...) Isoc Path p. 513.
the Gentry and Commonalty of England, to whom I am addressing my self, in the
Election of their Representatives in Parliament, of Magistrates in
Corporations, and Subordinate Officers in them, and all other Places throughout
the Kingdom, on whose Behavior the Welfare of the Nation does so much depend,
lest when they might have served the true Interests of Religion and the Nation,
by their making Choice of such worthy Persons as might have proved great
Blessings to us, if they had been thus employed, by their Faithfulness in their
Trusts, and by the happy Influence of their good Example; they, on the other
hand, by being instrumental in the Election or Promotion of vicious Men,
especially after the evil of their doing so is represented to them, may perhaps
draw a Guilt upon themselves of Partaking in other Men's Sins, of being
Accessory, in some degree, to the Mischief that is done by the Negligence and
Unfaithfulness of such Persons in their Duty whom they make Choice of, as well
as by the malignant Influence of their ill Examples upon others. Has God
Almighty said by the Prophet, 1 Samuel 2. 30.
Them that honor me I will honor; and they that despise me, shall be lightly
esteemed. Has Holy David said, Ps. 101. 6.
Mine Eyes shall be upon the Faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with
me: He that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me. Has the King lately
declared in his Proclamation, That vicious Men are a Discredit to his Kingdom,
and that he will discountenance and punish Immorality and Profaneness in
Persons of the highest and lowest degree, particularly in such as are employed
near his Royal Person; and that he will, upon all Occasions, distinguish Men of
Piety and Virtue by Marks of his Royal Favor? And lastly, has the Commons of
England, assembled in a late Parliament, in their Humble Address to His
Majesty, represented to Him, That the Debauchery of the Nation is chiefly owing
to the Negligence and ill Example of Magistrates; and that the countenancing
and preferring of Virtuous, and the discouraging of Vicious Men, is a proper
way to suppress it? And can any that have any Principles of Virtue, and Love to
their Country, that shall duly and impartially consider this, be instrumental
in promoting of profane and vicious Men to Places of Honor and Authority, and
choose to entrust with them the high Concerns of Religion and our greatest
Temporal Interests? How far Ignorance, Prejudice, or Inconsideration, may have
hitherto been an Excuse for any concerned herein, I shall not presume to
determine, but I may be allowed to say, that, Is ordo, vitio, careto, caeteris
specimen esto. Praeclara ista lex (ait Cicero) nam cum omni vitio carere lex
jubeat; ne veniat in eum ordinem, unquam vitii particeps, Ci^. lib. 6. de leg.
p 336.
it is to be hoped, it will not be hereafter pretended by any Men who are
sincerely concerned for the Honor and Interest of Religion, and the Security
and Prosperity of their Country, who having this Matter laid before them, shall
not only consider the fatal Consequences of their own ill Conduct in this
Matter, but the many and almost unspeakable Evils that this Nation has so long
groaned under by the Election and Promotion of wicked Men to Places of Honor
or Power; and, on the contrary, what a Glorious face of things we might expect
to see if Men of all Ranks, as well as those to whom I am addressing my self,
would acquit themselves herein, as Natural Reason as well as Religion may
convince them they ought, in the Discouraging or Opposing, in their feveral
Stations, the Election and Promotion of wicked Men to public Posts, and
thereby keeping them from doing so much Mischief as they have undeniably the
greatest Advantage for their doing in them. And if we will not be moved herein
by either Religious or Civil Considerations, I must ask leave to say, that we
are sunk below Heathenism in this respect, the formerly famous Delecti apud
Romanos Senatores, quibus corpus annis infirmum, ingenium sapientia validum
erat, unde patres conscripti, nuncupati, Sigoniu^ de jure Civiu^ Rom^noru^,
fol. In pluribus Romanum Senatum imitantur Decuriones, nec minor annis 25
decurio creabatur, nec major 55, meritis enim, and facultatibus dignissimi
eligebantur, Pancirolus de Magistra, fol 3. 4. Eadem forma in elegendis
Dunmviris, quae in creandis Decurionibus observabatur, hoc excepto, quod
Dunmviri tribus ante aut pluribus mens^bus quam Magistratum initent
nominabantur: ut si forte recusandi justam honoris causam habuissent. alii
eorum loco congruo tempore substi^^i possent, fol. 8.
Roman and Apud Lacedaemonios Senatui and reliquis virtus potius and merita
suffragabantur. Nam virtutis praecipue habita fuit ratio, ut in aliis omnibus
apud eos; ita etiam in quibusvis Magistratibus conferendis, Nic Crag Ripen. de
Rep. Lacedaem. Et Plato de hac repub. ita dixit: (...). Non enim, inquit, in
civitate honores, ideo in pretio esse, quod is qui eos gerat, divitiis
excellat, etc. Et Demost henes Graecus scribit, tantum (...), in ordinem
Senatorum cooptari. Aetas deinde justa lege quasi annuaria definita in
Senatoribus fuit annorum sexaginta. Caeterum vita honest acta in Senatoribus
praecipue deside rabatur, Crag lib. 11. p. 113, 114.

Judicium apud Athenienses constituebatur quod illi (...) vocabant, in quo
Senatorum qui lecti erant, vita diligenter exquirebatur, Sigonius de Republica
Atheniensium, lib. 2. p. 492.

Omnes oportebat Magistratus vitae morumque suorum antequam Magistratum inirent
rationem in foro apud judices reddere, ne quis Magistratum ullum gerere posset,
qui impudicitiae aut alio turpitudinis genere notatus fuisset, Sigonius, lib.
111. p. 532.

Novem viri antequam assumerentur ad Magistratum illum de omni vita acta causam
dicere solebant, quod si nullam dedecoris labem perpetua innocentia contraxisse
videbantur, ad (...) adsumebantur, deinde Magistratus gesti causam dicentes,
rationesque ferentes, si tum quoque innocents usquequaque apparuissent, ad
Areopagiticum Senatum conscribantur, Sam Petitus de Leg. Atticis, fol 190.
Introducebantur autem omnes illi Magistratus quorum anteactam vitam expendi,
and eam inquiri oportet, Pet ^f. 223.

(...). Isocratis Oration Areopagitica. p. 285.


Grecian Commonwealths having had a great regard to Virtue in the Choice of
their Senators and Magistrates, which seems to have been one of the greatest
Causes of their Stability and Prosperity. And herein our Gentry and Commonalty
have likewise manifestly greater Advantages and Opportunities for the Promoting
of the Work of Reformation, for the making one brave Effort for the Interest of
Religion and Virtue, for the Honor and Welfare of England, and thereby to
recover the former Glory of their Ancestors, who were Famous for their Virtue,
and Love to their Country, and which appeared so glorious in the Heroes of the
Gentile World. And for the Encouragement of those that are destitute of the
Advantages of Riches and Honors, of Authority and Learning, to use their
Diligence and Zeal in the Instances I have given, or in any other Expressions
of their Duty for the Promoting of this Work, Si quis rem considerare velit,
omnes eos vel saltem maximam partem eorum, qui in hoc toto terrarum orb res
praestantiores aggressi sunt, atque inter caeteros aevi sui heroes
excelluerunt, aut obscuro aut abjecto loco editos, and prognatos fuisse
abjectis parentibus.

Non est praetereundum maximorum virorum plerosque patres ignoratos, matres
impudicas fuisse, Scaliger.


I will put them in mind, that it has been long observed, that the Persons who
have been thought to have performed the bravest Actions, and done the greatest
Service to the World, have frequently been Men of obscure Birth and Parentage,
who were without Riches and Honors, and often, I conceive, without Learning;
of which a multitude of Instances might be given, if 'twas necessary here to
insert them. That though it is freely allowed, that Authority and Quality, when
they are accompanied with Virtue, as they ought to be, or when they are the
Rewards of it, Alii pro pecunia emunt Nobilitatem, alii illam lenocinio, alii
veneficiis, alii parricidiis; multis perditio nobilitatem conciliat, plerique
adulatione, detractione, calumniis, etc. Agrippa de vanit. Scien.

Aude aliquid brevibus gyaris, aut carcere dignum, Si vis esse aliquid.

Indignissimus dignissimo praefertur, plerunque illaudatus laudatissimo.

Ille crucem sceleris pretium tulit, hic diadema.


which too seldom happens, are truly honorable, and enable those that have
them to be more serviceable to the Interest of Religion, and the Good of
Mankind, which is their proper Business; but when they are separated from
Virtue, they render those that possess them truly scandalous, and highly
pernicious. Ut omnium rerum sic literarum quoque, in temperantia laboremus,
Sen. Ep. 106.
It Is true likewise, That when Learning is moderately pursued, and for the
Service of Religion, and Good of the World, it is both innocent and laudable,
and the Advantages of it for those ends are confessed; yet it is plain, from too
sad Experience, that it is too generally sought upon base Considerations, and
frequently applied to very ill Purposes; as is allowed, when it is made use of
for the Raising of Heresies, the Adulterating or Confounding the Simplicity of
the Christian Doctrine with Philosophical Notions and Distinctions, or to the
raising and continuing of unnecessary and dangerous disputes out of Pride and
Vanity, of Passion or Worldly Interest, to the disturbing of the Peace of the
Church, the Ruin of Charity, and manifest Injury of Religion. Paucis opus est
literis ad mentem bonam.
But as Virtue may be obtained without great Natural parts, or acquired
Knowledge, as is evident by the Lives of the common Body of Christians in the
first Ages, and is Nobilitas nil aliud sit quam cognita virtus, quis in eo quem
vetera scentem videat ad gloriam, generis antiquitatem desiderat?

Sed genus and proavos and quae non fecimus ipsi, Vix ea nostra voco.

Tota licet veteres exornent undique cerae atria, Nobilitas sola est atque
unica virtus.


honorable without any Ornaments from Birth and Honor, Authority or Learning;
so it makes Men capable of doing much good: Let them consider not only this;
but further, That it pleases Almighty God sometimes, as it seems, to raise the
Spirits of Men above their natural pitch for great Performances, to make use of
mean and contemptible Instruments, in Humane Appearance, to bring about the
great Ends of his Providence, whereby his Wisdom and Power is more visible, and
the Pride of Man is more humbled; and that among the various Instances of this
kind, which Sacred and Profane History acquaint us with, he did so in the
Publishing of Christianity, when he chose the foolish things of the World to
confound 1 Cor. 1. 27.
the Wise, and the weak things of the World to confound the things which are
Mighty: when he Commissioned a few mean and illiterate Persons to Preach the
Gospel, which notwithstanding prevailed over the Policy and Learning, the
Worldly Interest and Prejudice, the Strength and Opposition of the World; and
that as then not many Wise Men after the Flesh, 1 Cor. 1. 26.
not many Mighty, not many Noble were called; so in the Ages since, though
there has been of all Conditions, as well Noble, as Ignoble; Learned, as
Illiterate; Kings, and Philosophers; Emperors, and Statesmen, who have been
truly devoted to Religion, and have showed the mighty Power and Energy of it,
and adorned the Ages in which they have lived; yet it has been a general
Observation among Heathens as well as Christians, and it is a terrible one for
great Men to reflect upon, Luxuriant animi rebus plerunque secundis. Prima
peregrinos obscoena pecunia mores intulit, turpi fregerunt secula luxu Divitiae
molles. Pecuniis augetur improbitas. Divitiae seculi sunt laquei diaboli.
Divitiae raro virtutis sunt comites. Pietas, probitas, fides, privata bona
sunt. Fortuna quem nimium fovet, stultum facit.
That Riches and Honors do in the Nature of them tend to corrupt Men's Minds,
are great Clogs to Wisdom, mighty Obstructions in the Business of the Christian
Warfare to those that possess them: And therefore, That the Great and the Noble
are too generally diverted and carried away from the One thing necessary, the
working out of their own Salvation, and consequently their being concerned for
that of others, by the violent Temptations that their Condition exposes and
subjects them to, which Persons of a lower Rank are much without; wherefore our
Savior has assured us how Matthew. 19. 23, 24.
hard it is for a Rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; out of a sense
whereof a great number of Christians in most, if not all Ages, have refused
Titles and Honors, and have renounced Riches and Worldly Grandeur: Nay,
Princes and Potentates, Kings and Queens, have forsaken their Crowns, their
Fortunes and Territories, for a safe and happy Retirement: And it accordingly
appears, by the Account that is given of the Endeavors that have been so
successful toward a National Reformation, That as they were not begun, so
they have not been assisted by many of the Rich and Mighty, but by Persons of a
lower Rank, who submitted to be reckoned Disturbers of the public Peace,
Imprudent and Hypocritical Persons, etc. as the Christians of old were by the
Heathens, and as such will hardly fail to be who in a corrupt Age shall
faithfully go about to convince some Men of their Lukewarmness and neglect of
their Duty, and to disturb the Generality in their Vices, for the effecting a
National Reformation; who were willing, I say, to bear the Censures, the cruel
Mockings, and the Frowns of the World, and perhaps some of them to hazard their
Lives for the Vindicating of the Honor of the Laws of God, the Good of Souls,
and the Service of their Country; and that though it may perhaps be expected
from the Character of some few of the Great and Noble among us, who seem to be
much more honorably distinguished from those of their own Rank, by their
Virtue, than they are from those below them, by their Quality, that they have
it in their Inclinations, as it seems to be in their Power, with God's
Blessing, to be Instruments of Reforming us from public Profaneness and
Immoralities; yet, that it is still to be feared, that great Men will not
generally at least obtain of themselves to declare for oppressed Virtue, and
engage in its Cause till it has regained its Reputation more generally in the
World, and it is accounted a Mark of greater Infamy to be vicious.

Profaneness and Debauchery have, in truth, been ever Infamous in the Opinions
of the wise and good Men in all Ages of the World, and treated as such by the
Religion and Laws of Heathen Nations, as well as by the Christian Religion, and
the Laws of our own Country; which Justice and Temperance, Chastity and Truth,
never were, that I know of, by any; nay, there have never, I conceive, been
many Men so lost to the Notions of Good and Evil, as seriously to set a Mark of
Infamy upon some Men for their Virtue, or to make Panegyricks upon others for
their Vices; and neither the Number or the Quality of those that are guilty of
Profaneness and Debauchery can any more alter the Nature of them, or can take
off them that Infamy that the Law of God, the Laws of Nations, and the Law of
Nature have fixed on them, than they can the Nature of Murder, Bribery, or
Theft; and as they are infamous in their Nature, they will every day more
appear to be so, if we continue to make our vigorous Efforts against them. It
will not ere long be thought creditable for Men of an inferior Rank to be
carried through the Streets before the Magistrate, or to be put in the Stocks,
to do there public Penance for the Violation of Divine and Humane Laws: Or
will it be Honorable for Men of Title or Authority, who have thought
themselves unfit for gentile Conversation without a large share of Lewdness,
have reckoned it Wit to Blaspheme, and have, within our Memories, it is
believed, made their way to their Preferments by their Profaneness and
Debauchery, to have the Penalties of those Laws levied upon them in the Sight
of their Neighbors or their Country; to be upon Record; and to be disabled for
those Offenses, for Places of Honor, of Public and Private Trusts; to be told
before the Congregation Four times a Year by the King, in his Proclamation,
that he reckons them to be a Discredit to his Kingdom, and strictly Commands
their being brought to Punishment; and by their Minister at the same time, that
they ought to be avoided by Men of Religion, to be excluded from Christian
Communion till they reform, and that they will, unless they do so, be shut out
of Heaven, and be condemned to unspeakable and everlasting Confusion and
Torment? In short, we may in a little time see a Drunkard, a Lewd or a Profane
Person, though a Man of the greatest Quality or Estate, who now passes with too
little Remark and Contempt, and is kept in countenance by the Multitude of
Offenders of the same kind, make but a very scurvy Figure, be ashamed to show
himself in any Company, but of such as are like himself, abandoned of a sense
of true Honor as well as Religion, and shunned by all but the unclean Herd of
the Vicious and Profane, who may ere long be ashamed of one another in the
Sight of the Sun, and may be forced to converse, or rather to have their gangs
as High-way-Men, Clippers and Coiners have, in dark Corners, and in continual
fear of being discovered. This is part of the Glorious Prospect that we have in
view, whilst we continue to make our vigorous Efforts against Vice and
Profaneness: And is there any doubt whether they that acquit themselves in
this Noble Enterprise as they ought will entitle themselves to great
Acknowledgments from the present Age, and from Posterity, since the Influence
of their good Example, and the happy Effects of their pious Endeavors, may
last to succeeding Ages, as long as the Nation, and perhaps the World may last?

Let then the Men of the World, whose Hopes terminate with this Life, pursue
Honors and Titles, and what in their foolish Language they call their Worldly
Advantages; let them that think of no other Happiness, court popular Air,
intrigue and fawn, drudge and scramble for little parcels of Earth, which if
they meet with are their Portion, attended with Fear and Envy, Jealousy and
Hatred, Anxiety and Grief, O si pectora pateant divitum quantos intus sublimis
agit fortuna metus? Brutio coro pulsante fretum mitior unda est. Quem mihi
regem dabis non curis plenum; non diadema aspicias, sed vitam afflictione
refertam, non catervas satellitu^, sed curaru^ multitudine^.

Cur tu hos Evasisse putes, quos diri conscia facti Men's habet attonitos and
surdo verbere caedet Occulto quatiente animo tortore flagellum?

Non enim gazae neque consularis summovet lictor miseros tumultus mentis, and
curas laqueata circum tecta volantes.


which are their secret and almost constant Tormentors, and make them as the
Scripture expresses it, as the troubled Sea that cannot rest: But let those
that can look on these deluded and miserable Souls with a just Pity; that know
the Pleasures of Innocence; that are acquainted with the Triumphs of Conscience
that arise from the sense of their having served their God, their Country, and
themselves; that hope, after a few Years, for an Everlasting Inheritance, and
unspeakable Joy at God's Right Hand; that believe that our Blessed Savior 1 John 3 8.
Christ Jesus was manifested that he might destroy the Works of the Devil,
think it more honorable to be employed in the Promoting the same Glorious
Design to the utmost of their Power, and by all Christian Methods, according to
their Abilities and Opportunities, than to be Favorites of the greatest
Prince, than to be Masters of the World. We shall indeed meet with many
Discouragements, and much Resistance in these Endeavors. The Reformation of a
Nation, particularly that is so very degenerate, that a great part of it seems
to act as if it had entered into a Combination against Religion, cannot be
thought to be an easy Work; we never, I suppose, heard of such a one in any
Age that was effected without Opposition. The first Attempts, especially of a
National Reformation, unless they have the Advantages of Power, of Interest, or
of Numbers of Men to support them, must be attended with great Difficulties;
those that are engaged in them may expect to wrestle not only against the
Passions and Lusts of private Men, but against Principalities Ephesians. 6. 12.
and Powers, against the Strength and Policy of the Prince, as well as Men of
this World, since those that most need Reformation will most explode the
Attempts of it, and oppose it; and among them there will be often such met with
as by their Quality or Interest, their Power or their Authority, will be most
capable to obstruct it; and there will be others, who, when they have not
Power, or they dare not openly oppose the Undertaking, will be spreading their
Jealousies, that some secular Interest or dangerous Design is carrying on under
such plausible Pretenses, and will use their utmost diligence to find Fault
with the manner (how regular soever it be) of its being carried on, or to raise
Objections against the Persons engaged in it; and when they cannot find any
real ones, they will have recourse to their Inventions, to downright Slanders,
to mis-represent them, as the Heathen Persecutors did the Martyrs, to expose
them the more to the People's Hatred and Rage; nay, and that which makes the
Work yet the more difficult is, that there will not be wanting another kind of
Men, and indeed, I conceive, some of the worst sort of Enemies to such a
Design, who through some unhappy Principles or Prejudices will not only be
content to sit still themselves, and to be unconcerned in this Matter, but
perhaps to excuse themselves from giving that Assistance which might otherwise
be with Modesty expected from them; and to prevent the Censure that may be apt
to fall upon them for their ill Conduct, will be very ready to declare the
Attempts of this kind impracticable, unseasonable, or imprudent, as they do
most other things of the same nature; which, it is much to be both feared and
lamented, many of them want either Zeal, or perhaps Honesty to undertake, which
Men of no less true Wisdom, (if that Principle, whether it be called Caution or
Policy, that keeps Men from doing their Duty, deserves the Name of Folly,
rather than Wisdom,) not only attempt, but surmount the appearing Difficulties
of. But though Resistance to the first Attempts of Reformation from the Powers of
Darkness and the corrupt Nature of Man might be foreseen, and may have been
experienced by those concerned in the Transactions I have given an account of,
and may be still expected in some measure in the Prosecution of it; yet as
'twas at first necessary to undertake it, so it is still as necessary to pursue
it. Nay, the higher the Tide of Debauchery and Profaneness runs, the more
evident Reason there is for us to look to our Banks, to use all proper Methods
for the Opposing of it, and the more generous and brave is the Opposition,
unless it is more reasonable to give way to it, and expect an Inundation of
Wickedness and Ruin, than to endeavor to prevent it, since as the Case will
grow the worse, and more desperate by the delay, so the Objections that are now
made against it will thereby grow the stronger.

Let then the Opposition to this Enterprise be as great and desperate, and from
as various Causes as we can well suppose it; if those who are engaged in it do
sincerely propose God's Glory and the Good of Mankind in their Endeavors; if
they often turn their Thoughts within themselves, as well as upon the Faults of
others, and endeavor to be blameless and Phil. 2. 15.
harmless, and without Rebuke in the midst of a perverse Generation; if they
continue to take great Care that their Conduct in this Affair be regular,
governed by the Laws of the Land, and the Precepts of their Religion,
remembering that the Goodness of no end can make Evil means lawful, and as free
as far as it is possible from Imprudencies and Inadvertencies, to which the
wisest and best Men are subject, and therefore are no reasonable Objection
against a good Design to honest Men, that know how to give all just Allowances
to Humane Frailties in a Work of Difficulty, wherein many unexpected
Occurrences will arise, Numbers of Men are engaged, and who will be sometimes
taken unprepared and at disadvantage by bad and designing Men, who will not
fail to wait for their Halting, and to improve all kind of Advantages against
them; if they go on with Diligence and Resolution, considering that Solomon's
Direction, Whatever thy Hand finds to do, do it with thy Might, Eccl. 9. 10.
in this Work seems more especially to be regarded by those who are employed in
it, a Woe being pronounced against them that do Jer. 48. 10.
the Work of the Lord Or. negligently. Rev. 2. 10.
deceitfully, and a Crown of Life being promised to them that are faithful to
Death; if, lastly, they cry mightily to God, to whose Omnipotence no
Difficulties are insuperable, and without whom nothing is strong, no means can
attain their end, for his gracious Direction and merciful Assistance in a Work
of Hazard and Difficulty, wherein Wisdom and Constancy, the Spiritual Armor of
the Gospel is requisite, the Honor and Interest of Religion, and the Good of
Souls seem to be so much concerned, to prevent their being assaulted with such
violent Temptations that might overcome them, or to give them such
extraordinary Supports and Comforts as may enable them to bear up under them;
and they humbly depend more upon his Direction and Blessing than their own
Diligence and Conduct, considering that the Zeal we have for God's Honor, and
the Success of it is from Him; that our best Endeavors herein, as well as our
other Performances, will have a great mixture of Humane Frailty; and that after
all we shall do we shall be but unprofitable Servants. Luke (...). (...)
If they thus go on with Sincerity, with Prudence, with Courage, with Humility,
and trust in God, they may, I think, face all the World, we may soon see what
Courage Vice has, whether Profaneness and Debauchery will be able to hold up
their heads with their Supporters, (which they have too long had within our
Memory) as Religion has often done without them, and when the Powers of the
World have been against it. No, Sin is of the Nature of the Devil, its Author,
cowardly and sneaking, and will, with God's Blessing, give way when thus
opposed, which those concerned in the Transactions I have given an Account of
have experimented, and who have had so great Success, as makes it very evident
that a general Concurrence of good Men may, with God's Blessing, effect a
general Reformation; but if the Concurrence of Men of Religion should not prove
so universal as is hoped it will, or if our Endeavors should not succeed to a
National Reformation, as is proposed, we may however hope to do a great deal of
good; we shall bear our Testimony to Religion against the Corruptions of the
Age, and we cannot, I think, fail of giving a great Check to public
Wickedness; and though we should not after all, by our Prayers and Endeavors,
prevent the Deluge of Calamities that threaten us, an Ark may mercifully be
provided for us, we may deliver our own Souls, and it will then be known who
they are that are to be thanked that a thorough Reformation was not effected,
and the Misery of the Nation prevented; not only those who by desperately
discouraging and opposing pious and proper Endeavors for Promoting a
Reformation, seem to be of the Number of those that may be said, in some sense,
to fight against Acts chapter 5. v. 39.
God; but those likewise that despised the Warnings we gave them of their
Danger, all the Persuasions with which we pressed them to set about it, and
would not be prevailed with to give any hearty Assistance to the Work.
Supposing then that we are to prepare, in the Prosecution of this Enterprise,
for evil Surmisings and reproachful Words; for Storms of Malice and ill Will,
which the Enemy of all Goodness and the Passions of Men may be expected to
raise, this, I conceive, may, now the Tide is turning, be generally the
greatest Opposition of the infatuated and senseless Slaves of Vice; for in
Reverence to our common Nature I must presume, that there are few that will be
declared Agents for the Devil, that are so abandoned of all sense of Honor,
all Concern for their Reputation, as to enter publicly the Lists, and venture
their Lives for his Service. And as wicked Men have therein the worst Cause,
they have, I think, no settled and steady Principles to act upon, but little
true Courage, and not much Faith among them, they will often betray one another
when Occasion offers, and therefore we may conclude that they will never make a
firm stand against the united Body of good Men if they acquit themselves as
they ought in so glorious an Undertaking.

To the Men of Religion and Virtue of all Ranks, Orders, and Denominations,
without distinction, I ask leave therefore, in this common Cause of Religion,
humbly to apply my self. Your Religion is avowedly attacqued by the desperate
Rebels of Christianity, and Enemies to Virtue; your God is publicly
dishonored, yea, sometimes, it is still to be feared, Blasphemed, for the
Entertainment of Persons of all Degrees, all Ages, and both Sexes; His Laws are
trampled on; his Servants despised; the Notions of Good and Evil are
endeavored to be confounded, and your Country is in imminent danger of being
lost, if in the present Contest between Religion and Debauchery, Religion does
not prevail. You are all confessedly, by your Baptismal Engagement, listed
Soldiers for God's Service, against the Devil's Kingdom. And as God has an
undoubted Title to your Service, the King by publicly declaring for a vigorous
Execution of the Laws against public Wickedness, and the Cause of Religion,
has given you an happy Opportunity of discharging your Fidelity and Zeal for
your Great Lord and Master; and your Fellow Christians, who are already
successfully engaged in a public Opposition to Vice and Profaneness, to these
Rebels to Religion, and Enemies to your Country, seem to call on you to enter
into their pious Confederacy, as Moses heretofore did on the Israelites, when
he slood in the Gate of Exodus 32. 20.
the Camp; Who is on the Lord's side, let him come unto me? Or as Holy David of
P^ 94. 16.
old, Who will rise up for me against the Evil doers? Who will stand up for me
against the Workers of Iniquity? Now then is the Time, to make one general and
brave Effort for the Interest of Religion, and for the Welfare of the English
Nation. And will you any longer defer your Declaring and Engaging in this
Glorious Work, now it seems so apparent that this Cloud that appeared so little
to you at first is like to overspread our whole Horizon; that one of the most
plausible and uncomfortable Objections which was made to this Undertaking, of
its being impracticable, which we have too much reason to suspect to be upon
other like Occasions a frequent Excuse for Fear, Laziness, or want of good
Principles, is taken off, by the great Success that has attended it; that the
Heat of the Day, the fiercest Opposition to these Attempts, seems much over;
and that you have so very great reason to conclude that the Virtuous part of
the Nation, of all Parties, will fall in and give their Assistance in it, when
more particular Methods shall be laid before them; that if we point our united
Batteries against the strong holds of Debauchery and Profaneness; if we
prosecute this Religious War with Conduct and Resolution, which is so
successfully begun with so unequal a humane force, we have Victory in view, we
may, with God's Blessing, see a Reformation thoroughly essected, and put upon
such a firm Foundation, as that it may not be easily in the Power of a viciuos
Court, or of a degenerate Nobility or Gentry, in a succeeding Reign to overturn
it, again to debauch the Nation, and bring it in such danger of Ruin. But is
it not enough that you that have had an early Knowledge of these Transactions,
have not sooner engaged in a Cause which you could not well be supposed,
without great Inconsideration or Prejudice, but secretly to approve of under
all its Disadvantages, when it was in it self the same as it is now with its
Success, and merely perhaps because you thought the Service might be too hot
for you, and therefore you left it to others to engage in an Opposition to Vice
whilst it was Triumphant, to fall upon it in its Intrenchments, to bear the
brunt of the Battle, and reserved your selves for less doubtful and dangerous
Service, till the main Body of the Nation should come up, and Victory should be
turning on the side of Virtue? Cowardice in this Case, as in War, may be almost
as mischievous and as criminal as Treachery. Where is then your Zeal for God,
or Charity for Man, if you appear still so unconcerned whether Religion or
Profaneness prevails, if after Ten Years are past of a Reign in which we had
reason to promise our selves a Reformation would be carried on, and be the
Glory of it, you still frame further Excuses to postpone it, and such weak ones
as will very hardly pass with a mortal Man, who understands what indispensible
Obligations Religion lays upon us, heartily to set about it; but surely not
with the living God, that sees not as Man sees, but searches the Heart? Do you
think this Nation has not bled and suffered enough for our inexcusable Delays,
our deferring this necessary Work? How can you reconcile your Neutrality to the
Promises which many of you may be supposed to have made in the late days of
your Humiliation, or the Prayers that most of you put up to God for a National
Reformation? How is it consistent with the Pretensions you make of your being
of the purest Religion, or of the best constituted Church? What do you think of
that Declaration of your Blessed Savior, He that is Matt. 12. 30.
not with me is against me? Can you persuade your selves that your continuing
your Neutrality till the Victory is either so gained on the side of Religion,
that there will be little need of your Assistance; or that the Interests of
Religion are depressed, and your Country ruined, (which there is such Danger
of) beyond the Example of former Ages, deserves either the Name of Bravery, or
the Wisdom that is from Above? Athletam stadium, Nauclerum, tempestas, ducem,
pugna, magnanimum calamitas, Christianum vero tentatio probat and examinat,
Basil.

Nihil, mihi videtur, infelicius eo cui nihil unquam evenit adversi, non licuit
illi se experiri. Transisti sine Adversario vitam, nemo sciet quid potueris; ne
tu quidem ipse.


Difficulties and Sufferings are surely the proper Exercises of Christians, are
as it were the Test and Touchstone of Noble Minds; and therefore the Persons
who in all Ages have been esteemed the Wisest and Bravest, and to have deserved
best of Mankind, have been those, who for the Vindication of Truth, the Cause
of Religion, and the Service of their Country, have cheerfully undergone
Ignominy, Banishment, and Death, through the Malignity of the Times, popular
Fury, or the Tyranny of Governments; Magnum exemplum nisi mala fortuna non
invenit. Nondum felix es si te nondum turba deridet. Mutium ignis, Fabritium
paupertas, Regulum tormenta, Socratem venenum superare non potuit. Cicuta
magnum Socratem fecit, Sen. Ep. 13. Non enim hilaritate, nec lascivia, nec
risu, aut joco comite levitatis, sed saepe etiam tristes, firmitate and
constantia sunt beati, C^ecro de sin. (...), Plat. de R^p. Lib. 2. p. 361.
insomuch, that the most celebrated Heathen Moralists and Philosophers
declared, That a Man could hardly be supposed to be Virtuous without Suffering
for being so. And one of them could, we are told, bravely thus express himself
to this purpose: If a Man can see a Sword at his Eyes without winking; if he
can make it an indifferent Matter to him whether his Life goes out of his
Throat, or at his Mouth; if he can hear himself sentenced to Banishment, or
Torments, and can say, All this I am provided for; this is, says he, the Temper
of Mind that makes him great. Accordingly Socrates obtained so great Fame for
his Suffering Death with Constancy for his Religion. Aristides his Justice, and
Rutilius his Integrity and Courage, were more signalized by their Banishment.
But not to send Christians to learn Constancy in Suffering for a good Cause to
Heathens, among whom it was, in the first Ages of Christianity, a common
Saying, Soli Christiani mortis contemptores.
That the Christians only were Despisers of Death. So that Origin could it
seems boldly tell them, We can as cheerfully lay down our Lives for our
Religion, as the hardiest Philosopher of you can lay down his Coat. Did the
Martyrs and Confessors count it so great an Honor and Happiness to suffer
Bonds and Imprisonment, Exile, and all kinds of Death, to be Rackt, Burnt,
Stoned, Boiled, to be thrown to wild Beasts, and condemned to the Mines, for
the Honor of their Lord and Master, and the Salvation of their own Souls;
laughed at all the Methods of Cruelty, and tired out the Malice of their
Persecutors? And by these means, as the Roman Emperor and Philosopher, Marcus
Antoninus, told the common Assembly at Ephesus, in his Letter to them, to stop
the blind Rage of the Pagan Priests and People against them, They were always
Conquerours. Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae.
Could such vast Numbers of Persons, of both Sexes, of all Ages, and such
various Conditions, more greedily court Martyrdom, than, Men did in After-ages
seek Bishoprics and Preferments in the Church, and valued it more than Crowns
and Scepters? Insomuch, that a general Council thought sit to restrain their
Exposing themselves unnecessarily to it. And can the Disciples of the same
Crucified Savior, who are obliged by him to bear the Cross, are Luke 14. 27.
John 12.
bid to rejoice and be exceeding glad when they are Reviled and Persecuted for
his sake; and are directed by the Apostle, to count it all Joy when Jam. 1. 2.
they fall into diverse Temptations, be affrighted at all Appearances of
Suffering in a good Cause, think the danger only of meeting with Shame, or
other little Inconveniences, a sufficient Excuse for their not appearing for
the Honor of their Lord and Master, and the Saving of their Country? Nay, Can
the Soldier endure all the Fatigues, and venture all the Hazards of War, make
his way through Blood and Bullets, Fire and Water, upon no higher Motives
generally, it is to be feared, than for a larger Pay, or a greater Post of
Honor in an Army; to be talked of by those that have no more Reason than
himself, or use it to little purpose? Can the Courtier, in a corrupt Reign,
intrigue and plod, lie and fawn, lose his Rest, and wast his Spirits, endure
the Frowns of Men, and the Reproaches of his own Conscience, to please an
Earthly Prince, that is composed of the same Elements with himself? Can the
Covetous Man drudge and sweat, pinch Nature, and harass it, live Poorly and
Contemptibly, for the miserable Consideration of filling his Chests full of
polished Earth, or leaving it for a Son who often takes almost as much Pains to
damn his Soul in Spending it, as his Father might his, without Repentance, by
his unjustifiable Methods of Getting it? Can the Sons of Wine and Lust be
content to brute their Minds, and ruin their Bodies, bear the Cries of ruined
Tradesmen, and of their miserable Families, to transmit Poverty and Disease,
Infamy and Misery to their Posterity; to watch and fear, to rot and roar for
their unlawful and beastly Pleasures? Can the Libertine, when his Conscience
will not suffer him to be easy in his Sins, when he wishes there was no
Religion in this World, nor future Account in the next, be indefatigable in
raking out of all the Heathen Authors, and our Modern Plays, all Expressions
that may seem to favor his Licentiousness, and may help to beget or strengthen
his Infidelity; in short, take more pains to silence and stupifie his
Conscience, than might, with God's Blessing, be sufficient, if it were well
applied, to subdue his vicious Habits, to be wise, and to be happy? Can these
Men be thus resolute, diligent and daring in the pursuit of their Sins, or the
empty things of this World, that neither Frowns nor Favors, Hazards nor
Difficulties, do make any such Impressions upon them, as either to deter or
allure them from the Prosecution of their Designs, or from treasuring up to
themselves Wrath against the Day of Romans 2. 5.
Wrath, from being irrecoverably and unspeakably miserable; and shall the
Proselytes of Religion, that know its inestimable Value, be so fainthearted and
sneaking in its Glorious Cause, and in the discharge of their Duty, for the
obtaining an Everlasting Happiness, that every little Difficulty, the Favor or
the Frowns of its open Enemies, shall discourage and keep them from giving
their Assistance in its Defense? This surely all Men, that are sincerely
concerned for the Honor and Interest of Religion, and expect to receive the
unspeakable Rewards it proposes to those that faithfully pursue it, will be
ashamed of. I confess to the World, I dare not, I know not how to hope to be
rewarded with Everlasting Honor and Happiness hereafter from Him, who in the
purchasing of our Redemption endured the Heb. 12. 2.
Cross, despising the Shame, if I cannot prevail upon my self to suffer ill
Treatment, to be calumniated, laughed at, and contemned, in Obedience to his
Commands, and for the Good of Souls, for whom he died: Nay, I will not ask
Pardon of the profane Crew, the Generation of Scorners, that I tell them yet
more plainly, that I hope I had rather bear all the Contempt that their Tongues
and Pens can fling upon me for any Assistance I am enabled, by God's Grace, to
give this Cause I am representing, (whilst I continue under the same Sentiments
of it) which I do expect a share of, and am preparing my self to welcome; nay,
to suffer Death, if I am called to it, in the Discharge of my Duty therein,
rather than bear the Reproaches of my own Mind in this World for an
Unconcernedness for it, and much more than to be disowned by my Blessed Savior
at the great Day of Recompense, and to endure his Everlasting Displeasure. And
without the leave of those unhappy Wretches who would pass for Wits in these
days, by saying such things as have in all Ages marked those that have been
guilty of them with the most infamous Characters, and have made them looked on
as Enemies of Mankind, even Monsters in Humane Nature; those Panders for Hell I
mean who turn the most serious and sacred things into Jest and Railery, and who
will not therefore, I suppose, fail to treat with Scorn and Reproach the
Endeavors of Reformation, and those that are concerned in them: I must
remember them, that the Scripture not only tells us that in the last days
Scoffers shall appear, 2 Pet. 3. 3. Prove. 19. 29. Prove. 3. 34.
and that Judgments are prepared for Scorners, but that God particularly,
scorneth the Scorners. And as for those that herd among these profane
Scoffers, these professed Advocates for the Devil's Service, that neglect their
Duty, and sacrifice their Consciences, only to avoid their Scorn and
Contumelies, let me desire them to consider, whether they have not reason to
fear that God will treat them with Everlasting Contempt who for his sake, or in
Obedience to his plain Commands, refuse to be contemned.

Let us not then, Fellow Christians, who would be accounted faithful Soldiers
of Jesus Christ, be afraid of the Reproaches and Revilings Isa. 51. ^.
of such profane and profligate Wretches, but let us rejoice in them, and in
any other Persecution which we may undergo in so glorious a Cause. Let us
consider, that this Life is the proper Season for Service and Suffering, and
the next of Reward and Happiness. Unum quodque habet propositum Principes suos.
Romani duces imitentur Camillos Fabritios, Scipiones; philosophi proponant
Socratem, Platonem, Aristot etc. Nos autem habeamus propositi nostri principes,
Paulos, Hilariones, etc. Hieronymus.
Let the Lives and Deaths of the Martyrs and Confessors of old be much in our
Minds. Let us remember that the best Christians in all Ages have been derided
and contemned, that our Blessed Savior himself, the Captain of our Salvation,
who was rejected and despised Isa. 53. 3.
of Men, has commanded us not to be afraid Luke 12. 5.
of them that kill the Body, and after that have no more that they can do; but
to fear him that has Power to cast into Hell; and has said, that whosoever
shall be ashamed of him, Mar. 8. 28.
and of his Words, of him also shall he be ashamed when he comes in the Glory
of his Father with the holy Angels; but that if we are Reviled and Mat. 5. 11.
Persecuted for his sake our Reward shall be great in Heaven. Let us fortify
our selves with these Considerations against the most violent Opposition of the
Enemies of Goodness, and the dangerous Suggestions and ill Examples of formal
and lukewarm Christians, and of those who are too often falsely called Friends;
let us look on all their Insinuations, and any Objections whatsoever to the
Discharge of our Duty in this Undertaking, which we may meet with from the
Prudent and the Wary, tending to discourage us from the hearty Prosecution of
it, as Temptations that we are to resist, unless they can convince us that we
do not act herein as becomes Men and Christians, and good Members of the
Community; that this Work is not honorable in its self, desirable in its
Effects, and acceptable to Almighty God, which, I think, they will never do,
since they cannot prove that the Civil Government ought not to endeavor to
punish and suppress Public Sins, and the open Defiance of Religion, in answer
to Scripture, clear Reason, and the general Consent of Mankind to the contrary.

Lastly therefore, Let all those who are already sincerely concerned in this
Noble Undertaking, and all others that have any Love to God, any Charity to
Man, any Concern for their Country, or Regard to their Posterity, to engage
them in it, consider, that we have herein the Laws of God and the Nation, the
Commands of the King, the Concurrence of a late Representative Body of the
Nation, the Prayers of good Men, the Pretenses of those that carry but a Form
and Profession of Religion, and the Consciences that are not hardened, even of
bad Men, on our side; and moreover, the great Success that has already
attended these Attempts, to animate and encourage our Zeal and Diligence in it:
So that if we acquit our selves herein like Men and Christians; if God is on
our side, we know, there is, as Solomon says, no Wisdom, nor Understanding,
Prove. 21. 30.
nor Counsel, against him; we need not much fear the Strength or Policy of the
World, or the Powers of Darkness; we may, with God's Blessing, see Profaneness
and Debauchery every day more and more fly into dark Corners, as Idolatry of
old did at the appearance of Christianity, Vice be branded and confounded,
Virtue embraced, Religion prevail, England flourish, and give such an Example
as may provoke succeeding Ages and other Nations to an Imitation, and give
perhaps Occasion to reform Christendom and Mankind. But what Triumph of Soul,
which neither Riches, nor Honors, nor the Flesh can give, such happy Souls
may, Living or Dying, have, who have undergone Shame and Sufferings in the
faithful Discharge of their Duty, and for the Cause of God, who have been his
Instruments in bringing about such blessed Effects; nay, in discharging their
Duty herein, and in other respects, sincerely, though Success which is not in our
Power, and will not be required of us, should not attend it? And, on the
contrary, what severe Reflections they may hereafter make on their Behavior,
who, after this Matter is plainly laid before them, and a public Reformation
of Manners seems to be put as it were into their hands, will either openly
oppose, or secretly undermine the just Endeavors of it, or that will not be
prevailed upon either to concur in the Methods that are already laid, or to
engage in any other that they can suppose may be more effectual for the
carrying on a National Reformation, that can contentedly look on and see their
Fellow Christians suffer in any kind, by their brave Opposition to the declared
Enemies of God, and the Devil's Kingdom, the Cause of Religion to be injured
and depressed, and their Country so much endangered, for want of their giving
their seasonable and zealous Assistance to it, I will not undertake to describe.

I will only add, That if the Attempts of Reformation, which were began with so
great Disadvantage, have born up under so many Difficulties, which are carried
on by the united Endeavors of such Bodies of Men, in the several Parts of this
City, are spreading through the Cities and Corporations of the Kingdom, and are
propagating in those of Ireland, who have a Communication with one another, are
governed by Methods that have been approved by Persons of great Wisdom, and
consummated Judgment, and which have been so highly successful, should be
defeated by the Industry and Power, the Number and Interest of its Enemies: If,
I say, we should suffer Debauchery and Profaneness to regain their ground, and
to carry the Victory, after the Advances that are thus made toward the
Suppressing of them, and the Encouragements and Advantages we have for the
Carrying of them on to so glorious an Issue, have we not very great reason to
fear that we may never again have such an Opportunity put into our Hands? Can
it be thought easy, humanely speaking, to bring the Body of Men together that
are now engaged in it, to rally and reassume a Baffled Cause, wherein they may
perhaps be apt to think they may have made a full and dismal experiment of the
desperate Aversion and Opposition of this Generation to Reformation, have, if
they have acted therein, and in other parts of their Duty, sincerely, kept the
Guilt of public Wickedness from lying on them, and may have delivered their
own Souls? Or is there any probability that this Cause will be revived and
successfully retrieved by those, whom no Arguments will now prevail on, to
concur in the present Methods, or to give any other zealous Assistance to it?
And, who is there that believes that there is a Righteous God that governs the
World, that will not fear, how sanguine soever some Men may be upon the
firmness of our present Peace and Settlement, that notwithstanding our Councils
and Confederacies, we shall feel the Effects of the high Displeasure of
Almighty God, upon whose Blessing the Stability of our present Peace and
outward Prosperity does depend; that He will be avenged on such a Nation as
this? And if Jer. 6. 9.
this should prove to be our dismal Case, might it not then be said over us; O
ungrateful and rebellious Nation, that would so provoke infinite Patience
and Forbearance, would obstinately refuse so many gracious Offers, contemn
such various Methods of Mercy, as if thou had been desperately resolved upon
Destruction! O England! England! To what Misery have thy Sins brought thee! But
the Cause of Reformation is God's Cause, His Providence has seemed to me to
favor the poor Endeavors of it, which are represented in these Papers, and
therefore I hope they will, with his Blessing, so prosper and prevail, that
such a National Reformation may be effected as may prevent His heavy Judgments
falling upon us.

And may Almighty God, who is pleased to magnify his Power in Weakness, for
this end mercifully direct and support those who are sincerely engaged in this
Glorious Work, give what is said herein agreeable to his Will some Success in
the furthering of it, and graciously pardon any thing in it that may not be
acceptable to Him, for the Lord Jesus Christ's Sake.

All Glory to God.
ERRATA.
Page 5. lin. 23. for evil read wicked. p. 21. l. 3. for Interest r. Interests.
p. 26. l. 6. dele and. p. 41. l. 6. for know r. knew. p. ibid. l. 26. for has
r. have. p. 47. at the end of the Marginal Note dele p. 66, 67. p. 57. l. 5.
for do r. does. p. 5^. l. 4. for has r. have. p. 84. l. 2. for seems r. seem.
p. 98. l. 15. for pervented r. prevented. p. 113. l. 16. for. has r. have. p.
115. l. 7. for have r. has.

Advertisement.
ABstracts of the Laws against Profaneness and Debauchery. Blank Warrants
against profane Swearing and Cursing, Drunkenness and Profanation of the
Lord's Day, by Tippling in Public Houses, and Exercising of Trade. Blank
Registers of such Warrants, for the Magistrates calling of Constables,
Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, etc. to account at the Sessions or
otherwise, for the Execution of them, and the application of the Money thereby
levied, to the use of the Poor. Prudential Rules for the giving of Informations
to Magistrates in these cases. Printed for the ease of all Magistrates, and the
direction of private Persons, who, in any part of the Kingdom, are religiously
engaged in the Glorious Work of promoting a National Reformation: and sold by
B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill; W. Rogers, at the Sun in
Fleetstreet; D. Brown, at the Swan without Temple Bar; and W. Henshman in
Westminster Hall. An Account of the Societies for Reformation of Manners. A
Sermon Preached at St. Mary-le-Bow, to the Societies for the Reformation of
Manners: By the Right Reverend Father in God, Edward, Lord Bishop of
Gloucester, in 8vo. Price 6 d. A Sermon Preached at St. Mary-le-Bow, to the
Societies for the Reformation of Manners: By John Hancock, D. D. Chaplain to
his Grace the D. of Bedford, in 8o. Price 6 d. A Sermon Preached at St.
Mary-le-Bow, to the Societies for the Reformation of Manners: By Lilly Butler,
Minister of St. Mary Aldermanbury, in 8o. Price 6 d. A Sermon Preached at St.
Mary-le-Bow, to the Societies for Reformation of Manners: By Samuel Bradford,
Rector of the said Parish, in 8o. Price 6 d.
These Books sold by B. Aylmer in Cornhill.

For the more Effectual Promoting the Design of this Book, is added, An
Abstract of the Penal-Laws
Against Immorality and Profaneness, Commanded to be put in Speedy and
Vigorous Execution, by His Majesty's Gracious and Pious Proclamation, pursuant
to the Humble Address of the Honorable House of Commons.

OFFENSES. Laws and Statutes. PENALTIES. Profanation of the Lord's Day. ALL
Laws in force concerning the Observation of the Lord's Day, shall be put in
Execution: This Day is by every one to be Sanctified and kept Holy; and all
Persons must be careful herein to exercise themselves in the Duties of Piety
and true Religion, Publicly and Privately; and every one on this Day (not
having a reasonable Excuse) must diligently resort to some Public place, where
the Service of God is exercised, or must be present at some other Place,
(allowed of by Law) in the Practice of some Religious Duty, either of Prayer,
Preaching, Reading, or Expounding of the Scriptures, or Conference upon the
same. 29 Car. 2. Cap. 7. NOTE, That His Majesty's Protestant Subjects
dissenting from the Church of England, and qualified according to the late
Statute of Indulgence, are exempted from the Penalties of the Statutes, 3 Jac.
1 Eliz. 23. Eliz. 29. Eliz. and some other Statutes. But this Indulgence
extends not to such profane Persons who no where attend on the Public Worship
of God Established, or allowed by Law; nor to any that in Preaching or Writing
deny the Trinity. 1 W. and M. Cap. 18. 1 Eliz. c. 2. 3 Jac. c. 4. Such as
Repair not to Church, etc. on Sundays and Holidays, 1 Eliz. c. 2. Twelve Pence
for every Default, to be levied by Distress; and for want of Distress, to be
committed to some Prison, until the same be paid. Vid. 14, 15.. One Witness,
Absenting for a Month, If a Twelvemonth or more, 23 Eliz. cap. 1. 3 Jac. c. 4.
Twenty Pounds per Month, or forfeiture of Two parts in Three of their Estaus If
any come not to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper once a Year, Their Names and
Sirnames to be Pretented: Forty Shillings Reward to such as present them. None
shall speak or do any thing in Contempt of the most Holy Sacrament. 1 Ed. 6. c.
1. By Oath of Two Lawful Witnesses, by Three Justices, Quorum un. to be Bound
over and Prosecuted in Sessions. Whosoever shall disturb the Church or
Congregation per mitted, or misule the Teacher, 1 W. and M. cap. 18, 1 M. cap.
3. To find Sureties in 50 l. or committed till next Quarter Sessions, and on
Conviction to Forfeit 20 l. Proof by Two Witnesses before a Justice of Peace.
Whosoever shall disturb any Preacher allowed in his open Sermon or Collation,
or be procuring or abetting thereunto, or shall Rescue, etc. any Offender, etc.
To be Committed by any Justice of the County to safe Custody, and within six
days the said Committing Justice, with one other Justice, (if the Offender upon
Examination shall be found Guilty) shall Commit him to Gaol without Bail, etc.
for Three Months, and farther to the next Quarter Sessions, etc. Accusation
must be by Two Witnesses, or Confession. Such as Meet or Assemble out of their
own Parish upon the Lord's Day, for any Sports Or Pastim is whatsoever; or such
as shall use any Unlawful Exercise or Pastime in their own Parish upon the
Lord's Day. 1 Car. c. 1. Three Shillings and Four Pence to the Poor, where,
etc. to be levied by Distress and Sale, restoring the Overplus, etc. and for
want of Distress, to be sent to the Stocks for Three Hours; but they must be
questionem within a Month. If any Ca^rie, Wagoner, Butcher, etc. with Horse,
Wain, or ^^^t, or Drover with Cattle shall Travel upon the Lord's Day by
themselves, or any other for them, 3 Car. c. 1. Twenty Shillings for every
Offense, to be levied by Distress and Sale, to the Use of the Poor. If any
Butoner, or any other for him, shall Kill o^ Sell any Victuals upon the Sunday.
3 Car. c. 1. He shall Forfeit Six Shillings and Eight Pence, if questioned
within Six Months, to be Levied, etc. or may be Sued for in Sessions, etc. Two
Witnesses, View, or Confession, If any Shoemaker shall show with intent to
Sell any Boots Shoes, etc. on the Sunday, 1 Jac. c. 22. He shall Forfeit the
Value of every such pair, and also Three Shillings and Four Pence for every
Pair. If any Person of the Age of 14, shall on the Lord's Day, or any part
thereof, (...) any Worldly Labor, Business, or Work, etc. except Works of
Necessity (...) Charity, 29 Car. 2. Cap. 7. He shall Forfeit Five Shillings for
every Offense. If any Person shall Cry. Show forth, or put to Sale, any Wares
Fruit, Goods etc. except Milk ^^^y, before the Hours of Nine in the Morning,
and after four in the afternoon, 29 Car. 2. cap. 7. He shall Forfeit the said
Wares, Fruit, Goods, etc. to the Use of the Poor. No Drover, Horse-Courser,
Wagoner, Butcher, Higler, or any of their Servants, shall Travel, or come to
their Inns, on the Lord's Day. 29 Car. 2. cap. 7. The Forfeiture is Twenty
Shillings for every Offense. No Person shall use to Travel upon the Lord's Day
with any Boat, Wherry, etc. except allowed by one Justice of Peace so to do, 29
Car. 2. cap. 7. The Forfeiture is Five Shillings for every Offense. The
Conviction upon the Statute must be before any Justice of the County, etc. who
shall give Warrant to the Constables, etc to Seize the Goods showed, etc. and
to Levy the Forfeitures by Distress, etc. and for want of Distress, to put the
Offender in the Stocks for Two Hours: The Justices, etc. may reward the
Informer out of the Forfeitures, not exceeding the Third part. By View,
Confession, or one Witness. This Act extends not to dressing of Meat in
Cooks-Shops, Inns, or Victualling-Houses, for such as otherwise cannot be
provided; nor to Hackney Coaches that are Licensed. Every Person must be
Impeached upon this Act within Ten Days after the Offense. Drunkenness. A
Crime, from which the Ancient Britains were free, therefore the Laws against it
are new. Co. 3 Instit. fol. 200, 201. 4 Jac. c. 5. 21 Jac. c. 7. The Offender
for the first to pay Five Shillings to the Churchwardens, where, etc. within
one Week after Conviction, or else to be Levied by Warrant, etc. by Distress
and Sale; and for want of Distress, to sit in the Stocks six Hours. If any be
Convicted for being Drunk, by One Witness, View, or Confession, and the Party
confessing a good Witness against another Offending at the same time. If any
Ale Housekeeper be Convicted of Drunkenness, he is disabled for Three Years to
keep any Alehouse. 7 Jac. c. 10. 21 Jac. c. 7. For the second Offense, must be
Bound in Ten Pounds, with Two Sureties to the good Behavior; and for want of
Sureties, to be sent to Gaol. This Conviction of Drunkenness must be within Six
Months after the Offense committed. If the Constable levy not the Forfeitures,
he Forfeits Ten Shillings to the Poor, ut supra. Innkeepers,
Ale-House-Keepers, or Victuallers, that suffer any of the same Parish to
continue Tippling in their Houses, 1 Jac. c. 9. 21 Jac. c. 7. Ten Shillings to
be Levied by Distress, and Sale after six days; and for want of Distress, to be
committed till Payment, and Disabled for 3 Years from keeping any Alehouse,
etc. One Witness, View, or Confession, and the Party confessing a good Witness
against another Offending at the same time. If the Constable or Churchwarden
do not Levy the Penalty, or shall not certify the want of Distress within
Twenty Days, he Forfeits Forty Shillings, to be levied by Distress and Sale, ut
supra. If any Innkeeper, Ale-House-Keeper, Victualler, or Taverner, suffer any
Person (wheresoever his Habitation be) to continue Tippling in his House, 1 Jac.
cap. 9. 21 Jac. C. 7. 1 Car. cap. 4. Ten Shillings to be Levied by Distress,
and for want of Satisfaction, in six days to be sold, restoring the Overplus;
and for want of Distress, to be committed till Payment. Two Witnesses, or View.
Townsmen or others which shall remain Tippling in any Inn, Alehouse, or
Victualling-House, One Witness, View, or Confession, ut supra. 4 Jac. cap. 5.
21 Jac. c. 7. Three Shillings and Four Pence, to be Levied by Distress, after
one Weeks Neglect of Payment; or to sit in the Stocks four Hours. Constables
shall be charged on their Oaths to present Offenses committed against these
Acts. 1 Car. cap. 4. 21 Jac. c. 7. Dalt cap. 7. The Constable for his Neglect
Forfeits Ten Shillings, ut supra. These Statutes do Prohibit all Quaffing, and
Drinking of Healths, such Houses being solely appointed for the Accommodation
of Travelers, and for the Relief of the Poor. Every such Tave^ner, which shall
suffer any Person whatsoever to Tiple in his House, contrary to the said
Statutes, shall be adjudged within the Statute, 1 Jac. Cap. 9. Swearing and
Cursing. If any Person shall Profanely Swear or Curse in the Hearing of a
Justice of Peace, Mayor, etc. or be Convicted of such Swearing, by One Witness,
or Confession of the Party, 21 Jac. c. 20 3 Car. c. 4. 17 Car. c. 4. 6, 7
Guliel. Cap. 11. He shall fori^^t for every such Offense, to the Use of the
Poor, the respective Sums following; every Servant, Day-Labourer, common
Soldier, and common S^^ man, One Shilling; every other Person, Two Shillings:
If any Person, after Conviction, shall ^^end a Second time, such Person shall
pay Double; and if a Third time, Trebble the Sum respectively to be paid for
the first Offense. Every Justice, Head-Officer etc. may Command the Constables,
etc. (...) Levy the same by Distress: And for (...) of Dis^r^ss, the Offender
being above the Age of Sixteen Years, shall be for in the Stocks, for every
single Offense, one Hour; for any Number, at one and the same time, two hours:
If under sixteen Years old, and shall not pay the sai^ Twelve pence, he shall
o^ whipped by the Constable, by Warrant of the ^^^^^ce, Every Offense against
this Act must be proved within Ten Days after the Offense Committed. Every
Justice shall Register, etc. and certify to the next Quarter Sessions of Peace
all Convictions made before him upon this Act, and the time of making thereof,
and for what Offense. or by the Parent, Guardian, or Master, in the Presence of
the Constable. Every Justice, or chief Magistrate, wilfully omitting the
Performing of his Duty, shall forfeit Five Pounds, to be recovered by Action:
The Act of the Sixth and Seventh of King WILLIAM to be Read four times in the
Year, in all Churches and Chapels, under the pain of Twenty Shillings for
Neglect thereof. General Issue, etc. Treble Costs, etc. None shall in any
Stage Play, Show, May game, Interlude, or Pageant, Jestingly or Profanely
speak or use the Holy Name of God, Christ Jesus, the Holy Ghost, or Trinity. 3
Jac. C. 21. On pain of Ten Pounds, to be divided between the King and the
Prosecutor, to be recovered by Action, etc. Blasphemy. If any Person, having
been Educated in, or at any time having made Profession of the Christian
Religion, within this Realm, shall, by Writing, Printing, Teaching, or advised
Speaking, deny any one of the Persons in the Holy Trinity to be God, or shall
assert or maintain there are more Gods than One, or shall deny the Christian
Religion to be true, or the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be
of Divine Authority, and shall upon Indictment or Information in any of His
Majesty's Courts at Westminster, or at the Assizes, be thereof Lawfully
Convicted by the Oath of Two or more credible Witnesses, 9 and 10. Gulielm. 3.
For the first Offense, shall be adjudged incapable, and disabled in Law to all
Intents and Purposes, to have or enjoy any Office or Employment Ecclesiastical,
Civil, or Military, or any Part in them, or any Profit or Advantage
appertaining to them; and if at the Time of Conviction Possessed, etc. such
Office, Place, or Employment, shall be void. Note. This Statute punishes not
the Error, but the Impudence of the Offender. On the second Conviction, shall
be disabled to Sue, Prosecute, Plead, or use any Action or Information in any
Court of Law or Equity; or to be a Guardian, or an Executor, or Administrator,
or capable of any Legacy, or Deed of Gift, or of any Office, Civil or Military,
or Benefice Ecclesiastical; and shall suffer three Years Imprisonment, without
Bail, from the Time of the Conviction. The Information to a Justice of Peace,
to be within four Days for Words, and the Prosecution within three Months
after. To be discharged of the Penalties incurred by the first Conviction, on
Renunciation, in the same Court where Convicted, within four Months after the
Conviction. Lewd and Disorderly Practices. Keeping of Baudy-Houses, etc. is
against the Law of God, on which our Common Law in this Case is grounded:
Therefore the Keepers of Houses of Baudry and Incontinence, 1 Vent. 53. Co. 3.
Instit. Cap. 98. 1 Hen. 7. fol. 6. Are to be Punished, being a Common Nuisance,
by Indictment at Common Law, by Fine and Imprisonment. Resorters and
Frequenters of Baudy-Houses, To be Bound with Sureties to the good Behavior.
The Ordinary may punish Incontinency in their Clergy by Imprisonment, at their
discretion. 1 Hen. 7. Cap. 4. Adultery, etc. and all Acts of Baudry, are
Breaches of the Peace, 5 Co. 1 pt. 27 b. For which an Indictment will lie. If a
Constable, etc. has Notice that a Woman is in Adultery, etc. with a Man, or
that a Man or Woman of evil Fame is gone to a suspected House, Cook 3 Inst.
Dal. f. 224. He may take Help with him, and if he find them so, he may carry
them to Prison, or to a Justice, to be Bound over and Prosecuted. One that has
lewd Women found in his House, common Whore-Masters, or Whores, Strangers, or
others, that are suspicious, that walk by Night, especially if they haunt lewd
Houses, or keep ill Company, or commit Outrages, 7 Jac. cap. 4. 39 Eliz. c. 4.
43 Eliz c. 2. 4 Hen. 7. Cap. 12. To find sufficient Sureties for the Good
Behavior. Justices must do their Duty, On pain of being put out of Commission,
and other Punishment according to demerits. Idlers that refuse to Work, and
Disorderly Persons, 39 Eliz. c 4. 1 Jac. cap. 7. To be Committed to the House
of Correction. Wandering Rogues, etc. To be Whipped, and sent to the Place of
Birth; or if that not known, where last dwelt for one Year, or last passed. If
the Constable punish them not, He Forfeits Ten Shillings, to be ^evied by a
Warrant from Two Justices. Such as shall not Apprehend Rogues, etc. being at
their Doors, Two Witnesses, or Confession, 1 Jac. c. 7. Ten Shillings to be
Levied, ut supra. Every Constable, etc. who does not punish such as are brought
to him, 39 Eliz. c. 4. Twenty Shillings to be Levied, ut supra. Such as di^turb
the Punishment of Rogues, etc. 1 Jac. C. 7. Five Pounds to be Levied by
Distress, and Bound to the Good Behavior by Two Justices, Quorum un. Officers
remiss in Punishing of Rogues, etc. Ten Shillings to be Levied by Distress and
Sale, ut supra. To be Punished as Rogues, etc. Such as run away, and leave
their Charge upon the Parish, Such as threaten to run away, Two Witnesses, 7
Jac. C. 4. To be sent to the House of Correction, or give Security to discharge
the Parish. If any Woman shall have a Bastard Child which may be chargeable to
the Parish, House of Correction for One Year, to be sent by Two Justices, and
Bound not to Offend so again. Gaming. Keepers of Play Houses, and Unlawful
Games, Upon View, 33 Hen. 8. Cap. 9. Forty Shillings, and Imprisonment until he
become Bound by Recognizance to keep no more. Officers shall search every
Month, Forty Shillings. Such as Play in such Houses, Upon View, Imprisonment
until he be bound to play no more, and to pay 6s. 8d. to be recovered in
Quarter Sessions. Such Persons described in the Act as out of Christmas, shall
play at Unlawful Games any where within the Year, 16 Car. 2. cap. 7. Fraud in
Play or Betting, All Licenses to keep Houses or Places of Unlawful Games, shall
be void. 2, 3 P. and M. Cap. 9. Forfeit the Treble Value. Treble Costs.

FINIS.

