The Great Charity of Instructing Poor Children. A SERMON PREACHED At St.
Botolph Aldgate; UPON LORD'S DAY, Mar. 24. 1700. On the Occasion of A
Charity-School Newly Erected in that Parish.

By JOSIAH WOODWARD, Minister of Popler.

LONDON, Printed by K. Astwood, for Ra. Sympson, at the Harp in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1700.

TO The Right Honorable Francis Lord Guilford.
My LORD,
THAT Noble Delight and Industry wherewith your Lordship advances the Knowledge
and Service of God, demonstrates the Honor that Almighty God does You, in
making You Eminent in that Work, for which He sent his Son into the World. And
on this Account, those Schools of Charity which your Lordship, together with
Other Persons of great Worth and Quality, have studiously Advanced in this City
and other Parts; those Good Books which are by these Means distributed into
poor Families; and those Catechetical Libraries which are about to be compiled
in this Nation and our Plantations abroad, will be acknowledged with sensible
Respect and Gratitude, by all but such as have slight Thoughts of the Benefits,
of God manifest in the Flesh to destroy the Works of the Devil: Which is such a
Pitch of Gross and Odious Insensibleness, as one would hope, could never have
appeared in a Christian Land; but yet, alas! we have too many Notorious
Instances of it, through the desperate Depravity of Men in their Minds and
Manners.

I KNOW, I need not mind your Lordship, though some others cannot be called upon
too often to Consider it, That our Adored Lord and Savior, arose as a Sun of
Righteousness and Truth, to give Light and Warmth to this Dark and Degenerate
World: And that the Splendid Beams of his Glorious Gospel excel the Prove. 20.
27.
Candles of Humane Reason, and those Tapers which the best Philosophers held
forth to Men; as much as the Glorious Sun exceeds those Twinkling Lamps and
Torches, wherewith we endeavor to supply its absent Light: Yet, alas! through
the Depravity of Humane Understanding, and Men's condemning Love of Darkness
more than Light; We find some, like the Moles and Bats, declining the Splendour
of Divine Revelation, and doting on the Dimness of Humane Reason: Saying with
Philostratus, Porphirie, and the Ancient Humanists, or rather with Julian and
former Apostates, Let my Soul take its Risque with Philosophers, and the
Followers of Natural Reason; rather than with the Disciples of a Revealed
Religion, and the Admirers of the Book which God sent from Heaven. Like the
wayward Jews, who were for deserting the Pillar of Heavenly Fire, which led
them into Canaan, and conspired to make a Captain of their own, who might lead
them back into Egyptian Darkness again. An amazing Choice! and what cannot
otherwise be accounted for, but by what the Apostle has told us; 2 Cor. 4. 4.
Namely, That If the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the
God of this World has blinded the Minds of them that believe not; lest the
Light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine
into them.

WE see indeed with sorrowful Hearts, that it pleases God, to permit the
Legions of the Prince of Darkness, to oppose the Kingdom of his Dear Son. And
in this great and general Contest, all Men upon Earth are engaged on one side,
or other: For our Savior has declared Mat. 12. 30.
that none can be considered as Neuters, but that Such as are not with him, are
against him. And though there be but few of the Devil's Confederates, that are
hardy enough to own the side they take, but call it the Defense of Humane
Reason, or Humane Liberty, or some such Thing; yet, alas! they busily do the
Devil's Work, they sap the very Foundations of the Christian Religion (which is
the only true) and subvert the Authority of its Sacred Author.

IT is therefore, My Lord, to the great Honor of God, and the great Comfort of
devout Minds, that we find some Persons of Eminent Rank, Piety and Honor; who
in the Vigor of Youth, in the Height of Worldly Blandishments, and in the
Crowds of Corrupt Examples, bravely Trampling on All that the Usurping God of
this World can offer, to draw them to his Party; and who in Christian Zeal for
the Prince of Light, oppose the pernicious Encroachments of the Spirits of
Darkness, and are daily instrumental in discovering to ignorant Souls, the
certain Paths which lead to Eternal Light and Bliss. In which Glorious Work,
Your Lordship and the Worthy Gentlemen with You, are very happily engaged, and
will certainly find the Blessed Account of it, in the Accomplishment of those
Great and Precious Promises, which are made to such as glorify their Creator,
and administer to the Salvation of Men; which are Things most truly Great and
Noble, for which a Wise Man would chiefly wish to Live, and a Good Man would
not grudge to Die. And that your Lordship may long be successful in these
Divine Enterprises, and at last reap the Immortal Glory of them, Is the Earnest
Desire and Incessant Prayer of,

My LORD, Your Honor's Most Respectful AND Obedient, Humble Servant, Josiah
Woodward.

A SERMON, etc.
PROVE. V. 23. He shall die without Instruction, and in the greatness of his
Folly, He shall go astray.
SOLOMON, Who had a very Virtuous Education, and was Honored with Singular
Communion with God in his Youth, was inspired by the Holy Ghost (in his
Infinite Love to the Souls of Men) to write this Book of Proverbs for the
Instruction of Youth; as he tells us in the beginning of the Book ( Prove. 1.
4.) To teach the Young Man Knowledge and Discretion: That is, to show them how
blessed it is to be Religious betimes, and to Embrace those Principles of
Wisdom and Virtue, which all that despise them in their Youth come to lament in
their Age; crying out in the Bitterness of their Spirit at last, How have I
hated Instruction, and my Heart despised Reproof! Prove. 5. 12.

WE are therefore, to Consider this Wise Prince as a Tutor to Youth in this
Chapter, and we see, he begins it like a Grave Catechist to his Children; My
Son, attend unto my Wisdom, and bow thine Ear to my Understanding. (Ver. 1.) In
which he intimates, That since he spoke to them from the Bowels of a Father,
and in the Wisdom of God, all Young Persons (however conceited of their own
Wit, and addicted to their own Will, as Youth is apt to be) ought to submit,
and bow their Minds and Hearts to his Divine and Fatherly Instructions. And
knowing the Unsteadiness of Youth in Virtuous Purposes, to Engage them more
firmly herein, he shows them in the Sequel of the Chapter; to what a Deplorable
Condition such Young Persons usually come, who slight the Counsels of their
Parents and Friends; and run into those Excesses, to which their Youthful Lusts
prompt them. He instances in the Lust of Uncleanness, and insists upon it
throughout the greatest part of this Chapter; dissuading young People from it,
with all the Argument and Earnestness, that the Matter can be pressed: Showing,
that it is a Deep Pit, in which People bury their All at once. It being a Vice
that blinds the Mind, oppresses the Conscience, hardens the Heart, and gives
such an Arbitrary Power to the Sensual Faculties, as over-bears all that is
Good. And he tells them, that though the beginning of such sinful Ways seems
Smooth as Oil, and Sweet as Honey, (which is all that can be said for them) yet
they appear in the End as bitter as Wormwood, and sharp as a two edged Sword;
being the direct Road to Hell, and to Eternal Weeping and Wailing. For, as the
poor wandering Youth hates Instruction, and will not bear Restraint, but counts
those his Enemies who show him his Danger, and admonish him to do better, he
comes at last to that dreadful Case foretold in the Text, viz. to be abandoned
of God, and in a great measure forsaken of the Spirit of Light and
Understanding, and so he dies without Instruction, and in the greatness of his
Folly, he goes astray. The Holy Ghost says here, it shall be so with him;
intimating, that this is the usual End of such a Vicious and Profligate Youth,
he comes most commonly to this Tragical Exit and Conclusion: Namely, to dye as
wretchedly as he lived, and to go off his Stage of Vice and Vanity, in Horror
and Confusion.

THIS is the dreadfulest Thing under the Sun. To die without the Knowledge of
God, and his Son Jesus Christ, which is Life Eternal! to be given up to the
Spirits of Darkness! and to be led Captive in their Chains, and hoodwinked by
their Delusions, 'till he comes to be involved and immersed in their Torments!
This is the Depth of the Misery of Man.

WHAT Parent will not find their Bowels pained, to consider this as the Case of
any of their Children? You could not bear it, to see a Lion or a Bear snatch up
a Child of yours in its Devouring Mouth, and carry it off as its Prey* You
cannot bear the very Thoughts of the Devil's Appearance in some Horrible Shape,
and carrying away your Child in a Visible Manner, before your Eyes: Yet, alas!
how many Parents permit the Devil (that Roaring and Devouring Lion, as St.
Peter calls him) to seize their Chilin a way as certain and as terrible, tho*
not so Visible.

THEY hear their Children blaspheming God, and offending him daily, grossly and
familiarly; by the suggestion of the Devil (which demonstrates them to be under
his Power and Management) yet some laugh at all this, and there are but few
that are duly concerned about it. How few are effectually awakened to teach
their Children their Catechism and the Holy Scriptures, that they may gird them
with that Sword of the Spirit, whereby they may defend themselves from the
malicious Fury of Apostate Spirits? How few are concerned to teach their
Children, the Way to Eternal Bliss, through a Converting Faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ; that they may not through the Greatness of their Folly, and Grossness of
their Ignorance go astray; and plunge themselves into the Pit of Eternal Misery?

WHERE there is this pernicious Neglect of Catechizing in Parents, and such as
have the Oversight of Youth, it is an Error which is seldom corrected by
Sermons afterward; because they know not the very Terms and Language of the
Holy Scriptures, nor the first Rudiments and Principles of Christian Doctrine.
And thus, alas! the Text comes to be dreadfully exemplified; They die without
Instruction: They knew not the Lord and Savior of Men in his saving Offices,
and are ignorant of their own sinful and perishing Condition, and of the Terms
on which Salvation is offered them; and so, they live and die in destructive
Ignorance, and go astray from the Fold of the True Shepherd, and fall a Prey
into the Mouth of Him, that lies in wait to devour.

THIS is, methinks, one of the most moving Cases that one can think of, and
calls the loudest for Christian Compassion; and therefore I shall further
Explain it in the Following Observations.

1. ALL Persons are born in a State of Ignorance and Darkness as to Spiritual
Things, being without the due Knowledge of God, and having no suitable
Concernment about the Things which belong to their Everlasting Happiness. The
Text supposes, that all Young Persons need Instruction, and that it is the
Dreadfulest Thing in the World to die without it.

2. Good Instruction in Youth is God's appointed Means, to bring People to the
saving Knowledge of himself, and the Attainment of Salvation. The whole Design
of this Book verifies this, and it is expressed in a multitude of places
throughout it.

3. The Neglect of Early Instruction and good Education, is the Ruin of many a
Person in both Worlds. They live viciously, and die desperately; they pass from
the Errors and Works of Darkness, to the place of Utter and Eternal Darkness.
They die without Instruction, and go astray, and perish in their Ignorance and
Folly.

I. LET us in the first place Consider that which I first Observed, Namely,
That all Persons are born in a State of Ignorance and Darkness, as to Spiritual
Things, being without the due Knowledge of God and the Way of Salvation. The
Text supposes, that all Young Persons need Instruction, and that it is the
dreadfulest Thing in the World to dye without it: And consequently, that Pious
Instruction is the most seasonable Blessing that can come to any one in his
Youth.

IT IS well Observed by Zophar, one of Job's Friends (Job 11. 12.) that Man is
born as the Wild Ass's Colt, utterly Rude and Unuseful, except it be brought up
to Hand, by a very Early and Careful Management; and then it is of great Use
and Advantage to us. And we see it plainly so in our Children. If they are left
to themselves they are rude, froward, stubborn, wanton, undutiful and
unmannerly. Like a neglected Garden, which brings forth Weeds of it self; but
needs great Care and Pains to store it with useful Plants.

THERE is, Alas! a general Corruption of Humane Nature, ever since the Apostasy
of our first Parents. We our selves also (says the Apostle) were sometime
foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures. (Tit. 3.
3.) 'till the Love of God his Savior appeared to him by Divine Illumination.
And so it is with us all 'till the Grace of God makes us better. For God is the
Father of Lights, and the Author of every good and perfect Gift, (Jam. 1. 17.)
and we are directed to Ask spiritual Wisdom and Understanding of him. (Ver. 5.)

IF any doubt of this, Let him Consider, whence it is, that such a Reasonable
Creature as Man, should delight in Things so Unfit and Improper as all the Ways
of Vice are? Whence is it, that Children need no Teacher to lead them to Lying,
Pride and Stubbornness? Whereas they need much Instruction and Correction too,
mingled with many Promises and Allurements; to bring them to that which is Good
and Virtuous? Yea, whence is it, that all Men do not Naturally delight in God
above all other Objects, since He is undeniably the Best and most Excellent of
Beings? These are Demonstrations of the Corruption of Man, and of the Necessity
of Spiritual Regeneration by the Spirit of God; bringing him to love and
delight in God, in the sincerity of his Soul, e're he can be fit for Heaven,
and the nearer Presence of God. Our Blessed Savior has delivered this with a
double Asseveration ( John 3. 5.) Verily, Verily, I say unto you, Except a Man
be born again of Water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.
The Spirit of Wisdom must clear up his Understanding, and the Spirit of
Holiness must mortify his vile Affections and Passions, and turn the Bent and
Vigor of his Heart toward God as his Chiefest Good; or he will not be fit for
the Divine State and Work of Heaven, but will be barred out of it by the Nature
and Constitution of that All Pure and God-like State.

AND this our Natural State of Spiritual Ignorance is too gross, and too deep
to be removed and remedied by the best Light that Natural Philosophy and Humane
Art and Study can supply us withal, We need a Light from Heaven, and Wisdom
from Above, to make us Wise unto Salvation. For, When in the Wisdom of God
(says St. Paul concerning the conceited Greek Learning, which was then in
great Vogue and Esteem) the World by Wisdom knew not God: That is, (I
conceive); when God in his Infinite Wisdom saw, that all the Humane Wisdom and
Learning in the World, would never bring them to the just and saving Knowledge
of himself, as a Righteous God; yet pardoning and justifying a penitent Sinner.
It then pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching, (or by that plain but
powerful Preaching of the Gospel, which the Philosophers and Orators of those
times accounted foolish) to save them that believe.

MEN have indeed by the Light of Nature some Knowledge, That there is a God and
a Life to come. But how imperfect this Knowledge is, we see by the many absurd
Opinions and barbarous Customs of all those Heathen Countries, which are not
blessed with the Knowledge of the Gospel. They frame to themselves most
unworthy notions of God, they know not how to worship or serve him aright; they
have no Apprehension of the only way of being reconciled to God, by the Blood
of his Son, nor of becoming Good through the Sanctification of this Spirit.
Yea, we find some of them professed Votaries to the Devil, and doing Sacrifice
to their worst Enemy by the most unnatural Murders and Barbarities. Hence the
Apostle concludes concerning the unregenerate Part of Mankind, that they Walk
in the Vanity of their Minds, having their Understanding darkened; being
alienated from the Life of God, through the Ignorance that is in them, Ephesians. 4. 18.

WE may from all this assuredly discern, what sort of Lives such Children are
like to live; who are not well Instructed, Catechized and Governed in their
Youth. That which is born of the Flesh is flesh, says our Blessed Savior,
(John 3. 6.) Carnal Principles will produce nothing better than a Carnal Life.
So then, since Children have none but bad Principles and Inclinations of
themselves; what can we expect from them, but the greatest Lewdness and the
blackest Impieties; except through the Grace of God, and the Care of others, they
are better principled? Especially if we consider, How busy and crafty the
Devil will always be, to prompt them to all Wickedness; whilst alas! the poor
Child is utterly Ignorant of his Devices. So that a Youth without Instruction
will be like a benighted Traveller, walking alone in the midst of unknown Pits
and Precipices; it is a Thousand to one, but he falls into some of them to his
utter Ruin.

BUT it is God's Will that it should be otherwise, and it should be the Care of
all that love and fear God, to bring up their Children in the Knowledge and
Service of their Creator, in the Days of their Youth; that they may shun the
dreadful Case of the Text, which leads me to the Second Observation. viz.

II. THAT good Instruction in Youth is God's appointed Means, to bring People
to the Saving Knowledge of Himself; and the Attainment of Eternal Life. God is
pleased to call to Young People in the beginning of this Chapter, to bow their
Ear to Good Instruction, that they come not to the Dreadful End, foreshewn in
the End of the Chapter.

INDEED, the Time of Youth is the most proper Time in Nature for good
Instruction. Children are apt to catch at every Thing they hear, and to retain
it, and repeat it. Their Faculties are fresh and vigorous; and they perceive
themselves void of Knowledge, and are greedy to take Information, and soft and
capable of any Impression. They are also void of those Prejudices against Truth
and Virtue, which they are afterward likely to take up. And they are not now
capable of such bodily Labor, as is apt to hinder their Learning in their more
Adult Years. On all these Accounts, the Time of Youth is the fittest of any for
good Instruction; and the properest Season to plant the Principles of Religion.
And that chiefly, because it is God's Time, and must therefore of Necessity be
the fittest and best. The Commandments of God do often bind this Duty very
awfully, on the Consciences both of Parents to teach their Children; and upon
Children to mind the Instruction of their Parents and Tutors. Parents are
required to Train up their Children in the Way that they should go; (Prove. 22.
6.) and Children are required to Obey their Parents in the Lord. (Ephesians. 6. 1.)
Parents are to Bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. (Ephesians.
6. 4.) And Children are commanded to Keep the Commandment of their Father, and
not to forsake the Law of their Mother, (Prove. 6. 20.)

AND these Injunctions are enforced by the highest Promises and Threatenings.
The Apostle tells us, that the Fifth Commandment is the First Commandment with
Promise; That it may be well with thee, and that thou may live long on the
Earth. (Ephesians. 6. 2, 3.) And on the contrary, it is threatened; That The Eye that
mocketh his Father, or despises to obey his Mother, the Ravens of the Valleys
shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall cat it. (Prove. 30. 17.) And
suitably to all this, we find the Mother and Grandmother of Timothy, commended
by the Spirit of God, for instructing their Child in the Scriptures; and
Timothy is commended for his Proficiency, suitable to his Education. As we read
in St. Paul's Epistles to him.

AND be it here Observed, That if any one is not taught to Read, and to know
his Catechism in his Youth; it is a Thousand to One, whether ever he learns
either of these afterward. The Senseless Pride of an Ignorant Person, is apt to
disdain Instruction in these Things afterward; and they are utterly ashamed,
to acknowledge themselves ignorant of that, in which they perceive, many little
Children able to be their Tutors. So that we cannot be too urgent with all
Parents, and such as have the Management of Children, that they begin early to
instruct them in the Scriptures and in their Catochisms; and that they take
Care that they learn to read betimes, that they may of themselves, Draw water
out of the Wells of Salvation. For it is a most deplorable and moving Case,
that God should send us a Book from Heaven, concerning our Eternal Salvation;
and that any among us should say, as those ( Isa. 29. 12.) I cannot read it,
for I am not learned: It Is written in unknown Characters as to me, because I was
never taught to read. We many times now hear, such Ignorant Persons blaming
their Parents for neglecting them in their Youth; when they come to perceive
the want of such Learning, as they might have attained in their Youth; and it is
to be feared, that too many such Parents, will hear the more doleful
Accusations and Curses of their wretched Children, in their Torments hereafter.
Where it may probably be said by many a Person, had my Parents taught me
better, I might have escaped these Everlasting Burnings. This leads me to my
Third Observation. viz.

III. THAT the Neglect of Good Education and Early Instruction, is the Ruin of
many a Person in both Worlds. 'They are brought up negligently* they live
viciously, and* dye desperately. This was so sadly verified in the Case of
Eli's Sons, (1 Samuel 3.) that it is enough to terrify every sensible Person out
of such Neglect. His Sons were first Children of Darkness, then Sons of Belial,
and then Sons of Perdition. And thus, alas! it usually fares with Uncorrected,
Ungoverned and Uncatechiz'd Children; as it will further appear in the five
following Particulars; which demonstrate the dismal Case of Ignorant and
Undisciplined Youth.

(1.) THEY cannot live as Christians, if they know not the Fundamentals of the
Christian Religion. A Man can act no better than his Principles dictate to him.
And such as are not taught the Principles of the Christian Religion, are never
like to have them. An express Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ is necessary to
the Salvation of a Christian, ( Mar. 16. 16.) He that believes not shall be
damned. But how can they Believe on him, of whom they have not heard? How can
they come to know the Person, the Offices, the Covenant, the Sacraments, and
the Will of our Lord and Savior; except they learn it by the Instruction of
their Parents and Friends, out of their Bibles and Catechisms? It Is true, the
Foundation of the Sacred Morals of our Religion is laid in Nature it self, and
the Equity, Fitness and Reasonableness of them is discernable by Natural Light.
For, Why of your selves judge ye not that which is right? Says our Blessed
Lord, ( Luke 12. 57.) But then, the Light of Nature is so dim and faint, that
it will soon be obscured and overlaid by sinful Customs; and if the Light which
is in Men be darkness, how gross is that Darkness! (Mat 6. 23.) How
extravagantly vicious will those Affections and Passions be, which have no
Light by which they may steer; and no good Principles from which they may act?
Such uncatechized Children, I say, cannot be good Christians; yea, they usually
prove the worst of Men. For,

(2.) For want of being grounded in the Essentials of Christian Doctrine, they
are easily misled into any Error or Heresy. It may be Observed, that there.
was scarce ever any foolish Opinion started, but the vain Author found some, as
vain as himself to follow him in it. As in the Case of Mahomet, Mugleton and
others. And it can be nothing but Ignorance, that is the Mother of such
Devotion: The Ignorant catch at any thing. And hence proceed those Unhappy
Divisions and Parties that are among us; which is in a great measure owing to
the want of due Catechizing. The Enemy sowed Tares, whilst those were asleep,
that should have sown better Grain.

(3.) These Undisciplined and Uncatechized Persons usually prove ill Members of
the State; and the very Pest of the Neighborhood, in which they live. One may
indeed call them, the very Vermin of the Public Body. Hence come those Swarms
of idle, pilfering and purloining People, of which we hear daily Complaints,
and feel the dismal Effects. Some of which are so crafty in their Devices, and
so hardened in their Wickedness, that they seem to be the very Black Guard of
the Prince of Darkness; and a fruitful Nursery of a sort of People, which fill
the Goals and load the Gallows. A very sad, but a very great Truth.

(4.) These Untaught and Uneducated People are they, who chiefly bring a
Reproach on our Religion, and the Church of Christ amongst us. They live like
Infidels in a Christian Land: And many of them being bred up to no Employment
at Home, are forced by their Necessities to seek their Bread* abroad; and so
they carry our Shame, together with their Villainies, into Foreign Parts. And
many Foreigners take up a Prejudice against our Nation, and against our
Religion, by what they see and suffer from these Profligates; which has proved
a great Bar to the Progress of the Christian Religion.

(5.) THAT which is yet the most dreadful Thought of all, is, That the God that
made them will reject them at the last. They are a People of no Understanding
(says the Prophet Isaiah) therefore he that made them will not have Mercy upon
them, and he that formed them will show them no Favor. (Isa. 27. 11.) They
bear the Image and Superscription of their Father, the Prince of Darkness; and
will be adjudged to him by the just Judgment of him, In whom there is no
Darkness at all. They have long lived in Defiance and Enmity to him, that came
to be the Light and Life of the World; they hated the Light of the Gospel, and
the Guidance of his Holy Spirit; they have pleased themselves with the
Delusions of the Devil, and therefore they fall a Prey to him; as Apostates
from their Creator: And as they loved Darkness more than Light, they must
inevitably take their Portion in Eternal Darkness: For, They die without
Instruction, and go astray from God, and his Beatifick Presence.

O Dreadful End, of such as are neglected* in reformed! Enough to create Horror
in every Soul that considers it. Who is there, that has any thing of the Spirit
of Christ in him, that would not think a great part of his Care, Pains and
Estate well laid out, if he may but be Instrumental to save some few; yea, but
one single Person, from this Eternal Ruin? And that I may incline every one
that hears me, to take this moving and mournful Case into Consideration, I now
come to apply what has been said.

SINCE the Case of gross Ignorance is thus dreadful and deplorable, We may see,

Infer. 1. To how Divine and Blessed a State the Holy Gospel of our Lord tends
to lead us! It comes to retrieve us from the destructive Darkness of Sin and
Satan; to knock off the Fetters of the Prince of Darkness, who had led us
Captive at his Will; and to translate us to the Light and Liberty of the Sons
of God. We may better spare the Light of the Sun, than that of the Gospel; for
this is the Light of our Souls, and the Foundation of our Hope, and the Dawning
of Everlasting Light. Here we have perfect Truth, infinite Mercy, safe
Directions, and strong Consolations. We may challenge all the Philosophy that
ever appeared in the Word, to give us so much Divinity, as we can view in one
Chapter of the New Testament; and we are sure that all the Riches of the whole
World are not of such Value, as one of the Promises of that Blessed Book. O
that it were more frequently in our Hands, more deep in our Hearts, and more
legible in our Lives.

Infer. 2. SINCE the Case of gross Ignorance is thus dreadful, what a
constraining Argument is this to all Parents and Governors of Youth; to be
very Early, very Conscientious and Industrious in Catechizing and Instructing
their Children. One would think, that it were enough to drive Parents to
Distraction, to think of any dying Child of theirs, as going to Eternal Misery,
for want of due Instruction. If any Parents should starve their Children, by
denying them necessary Food when they have Plenty of it by them; the whole
Neighborhood would cry Shame on such a detestable Barbarity, and count them
worthy of Death for it: And surely the Destruction of an Immortal Soul, will
one Day appear as hateful and as Criminal. So that the Ease of their own Minds
and Consciences, ought to quicken Parents to this Duty; and besides, they
cannot reasonably expect any Comfort in their Children, nor Duty from them, if
they be not well instructed. We must carefully cultivate and manure our Fields,
if we would reap a comfortable Hanvest; otherwise they will produce nothing but
Weeds and Thorns to offend and wound us.

Infer. 3. SINCE the Case of gross Ignorance and the want of Education is thus
pernicious; What greater Charity can we show to Humane Nature, than to
contribute toward the Instruction of those; who will otherwise very probably
die without it? Solomon tells us, that Instruction is rather to be chosen then
Silver, and Knowledge rather than choice Gold, (Prove. 8. 10.) From which it
follows, That such as educate their Children well are greater Friends to them
than such as leave them a Temporal Estate. For indeed, an Estate bequeathed to
such, as have neither Knowledge to use it well, nor Principles to do good with
it; is like a Sword in the Hand of a Madman, with which he will be likely to do
much harm to himself and others. Whereas on the other Hand, Good Manners and
Christian Behavior recommends the meanest Person to all that know him; and
that Good Providence which orders all things, will not leave them destitute of
outward Necessaries, Who seek the Kingdom of God in the first place. (Mat. 6.
33.)

I cannot therefore, without Praise to God, turn my Eyes toward those many
Children before us; who at once adorn the House of God, and show forth the
Honor of those Persons, by whose Care and Charity they are brought to
Christian Education. Praised be God, who put so worthy a Design into the Minds
of Men, and who has enlarged the Hearts of any to contribute generously toward
it. This gives us some Hopes of the Continuance of God's Mercies to us,
especially that Mercy of Mercies his Holy Gospel. We hope, the next Generation
will prize it more, and practice it better than this has done; That it may be
well with them, and with their Children.

THIS should prompt us, yea, bring us under a sort of Necessity; to put forth
our selves to the utmost to advance the Good Education of Children, and to
promote Christian Knowledge in all others that want it; which we may do these
three Ways.

First, BY personal Conference: Taking Pains to instruct those Children, and
other Ignorant People, with whom we converse, in the Knowledge of the Great
Things of God's Law; and especially in those practical and necessary Truths, in
which the Essentials of our Holy Religion consist. Christians are to be as
Salt, to all that keep Company with them, to season them with the Savor of
Christian Doctrine. This does indeed, principally concern Ministers, who are to
be Burning and Shining Lights in their Generation; whose particular Visits to
the Houses of their People, and personal Enquiry into their State and Manner of
Life; is of very great Use to the Advancement of Religion in Families, and to
excite that Christian Affection to their Minister; which will make his
Instructions the more effectual upon them.

Secondly, ANOTHER Way of advancing Spiritual Instruction is, by giving and
dispersing good Books abroad in the World, especially to poor Families. This
may in some Cases do more good than personal Discourse, in that a good Book
abides with the Person to whom it is given; and will lie before his Eyes at all
Seasons, and perhaps some Affliction or some other good Providence, may be a
means to awaken and soften his Heart; and make it fit to receive Instruction,
and to prize a Book of Devotion. And blessed be God, we have many Honorable
and Reverend Persons happily engaged in this Excellent Work; which we must
acknowledge to be one of the best of Charities. And in this, those that are
Wealthy will do well to consider, the Deplorable Case of our Plantations; in
which most Christian Work, a very Pious and Reverend Dr. Bray.
Person has adventured his All, with a sort of Apostolic Charity to the Souls
of Men. In this Noble Design, all that really love our Blessed Savior and his
Gospel, cannot but pray to God to prosper him. Surely it is time for such as
love the Kingdom of God, and repeat the Second Petition of the Lord's Prayer, (
Thy Kingdom come) to set themselves in good earnest, to retrench the
Encroachments of the Prince of Darkness.

Thirdly, WE may be instrumental to promote the Instruction of others, by
contributing, according to our Ability, toward the maintenance of poor
Children at School; who may otherwise, through the Poverty of their Parents, be
too likely to Dye without Instruction. And blessed be God, who has so far
inclined the Hearts of many Persons to consider this; that there are now in and
about this City, about a Thousand poor Children taught to read, and instructed
in their Catechisms; and brought up to other Things, which tend to make them
useful in their Generation; through the Christian Charity of Well-disposed
Persons. A most Excellent Work, toward which, all that duly know the Gospel,
cannot but be Glad to contribute, that they may share the in vast Blessings
that attend it.

I am confident I need not tell you, that Christian Charity is necessary to a
Christian Life; since the Apostle tells us, that all our other Works though never
so splendid, will avail us nothing without Charity (1 Cor. 13.). And indeed,
there are so many Commands in the Gospel which require it, and so many Promises
which enforce it, that we must quit our Christian Faith if we renounce this
Christian Grace.

SUPPOSING therefore, that your Christian Breasts glow with Charitable
Affections and Dispositions; you have only two Things to look to in the
Exercise of your Charity: Namely, First, That you give to a good Design: And,
Secondly, That you deliver it to such Hands, as will faithfully employ it
according to your Intention.

1. AS to the First, Contribution toward the Teaching of Children to read, and
to the Instructing them in the Principles of Religion and Virtue; is one of the
most Extensive, Good Desings, that we can readily think of. For Instance,

(1.) YOU WILL hereby prevent much Wickedness in the World. You Will be likely to
bring those Lips to praise God, who might otherwise blaspheme his Holy Name.
You may hereby diminish, and we hope in the Progress of it, thin the Kingdom of
Satan, and increase and greaten the Number of the Flock of Christ.

(2.) HEREBY, you take the likeliest Way to make the meaner sort of People
useful in their Generation. Such as perhaps might otherwise have robbed or
injured you, may through Christian Instruction become a faithful Servant to you,
or an useful Artist by you, or an honest Neighbor near You: Yea, perhaps out
of those little Nurseries of Virtue and Good Manners, there may arise some
Eminent Citizens, who may themselves be able to relieve others, and to be
Benefactors to that place which was so careful of them, and bountiful to them
in their Feeble and Helpless State.

(3.) HEREBY, You administer to them in the best sort of Gifts. You become Eyes
to the Blind, Knowledge to the Ignorant, Wisdom to the Foolish; and perhaps
Salvation to such as might otherwise have perished without Instruction. When we
see a poor neglected Child grovelling in a Dunghill, begging in the Streets, or
wallowing in Wickedness: Let us Consider, that this poor Creature has an
Immortal Soul as well as we; yea, perhaps he has good Natural Parts, and if he
were but well Educated, he might be of Great Use in his Generation. However, we
are sure he has a Soul for which Christ died; and might share in the infinite
Glories of Heaven, if due Care were taken of him. O! how can any Christian
Bowels but yearn over such a Melting Object?

IT was a particular Case very like to this, that moved the present
Divinity-Professor of Halle in Saxony, Dr. Franken; to compassionate the
Ignorance of poor People, and by his Exhortations and Interest to procure the
Erecting of a College, for the Maintenance and Instruction of about a hundred
poor Children. But I must pass on to what remains.

(4.) AS by this Charity, you will have many Prayers put up to Heaven for you; so
whatever Good they are brought to do through this their Virtuous Education, will
in a great measure redound to your Account. For, Such as turn many to
Righteousness, will shine as the Stars for Ever and Ever. (Dan. 12. 3.)

2. THIS clears the First Point, Namely, The Goodness of the Design. And now as
to the Second, Namely, Your being sure that what you give, is faithfully
disposed of according to your Charitable Intention. Your own Eyes see it, in
those Comely Classes of Youth before You; and your Ears have heard the Proof of
their Instruction, in the principal Doctrines of our Holy Religion. In which
they give a good Example to other Youth, in the Exactness and Audibleness of
their Answers, in their devout Behavior, and their Melodious Singing of
Psalms; in which, I pray God incline all our Children to follow them.

AND this minds me of an Act of Charity, in which Every One may contribute
toward the Advancement of these Christian Designs; Namely, In Hearty Prayer
for God's Blessing upon them. In this, the poorest Person that is, may be a
Benefactor. And Oh! May we all be Earnest in Prayer to God, that it may please
him to Fill the Earth with the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior, as the Waters
cover the Sea. That, as in the Sea, there is no Gap or Discontinuance of the
Expanded Waters; so there may be no Ignorance of Christian Doctrine upon Earth;
and so, no Ground whereon to Erect the Kingdom of Darkness. But that All People
may know the Lord from the least to the greatest; from the Child that is coming
into the World, to the Old Man that is going out of it; that so, none may incur
the Dreadful Doom of the Text; that is, To dye without Instruction; and go
astray from God and his Kingdom. Which God Almighty grant for the Sake of Jesus
Christ, who died to Turn us from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan
unto God.

Amen.
FINIS.

