A Word to the Army, Or, A Friendly REPRESENTATION And Humble Request to the
Honorable the L. Charles Fleetvvood Commander in Chief, and the Lord Lambert,
and the rest of the Officers and Soldiers of the Army in England.

Written a while since, by a Lover of his Country, Peace, Truth, the
Parliament and Army.

PROVE. 22.3. A prudent man fore-seeth the evil and hides himself, but the
simple pass on and are punished.

Prove. 14.22. Do they not err that devise evil? But mercy and truth shall he to
them that devise good.

Printed for Richard Wodnoth at the Bible in Leaden-hall-street, 1659.

To the Right Honorable Charles Fleetvvood Esquire. Commander in Chief of the
Forces in England, and the Lord Lambert, and other Officers of the Army, and to
all among them that fear GOD.
Right Honorable and much Beloved,
GIve your servant leave I beseech you to deal freely with you. The Son of
Craesus a dumb man, opened his mouth, when he saw his Father in danger to be
killed, saying, Do not kill Craesus, and should not I when our political
Father, the Parliament the Supreme legal Authority in these three Nations is so
dealt with by you? These are not the words of an enemy but of a friend, who
has prayed a thousand times for you, and does still, and they are not my sense
only, but the sense (I dare be bold to say) of very many ten thousands of the
godly and well-affected people in these Nations. You do know, and we do know,
put out that you do know and have acknowledged, That the holy Scriptures are
the Word of God, and the only Rule of Faith and Life, and the only means of
Salvation, and not old Traditions or new Revelations. That Jesus Christ is the
Son of God, and very God, and the only Savior of men. That the preaching of
the Word by a Learned, faithful and godly Ministry, lawfully called and
solemnly set a part to that work, is an Ordinance of Jesus Christ to continue
to the end of the world, for the gathering and building his Church. And sure
you do or may know the great design of the Romish Priests, Jesuits, and
Quakers, and many others amongst us, though on different grounds, is to take
away our Minister a established maintenance, in order to overthrow the
Ministry it self; for they well know, that if Tithes be once down, no other
maintenance will, or can be be settled, that will please all, or the greatest
part of them you count godly, (not to maintain others) or to continue, and so
to overthrow the Gospel it self, to pull down Christ's Kingdom, and advance
Antichrists; this is the work of Rome, which we hope you do abhor. Also you do
know that Magistracy is an Ordinance of God, That all men ought to be subject
to the Magistrate for Conscience sake, in all things lawful though the men be
bad, And that they that resist, do resist the Ordinance of God, and shall
receive to themselves damnation: Also, you do know, That the Parliament of
England is the Supreme Authority in these Nations, That it is the undoubted
privilege of the Parliament to sit, Act, and determine freely according to
their Judgment and Consciences; I may add, That it is not to be presumed or
imagined, That a Parliament equally chosen by the good people of this Nation,
can betray or desert their Trust and Native Country, in whose welfare their
own does so much consist, though some particular persons may and have done. And
that it is the undoubted Right of the people (not of the Army or some few
persons only) to choose their own Representatives, also to Petition and
represent their desires and thoughts to them, as they conceive cause, and then
to acquiesce in their determination, and to obey them in all things lawful,
That if matter of controversy do arise concerning any public Affairs, not
you, or we are the public Judges, but the Parliament; Our Representatives duty
is to judge and determine for us both, and your and our duty is to obey, either
actively or passively, according to our private judgment of discretion. And you
do know, that you had your Call and Commission from this Parliament, to fight
for the preservation of the true reformed Protestant Religion, the Privilege
of Parliament, the just Liberties of the People, and the good old Laws of the
Land. This is the true good old Cause and that not according to your
apprehensions, but according to the directions of the Parliament, both at your
first call and Commissioning, and lately since you invited and entreated them
to sit again, In your Decla. May 11 1559.
and to go on to perform the trust reposed in them by the people. And you did
declare, That you did greatly rejoice to see and read their Declaration of May
7, and that you would assist them in settling the Commonwealth.

And you do know that Soldiers ought to obey their Superiors that did call and
commission them to do violence to no man, to accuse none falsely, and be
contented with their wages, and not turn their Masters out of doors, and take
the Power to themselves, with what face then can you lift up your hands, and
with what Conscience appear before God or men, who have by force took on you
the Supreme power of judging, turned out the Parliament also, contrary to Laws
of God, and the trust reposed in you by them and us, and contrary to your own
late free engagement, and this when they were doing their duty, and had not
betrayed their trust, and quite contrary also to the intention and desire of us
the far greatest part of the honest and well-affected of the people. And since
this was written, voted down (as, it is commonly reported) the Ministers Lawful,
Ancient Established maintenance which is their freehold, and in which, doing
the work, they have as good a propriety as you have to your Lands, Swords,
Horses, or any thing you have, to the great scandal of Religion, which you
profess above all us to the great grief, and sadding the hearts of (I am sure)
the far greater part of the truly Godly and well affected to the common good;
you have hereby also much hardened the hearts of the old Malignants, Royalists
and Episcopal party, given them great hopes and advantage to ruin both you and
these three Nations, and opened their mouths wide too justly to reproach the
famous long Parliament (as you your selves, not long since find it) the Army
and all the good people who have spent much blood and treasure to further an
happy and just reformation and settlement in the Church and civil State; Opend
a door for the deluded bewitched Popish Quakers, and all Blasphemers to poison,
seduce, and destroy souls, and for the Romish Priests and Jesuits, and such
like Emissaries (which many fear have secretly a great influence in your
Counsels and actings to make and widen our breaches and divisions, to
undermine and overthrow Religion and civil Government, and seduce us again to
be Slaves to Rome) though you have often declared in print against toleration
of Popery, and weakened the hearts and hands of the far greatest part of the
truly Godly and honest party; And that at such a time when there are two
powerful Armies abroad, ready to be employed to help Chapter St. to invade these
Nations, to the utter ruin both of Church and State, and all our just Liberties
and Privileges; Also when the Protestant party abroad call for our help, being
in great danger by the confederate Popish Princes, so that we know not what to
say and plead for you, ourselves and the good people of these Nations, against
our Adversaries that reproach us.

Gentlemen, we most earnestly and humbly beseech you, as you are men, as
Englishmen, as Christians, as you love your Native Country, Friends and dearest
Relations, As you love God and Jesus Christ, and his glorious Gospel, truth and
Ordinances, the only means of your Salvation, as you would prevent the effusion
of much blood, and ruin of these three Nations and Relion; As you love your own
selves, And as you will answer with comfort before Jesus Christ the Righteous
and all-knowing Judge, before whom both you and we must all after a few days
appear, be ingenious, be Englishmen, be Christians, indeed and good earnest
speedily and sincerely repent, humble your souls before God and men, beg
pardon, and do what possibly in you lies, that the Members of Parliament
lately interrupted, may come together again, sit and Act freely, according to
their judgments and Consciences, to settle us in the form of a free
Commonwealth, and the great things contended for agreeable to the revealed Will
of God; and that a good Confession of Faith may be settled as the public
profession of these Nations, that the World may not say we are of no Religion;
That a Godly and Righteous Magistracy, and a Learned, Godly, Faithful, and
painful Ministry be also settled and encouraged with the famous Universities,
and all wholesome literature. That Popish Quakers, Socinians and
Antiscriptuarists, and Antitrinitarians may be restrained from disturbing
others in the Worship of God, and confined to private places and small numbers;
And that the Romish Priests and Jesuits be effectually discovered and banished
under pain of death, as many other States have done with the Jesuits, the
Incendiaries of Christendom. And provision made for the choice of another
Representative of persons fitly qualified to sit down when these are to
dissolve; To carry on and perfect the work of an holy and Righteous
Reformation, so shall we and all the Godly and good people of this Commonwealth
rejoice with you, bless God for you, and fervently pray for you, Peace and
Truth will be settled, the Salvation of Souls furthered, our interest in
Flanders continued, a thing of great concernment, The Protestant cause and
Professors abroad much revived, And our common Enemies ashamed and
disappointed, And you shall live and die in great honor and happiness, and
leave your names and posterities a blessing in the Earth.

But if you will not harken to these wholesome and necessary advises and humble
requests we shall sit down and weep for you in secret, and over our dying
Religion, Peace, Laws, Libertyes and Happiness, yet shall not cease day and
night to pray for you, that God would give you sober and serious thoughts, so
as to return to your first engagement and works, but if you will not,
deliverance shall come some other way, and you and those that adhear to you in
those unparliamentary ways, who now seek to maintain and greaten your Houses,
Estates, Honors and Domination, wordly interest (for which you do blame the
Parliament we think unjustly, notwithstanding any thing we have yet read or
heard) and your names shall perish as some great men's have done before your
eyes.

But I persuade myself I shall hear and see better things of you, that the
former things were done in fits of passion, raised and blinded with
self-interest, and self-love, and that the valiant spirit of true Englishmen
will again appear, and your Christian Consciences will awake and get upmost
again, to return to a right understanding, and acting vigorously in your own
sphere in a right way when there shall be just cause, as Freeborn Englishmen
and true Christians, that make the word of God the rule, and the good Laws of
the Land, and commands of Superiors.

And if you do return to act according to your Engagements, and the trust
reposed in you by the good people in Parliament, and do indeed seek God and his
Glory, and the Commonwealth of these Nations first and chiefly, he will be
found of you; If you neglect him, he will neglect you; mind God and he will
mind you, honor God and he will honor you, Act according to the rule of His
Word and the trust reposed in you by the Parliament, and he will Protect and
Exalt you; Never think to be Blessed in your deeds, and a Blessing to these
Nations, if you go on to Act so irregularly, but that thing will grow worse and
worse; Never think to see this Commonwealth settled with Truth and Peace while
Romish Priests, Jesuits, and abominable Blasphemers are suffered among us,
whose great defigne is to corrupt, poison, and seduce poor Souls, hinder the
Gospel, the Salvation of Souls and all good settlement, Nor do not think that
Quakers that offer you their Service, when they have power in their hands, will
long be your friends if you be for Christ, his Words and Ordinances, Or that
the common people will always be ridden and made Slaves by them that should
serve them and help to make them free.

Pray pardon my sadness, I could not be at rest till I had written thus,
consulted with some others whom I know wish you well and honor you, and
communicated my thoughts to you. I am a Freeborn Englishman, I might say more
but forbear, It is the true reformed Protestant Religion, the flourishing of
the Gospel, the Ordinances of God, and hand of Christ, the welfare of my native
Country and yours also I am pleading for, and whose welfare I seek above all
particular interest in the world; I have often spoken for you, written for you,
acted for you, prayed for you from the first day to this very day, and I hope
shall ever persist in the best wise I can to promote these public end; and
interests; I count not my name worth your knowledge, no matter how low I be in
the esteem of men, so Christ, his Truth, Ordinances and people be exalted,
established, and flourish in Purity, Holiness, and Righteousness; My Lords and
Gent. I remain your faithful and constant Orator and Servant to assist you to
his power so far as he does apprehend you walk and act Righteously, and hope
yet to see the day again to praise God for you and with you; Amen, so be it.

FINIS.

