THE Great Duty OF Love and Faithfulness TO OUR Native Country: OCCASIONED By
the Coolness of Some in its Necessary DEFENSE, and the Forwardness of Others,
in pushing on its Ruin. Delivered in A SERMON AT THE CHAPEL of POPLER,
December 3. 1693.

Published at the Request of the Hearers.

By JOSIAH WOODWARD Minister of Popler.

Nescio qua Natale Solum Dulcedine cunctos Ducit, and im memores non sinit esse
sui. LONDON, Printed for R. Simpson at the Harp in St. Pauls-Church-Yard, 1694.

To my Countrymen, the Courageous Soldiers and Seamen of England, in the
Service of Their Most Excellent Majesty's, King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
TO whom may I so fitly Dedicate this short Discourse, concerning Love and
Faithfulness to our Native Country, as to You, Gentlemen, who are (under the
Divine Providence) the Bullwarks and Ramparts of it. We have but few strong
Garrisons, save what are lodged in our Wooden Castles floating on the Sea: And
we hope that these, together with our Landforces Headed by so brave a General,
will (with Gods Blessing) keep the Land of our Nativity from being the dismal
Seat of War and Misery; and make it at last a Scene of Triumph and Peace.

Our English Arms by Sea and Land, have been famed and feared all over the
World within a few years past; and many of you give us the happy demonstration,
that all our English Valor is not withered. But there is one thing too sadly,
and alas! too generally forgotten, though it be very necessary both to True
Valor and Good Success; and that is, True Piety.

We cannot but own, That there is a Holy and Almighty God, the Disposer of all
Events: How much does it concern us then, to secure an Alliance with him, that
he appear not against us! For he is the Lord of Hosts, and will appear on one
side or the other, where Armies engage; and what Part soever he takes, it will
be sure to be Victorious: It is God that girdeth me with strength, said Valiant
David, Psalm. 18. 32. He is the God of the Spirits of all Men, and can either
advance them to an unsurmountable Height of Valor, or sink them to a base and
contemptible feebleness and fear.

No Soldier therefore marches in so good Array, as he that is girt with the
whole Armor of God, mentioned Ephesians. 6. 11. and has the Praises of God in his
Mouth, as well as a Two-edged Sword in his hand, Psalm. 149. 6. Goliath, the
Champion of the Philistines, wanted no Weapon nor Strength of Arm; but he came
forth defying God, and so he blasphemed himself to death, and fell by the sling
of a despised Stripling.

Wherefore, as you would approve your selves great and brave Men, labor to
gain the Victory over base and shameful Vices. Your Victory here will be a most
happy Presage of the Fall of all your other Enemies that rise up against you:
For even Death it self will become your Conquest through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Let me therefore entreat you, My Brethren, with the most Affectionate Bowels
of a Friend and Brother, That you keep the fear of God before your eyes, and
call devoutly on his Glorious and Fearful Name. And since you have not often
fit places of retired Prayer, be the more frequent and earnest in short
Ejaculations at all times. Let not the Fury of any Lust or Passion make you
forget God, in whose hands your breath is, and whose Blessing alone can make
you prosperous. Consider therefore what a Madness it is, to be accustomed to
that common, but dreadful sin, of Swearing and Damning. It Is a sin of no
Temptation, but of infinite Guilt, so that it seems to need no Argument to
induce a Soldier to leave it, but to consider, that it is Fighting under the
Devil without Pay, and that against an Omnipotent GOD, who will destroy his
Enemies eternally.

Be entreated also to keep strict sobriety, or you cannot be Men, much less
Heroes: And be just, civil and modest, in your Deportment, or you will want the
hravest Method of Conquering, and bringing all People over to your side. And
when you come to face your Enemies, let Love, Honor and Concern for your GOD,
and King, your Religion and Country, make you Resolute and Courageous: And let
not Despair it self incline you to turn your Backs, for then you give
opportunity to the veriest Coward to kill you without danger; the greatest
Slaughter is ever made in the Pursuit.

In a word, I beseech the Invincible God to lead you on inspirited with true
Gallantry, and to bring you back laden with the spoils of your Enemies; that so
our latest Posterity may Crown you with Immortal Honor, as the Preservers
(under God) of our Lives, Liberties, and Religion; and the Conquerors of our
most Desperate and Dangerous Enemies.

So Prays Your Servant and Countryman J. W.

Psalm. 122. 8, 9. For my Brethren and Companions sake, I will now say, Peace be
within thee.

Because of the House of the Lord our God, I will seek thy Good.


IT was to Jerusalem that these kind Wishes are Voted in the Text. And indeed,
to what Place should a Jew wish so well as to his own Land? for which the
scattered Remnant of them do yet retain an inextinguishable Love.

Jerusalem was at that time both the Metropolitan Church and City of Judea: and
in this double Respect the Psalmist here (inspired by the Spirit of God)
demonstrates his Zeal for its Peace and Prosperity; as the words distinctly
express. For my Brethren and Companions sake I will now say, Peace be within
thee. That is, I wish Thee all desirable Blessings, O my Native Country, for
the sake of my Relations and Friends who live in thee. And that which further
engages my Concern for thy Welfare is, that God has Chosen Jerusalem to be the
Seat of his Holy Temple. There the true God was then Worshipped, and there was
his Church and peculiar People: therefore I will do all that in me lies to
Advance thy Happiness: Because of the House of the Lord our God, I will seek
thy Good.

So then, in these words we find two very constraining Reasons for the Love of
our Country, which must needs be binding to such as have either Sense or
Conscience. For

First, If we have any bowels of Humanity toward our Relations which are our
own Flesh, or to our Dear Friends, which are as our own Soul: we must seek the
Peace and Prosperity of the place of their Habitation: and say with the
Psalmist, For my Brethren, etc. Or

Secondly, If we have any pious Concern for the Sacred Interests of the
reformed Religion, and the Church of God: we must seek the Good of this our
Land; as in the latter part of the Text -- Because of the House of the Lord our
God, I will seek thy Good.

These words then tend to impress a Zealous and Indefatigable Concern for the
common Good upon our Consciences: assuring us of this point of Doctrine:

Doct. That it is a necessary part of our Duty, both as Men and Christians, to
promote the just interests of our Country in Church and State.

Both these Sorts of Interests, were ever esteemed by the Heathen as their most
precious and even vital Enjoyments; and they thought the Defense of them, the
most just and necessary Causes of War: which ever awakened all their Courage
and Zeal to assert and defend. When they fought Pro aris and Focis, (as they
termed it) that is, For their Altars and Fire places, they still fought with a
pertinacious Resolution to Conquer or Dye. And these are the very Things
expressed in the Text before us: and indeed they are the Things which we contend
for in the present War with France: which is endeavoring not only to get our
Houses, but the Houses of our God into their possession. And how they will then
treat them, we may see by the Ruins of the Protestant Churches in France.
There were there within these few years, more than a Thousand places of God's
Public Worship, where above Fifteen Hundred Thousand Protestants served God
according to his own Institution. According to the computation of Mounsieur
Carlot, the Deputy of Levennes, in their last National Synod, at Loudun.
But alas! the Popish Fury has either laid those Churches in Ruinous Heaps, or
so Fundamentally destroyed them, that there is no Token that they ever were in
Being.

And alas! they have treated the poor Protestants as barbarously, as they have
done their Churches, as the Deaths of many Martyrs and Confessors there, by
unexampled Crueltys do abundantly testify.

They have dis-joynted all the Bones of some by Skrews fastened to every Finger
and Toe. They have broyled Others before slow Fires. They have rolled the naked
Bodies of Others upon broken pieces of Glass, till there was no room for any
more to pierce the miserable Sufferers. They have kept some from Sleep many
Days and Nights together to distract them, and kept othersome from Food as
long to Starve them; As those Authors of undoubted Fidelity, Monsieur Claud and
Monsieur Jurieu, have publicly testified: together with many other Relations
too sad to be read without Tears, or considered without extremity of Pain in
all tender Bowels. And if any yet doubt of this, let them look on those
excellent Men, who for the sake of the Protestant Religion, are at this Day
Chained in the French-Gallies, with a chain of more than Fifty pounds weight.
And to this Day we ever and anon hear of an Assembly of Protestants there,
taken and hanged, for no other reason, but because they are found at their
Prayers together.

Now, when all these Miseryes are advancing toward our Borders; When the same
infernal Dragoons (blooded by the Executions, and hardened by the Groans of
their own Countrymen) are longing to try our Constancy by the same Methods.
What reason have we to stand up as one man in the just Defense of our Lives and
Liberties, and the necessary Vindication of our Religion and Country? What
Spirit are they of, that will not Act in their own Defense against Cutthroats
and Robbers of Churches?

When Joab, the General of the Armies of Israel fought against the Syrians and
Ammonites: He excited the Valor of his Soldiers to a wonder, with that short
speech of his (2 Samuel 10. 12.) Be of good Courage, and let us play the Men for
our People and the Citys of our God. And the bare mentioning of these dear
enjoyments, inspired them with Valor to such a Degree, that they got an entire
Victory over their Enemies that had enclosed them round.

And this suggestion was ever a part of the speeches of the Heathen Officers
before they engaged their Enemies: Namely, To mind their Soldiers, that they
were to Fight for their Temples and Fire-sides.

And it usually excited them to put themselves out to the utmost; and to count
their Lives as nothing in comparison with that for which they adventured them.

And is it possible that Christians can sink below the Honor and Honesty of
Jews and Heathens in this point? Would a Heathen adventure his life in the most
threatening dangers to defend his Country? And can any Christian be so base, as
to hazard his life to Betray his Country? Alas! any but Englishmen may well
make a doubt of this. And surely all the World may well stand amazed at our
Coldness in our necessary Vindication of all that can be accounted Dear to us.
But above all, they that have felt the French Barbarityes, must needs wonder at
the principles and Practices of those people who can find in their hearts to
befriend the Designs of such an Enemy.

It is indeed, the most unnatural betraying of the Essential Interests of our
Country, that makes a Discourse of this Nature seasonable: which one would
hardly believe, (were it only for the Honor of our Nation, and humane Nature)
did we not know it by too sad and costly experience. In truth, this degenerate
age abounds with monsters of Sin of all kinds: men are monstrous in their sins
against God, by bold and pleading Atheism: against their own Souls by dreadful
imprecations of Damnation: and against their own Country, not only by Treachery
and Correspondence with its fatal Enemies, but even by offering earnest Prayers
and Vows for their Successes; and discovering a Grinning Cursed Laughter at the
losses of their own Nation. An Affront which no Government in the world has
less deserved by any Severities to them, than this, and none upon earth but
this, would bear at their Hands.

I shall therefore in opposition to the common perfidiousness to the Interests
of our Country, and their own in the end (notwithstanding all their chimerical
fancies to the contrary) endeavor to assert these two Positions.

First, That we are bound by the Laws of God and Nature to advance the
Interests of our Church and Nation: or, as the Text expresses it, to pray for
the public Peace, and seek the common Good.

Secondly, That no personal or particular Respects can take off this double
obligation.

1. Pos. That we are bound by the Laws of God and Nature to pray for the
public Peace and seek the common Good. Indeed, the genuine Laws of Nature are
the most universal and indelible Laws of our Creator. And amongst these, there
are none more deeply impressed than those of Self-love, and a Desire of
Self-preservation: which ever make the feeblest and fearfullest Creatures put
themselves out (Ad extremum Virium) even beyond their usual strength. Now, if I
would preserve my being, I must have a place to subsist in, and means of
Subsistence. And this will put us on the defense of our Native Land, to whose
common Comforts we have a natural Right, and it a Right to our continual
assistance. And the grater Ease, Liberty, and Safety, I enjoy in my own
Country; my Love and Concern for the Defense of it against its Enemies, must in
reason proportionably increase. If I am born a Freeman, I may justly withstand
such as come to load me with Chains. Reason will soon agree with that advice of
the Holy Scripture, 1 Cor. 7. 21. If thou may be free, choose it rather,
than to live a Bond-slave.

So then, the Love of my Country is as natural as Self-love, and this as
natural as our Breath, or Pulse. And all sober Heathens have ever been true to
this Principle of Nature: insomuch, that we hardly find any Maxim so
Celebrated amongst them as that Epidemical one, Dulce est pro Patria mori. That
is, It is a sweet thing to Dye for ones Country. Nothing is more Common than
such expressions in Cicero, Seneca, and all their Philosophers: And nothing
more frequent than instances of it in Livy, Tacitus, and all their Historians.

When it was told the Romans by their Augures, that their State would never
flourish, till some Roman of Noble Blood leapt into the great Chasm at Rome:
with what Cheerfulness and Bravery did the Noble Curtius mount his Steed and
leap down the precipice! When Attilius Regulus was taken Prisoner by the
public Enemy, and by them permitted to return to Rome upon his parole of
Honor: and there perceived that the State could not condescend to their
demands for His Ransom without their prejudice; He not only dissuaded the
Senate from procuring his Liberty at such a Rate, but secretly went and offered
himself to his Enemies, and there underwent a most painful and lingering Death,
rather than be an occasion of any detriment to his Country by his Life.

And these Illustrious Instances of Zeal for the common Good were not so much
gazed at in those days (as we do now, in the History of them) because they
were then common, and every Body thought it their bounden Duty. For their usual
discourse was, Nemo sibi nascitur, Partem Patria, partem Parents, partem Amici
postulant. That is, None of us is born for himself; Our Country and our
Parents, and Friends, may so duly challenge a part of us, that we cannot look
on our selves as at our own disposal, but as consecrated to the common Good. So
that these honest Heathens following the Light of Nature, and the Psalmist in
the text guided by revelation, followed the same Leader, that is God; and in
Obedience to the King of Nations, they prayed for, fought for, and died for
their Country. -- For my Brethren and Companions sake, I will say (that is, I
will pray) that Peace (that is, all manner of Blessings) may be within thee, O
my desirable Country. Peace be within thy Walls, and Prosperity within thy
Palaces, ver. 7. may they Prosper that love thee, ver. 6. But let them all be
Confounded (in their Designs) and turned back that hate Zion: Let them be as
Grass upon the House tops, which withers before it grows up, Psalm. 129. 5,
6.

Nothing can be more exasperating to human Bowels than to see our Parents, or
Brethren, or Wives, or Children slain before our Eyes. To see them welter in
their precious blood, which by sympathy of Nature we look on as our own. To see
our Houses plundered, and afterward burnt. To behold licentious Soldiers
treating Age with Scorn, and Youth with shame. O dreadful! What sensible Soul
can lend a hand, to draw on such a heavy Chain of Miseries, which we nor our
Posterity are able to bear?

Yet further, there is in men a sort of natural tenderness for the Rest of the
bones and dust of their deceased Ancestors. How can I choose but be sad, said
Nehemia, when the Place of my Fathers Sepulchers lies waste? Neh. 2. 3. There
is also a natural Love to our Posterity, which is very forcible. And nothing
can touch a Parents Heart with more horror and Regret, than to behold the
symptoms of the Miseries of their Posterity.

And Christianity Cherishes and Enforces all these honest Instincts of Nature.
For our blessed Savior came not to destroy these Laws, but to perfect and
sublimate them. And his Gospel declares, those worse than Infidels, that
provide not for those of their own House, 1 Timothy 5. 8. So that we have
Super-abundant obligations to be fathful to our Countries Interests.

Now, without all controversy, we have manifest reason to expect the greatest
Violences in all these respects from our Enemies of France, if they prevail
over us, which God of his infinite goodness avert. They waste with Fire and
Sword the most Famous and Ancient Cities, and their Inhabitants: As in the
Palatinate and other Countries. They pull the very bones of Princes out of
their Sepulchers, and will not suffer their Dust to rest: As in the Case of the
Electoral Princes buried at Hydelberg. They take little Children from their
natural Parents to breed them up in their own Superstitions: as they have dealt
by many Protestant Families in France. So that there can hardly be imagined any
Plague so universally calamitous to the present and succeding Ages, as a French
Conquest would be: nor can people act more inhumanly and unchristianly than in
helping on such a Calamity.

And this barbarity of deserting and betraying our Country will be further
aggravated, if we consider: That as the undutifulness of a child to a Parent,
is mightily blackened by the Consideration of the extraordinary goodness and
indulgence of the Parent; so is the un-natural Treachery of Englishmen to
their Mother Country, in that they Betray a good Land, abounding with all
useful accomodations, and with peculiar Liberty and Light of God's Word, which
are the sweetest enjoyments of humane Life: in which the happiness of no people
upon Earth is parallel to ours.

O sad! Do the Miseries of such a Land, and the Loss of such enjoyments deserve
the Grinning Laughter of any amongst us? Can there be found in a Christian Land
such a seed of Nero, as can rake in the Bowels of such a Mother with delight?
Surely Nature and humane Bowels are perished in such Breasts. We must take Leave
to speak plain to these things, since for ought we know, we speak our last: For
these Treacheries have helped to cast us on the very brink of Ruin.

Use. Now, the Inference that is naturally drawn from this first Position, is
That such as any way Contribute to weaken the Defense of their Country, must
needs be condemned by themselves and all the World, Jews, Turks, and Pagans,
have ever looked upon such as the worst of men, bereaved of all notion of Good,
and sense of Honor. Yea, what ever the Government or Governors be, the case
is nothing altered. Treason against the State and a Man's own Land, is ever
horrid and abominable; and the very horror of it has made many a man run mad.
As in the Case of one Mr. C. a skilful Shipwright sent into France in the Reign
of King Charles II. to instruct them in the building of Ships; who as he was
returning home, had such Terrors on his Conscience that he pistoled himself,
and never set foot on his Native Land again, to whose interests he had been so
false. As an Eyewitness now living testifies.
Such as betray their own Nation are Murderers of their own Parents, and
Brethren, and Children; and do in effect set Fire to their own Houses and
Churches; and where the madness is so extreme, it is no wonder if at last they
murder themselves.

And such as any way contribute toward this, take a proportionable share in
this horrid Guilt: Such as Embezzle the public Stores do really rob every
particular Person in the Nation, who is interested therein, and whose safety
depends thereupon. And these Public Cheats, are worse than Robbers on the
Highway.

Again, to be false in any public Office or Authority, in such a season as
this, is at once to betray, not only the Interests of these Three Nations, but
of a Fourth Part of the World: and whatever kindness any one shows to the
Common Enemy and Invader, is (as such) a real Injury to all Christendom,
tending to the universal Empire of France, and the universal Ruin of other
Nations; an extreme Guilt, enough to cast any sensible Person into an Agony
with the horror of it.

But perhaps some People are by private Respects and Opinions drawn into this
Snare: and so may think to ward off that imputation of Baseness and Treachery
which is laid to their Charge by the Grand Senate of our Land, and by the
generality of men. Their Pleas will properly fall under the consideration of my
second Position; and I think will appear to all considerate and equal Judges to
fall before it, which was;

2. Pos. That no personal and particular Respects can take off our natural and
supernatural obligation of seeking the Good of our Church and Nation.

Now, this is a Truth as evident, as, That the Whole is greater than its Part:
Or, that a Million is more than a single Unite. For even so, must an universal
Good of necessity be more regardable than a particular. This our Reason cannot
so much as question.

And if it were possible, the duty of it would be more clear to a well informed
Conscience, than the truth of it to sound Reason. For, what Christian ever yet
disputed, whether the mad Humor of running Known to our men in the
East Indies; sometimes to their Cost.
Muck amongst the Indians, be an execrable Barbarity or not? Where a resolute
Fellow whom they call a Muck (madded by discontent) does all he can to be the
death of all mankind, and usually begins the Tragedy in the Butchery of his own
Family. Now as to our Case; though we do not act thus with our own hands, yet if
we deliberately assist those that will, it comes all to the same End, and we
contract the same Guilt: For in the Case of Murder, all are principals. But
yet against this, some Object.

1. Obj. That they have sustained great Losses by some Alterations in the
State, which palls their friendship toward it, and makes them have little
Concern for it.

Ans. To which I Answer, that if that Alteration was necessary to preserve the
whole Community, every particular Person is so far from being a Loser by it,
that he hereby gains whatever he enjoys. Perhaps he loses some part of his
Estate, or some place of profit: But he enjoys his Life and Liberty, and
Spiritual Advantages; and all these are given to him for a Prey. And he has
reason not only to be Content, but thankful: Yea, though he had lost his All in
order to the public Good, and the Happiness of his Posterity.

2. Obj. But others Clamor, That the present Impositions and Taxes fall heavy,
tend to a general poverty, and make a great Cause of discontent,

Ans. I Answer, They cannot move any good or prudent person to any impatience:
A good man will part with All rather than the Gospel, as many Thousands have
done in all the times of Persecution. And a prudent man will think a part very
profitably laid out to save the whole. The present Taxes which are designed to
prosecute the War against the Common Enemy, will appear to every considerate
Person as necessary as a Levy to keep up the Sea-Banks. To be sparing in a Case
of such necessity, is to be wanting and cruel to our selves and Posterity; like
the fatal parsimony of the wealthy Citizens of Constantinople, who refused to
lend their own Emperor a Thirtyeth part of that money which the Turkish
Emperor took from them for a spoil, bereaving the wealthyest of them of their
Lives too, to consummate the Tragedy.

3. Obj. But we reap little advantage by all our Expenses: so that our
Contributions seem to be exported for the support of Foreigners, or
mis-employ'd by private hands to their own advantage.

Ans. We reap the manifest advantage of mantaining a brave Fleet at Sea, and a
Valiant Army on the Continent; without which we should in one month be Ruined
beyond possibility of reparation: And all that is done to Support our Allies,
tends to find the Enemy work on that side, and keeps the War off from us. But
if in this Juncture, there appear any amongst our selves so vile and
proffligate as to embezzle or mis-imploy the public Treasure, they well
deserve, That every Person in the three Nations should throw a Stone at them:
for every one in this Case is an injured person.

But there remains yet a Plea, which would make the betraying of our Country a
matter of Conscience; though sometimes pleaded by those who make Conscience of
nothing. However, they argue thus.

4. Obj. Though no man's private Interests can be ponderous enough to weigh down
the Interests of three Kingdoms lying in the opposite Scale; Yet may not our
Allegiance sworn to a dispossessed Prince bind us to do all we can for him, let
what will follow upon it: though it be withal granted, that the said Abdicated
Prince did industriously and openly endeavor the Fiat Justitia etsi ruat
Coelum.
subversion of the Government, and destruction of the Community.

Ans. This is the Goliath-Argument, and like him brings a Sword to cut off its
own Head. For, fidelity to God and our Country was our duty before we Swore
Allegiance to that Prince, and could not be nulled by the Oath of Allegiance
required in the English Government. Yea, the very design of binding Subjects by
Oath to the Supreme Power, is to make it more able to Defend (not Destroy) the
common Good. The fundamental End of all civil Government, being to render the
whole Political Body safe and happy. And this is plainly affirmed by the
Apostle, Romans 13. 4. The King is God's Minister to thee for Good; that is, in
order to the Public Advantage.

So then, since the Laws of Nature are before and above all political Laws, and
we must be considered as men, before we can fall under the notion of Subjects;
and since Preservation is the End of all Government, and since the Laws and
Government of England have ever conserved, with the gratest Tenderness, the
Rights and Liberties of English Subjects, What Reason or Religion can their be
in the present Case? Namely, in making a Sacrifice of our Bibles Fiat Justitia
in vastatorem Europae, ne ruat Orbis Terrarum.
and Mother Country to the great Golden Image of the French Arbitary Power,
which the Babylonians have set up; and would have all People, Nations, and
Languages, to fall down and Worship it; and they require us, above others, to
bow to it, because they make their pretended Kindness to the aforesaid Prince a
stale to their Ambition and Usurpation.

But, can that be indeed an act of Righteousness, which (by humouring the Vice
or Error of one man) destroys many Millions? Or, is it not rather a perfect
Dementation, than a Principle of Conscience? For my part, were I dissatisfied
about the Legality of the present Government, (as I thank God, I am not in the
least) yet I should think my self obliged to keep my Scruples private within my
own Breast. Because if this political notion of mine should in the end prove a
gross mistake (as our Lawyers, the best Casuists in this Case, assure us it is)
what should I have to answer for before God and men? When I should be proved to
be a fighter against the most merciful providence of God, and a Vile Traitor
to my own Country, which is the worst sort of Parricide. What Restitution can a
private man make to many injured Nations?

It had need be a manifest part of Duty, so clear and demonstrative, that there
is no room for doubt, that engages us against all the Interests of this Life:
Otherwise we shall want Comfort in our sufferings here, and may not only miss
the Crown of Martyrdom in the other world, but fall under the Curse denounced
against such as are without natural affection, Romans 1. 31. Yea, such as deny
the faith by the want of Christian care for those of their own Blood, 1 Timothy 5.
8.

I would therefore ask such Persons as lie under this unhappy mistake a few
Questions; which, since Conscience is pleaded, I would desire them with due
Application of Conscience to consider:

1. Quest. Is not our Love to our Country, and our Endeavor after the welfare
of our Relations and Posterity, a natural binding duty, and in order of Nature
before our engagements to any Political Institution?

2. Quest. Is not the Preservation of the Community, or whole Political Body,
the very End of all political Institutions?

3. Quest. Is it not a contradictions and phrenetick Notion, to destroy any
Country in Love to the Prince of it, though he were never so Rightfully entitled
to it?

4. Quest. Can a Person of the Reformed Religion, with a safe Conscience, dip
himself directly or consequentially, in the Luciferian Design of the French
Politics, to blot out Protestancy, and enslave Christendom?

5. Quest. Can a good man continue five years together in such execrable
ingratitude to God, as never to render hearty Praises to his Great Name, for
our Marvelous Deliverance from the Ruin designed to our Church and State in
the late Reign?

6. Quest. Can a Papist that is Zealous for Popery, even to Bigotry, sincerely
now take, and faithfully keep the Oaths which English Princes are obliged to
take at their Coronation?

7. Quest. Can any good Christian desire that a Popish Prince, continuing
Zealous for the Principles and Propagation of Popery, should again come to the
Imperial Throne of England, and put himself afresh to this hateful and dreadful
Dilemma? Namely, either to mock God and men by solemn Oaths, and repeated
Promises made to Protestants in abominable Hypocrisy, which was done in the
first part of a certain Reign: Or to fall down right upon illegal and open
Violations of the Rights of the Protestants of England, as it was done in the
last part of it.

If this be allowed, I think we may as well conclude, that a firm Protestant
may enter upon the Possession of the Throne and Chair of the Pope, and Swear
and Vow to preserve all the abominations of the Papacy. But we may easily
foresee that Papists would clamor against this as a thing impracticable and
self-contradictions: As the Associates of the Holy League in France did against
their Henry the Fourth, who often protested that a Protestant was incapable of
the French Crown; and surely we have as much Reason to say, That a Papist is as
incapable of the Crown of England.

And now having considered the two Positions proposed to be spoken to, I come
to Apply them; and the manifest Duties which the forementioned things do
enforce upon all serious Minds, are briefly these:

App. 1. Inf. That we manifest our selves sincere Lovers of our Country, by our
earnest Supplications to the Sovereign Disposer of all things, in the behalf of
these divided Churches and Kingdoms Let us say, as the Psalmist in the Text,
Peace be within them. May all Divisions and Emnities in Church and State be
healed by pacifick Methods, and the Edge of all Passion be turned against that
overgrown Debauchery, which needs the help of all hands to pull it up. Let us
try the powerful Means of Prayer and Fasting, to cast out that unclean Spirit
of Profaneness, which has kept so long and raving a Possession amongst us. Had
our Public Fasts been kept with better Conscience, we might have expected to
have seen our Public Affairs in better Condition. To redress this, as much as
possible, let our private Fasts be very frequent, and very faithful. We have
need, alas! to set up Daniel's Fasts within our Chambers for three Dan. 10. 2,
3.
Weeks together, without eating any pleasant Bread, and pray as he does, Dan.
9. 16. O Lord, according to all thy righteousness, I beseech thee, let all
thine Anger and thy Fury be turned away from thy City Jerusalem, thy holy
mountain: because for our Sins and ihe iniquities of our Fathers, Jerusalem and
thy people are become a Reproach to all that are about us. O, may all the
Watchmen of our Jerusalem never hold their Peace, day nor night, and give the
Lord no Rest, till he establish it, and make it a Praise in the Earth. (Isa.
62. 6, 7.) Yea, let every Soul endeavor, by his Prayers, to become a Patriot,
by pulling down Blessings on his Country. And if we would make way for our
Prayers to come before God in an acceptable manner, in the next place,

2 Inf. We must, in love to our Country, do all we can toward the removing the
general and open Profaneness from its Borders; this is the accursed thing which
troubles our Israel, and blasts our Undertakings. Wickedness is a thing which
God will never bless, and will not long bear. Let us not then be discouraged by
the Scoffs or Frowns of wicked Men, from endeavoring to prosecute and
discountenance Vice. We cannot well think it a less-glorious Martyrdom, to dye
for the propagation of the Practice of the Gospel, than for the Profession of
its Faith. Let us all then, in our stations, endeavor an universal
Reformation; for, indeed we must be looked on as a Nation under God's Rod, who
trys whether lesser Scourges will bring us to our Duty; and if not, we have
reason to fear utter Destruction. O, that God would give us all a just and
timely sense of His impending Wrath, which seems to be so near, that only the
present apprehensions of it can be timely enough to prevent it.

3 Inf. Let us be steady and vigorous in the performance of our Duty to Their
Majesty's King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, to whom, besides the Ties of Duty and
Gratitude, we are bound by a sort of Necessity, and must say as in the Text;
For my Brethren and Companions sakes, I will wish your Peace. and because of
the Houses of the Lord our God, we will seek your Good.

4 Inf. Let me exhort Soldiers and Seamen to whet and enliven their Courage
from these Principles, namely, The love of the Reformed Religion, and the
Liberties of your Country. The justness of your Cause may make you bold and
undaunted, when you engage the Enemies of all that ought to be dear to you;
especially if the love of the sacred Gospel has its due place in your Hearts.
And, O that it had more deep and firm root there! for, a Good Conscience is as
a Wall of Brass about a Man. The Righteous is bold as a Lion, (Prove. 28. 1.)
God has promised to put the Fear and Dread of such into the Hearts of their
Enemies; so that they shall have a very easy Victory, and a very glorious one,
because wrought by the special Favor of God. (Deuteronomy. 11. 25.) There shall no
man be able to stand before you; for the Lord your God shall lay the fear and
the dread of you upon all the land that ye shall tread upon. So that you and we
have great reason to regard the Counsel of God, given, Deuteronomy. 23. 9. When the
Host goes forth against thine Enemies, then keep thee from every wicked thing.
Wherefore cast away all Iniquity from you, that so the Spirit of the Lord may
come mightily upon you, as it did upon the famous Worthies of old, who being
thus supported, always did Wonders.

5 Inf. Let us all (however divided about the lesser matters of Religion) stand
up with one Soul against the Common Enemies of Protestancy: And, however
unhappily divided we are about some Political Notions, let us nevertheless,
with one consent, oppose the Designs of the Common Enemy of our Country.

Whilst the execrable French Faction here is zealous, earnest, and impudent;
daring us publicly with their Wagers, and defying us with their Threats. If in
such a Juncture we on the contrary remain cool and indifferent, as if it were a
light thing how the matter succeeded; we can at this rate make no Countermine
to their desperate Designs, but they are too like to carry all before them.

We have a sort of spiritless and enervate Creatures amongst us, who in a very
poor and passive manner say, We will have no hand one way nor the other; We
will not concern our selves, nor intermeddle. No, Sirs? what! not when your
Enemies come with Idols to your Churches, and Firebrands to your Houses! Not,
when a Universal Ruin threatens your Selves and Posterity? Surely, as you will
be the easiest, so will you be the most despised Prey of your Enemies, who (if
they have any Manhood in them) will show more Favor to the brave Defenders of
their Country, than to the sneaking Deserters and Betrayers of it.

Methinks it might sufficiently awaken every reasonable Soul, to push on the
present War with the utmost vigor, if he will but exercise so much
Forethought, as to consider what will be the dreadful consequences of
miscarrying in it.

It Is to me past doubt, that we had better be subdued by any People in the
World than by the French. No other Nation has Naval Forces sufficient to secure
such a Conquest. If the Turk subdued us, he would miserably tyrannize; but he
would permit us the enjoyment of our Religion for a small yearly Tribute. If
other Nations subdued us, either their distance would slacken our Bonds, or
their weakness would press us more lightly As in the Roman and Danish Conquests.
. But France is our next Neighbor, very powerful by Sea and Land, able to load
us with heavy Chains, and to rivet them upon us. And besides, it looks upon us
as a Nation capable of being a Rival to her Glory; and has often felt the power
of our Arms in her own Bowels: Yea, she has been made a Conquest by us, and
longs to wipe off that stain, and to pull her Lillies out of the Paw of our
Lion. And further, She has often found us a Goad in her Side, when she flew at
the Quarry of other Conquests. And 'twas only whilst we slept, that She got up
such a Fleet upon the Sea, and enlarged her Boundaries so widely upon the Land.
And upon these accounts we must expect no Mercy at her hands; but to be stripped
of all our Strength and Glory, and to be made a Dunghill of Desolation. Her
Statesmen would allow our Liberties no more Quarter, than the Jesuits would our
Religion.

Ah! how dreadful an infatuation is it, not to be sensible of the Approaches of
such Miseries! the mere possibility of which, were enough to startle any Man of
Sense, the likelihood of it enough to transport the meekest Spirit into an
extreme Rage.

Should such a Thing come to pass (which God in mercy for ever avert) what
would Posterity say of the Politics and Prowess of our present Age? What a
burning shame would the Slavery of England be to the present Inhabitants of so
Strong, so Rich, and Populous a Land? A Nation so much famed and dreaded in
times past all over the World: and such a peculiar Terror to the French Nation,
where the very Name of an Englishman has been known to get a Victory Witness
the Tremendous Name of Talbot, in Sir Ric. Baker's Chron.
Surely we had, every Soul of us, better dye in the Defense, than live in the
Bondage and Reproach of our Nation. I am not over-prone to put men upon the
hazard of their Lives, nor am I rash in what I have spoken; for I again
affirm, That our Lives ought to be less dear to us than the enjoyment of the
Gospel and the Liberties of our Country. And in this, I am sure, The Hands and
Hearts of all good Protestants and true Englishmen will concur with me.

For my part, I speak nothing here in Envy or Enmity, to so great a Monarch as
the French King, I wish he really were as great a Hero as his Flatterers on
both sides the Sea boast him to be. I wish he had manifested that Truth and
Honor in all his promises to his own Nation, and Compacts with others, which
might render his name Honorable and his Memory blessed. O that he never had
drawn forth his Sword against the Truths of Jesus Christ; nor shed the blood of
Martyrs in his own Land, and Rivers of blood of poor Innocents in his
usurpations upon the Territories of others. And in short, I sincerely wish,
that he were as good a Prince, and Reigned within his just dominions with as
much Honor and universal prosperity as humane Life admits.

And if these were his only Aims, no Good Man would stir his Tongue or Hand
against him. But when he flies at All, without sense of Right, or Bowels of
Pity; and would crumble all the Nations of the Earth to Dust, to erect a
Mountainous Babel to his own exorbitant Ambition; here it is every ones Duty and
Interest, to do all they can to oppose the grand Robber, and stop the Chase of
the mighty Nimrod. And to excite every Soul to this, I shall only add,

I. That the manifest Duty of so doing will bind every Motives.
sensible Conscience; namely, The plain natural Duty of Love to our Country and
Religion. To be wanting in this, is to deny the Faith, and act more barbarously
than Infidels, (1 Timothy 5. 8.) It is indeed Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine
cunctos ducit, etc.
to fight against Nature it self, and the God of Nature, who seems to inspire
all men with a sort of fondness to their Native Place; so that most People like
their own Home above other places, much finer and better. And this natural
Kindness seems mutual; for the place in which we were bred and born is thought
by Physicians to abound with such a friendly Air to us, as to be our last
Relief in time of pineing Sickness, when all their other Arts and Drugs are
insufficient to succor us: And shall we forsake the Land of our Nativity in
her Extremities, which is so cherishing and faithful to us, even to the Death?
In this, even inanimate Nature it self will reproach us.

II. The Honor of so doing will constrain all Persons of Character and
Reputation. Naaman is recorded in Scripture to have been an Honorable Person,
because by him God had given Deliverance to Syria; (2 Kin. 5. 1.) And it is
said, That Mordecai was great among the Jews, and accepted of the multitude of
his Brethren, because he sought the Wealth of his People. (Esth. 10. 3.) And we
behold Queen Esther with Tears protesting, That she could not endure to see the
Evil that was coming upon her People, and therefore she put her Life in her
Hand to prevent it. (Esth. 8. 6.)

And our Excellent Queen, of fragrant and blessed Memory, Queen Elizabeth,
often assured her People, That she was ready to sacrifice her Life for their
Safety; and acted always as she said, and is therefore to this day had in the
greatest admiration.

These were Worthies indeed, to be had in everlasting remembrance! when the
lying Statues of such Princes as are only great in doing Evil, will be buried
in the Dust, or rather in the Dunghill.

O, that all perfidious Betrayers of their Country were treated as their
Brother the late Governor of Heydelburgh, and had their Swords broken over
their Heads, and the pieces of them thrown in their Faces; which surely is more
fit, than that they should sheath them in their Mother's Bowels: And this would
be but a very mild, though a very symbolical Punishment of such an unnatural
Transgression.

But if they escape Punishment from those they betray, they will certainly find
it at the Hands of those they oblige; their Wooden Shoes will reproach their
Blockish Heads, and their extreme Folly will not fail to be its own Penance.

III. Lastly, The absolute necessity of seeking the Good of our Nation in order
to our own safety and subsistence, will compel all People of Sense to their
Duty of this kind. We must be true to the Interests of our Country, or perish
in the neglect of the necessary Care for our own Safety.

So that, as we have any natural Love for our Relations, or any supernatural
Affection for our Religion, or any natural instinct of Self-preservation, or
any sense of Honor in acting suitably to all these Obligations, we must seek
the Good of our Jerusalem, in its Ecclesiastical and Civil Rights and
Immunities.

In sum, As we would not see our Native Country a base tributary Province,
stripped of all its Glory, and made servile to a Foreign Power: As we would not
deliver up our Children to be bred up in the Delusions of Popery, and be the
means of their Slavery to the most Arbitrary and Cruel Masters: As we would not
behold our Enemies reaping what we have sown, and inhabiting the Houses that we
have built: And lastly, as we would not behold the Altars of Superstition set
up in our Churches, nor suffer the Light of the Gospel (for which our Martyrs
dyed) to be extinguished by the Abomination that makes desolate: I say, as we
would shun these intolerable Plagues, and longer enjoy those inestimable
Blessings (spiritual and temporal) which we now are blessed withal, we must all
do our utmost to cast away all Iniquity from us, and to sue out our Peace with
God, through our Lord Jesus Christ: And withal, we must unanimously apply our
utmost Industry, to withstand the vigorous Efforts of our powerful Enemies: as
we have any tenderness for our Brethren and Companions, or any Zeal for the
Houses of the Lord our God.

Consider what has been said, and the Lord give you Understanding in all
things. Amen.

FINIS.

