A WORD IN SEASON.

OR Three Great Duties of Christians in the worst of Times: Viz.

Abiding in Christ, Thirsting after his Institutions, and Submission to his
Providence.

The first opened, from 1 John 2.28. The second from Psalm. 42.1, 2. The third
from Jer. 14.19.

By a Servant of Christ's in the Work of his Gospel.

To which is added, by way of Appendix, the Advice of some Ministers to their
People for the reviving the Power and Practice of Godliness in their Families.

Gal. 1.8. Though we or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel, than that
which we have preached, let him be accursed. Ver. 9. As we said before, so say
I now again, if any man preach any other Gospel unto you, than that you have
received, let him be accursed. London, Printed, 1668.

To all CHRISTIAN READERS; More especially such Who either occasionally or more
fixedly have at any time sat under the Authors Ministry.
AND by it being dead yet speaks, (says the blessed Apostle of Abel) either
by his faith, by which he offered up to God a more excellent Sacrifice, or by
the witness which he obtained that he was righteous, God testifying to his
gifts; or by both. By the first he spoke unto all Believers, to instruct them
in their duty; by the latter he spoke unto them, instructing them in the
success of duty: by both he speaks unto us to go and do likewise. There are
this day many eminent servants of God that must be reckoned amongst the dead,
(the greater the lamentation) and not in the Gospel sense, (as the Apostle
says the woman that lives in pleasures is dead while she lives; no, they are
persons known to you not to have lived in Alehouses, in rioting and luxury,
but in a daily keeping under of their bodies, that they might be in subjection
to their spirits: that whiles they preached to others, themselves might not
become reprobates, (according to the Apostles rate of living, 2 Cor. 9.27.) But
they are legally dead, dead as to you, though alive to God, alive to the world,
or rather in the world. Most of these being dead yet speak: their former pains
amongst you, their holy conversation while they went in and out before you,
speak. Their lives, their labors, their present patience, speaks. It
speaks what they were, what they are, what you should be. Yea, and some of
their written Books yet speak to you, (you have some milk from the bottle,
though not from the breast.) The Author of the following sheets is one of those
thus dead, your importunity has made him thus to speak. Something you would
have him say. And when you had brought him to a resolution in this to listen to
you, he knew not better what to say than, Brethren, abide in him, that when he
shall appear, we may have confidence, and not be ashamed at his coming. You are
his witnesses, that when you heard him in the Pulpit, he used not to say to
you, Come to me, to my opinion or party; but only, Come unto Christ that you
may have life: He pleaded then for his Master, and insisted upon the one thing
necessary, having a latitude of charity, (though not an indifferency as to his
own practice) for any parties of any persuasion, whom he saw walking in the
path of Justification by the righteousness of Christ alone, and in paths of
holiness suited to that faith. He thought railing and smiting of little value to
the soul, that neither hears the one, nor feels the other; and judge the
Scottish Horning, and the English Significavit of equal value for the
reformation of mistakes in the understandings of Christians. And that the
rational soul forfeited its name that day, that it should be thus conquered.
This made him (though he could have wished all as he was, excepting the obloquy
which men of his persuasion were subjected to, from those who speak evil of the
things that they know not, yet in his preaching to pursue a nobler design, and
to call you to come to him, who without respect of persons receives men of all
persuasions, (holding the foundation.) In him, he trusts, he has left many
of your souls set upon the Rock that is higher than he is, having your faith
not standing in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God, builded upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the chief corner
stone. He being now dead yet speaks, and speaks the same language, (after
the beloved Apostle) abide in him. He desires this of you, that if the way of
worship wherein you (together with him) formerly walked appear less according
to the pattern of the mount, the rule of holy Scripture, than some other, you
would forsake it, and adhere to what you see most conformable to the rule of
Scripture, the example of Christ and his Apostles. He assures you he would
himself do it, and if in any thing he differs from you, this is the reason, He
sees, or thinks he sees, what he embraces most according to the will of God
revealed in Scripture. He would in this point say more to you, if he did not
think the holy Scriptures perfect as to a rule of Worship, and as able in that
as in matter of Doctrine, to make the man of God wise to salvation, and were
not afraid of making himself wiser than his Master, one piece of whose errand
to earth was to reveal his Fathers will. This has made him repeat to you the
Apostles words, Abide in him, thinking it the only thing necessary for you,
and a seasonable word, whiles so many tempters envy you that happy station.

As a means in order to this, he has also fubjoyned something to preserve and
quicken your appetite to Gospel-institutions. He knows that Union is maintained
by Communion; and that communion with God is much in and by those appointments
of Worship which Christ has instituted. This is the substance of the following
sheets.

Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ,
the great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
Covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you
that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory for ever and ever. Amen.

1 John 2.28. And now, little children, abide in him, that when he shall
appear, we may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming.
THE first words of my Text speak the Penman to be some aged spiritual Father,
whose years and authority might justify him in so relative and familiar a
compellation. So indeed he was, not Paul, but John the aged; the beloved
Disciple, 1 John 1.1.
who had seen and heard what he declared: and this Epistle is judged to have
been wrote by him in his extreme old age at Ephesus. The true Shepherds this
treat their Masters Lambs. The world can find no nicknames harsh, and infamous
enough for Saints: the beloved Disciple calls them Little children. The words
of an aged dying Disciple, and one who leaned upon our Saviors breast, are to
be regarded: but a greater than the beloved Disciple is here. John speaks in
his Masters name, and you know it was his Masters language, Whosoever shall
offend any of these little ones. And again, Fear not, little flock, it is your
Fathers will to give you a Kingdom. The Scribes and Pharisees of that age gave
them other names, Schismatics to the Jewish Church, perverters and seducers of
the people, (they never died upon the cross for them, they never traveled in
birth for them, till Christ was formed in them. Strangers call those rogues,
whom Parents call little children.) But what says this spiritual Father to
these little children? Abide in him, that when he shall appear, we may have
confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming. When our blessed Lord
was taken up into heaven, and the men of Galilee stood gazing up to heaven, two
men stood by them in white, Acts 1.11.
saying, Why gaze you? That same Jesus which is taken up into heaven, shall so
come in like manner as you have seen him ascending into heaven. [So] as to his
Person. God-Man, as he ascended; but not so as to his retinue, for we are
elsewhere told, that he shall come with ten thousands of his Saints. And again,
Jude 14.
That he shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire.
That he shall descend from heaven with a shout, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.
with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of God. And this is the
coming and appearing mentioned in the Text, which lets us know that Christ is
he that is spoken of in this Text, and no other.

Christ never makes an errand into the world for nothing. When he came before,
it was to work out man's redemption, his next coming will be of another nature.
The Apostle tells you, That God has appointed a day wherein he will judge the
world. A truth that solveth that great riddle of Providence, which made so many
wise Heathens deny a Deity, and has made so many good Christians sometimes
doubt it Why the way of the wicked prospers, and the rod of the wicked lies
upon the back of the righteous. If it were not that we believe that harvest, we
should stumble at the long furrows which the plowers make upon the backs of the
righteous. But this salves all: yet a little while, and the children of God
shall be delivered from their prisons, and dens, and furnaces of affliction,
and their accuser and persecutors shall supply their places; ah! happy were
they if it were no worse) but flaming fire is much sadder, especially
aggravated with the adjunct of eternity) For behold he comes, yea he comes to
judge the earth; with righteousness shall he judge the world, and the people
with equity. Would you know who this He is? The Apostle tells you, it is the
man Christ Jesus, he whom the Jews crucified, he whose Gospel men so much
despise, and against whom all imaginable despite is done; he that must not be
preached unto people that they may be saved. It is he that comes. Men's
different affections to Christ, read in all their faces and deportments,
sufficiently evince, that at this day of his coming there will be differing
complexions of men's faces: With what faces will they behold this dreadful
Judge, who have despised his Blood, obstructed his Gospel, haled his true
Disciples into prisons, abused his Ministers, concerning whom he has said, I
will be with you to the end of the world; and, He that despises you despises
me. And again, of his Saints in general, If any shall offend any of these
little ones, it were better that a millstone were hung about heir neck, and they
thrown into the sea. On the contrary, the righteous will lift up their head
when the day of their re^emption comes nigh. They have not been shamed of
Christ, no not of his Cross, and will have no cause to be ashamed ^t his
appearance. This is that confidence, and not being ashamed, of which ^he Text
speaks, unless it be to be ^nderstood with a particular reference ^o the
Ministers of Christ, for it is in ^he first person. That we may have
confidence. Isaiah triumphed in the faithful ^ischarge of his Ministry in
this, That ^ough Israel was not gathered, yet he should be glorified. And St.
Paul, that h^ should be a sweet savor to God, both with respect to them that
were saved, and to those that perish. If the Prophet has warned the sinner,
Ezekiel. 3.
if he die in his sins, yet the blood lies on his own head, the soul of the
Minister is free. The case is otherwise if they be not warned, (God have mercy
on those, that out of greediness of lucre take so many of these little children
into their care, that the^ are enforced to put them out to Nurse that have no
breasts, where they a^^ starved.) But yet as the painful Master that has taken
an idle child under h^^ care, who through his own negligen^^ profits nothing,
yet cannot without some shame, and lothness to hear i^ stand to hear his
non-proficienc^ brought to a test: so the painful Minister of Christ will not
without some blushing and reluctance at the great day stand and see the many
souls under his charge adjudged to eternal bur^ings. Therefore says the
Apostl^ That we may have confidence, and not ashamed. But what should be done
h^ Gospel-professors, that both they ar^ their Teachers, at the day of Christ's
appearing, may have confidence, and not be ashamed? This is summed up in a few
words, Abide in him. But I must not pass over those little particles in the
front of the Text. [But now] It is generally agreed that St. John wrote this
Epistle in a time wherein Professors to Religion had made great Apostasy, both
in matter of faith and holiness. Eusebius and Augustine reckon up nine or ten
most erroneous and impure Sects, which troubled the Church in his time. And as
it was a time of great defection, so it was a time of most bitter persecution.
John himself was banished into the Isle of Patmos, where Christ bare him so
much company, and dictated to him the Revelations. This Historical Circumstance
adds a great Emphasis to those particles in the front of the Text, But now.
Now when the love of so many waxes cold, now when the world is so much in arms
against Christ and his Gospel, now when the Doctrine of Christ ^s so much
deserted and despised, when ^he ways of the Gospel are so much de^amed, when
all manner of uncleanness and leudness so much abounds. Now, little children,
abide in him.

In the Text is observable, 1. A familiar Compellation, (...), little children.
2. A seasonable Exhortation, (...), abide in him. 3. An Argument enforcing this
Exhortation, (...), etc. that when he shall appear, we may have confidence, etc.


This Text affords several Propositions of Doctrine, some more implied, others
more expressed.

That Christ will appear. 1. Prop.
Though at present he be personally absent, and disappeareth to his people, yet
he will come again, he will appear.

That at the day of his appearance, 2. Prop.
some will have boldness and confidence, others will blush and be ashamed.

That it is the great concernment of Christians to abide in Christ, 3. Prop.
and that especially in evil times.

4. 4. Prop.
That a peoples abiding in Christ will add to a godly Ministers boldness and
confidence, when Jesus Christ shall appear in Judgment.

The third being the main Doctrine of the Text, is that which I shall only
insist upon.

1. Prop. It is the great concernment of the children of God, the Disciples of
Christ especially in evil times, to abide in Christ.

The foundation of this Proposition in the Text is evident: But now, little
children, abide in him. Now that the times are thus evil, by the corruption of
men on the one hand, by the rage of men on the other hand. Jo. 1.2.18, 19, 26.
Now that there are many Antichrists, by which we know this is the last time,
verse 18. Now that many are gone out from us, who were not of us. Now that
there are many that seduce you, verse 19, 26. Now abide in him. But for a
fuller discourse upon this subject, it will be necessary that I should open to
you, 1. The meaning of this term, Abide in him, that you may know the full
import of it. 2. That I should show you, wherein this appears to be the great
concernment of Christians; 1. In all times: 2. More especially in evil times.
3. Then I shall bring it home to you in a more close and particular application.


1. Quest. What is the meaning of this Exhortation, Abide in him? What is this
to abide in Christ?

1. Abide] is a term of continuance, and signifies a continuing or persevering
in some place, or station, in which a person is, being here applied to Christ,
it must signify a perseverance or continuance in union with Christ, or in some
station or relation referring to him. There are three ways by which a man may
be said to have a relation to Christ.

1. Sacramentally. We are said in Scripture to be baptized into Christ, Romans
6.3. Gal. 3 26.
Romans 6.3. Gal. 3.26. not that the person baptized is forthwith justified or
regenerated, (none can maintain that without asserting an intercession of the
state of justification, and total and final apostasy) but by Baptism we are
made members of that mystical body, whereof Christ is the head, (I mean the
Church) thus in the strictest sense, those that are baptized are baptized into
Christ mystical. Christ as the Head of the Church, though not as the Head of
the Elect. From this relation to Christ there is no starting, but by renouncing
or denying our Baptism. Besides, We are baptized into Christ, as the soldier,
by taking his pay, or taking his oath, is listed into an Army, that is, under
an engagement to profess Christ, and to be his servants. 2. Putatively, or
Visibly. It is a figurative, but very usual expression in Scripture, for men to
be said to be, what they judge themselves to be, or what they outwardly own and
profess to be; thus the seemingly righteous man is called righteous. And in
this sense you read of some that deny the Lord that bought them, ((...), that
is) and we are bid not with our meat to destroy our Brother, for whom Christ
dyed. Thirdly, More spiritually and really by an union of faith. Thus that man
is in Christ, who actually believes, faith is that grace which makes the true
and perfect union betwixt Christ and the soul: I mean that faith which the
Apostle calls, the faith of Gods elect: the faith that works by love
purifieth the heart, gives the soul victory over the world, etc. Which faith is
not an idle, and inactive quality, but working and powerful justifying it self.
1. By a profession owning of, and adhering to the truths of the Gospel. 2. By a
suitably holy life and conversation. With reference to this, I take the
Exhortation.
2. But Secondly, This Exhortation does not suppose, that it is possible, that
the union once thus made betwixt Christ and the soul can be dissolved. He that
is the Author, is also the finisher of our faith. The Seed of God (says our
Apostle) abides in the believing soul. It is a great mistake of some to
conclude, from such kind of Exhortations as these, the possibility of a
Christians falling from a state of Grace.

3. But Lastly, Though a Christian once truly implanted into Christ, and by
faith engrafted, cannot but abide in him, being kept by the power of God, and
upheld by an everlasting arm. Yet, 1. This union on our part must be preserved,
by the use of such means as he has appointed. 2. A man may fall away gradually
from his profession, and may abate of his practice in holiness: Now with
reference to one or both these, is this Exhortation, and many others of like
nature in Scripture which signify these two things.


1. Live in a diligent use of all those Sacred Institutions and Means which God
has appointed you in order to your preservation in that state of grace into
which the Lord has brought you, and will by his power, but ( through faith on
your part) preserve you to salvation. 2. And take heed that you abate not in
degrees of faith and love. This now is the meaning of this short Exhortation,
abide in him, which we shall the better understand by considering other
Scriptures, in words, or in sense parallel to this.
It is a phrase we rarely meet with in holy Writings, but only in the Gospel,
and Epistles of this blessed Apostle. It was Christ's Exhortation, John 15.4.
Abide in me, Joh. 15.4, 7, 10.
expounded ver. 7. If any man, abide in me, and my words abide in him. ver. 10.
1 John 2.6.24.17.10. 1 John 3.6.
Abide in my love. 1 John 2.24. it is a little altered, if you abide in that
which you have heard. 1 John 2.26. He that says he abides in him, ought so to
walk as he also walked, ver. 10. it is called an abiding in light: 1 John 3.6.
Who so abides in him sins not. So then when we are exhorted to abide in
him, we are called upon, To take heed of sin, to do the will of God, to walk in
the light of truth and holiness, to continue in the owning, and profession of
the truths of God which we have heard, to take care that the words of Christ
may abide in us. Two things we are called to for: two things we are admonished
to take heed of.

1. We are called to, for a steadfast owning of, and adhering to such
propositions, as we before by faith have embraced, and been persuaded of from
the Evidence of the word of God: and admonished to take heed of disowning, or
denying any of them. 2. We are called to, for a conversation close to the
revealed will of God, and conformable to that of Christ, and to take heed of
any looseness, or remisness in the practice of holiness, whether referring to
our more religious homage to God in acts of Worship: or to our more ordinary
conversation in our behavior toward men. This is that abiding in Christ,
which I say, is a duty of so high a concernment to Christians, and that
especially in evil times.
I shall First, Evince it of general concernment to Christians.

Secondly, I shall show the special conconcernment of it in evil times.

First, I say, it is of general concernment to profession in all times. This
will appear to us, if we consider it as an End, as a Means, or as a Condition,
or as an Evidence.

1. As an End. I mean as a duty of it self falling under a multitude of Divine
Precepts. Obedience to God in the great business of our lives. In these two
words. Believe and Obey is summed up the whole duty of man. Obedience is our
duty to God, as our Sovereign Lord, should not the Servant obey his Master? As
the fountain of our Life and Motion and Preservation? Should not the Child obey
his Father, though he be but in the hand of God a Second Cause of Being and
Life, and maintenance to him? Obedience unto Christ is yet our further duty
upon the account of redemption, and manumission, as he who has bought us, and
that by no mean price out of the hand of our greatest Enemy, and has brought
us into the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God. It is he that has said to us,
Abide in me: and again, v. 10. Abide in my love. I might multiply many Texts
speaking, though not in those words, yet to that sense all those precepts that
oblige to perseverance, to a further progress and continuance in the ways of
God: or that caution us against final, or gradual Apostasy, speak all to the
same sense. So as if it be any thing the concernment o^ Christians to fulfill
the Will of their Lord, who has purchased them unto his service with his
blood: It is their concernment to abide in Christ.

2. But Secondly, Let us consider it as a means. Many things which are not i^
themselves desirable, are yet valuable with reference to their end. Finis da^
amabilitatem mediis: this is desirable a^ an end, and as a means also. I will
open this in a few particulars.

1. It is a necessary means in order to the Christians bringing forth fruit. If
he abides in Christ, he shall bring forth fruit: if he abides not in him, he
shall not bring forth fruit. You have both these Propositions from the mouth of
him that could not lie, and both brought us an argument to enforce this duty,
John 15.4, 5. Abide in me, and I in you; as the branch cannot bring forth
fruit, except it abide in the Vine, so no more can you, except you abide in me.
V. 6. He that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit. It
is highly the concernment of Christians to bring forth fruit, the fruits of the
Spirit, the fruit of righteousness unto life: It is necessary in order to the
glory of God. Herein (says our Savior) is my Father glorified if you bring
forth much fruit.

It is necessary in order to their own salvation. But without their abiding in
Christ, they cannot bring forth much fruit: nay, they can bring forth no fruit;
you have this in the words of our Savior, John 15.5. Without me you can do
nothing. Nothing spiritually and formally good, nothing that will bring God any
glory, or do us any good. It is (...) very emphatical Text, he does not say^
Without me you cannot do any great thing (...) but without me you can do
nothing. Not, without me you can do little, but without me you can do nothing.
Yea, and in the Greek are two Negatives, which in their Idiome make a more
vehement negation^ as much as if he said, you cannot, you cannot do any thing.
But if we had not so direct a Scripture reason standing upon a Scripture
foundation would conclude it.

1. It is a Principle in Natural Philosophy, Operari sequitur esse, and evident
to every Vulgar eye, that where there i^ no life, there can be no motion or
operation proper to that life: All life lies in some union: Natural life in the
union betwixt the soul and body, spiritual life in the union betwixt the soul
and Christ. So as till there be such an union, there can be no spiritual
operation, nor can it be any longer than that union holds. 2. Nay further,
Operation depends not only upon union, but upon communion. Suppose a man to be
alive, the union betwixt the soul and body not dissolved: if any thing hinders
the souls communion with any part) as in the dead palfie, etc.) it moves, it
acts nothing: So it is with the soul, suppose the union with Christ not
dissolved, (that once made cannot be dissolved) yet if there be not a
communion, if the soul receives not from Christ, it brings forth no fruit. Yea,
and according to the degree that it receives influence from him, so will its
fruit be. 3. Again, it appears by the similitude used by our Savior, John
15.4. Says he, I am the Vine, you are the branches. Cut off the branch from
the Vine, it brings forth no fruit: nay, let it abide in the Vine, if any thing
hinder it, that it receives no influence from it, it brings forth no fruit:
let it receive but a little influence, it keeps alive, but it brings forth but
little fruit: let it on the other side receive much influence from the Vine,
then it brings forth much fruit. It is the high concernment of the soul, to
bring forth fruit, and to bring forth much fruit. Hereby God has a great deal
of glory, and the glorifying of God is the great end of our lives: hereby a
Christian has much comfort, and Peace and satisfaction in his own soul: The
fruit of righteousness is peace and assurance for ever: and the End of it will
be much glory: he that brings forth much fruit, shall sit upon a Throne. This
is my first Demonstration, from the duty considered, as a means.
Secondly, Says our Savior, John 15.6. If a man abide not in me, he i^ cast
forth as a branch, and is withered, and men gather them, and cast them into the
fire, and are burned. All in a parable, but the sense is easy. Abiding in
Christ is the means, and only means for (...) Professor to keep up his beauty
and glory, and vigor, and to keep him out of He fire. This is the sense in
short of this Parabolical expression. A branch separated from the Vine, is cast
aside as an useless thing, not suffered to lie near the Vine, being thus
separated and cast out, it withers, wanting the sap and juice of the Vine, by
virtue of which it brought forth leaves, and was green and flourishing: being
thus withered, Husbandmen use to appoint their Servants to gather them up and
burn them.

1. He that has made a profession to Religion, a purer way of worshipping God,
and a stricter conversation before him, if he makes a defection from it, he is
cast forth. Cast forth by the Church, if that be in a calm and Pacate State,
and not in such a crowd of disturbances from the world, that it cannot draw out
its spiritual Sword, and ^et me tell you Christians, that is a dreadful thing,
to be orderly excommunicated by a Gospel Church. The Apostle calls it a
delivering up to Satan, ^he separation of the Israelites from the Tents of
Corah, Dathan and Abiram was (...) forerunner of Gods dreadful Venge^nce on
them, the Churches separation from an apostatized Professor for his Apostasy,
is not to be flighted. Pro^ided this be done by a true Church, and for a just
cause it is formidable enough, for other Bruta fulmina, they signify little
according to that of Job, How forcible are right words, but your ^rguings what
do they reprove? But this ^s not always, I told you, the Church ^s not always
in a condition, to execute this Vengeance upon Traitors. However they are cast
out by the Providence of God. A notorious sinner may be cast out in the sight
of God, when h^ is not so in foro Eccles^ae in the view (...) men: and there is
no branch not abiding in Christ, but in this sense is cast forth. God casts him
forth, he never had any true union with Christ, he shall no^ now have any
appearing relation, God will not own him, his Saints shall not^ he shall be
none of them that God will care for with that special care which God extends
to all those that are visible members of his visible Church, h^ has made a
defection from the City of God, and has removed himself into the suburbs of
Hell, he shall no^ now have the privileges of common Citizens. Thus men use to
do. Tu^^ says, it was never known, that those who made defection, and proved
false to the City of Rome, jura civium tenuerunt, enjoyed the privileges of
Citizens. God will let it be seen, that those who are false to his City shall
not retain the privileges of the City of God.

Secondly, As the branch casts out, with thereth. So it ordinarily is with
professors, they lose their beauty and glory, whether it lay in their quick and
excellent parts, these often times abate, their gifts dwindle, and come to
nothing: or whether it lay in the repute and credit they had in the Church of
God; they are looked upon as Fugitives and Renegadoes by the sincerer professors
of Religion. Nay, for the most part, this is not all, they lose also their
hopes for repute and credit with the world. Who regard them as little as the
Pharisee did Judas when he had betrayed his Master. The wise God so orders
it, that the world shall not trust those that his Church cannot trust. A
fugitive from his Profession, shows too little of a Christian to be valued by
the Church, and too little of a man to be much valued by the world, who
ordinarily love the Treason, but hate the Traitor; they like it well enough, to
see one professing to Christ spitting in his face, to hear him jear and mock at
the ways of God in which he once walked, but in the mean time they hate the
traitor; abhorring the levity and inconstancy of this weathercock in Religion,
that turns in obsequiousness to every wind. Thus he withers every way. That
which he has is taken from him: his gifts and parts, his credit and
reputation, he becomes a man of no value to every one. But there is worse yet
that follows.

Thirdly, (Says our Savior) Men gather them, and they are cast into the fire
and burned. Thus men deal with the withered branches of Vines, once separated
from the Vine. Thus will God do with Professors that abide not in him. They
shall be gathered up it the great day of Judgment. Our Savior tells us who
shall gather them, the Angels. Mat. 13.
They shall be burned with unquenchable fire. The Apostle says, There
remains nothing for them, Heb. 12.
but a certain dreadful looking for of fiery indignation. Now our abiding in
Christ, in the truths of Christ which we have formerly owned: in the ways of
Christ to which we have formerly professed, and in which we have formerly
walked, is by our Savior himself prescribed, as the only means to avoid this
unspeakable evil otherwise hanging over our heads.

Thirdly, Our abode with Christ, is the excellent means to keep his presence
with us. Joh. 15 4.
Abide in me (says our Saour) and I in you: So John 14.23. If any man love me,
he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him,
and make our abode with him. What is this for Christ to abide with the soul? I
answer, as it is one thing for a soul to be in Christ, another thing for a soul
to abide in Christ. So it is one thing for Christ to be in the soul, another
thing for him to abide in the soul. The abiding of Christ with a soul, I think
implies;

1. His manifestation of himself to the soul; John 14.21. He that has my
commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me; and be that loves me,
shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and manifest my self unto
him. The Lord may be in the soul, and yet be hid, so as the soul may go about
trying, Where is my God become? The soul may walk in the dark, and see no
sight. Christ is then said to abide in the soul, when he appears to it, and
that in some constancy, that he is not (to use the Prophets expression, Jer.
14.8.) as a wayfaring man who tarrieth but for a night. And, 2. Gods sensible
manifestations to a soul, may be in the influences of comforting, quickening, or
strengthening Grace. Take a soul under the greatest desertion, and cloud of
Divine light, there is yet, as an Union, so some communion betwixt God and it,
as the soul does in some degree communicate it self unto God, under the
greatest apostasy it can be guilty of (if it truly belongs to him) its
backsliding is but gradual) so God does in some degrees communicate himself to
the soul under the greatest desertion, the Union abiding, some communion is
necessary. But now the Lords abiding with the soul, argues more than this, it
argues thus much, that the soul who thus abides in Christ, shall be under some
sensible influences of Divine Love, and that not only for its consolation
chearing and refreshing it under dark issues of Providence, but for its
strength and liveliness in the way of God, it shall grow stronger and stronger,
every day more fresh, and lively, and active in the ways of God. Without this,
how heavily does a soul walk? crying out with David, Lord, When will thou
comfort me? How hardly and heavily does it come off with any spiritual duties?
How weakly does it perform them? When these locks are shaven off, in which its
great strength lies, it becomes as another soul. And this evinceth it, to be a
great point of a Christians Wisdom to abide in Christ. You meet with a Promise
in the Old Testament to this purpose. I will make an everlasting Covenant with
them; Jer. 32.40.
that I will not turn from them to do them good: but I will put my fear into
their hearts, that they shall never depart from me. Mark how God twists these
both together: the same Covenant that ensures us Gods abode with us, to do us
good: engages us also not to depart from him. Thus far now I have evinced this
as a piece of a Christians wisdom to abide in Christ; by considering it, as an
End, 2. As a Means. A Means in order to our keeping Christ's abode with us. 2.
In order to our bringing forth fruit, and much fruit. 3. In order to the
preservation of our selves, from the greatest evils of being cast forth,
withering and burning. 3. Let us consider it as a condition to which indeed all
the Promises of the Gospel are annexed. You may observe all the promises
annexed to a continuance in the words of Christ; to overcoming, to an holding
on to the end; which expressions, and many more of like import, signify the
same thing as abiding in Christ. It is a question amongst Divines, whether the
Covenant of Grace, be absolute or conditional. If we understand by the Covenant
of Grace, that Eternal Paction which was betwixt God the Father, and his
Eternal Son (as the head of the Elect) it is no question absolute, and nothing
is required of the Elect, in order to their Salvation, but what God in some
other branch of that sacred Stipulation, has engaged to do for them, give unto
them, or work in them: but because in what we are to perform, our own endeavor
is required, and we are workers together with God (to use the Apostles
expression in another cause) therefore in all Exhibitions and Declarations of
this Everlasting Covenant unto men (which were gradual, according to the
different periods of the world, and as God was pleased more or less, darklier
or more clearly to reveal his mysteries) it is propounded conditionally: And
this is the Condition annexed to all the great Promises of the Covenant, that
we should abide, hold fast, persevere, continue to the end, not draw back, etc.
I shall only particularize in one, and that is no mean one, John 15.7. If you
abide in me, and my words abide in you, you shall ask of me what you will, and
I will give it you. For poor worms to have a liberty to go to God, to ask of
him, to ask of him what we will; and this under an assurance from the only Son
of God that we shall have it: Is it nothing to us? Seems it to you (Sirs) a
small thing to have this liberty of access to the Throne of Grace? this is
promised by him that cannot lie, and the condition annexed is your abiding in
him. If you abid^ in me, you shall ask what you will Certainly, I shall need
say no more to evince this Abiding in Christ, the great concernment of
Christians. 4. But once more, let us consider it as an Evidence. An Evidence of
the truth of our Union with him. An Evidence to our selves: An Evidence unto
others.
1. We can no other way evidence to ourselves, that we ever had any true union
with Christ, than by our abode and continuance with him. There is a real
difference betwixt a seeming and a real and sincere Professor, but not
discernable (other than to him that searches the heart and tries the reins)
any way but by a steady and constant abode in our profession. God has said, if
the righteous man forsake his righteousness, and commit iniquity, his
righteousness shall never be remembered. And again, If any one draws back, my
soul shall have no pleasure in him.

Whiles those, and such like Texts abide, this assertion must be true. The
Apostle speaking of some that were gone out from the Church, says, They were
not of us; if they had been of us, they had continued with us. That day a
Christian steps back, he loses all his hope, all his joy, peace, comfort and
satisfaction.

2. It is our only Evidence unto others. Put case a Christian has a truth of
Grace, and be really united to Christ, by an union which sin shall not
dissolve, and this Christian apostatizeth from his profession (though it shall
not be totally and finally) gradually. What ever he be, other Christians
(during his Apostasy before his return) cannot judge him a Christian indeed,
but must look upon him as a temporary Professor till they see him renewing
himself, by repentance, for De secretis non judicat Ecclesia. The Church of God
can judge only from what appears, and interpret his heart by the Comment
which his actions make of it. The sum now of all is this. If a Christian be
concerned, to keep the manifestative, and influential presence of Christ with
him, to bring forth the fruit of holiness to the glory of God, and much fruit
to maintain his communion with Christ, and his Church, his vigor, credit and
glory with the Church of God, to keep himself out of Hell fire, to maintain his
unspeakable privilege, o^ going to God, and asking of God what he pleases,
with assurance of receiving from Christ what he asks, if he be concerned, to
preserve unto himself, and to have, to give unto others an Evidence, that he
has not mocked God, and deceived men in his profession, and acted an odious
dissembler, and counterfeit in Religion. It is then his wisdom and high
concernment to abide in Christ. I added further, that it is his more especial
concernment to look that he abide in Christ in evil times. Let me evince that a
little, and it will appear to you; if you consider with me these things.

1. That in such times it is most difficult to do it. It is a known saying,
Difficilia quae pulchra; No brave thing is easy. It is an easy thing, when
the Jews prosper, to lay hold on the skirt of a Jew, and say, we will be called
by thy name, to swim with the stream alas, in such a day, there are bladders
enough to hold us up from sinking; besides the force of the stream alone will
do it, but an evil time is the time of trial. Peter himself found it easier to
abide with Christ, when all the world ran after him, than when all his
Disciples ^rsook him and fled. Evil times ordinarily afford three disadvantages
which make an abode in our profession more difficult to Professors.

1. The first is, from the loosening the ^kin to wickedness. There is this
chara^teristical difference betwixt a good and evil time in a spiritual sense.
In (...) good time, a man may be as good as he will, but he may not be as loose
and pro^ne as he will; he may pray and hear, and wait upon God in Ordinances,
pub^ckly and privately as much as he will: ^e may not drink, and swear, and be
^thy, and reproach the holy name of God as much as he will; the Magi^^rate
remembers his Office to be a terror (...) them that do evil; and will let him
^now that, to that end he bears not ^e Sword in vain. In an evil time men ^ay
be as loose, and lewd, and profane as ^ey will, but they may not be so pure,
and ^ly, and religious as they will. They ^ay drink, and swear, and meet to
re^l, and dishonor God what they will, but they may not be so holy they may
not pray hear Go^ word, etc. as much as they will. A^ give me leave to tell you
this is a very evil time when it is thus, that go^^liness and profession is
almost the on^ crime. And through the naughtine of our hearts, whose native
bias stan^ to evil, this makes it very difficult (...) abide with Christ; to
hold fast our profession at such a time, when we (...) that we may give the
loose to our lu^ without fear of danger from Eart^ It is true the man that has
a true ro^ of grace hates sin, and loves goodn^ from a more inward principle,
but y^ in regard of the corruption of o^ hearts, an outward hedge does w^ and
contributes much to keep the b^ within their true compass.

2. A second thing which in su^ times makes it difficult, is the tempta^ on of
outward advantages, which su^ times usually afford Renegadoes in profession.
When the Devil was got on the pinnacle, he sh^weth Christ all the glo^ of the
world, and promises hi^ (more than he had to dispose of) (...) ^^ss than all,
if he would fall down and worship him. Infinite are the instances (...) story
of the large proffers in times ^f backsliding have been made to Professors upon
condition of Apostasy, though for the most part the performance has (through
Gods righteous judgment) been very slow. The Devil for the most part serving
his servants of this nature, as the Popish Persecutors have used to serve their
Prosecutes, first debauched them, then burnt them: or as Amnon served his
Sister ^hamar, first obtained their lust of them, ^hen thrown them down stairs.
But ^emptations from profits, honors, credit, ^laces, are no light things,
especially where they meet with hearts, whose peculiar lust is ambition, or
co^etousness, or any thing of that nature; and this is a second thing, which
makes ^biding with Christ at such a time difficult; especially for men, whose
^irth, breeding, acquired or natural ^arts and accomplishments are such as
^ender them capable subjects for such things.

3. A third thing which creates the difficulty, is, the temptations which s^
times afford on the other hand. Wh^ the Devil had our Savior on the p^^nacle,
he had not only the advantage (...) a prospect to give him a view of the world:
but of a Precipice too, to threat^ him with into a compliance. Evil tim^ afford
not only places of profit, a^ honor, applause and encouragement^ tempt
Christians to a drawing back^ but also Gaols and fetters, nicknam^ and
reproaches, instruments of death a^ cruelty, to fright Professors out of the
good ways of the Lord: and the best of Christians have so much (...) sense in
them, so much of carnal an^ slavish fear, as these prove no we^ Engines often
times to debauch the^ Now this difficulty of standing o^ ground at such a
charge, lets us know we are concerned to look to our sp^rits at such a time
especially, if it b^^ considered connexively with what (...) shall further add:
for although difficulty, abstractly and barely considered, discourageth
undertakers in an^ work: yet if the work be honorable and necessary, and of
high advantage ^it whetteth the spirits, instead of abating ^our courage.

2. Secondly therefore let us consider the honor and advantage we shall have
by ^ur abode with, and in Christ at such a ^ime, and the danger and
disadvantage of ^ur forsaking him. It is a great honor to a Church, and to a
particular Christian, ^o abide in Christ with an evil time. This ^as the honor
of the Church of Per^amus, Rev. 2.13. I know thy works, and where thou
dwell, even where Sa^ns seat is, and thou hold fast my ^ame, and have not
denied my faith, even (...) those days wherein Antipas was my ^ithful Martyr,
who was slain amongst ^u where Satan dwells. The com^endation of this
excellent Church is ^mplified here from two observable ^rcumstances. 1. They
dwelt where Sa^ns seat was, and yet they kept the ^ith, and held fast the name
of Christ. ^he Devil has a fugitive being in ^ost places, but in some places
he has ^seat, where an uncontrolled pro^ness, and debauchery abounds, ^ere's
Satan's Seat. It is an hard thing (...) dwell near his Seat, and yet to hold
fast the name of Christ: but it is a great honor to a Christian, to dare to b^
strict, and holy, and walk with Go^ under the eye and frown of the Devil^
Secondly, They were faithful in those day^ when Antipas was slain. To abide i^
Christ when multitudes run after him (...) this is no great honor, but when
the Devil is making havoc amongst Christians, throwing some into Gaols others
into their graves, then to ho^^ fast the Lords name, this is a great honor to
Professors. You are those (sait^ our Savior in an emphatical praise o^ his
Apostles) who have abode with me i^ my temptations. It is an honor to (...)
Soldier to stand by his Captain, when the battle goes against him, when some
of his companions are fled, other are slain, and he is almost left alon^ Such
honor has the child of God i^ such a case.

Nor is it merely matter of honor but of real advantage too. Such o^ may be
assured, Mar. 8.38. Luke 9.36.
that the Lord will not (...) ashamed of him in the great and terri^ day.
Observe the Text: it is at le^ implied in it; Whosoever therefore shall (...)
ashamed of me, and of my words, in this adulterous and sinful generation, of
him shall the Son of man be ashamed when he ^ometh in the glory of his Father
with his ^oly Angels. When is the time, when there is any fear of Professors,
that they should be ashamed of Christ, and of his words? Is it in the Sunshine
of the Gospel? No fear of that, profession then crowns its friends, and is a
reward to its self. The fear is in an evil ^ime, when a man cannot own God and
his ways, but he must be made (...) byword, purchase to himself reproach and
a nickname, be pointed at ^s he walks in the Street, when he cannot depart
from iniquity, but he becomes the scorn of fools, and makes himself a prey;
this is the proper time when Professors are apt to be ashamed ^f Christ and his
words, and if they ^ave any thing to do with Christians, ^t is secretly, coming
by night (as Nico^emus to Christ) But says this Text, ^f any be ashamed of me
and my ^ords, of him Shall the Son of man be ^shamed, when he comes in the
glory of ^is Father. The contrary is implied also, if there be any that an evil
time cannot make ashamed of Christ, and the ways of Christ, but he will dare
to own them, in the face of the world, when most peevish and angry: that is the
man, whom the Lord when he comes to judge the world will not be ashamed to own.
Oh! what an honor will this be to a poor worm, when all the world shall be
gathered together before the Judgment Seat of the great God, and a poor
creature shall stand amongst them, of whom it may be while he lived, his
friends were ashamed, great persons durst not own him, if they met him, they
were ashamed to speak to him, because he was looked upon as a Puritan, and the
Eternal Son of God at that day shall not be ashamed to own him as hi^ Child,
his Servant. Nay, honor is no^ all in the business: Our eternal happiness
depends upon our Lords owning us, or being ashamed of us at tha^ day. Christ
will be ashamed of non^ at that day, to whom he will not say^ Depart from me ye
cursed into everlastin^ burnings. For Christ at that day not t^^ ^e ashamed of
us is the same thing as ^o give us the Kingdom which he has prepared for them
that love him. But ^et a little further in demonstration of ^his, see that
Text, Luke 22.28, 29. Luke 22.28, 29.
You are they which have continued with ^e in my temptations. And I appoint
unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has ^ppointed unto me. Christ's temptations
(there mentioned) were his trials, and ^buses from men which he met with ^uring
his labor in the accomplishment of our Redemption.

Christ has his temptations still, not ^ersonally, but mystically; not in the
body ^f his flesh, but in his body which is the church. His precious members
have yet ^he trial of cruel scoffs and mockings, o^ ^aols and imprisonments.
The Gospel is ^bjected to the same persecutions, to which the Lord of the
Gospel subjected himself. Now some there are that abide ^ith Christ in his
temptations, whilst others turn their back, professing they ^nnot burn: What
shall these men ^ave? I appoint (says our Savior) (...) you a Kingdom. A
Kingdom! what (...) reward is this? What will not vain men venture, what will
not they suffer that they may but usurp a Kingdom (...) When they have it, what
have they more than a gilded Crown of rea^ thorns upon their heads? But what i^
this Kingdom? not earthly, but heavenly; not a Kingdom for care, trouble
solicitude and domination, but for pleasure, joy and happiness unspeakable.
(...) Kingdom without a care, a Kingdom without an enemy, a State having a^ the
sweetness, happiness and conten^ but nothing of the trouble and burden of an
earthly Principality. Nay; he add^ As my Father has appointed me. The particle
[as] may either refer to the Kingdom before spoken of, then it (...) nota
similitudinis, non equalitatis, not (...) note of equality, but of similitude.
Go^ abiding servants shall not have an equ^^ degree of glory, but the same
specific^ glory with Christ. Or else the parti^^ may denote the title and
assurance: (...) certainly as the Father has appointed me a Kingdom, and I
shall have it, certainly shall you have your Kingdo^^ On the other side, not to
abide w^^ Christ and in Christ in an evil time, (...) a matter of great
dishonor, and highest disadvantage to us. It will be of great dishonor to us,
both in this life, and at the great day of the Lord. In this life first, and
that with all sorts of men. Constancy to principles and profession ^s a virtue
which commends it self to the worst of men: for the contrary argues either a
want of judgment in our first em^racing principles, and undertaking ^rofession;
or a levity of mind and want ^f conscience, both which are high dis^aragements
to our reputation and honor. For a man to engage in Religi^n, not
understanding, or not having ^uly weighed the principles of it in the ^allance
of the Sanctuary, is no better ^han to erect an Athenian Altar, To the ^nknown
God: if he has weighed them, and approved them as (...), ^e most excellent
things, to desert them argues such a want of conscience, ^s fitteth none but
those who make a ^heap reckoning of eternity, and will ^ell their souls and
highest concernments for a morsel of bread. Hence it (...) that an Apostate
never is in credit ^ith the men of the world, or that faction in it to which he
has made defection, who cannot but look upon him as wanting either judgment
o^ conscience. Did he first engage in (...) course and practice of Religion,
with out any enquiry into the principles (...) it, or examining the truth of
the^^ What could be a greater levity or vanity? Did he understand the
principle^ and compare them with other pretended spiritual things, and judge
these (...) which he has walked the most rational, the most agreeable to the
will (...) God? Why has he now reject^ them? why is he departed from them Is
the will of God altered? Is the Yea and Nay with him? Is the (...) the same,
the will of God the same, an^ his judgment altered and practi^^ turned? What
lightness is this? Ho^ unworthy of a man, much more of Christian? God therefore
calls after h^ ancient people the Jews, turned Re^^gadoes from him, Jer. 2.10,
11.
Jer. 2.10, 11. P^ over to the Isles of Chittim, and send u^^ Kedar, and
consider diligently, and set there be such a thing. Has a Nati^^ changed their
gods, which yet are (...) gods? but my people have changed their glory for that
which does not profit.

Object. Some will say to me, Is then every change of a Christians mind in the
p^actice of Religion infamous or unlawful?

Sol. I answer, No. There is a Religion which men have ex traduce, a religious
course which they have taken up merely from the example or instinct of their
parents, without any exercise of their own judgment, (and I am afraid this is
the Religion of the most in the world:) They can give no other account why they
worship God this or that way, but because this was the way their forefathers
worshipped God, and they hope they are gone to heaven; and should they be wiser
than their fathers? This was the Religion of the Woman of Samaria before she
was converted, Joh. 4.20. Our fathers worshipped in this mountain, and you
teach that in Jerusalem we ought to worship. This is that which the Heathens
generally said for their superstitious worships, and which they urged to
Christians from time to time. There is no true reproach arises to any, from
changing his practice in Religion taken up upon this score: the reason is,
because every o^^ ought to live by his own faith. And Go^ expects, that when
we are arrived to years of discretion, that we can use (...) own reason, we
should Prove all things, and hold fast that which is good. Yet the^ world
accounts this a reproach to (...) man.

2. There is another blind Religion which men may be engaged in, from
Tradition, and the course of the Church wherein they have lived. The only
account they can give why they thus or thus worship God, is, because this has
been the course of their Country, the custom of that Church in which they have
been educated. God expects of us, that we should, especially in the great
matters of our souls, not take up any thing upon trust. But it being certain,
that God has left an infallible rule in his Word, and given unto man a reason
and judgment, he expects men should exercise it, and live (as I said before)
by their own faith. For a blind Papist therefore, that has been muffled in his
Religion, and taught to believe and do, as that which a pack of men, calling
themselves the Church, has taught him, having his own understanding awakened,
and his reason manumised to use it, and judging that hitherto he has
worshipped God ignorantly, and contrary to what the rule directs; to turn his
feet into the way of Gods testimonies, is no real reproach.

Thirdly, Suppose a Christian has undertaken a way and practice of Religion,
upon enquiry into the will of God, conscientiously believing, and walking
according to his own judgment upon the will of God revealed in Scriptures: The
judgment of man growing by degrees to perfection, and not being infallible, it
is not impossible but in some things he may alter his judgment and practice,
upon the further illumination of his mind, and information of his judgment: and
it may be no just cause of reproach to him. But then his alteration must be
apparently for the better: that is, for such (...) course as is apparently more
conformable to the Scripture, and the holy will of God revealed in them and
consequently is more pure^ strict and holy. And if it be so amongst the men of
the world, (wh^ will not understand this) it will be reproach to him. But where
a man changes for what is apparently a loos^ way of serving God, and which
brin^ God less glory, and gives a great liberty to the flesh: this is a
reproac^ not to be wiped off. But the good (...) bad word of the world is not
high^ considerable, (indeed only to th^^ who make a defection to it) To h^^^ a
praise in the Churches of Christ, is wh^ is most truly valuable. How little
(...) this can those expect who have ^^proached the Gospel, and the holy a^^
right ways of God? Such men become the shame and grief of all tho^ who were
formerly their companion in the things of God.

But alas, what is the dishonor (...) this life, to the shame they will me^
with at the great and terrible da^ when, as I showed you before, the So^^ of
God, coming to judge the quick (...) the dead, with his glorious Angels, sh^^
be ashamed of them. Oh the dishonor of that day! How shall all Apostates, with
those mentioned Rev. 6. at that day cry to the mountains to fall upon them, and
to the rocks to cover them, that they may not see the face of that Christ, whom
they deserted in the hour of temptation, whose ways and ordinances they
forsook, because of the reproach and threats of men. But this is not all: That
day will not only be a day of shame, but also of wrath, yea of great wrath. And
certainly there is none will have a greater share in the dreadful wrath of that
day, than those who have forsaken the right ways of the Lord. Degrees of wrath
will be dispensed according to degrees of sinning. Now there are none who have
to an higher degree dishonored God, and made his name to be ill spoken of,
than such as have apostatized from the ways of God. But this I have before
hinted, I shall therefore add no more to the confirmation of this point. I now
come to the application of it, and that I shall bring under one general Head of
Exhortation, which I shall divide into two more general branches: 1. The^ first
respecting, Such as yet keep their station in the ways of God, to confirm them,
and engage them not to stir their ground. 2. The second respecting such as have
made a defection, (if possible) to engage them to return.

In the first place give me leave to speak to you, Exhort. 1. Br.
my Brethren, who ye^ are in the ways of God, what you were to you let me
repeat my Text, An^ now, little children, abide in him. It is reported
concerning the blessed Apostle who was the Author of this Epistle, that abiding
at Ephesus, when he was very old, so as he could not go to the place where his
Disciples met to worship God, but as he was carried, no^ was able to speak
much, he was wont at their several meetings one after another to say nothing
but this, Hieron. in 6 cap. ep. ad Gal.
Little children, love one another. His Disciples at last tell him of it, and
wondered that they never heard more from him than one sentence, and that so
often repeated. He answers them, It is the precept of the Lord, and if that
alone be done it susficeth. If, my beloved friends, it were my case, and I
could speak but seven words unto you in this evil time, these should be the
words, And now, little children, abide in Christ. If you should ask me, why I
so often inculcated those words, I would make you the same answer, It is the
precept of our Lord, and if this be done, it is enough. I would not say unto
yo^ Abide in me, or in my words; nor, Abide in the words which the faithful
servants of Christ have formerly taught you. This may be your duty, but not
because they taught it you; they were fallible men. Search the Scriptures.
Abide in Christ. God forbid any Minister of Christ should require more of you.
I would not say to you, Abide in any principle you have learned, nor in my
practice you have walked in. This may be your duty, but not unless those
principles and practices have been what our great Lord and Master has required
of you, Abide in Christ, Hoc solum sufficit, this alone is enough. But that you
may understand the full scope of the Exhortation, I shall open it in three
things, and so divide this Exhortation into three branches.

1. 1. Br.
Abide in the faith of Christ: I mean, the fixed persuasion of the truth of
Gospel propositions. Truths which Christ in his Gospel has revealed to you. 2.
2. Br.
Abide in your faith in Christ; where I shall not take faith strictly for
adherence, but as comprehending that, and hope, and patience. 3. 3. Br.
Abide in your obedience to Christ; walking in your uprightness in an exact
obedience to his blessed will, both in matters of Worship and Homage toward
God; and in matters of Holiness, Justice, equity, and Mercy toward men.
1. 1. Br.
Abide in the faith of Christ, that is in a firm and fixed persuasion of the
truth of those propositions of truth, which Christ has in his Gospel revealed.
This is the least of a Christian, and that which distinguishes him from a Jew,
wh^^ believes the Old Testament but not the New; and from a Pagan, who
believes neither. A man may go to he^ who has it, (for the devils also
believe and tremble, they could say, Thou an^ Christ the Son of the living God)
but n^ man can go to heaven without it. It is ^he foundation of justifying
faith, it has an influence upon all our practice. How shall men call on him on
whom they ^ave not believed. Therefore the Apostle ^eaking of some Apostates,
joins both ^hese phrases together, Having made ^ipwrack of faith and of a good
conscience. Without reliance on Christ, none can ^e saved; who will trust and
rely, and ^dhere to a Savior, who does not ^now him, or is not persuaded of
him ^^ his circumstances of sufficiency. Think not therefore light of this. The
propositions of the Gospel are various, the Scriptures are as full of them ^s
the Heavens are of Stars; but as one ^ar differs from another in glory, ^^ it
is with these Propositions. All are ^ot of equal weight, glory, and influence.
Divines have usually distinguished them into Fundamentals, and such as ^e no
Fundamentals. But what are Fun^amentals is not yet agreed, nor I think ^er
will. I shall not undertake to de^^de the controversy. But in short,

I think Propositions of truth may be illed Fundamental, 1. With reference to
others. So those truths are Fundamental, which are the bases and foundations of
all others, from whence the^ flow by way of just consequence o^ inference.

2. With reference to our salvation and so those are fundamental upon which our
salvation depends. And (...) these, 1. There are some that must be explicitly
known and assented to, or we can not be saved. I think truly the number of
these is not great, though I durst n^^ undertake to define them. 2. Others
there are, of which (...) cannot say, that an explicit disting knowledge of
them is necessary to salvation, but some knowledge of the^ and assent to them
is necessary, especially to persons living under the light of the Gospel. I
shall not pretend ^^give you a strict account of all that f^^ under either
notion, but some I shall more especially commend to you.


1. That the holy Scriptures are (...) Word of God, and the only rule of fai^^
and life. This is the principle of (...) Christian Religion, and the proof of
from Scripture is not to be expected. Take heed you fail not in this, yea, and
take heed upon what argument you receive the Scripture as such. The Socinian
will tell you there are arguments enough from reason, (but the greater is not
blessed by the less.) The Papists will tell you, the Tradition of the Church is
enough. If you take the Scriptures upon either of these evidences as
sufficient, the devil has a fair advantage to tell you, That both these are
but humane testimonies, and humane testimony can beget but an humane faith, and
if an humane faith be sufficient for the Scriptures in general. It is
sufficient for every proposition of faith revealed in them. Our Savior ^lessed
Peter for believing what flesh and ^loud revealed not to him. The old Doctrine
of Protestants was, That nothing ^ut the impression of the holy Spirit, work^^g
by and with reason, and the self-^vidence of those holy books, can be enough.
^old there, or you lose all. Do the ^apists bid you, Prove the Spirit you
pre^nd to persuade to? Bid them prove their Church, whose traditions they
obtrude upon you, and you are even with them. They must certainly prove it by
the Scriptures, or not all; and i^ so, I hope the Scriptures may as we^^ be
allowed to shine in their own light as in the light of the Church, which has
no light but what it must borrow from the Scriptures. 2. That the Lord Jesus
Christ, the Eternal Son of God, prophesied and prefigured of old, in the
fullness of time, assume our nature, and as God-Man died ^^ our sins, and rose
again for our justification being our only Savior, Mediator, and Intercessor;
and he whom God has appointed to judge the world. The Socinian or Unitarians
(as they call themselves deny the eternal existence of the Son God, and so call
you to believe in a insufficient Savior, they deny his M^rits, or the
Satisfaction of them. The Papists tell you of other Mediators and Intercessors,
(hence their invocation (...) Saints) they teach you to trust in you^ own
merits, take heed of these, the shake the foundations. The Apost calls Christ,
God over all, blessed for ev^^ It tells you, Romans 9 5.4.25.
Romans 4.25. He was ^^ livered for our offenses, 1 Timothy 2.5.
and rose again for our justification. It tells you that there is but one
Mediator between God and man, even Christ. That he lives to make intercession
for us, Heb. 9. Acts 4.12.
That there is no other name under heaven by which we can be saved, neither is
there salvation in any other. Let this be a second. 3. That there is none
righteous, no not one. No Infant. Romans 3.10.5.15, 17, 18, 19.
The Scripture tells you, Ephesians. 2.3. We are all by nature children of wrath.
Psalm. 51.4. That our mother has conceived us in sin. That by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners. No grown person either legally righteous.
1 King. 8.46. For there is none who lives and sins not. Jam. 3.2. Ja. 2.10.
Eccles. 7.20. There is not a just man that lives, and sins not. Nor yet
Evangelically righteous from any righteousness of his own. But of this more by
and by. 4. That the righteous Lord loves righteousness. And without
righteousness no man can stand before God, but will certainly be accursed to
all eternity. The Psalmist tells you, The righteous Lord lovth righteousness.
The Law is, Gal. 3.10.
Cursed be he that continues not in every little of the Law to do it. The
Gospel dispenses not with that curse, it only allows of our Sureties
fulfilling the Law for us, and our fulfilling of it in him, according to that
of the Apostle, In him you a^^ complete. 5. That there is no righteousness,
when in any poor creature in the great day (...) the Lord can stand before a
righteous God but the alone righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, that is,
his active and pass^^ obedienee imputed and made over unto ^^ Nor is there any
deliverance from wrath but by this righteousness of Christ imputed. This point
is the very hinge of the Gospel, Luther called it, The Article of banding or
falling Church, it is the Article of a standing or falling soul. How this, and
you will not easily be seduced in other points. The Scripture tells you, P. cts
4.12.
There is no other name give under heaven by which men can be save^ Neither is
there salvation in any other. It is the whole business of St. Paul almo^^
throughout the Epistle to the Roman and that to the Galathians, to pro^^ his.
St. Paul desires to be found ^^ Christ alone, Phil. 3.9, 10.
not having his own righteousness which is of the Law, but the righteousness of
God, the righteousness of faith. Hence Christ is called, The Lord our
righteousness. And he is said to have been made sin for us, who knew no sin,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him; And to be made of God
for us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption. 6. That every soul
thus justified is effectually called. He is not only (as many are called.)
called out of the Pagan world to believe and receive the Doctrine of the
Gospel, but by the Spirit of God powerfully joining with the Word, he is made
to see and be sensible of his lost condition out of Christ, and enabled by a
true and lively faith to receive, and lay hold upon and trust in Christ's
righteousness, he is also regenerated, that is, made a new man, by a thange
wrought by Gods Spirit in his heart, affections, whole man. And without this
none is justified, none can be saved. Joh. ^.5. Except a man be born again of
water and the Spirit, he can never enter into the Kingdom of God. To. 8.13. If
you live after the flesh, you shall die. To. 8.1. There is no condemnation to
them that are in Christ, who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit. If
a man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. And in many other
Texts. Let men talk what they please of Baptismal Regeneration, who so lives to
years of discretion, and has no more, shall never see the face of God. I know
the most learned assertors of it conclude it of little value, ponentibus
obicem, as they say, that is, if men after Baptism wilfully sin against God,
(who lives and does not?) So as that limitation makes their novel Doctrine but
a security to baptized persons dying in infancy. They have a fancy to merit the
name of Blandi instead of Duripatres infantum, (as Augustine was called). All
that is to be feared of the imbibing in that new Doctrine is, lest people
should be lu^led asleep with that notion of being justified in Baptism, and
think that i^ afterward they run to all excess of riot they need only to wash
their feet, by a^ slighty repentance, and never look after a true sight of sin,
or an actual believing in the Lord Jesus Christ. 7. That Christ's Righteousness
is not imputed to any soul, without the exercise of faith, eying, receiving,
resting upon Christ, and Christ alone for salvation. Nor can any true act of
sanctification flow from any other principle. So as one who never in the fight
of his sin and lost condition fled to Christ, and laid hold upon his
righteousness, be he under what other circumstances of birth, breeding,
Church Membership, moral righteousness, formal and constant performance of
religious duties is in a state of damnation: and so dying perishes for ever,
John 3.18. Joh. 3.18.
He that believes on him, is not condemned; but he that believes not; is
condemned already: because he has not believed in the name of the only
begotten Son of God. Ver. 36. He that believes on the Son, bath everlasting
life: he that believes not, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides
on him. Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God. And again,
Without faith it is impossible to please God. 8. That regeneration and faith,
and every other habit that is truly spiritual comes from the special
distinguishing grace of God, and is wrought in the soul, by his alone power,
and by him drawn out into exercise, and we have no power of our selves so much
as to think one good thought. Except a man be born again of water and the
Spirit, Joh. 3.5.
John 3.5. Born not of blood nor of the will of the flesh, nor of man, but of
God. Phil. 1.29.
Phil. 1.29. It is given you on the behalf of Christ to believe. Faith is not
of our selves, it is the gift of God. Ephesians. 2.8. Ephesians. 2.8.
Every good and perfect gift comes from above, Jam. 1.17.
James 1.17. Without me you can do nothing, John 15.
John 15. We have no sufficiency of our selves to think one good thought, 2
Cor. 3.5.
2 Cor. 3.5, Abide in this (Christians,) Christ does not say, Without me you
can do no great things, nor without me you can do little, but without me you
can do just nothing. 9. That whosoever is thus justified and regenerated,
sins often, but yet in some sense sins not: Not as others do, not making
a trade, nor taking a pleasure in sinning, not with plenary acts, and consent
of his will. He cannot be an habitual, constant Drunkard, Unclean person,
Swearer, Curser, Liar, Blasphemer, Prophaner of Sabbaths, or the ho^y Name of
God; he cannot live in a known course of cheating and defrauding: but though he
falls seven times a day, yet it is by sins of infirmity; and if he be overcome
by temptations to greater sins, as Noah, Abraham, Job, Peter, David, etc. yet
he lies ^ot in them, but with Peter weeps bitterly. 10. That although a child
of God may ^n many things be ignorant of his duty, and wherein he knows it, may
sometimes ^ant strength to perform it: and he who ^oth most is not perfect: yet
no true child of God will live in the wilful and instant omission of any known
duty, ^or in the wilful ignorance of any part ^f his duty; but striveth to grow
in ^race and knowledge: and for what he knows. To will is present with him,
though he has no strength to perform: and as to his inward man, he will
delight in the Law of God: and though he ^e not perfect, yet he striveth after
peraction, Phil. 3.12. Phil. 3.12.
He follows after, that he may apprehend that for which he is also
apprehended of Jesus Christ, counts not himself to have app^^ hended. But
does this one thing, forgting those things which are behind, reaches forth to
those things that are fore, and presses toward the mark for^ price of the high
calling of God Christ. 11. That in order to this, he who ^^ would see the face
of God, must make Word of God his rule, Isa. 8.20. Mat. 15.9. Joh. 4.23. Deuteronomy.
12.32.
both of faith (...) life. Believing no Divine Truth but upon credit of the
revelation of it in the S^^ptures (indeed otherwise it can be^^ Divine faith)
taking his Rule for W^^ip from the Scriptures, Col. 2.23. Psalm. 119.109.
both for (...) Acts, and for the manner, and direct^^ all the actions of his
life, in his g^^tal calling, in his particular relation, cording to the general
and particular Rules of the Holy Word of God, ^^ turning aside from them. 12.
That as we shall all dye; there shall be a resurrection from the di^^ and a day
of Judgment. When Christ shall judge the quick and the dead, i^ cording to his
Gospel. When the fe^ful, the unbelieving, Rev. 11.8.
the abominable, m^^ dere's, whoremongers, sorcerers, idolaters, and all liars,
all those that trouble the ^rvants of God, that know not God, that they not his
Gospel; all thieves, 2 These. 1.7, 8.
covetous persons, drunkards, revilers, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
extortioners, etc. shall be adjudged to the Lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, to have their portion in fire and brimstone, in everlasting
burnings, with the Devil and his Angels. On the contrary, Those who by
believing and obeying the truth, and by patient continuance in well doing, Romans
2.
Evidence, That they are such whom God from Eternity has chosen to life, on
the behalf of whom, Christ made an Eternal Covenant with his Father: for whom
he died: To whom he has given his Spirit in a way of a special and
distinguishing grace, shall have a joyful resurrection, and hear that blessed
sentence pronounced to them: Matthew. 25.
Come you blessed of the Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you. These
are some of those Gospel Propofitions, which you have been taught, Abide in
them. Search the Scriptures, see if they agree not with them: if they do, take
heed how you change your persuasions as to them, for any new systeme of
Doctrines leadi^ you to salvation: This faith will le^^ you unto holiness and
strictness of life: will not give you that liberty to the flesh, which other
does. It will ma^^ you live in the daily view of the truth. Straight is the
way, and nanr^ is the gate that leads to eternal li^^ and few there be that
find it. Which will remain true, when all the wor^^ shall be found liars. I
pass to the ^^^ond branch of the Exhortation.
Abide in your faith in Christ. 2. Br.
I shall not her take faith in so strict and abstract a notion, as it is
sometimes take in Scripture, but as it comprehends 1. Adherence to, and
reliance upon the Lord Jesus Christ, and him alone for salvation. 2. Hoping in
him. 3. Patien waiting for him. The two latter are the daughters of faith
strictly taken but they have so much of their Mother that in Scripture they are
often taken for it, and called by here name.

1. Abide in your steadfast adherence to and reliance upon the Lord Josus Christ
and him alone for salvation. There are some that despise salvation, some that
neglect it, some that vainly seek it, some have no hope, some have no true
foundation for their hope; Some never think of another life, so neither hope
for it, nor despair of it, but live like Beasts in the world, crying, Let his
eat and drink, for to morrow we shall ^lye: and so call out their souls to no
^ct of faith, or adherence to any thing at all in order to it. I hope I peak to
such as believe they have souls, and that their souls are not given them merely
pro sale, to keep their ^odies from putrefaction, but that they are immortal
beings, capable of, and ordained to an Eternal existence, which must be either
in eternal life, ^r in eternal misery, and who live in the waking conviction of
this, and so are concerned to think what they should trust to for eternal
salvation: Some are thus far awakened, but like Browning men, lay hold on every
twig and bulrush, never considering whether ^t will bear their weight or no.
One man thinks, if he be baptized, he shall be saved. Another if he keeps his
Church, and pays every man his own he shall be saved. Another if he give his
goods to the poor, builds Church^ Hospitals. This is all to say we have our
life in our hands. You have been otherwise taught, viz. To do all that you can
in obedience to the commandments God, and when you have done all, to s^^ you
are unprofitable servants; to say the is not my Righteousness. Isa. 64.6.
to say after the Church; We are as an unclean thing and all our righteousness
as a filthy rag^ to cry out, None but Christ, None b^^ Christ. Hold there
Christians, live in daily view of eternity, in a daily exercise of faith,
adherence to, and relian^^ upon the Lord Jesus Christ, as he h^ whom alone you
can be brought to blessed Eternity. Let the Papist if h^ will, trust to his own
merits. Trust you to the merits of Christ alone Their Learned Cardinal when he
came to dye, could cry out, It is the safest do so; -- Video melior a proboque
Deteriora sequor.


Let them if they will trust to the superlative merits of other Saints, it may
be they were no Saints; if they were, they must be better supplied ^an the Wise
Virgins if they have oil mough for themselves and you too: if they had, there
is no way of conveyance to you ordained by God: but very man has use enough of
his own righteousness: and at the great say, it will be found, that those have
^een mistaken, who have dreamed, that any but Christ have had any to spare, or
any that could be imputed to another. ^^ trust in Jesus Christ, and in him ^one.

2. Abide in your lively hope. In ^our hope of a glorious resurrection: In ^ur
hope of a day, when God shall judge be world by our Lord Jesus Christ: In, our
hope of eternal life. This very age will tell you, that if such as fear God,
and strictly walk in his ways, Following the severer paths of Worship and
^oliness, had hope in this life only, they were indeed of all men most
miserable. These are the worlds reproach, these almost are the only
transgressors accounted; Drinking, Swearing, Blaspheming, Cursing, Uncleanness,
these are but venial tolerable sins: Close walking with God, fearing to offend
him ^ matters of Worship, praying, meeting together to fast and pray: these are
the Capital Offenses, for which Prisons, o^ are prepared. But Christians, the^
will be a Resurrection of the body, the^ will be a day of Judgment: There will
a revelation of eternal life. The body of Gods people may be abused, waste in
Prisons, and consumed there, but they shall live again. Men now judge the
world, it stands them in hand consider, whether they make righteo^ Laws, and
decree righteous judgment ^^ on them: For there is another day Judgment
appointed, when all Law and Acts of Judgment upon them, wi^ be examined again
by the Divine Law and by the Standard of Heaven tried. The issue will be then
tried, whether Drunkards, Swearers, Cursers, Unclean Persons, such as wallow in
all manner ^ filthiness; or such as live according to the strict rule of Gods
Word, and defire no more than that they may quietly live so, according to the
just dictates and apprehensions of their own consciences, be the troublers of
Israel, be the persons more or less approved and accepted of God: I say the
issue will be tried again upon appeal, at the tribunal of Christ. Live
therefore in this hope, and let not the deferrings of your hope, make your
heart sick. He that shall come, will come, and shall not tarry. The blessed
Apostles sixteen hundred years since saw him preparing his Chariot, and making
ready, and in the view of it endured cruel mocking courgings, imprisonments,
fiery trials, the loss of all, and counted all but dung, that they might in
that day be found in him. Your salvation is nearer now, ^ea, it is nearer than
when you first believed. Maintain this blessed, lively, glorious hope. Maintain
it, and it will maintain you. It is a grace, will not be your debtor. Without
it your heart will break under it, it cannot break. But remember, Hope which is
seen is no hope: You may for ought I know endure many a cold night, in
derisions, reproaches, etc. in Prisons, in other Lands. Whiles you keep that
faith and good conscience, which your Master has given you in charge, before
the days of your servitude be expired; yea, the long night of death may come,
and your flesh may rest in hope some years. But still maintain your hope:
Rachel will come at last, eternity is coming. A joyful resurrection, a day of
Judgment is coming, you have done your work, and are doing of it, serving God
with faithfulness: others must d^ theirs too, in filling up the measure of
their iniquity, persecuting him in his members, whose person they cannot reach
(unless by their profane Oaths) God will judge both you and them according to
your works. The men ^ this world it may be pierce your heart as with a sword,
when they say, When is your Christ become? Where is the Promise of his coming?
It is not more than sixteen hundred years, and all things remain as they were.
But you shall see him Christians: you shall see, and they shall see that Christ
riding in triumph, with all his Angels, and ten thousands of his Saints, whom
you have desired to serve faithfully with your spirits, whose Kingdom you have
desired to advance; and they shall see him, whose Name they have profaned,
whose Gospel they have obstructed, whose Kingdom they have opposed, whose
Ministers, whose Members and Servants they have abused, imprisoned. I say they
shall see him, Revel. 6.15, 16.
and endeavor to hide themselves in Dens and Rocks of Mountains, and say to
the Mountains, and to the Rocks fall on us and hide us from the face of him
that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, for the great day
of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to abide it. Abide in this hope.

3. Abide in your patient waitings for God. Adherence to Christ secureth the
soul, it sets it on the Rock that is higher than it, and secureth it as to
Eternity: It puts the soul into a certain state of Salvation, and keeps it so.
Hope keeps it alive, and full of vigor, and cheerfulness, and strength in that
state, so as it faints not under all the delays of Providence. Patience
stays the soul, and makes it to stand still and wait for Gods time, so that
neither in its heart, nor in its actions it makeeth have, but having chosen its
ground, and found it to be such as will bear a soul, and such as a soul ought
to stand upon, it stands still, without weariness or murmuring or discontent;
and notwithstanding all the Artifices of the World, Flesh and Devil, all the
vollies of shot that are made against it, all the discouragements that it has,
yet it stands, and waits still, and will not stir from the ground which it
has chosen: but says, This way, this course I have chosen in expectation of
an happy issue, I yet see it not, but yet here I will stand, here I will abide;
here will dye; if I perish, I perish. The blessed Apostle tells the Hebrews,
Heb. 10.36. He. 10.36.
You have need of patience, the after you have done the will of God m^ inherit
the promise. There is a pass^^ patience, which lies in a quiet submitsion to,
and a glorifying of God under the frowns of his Providence. Christians in
suffering times have need ^ this. Lu. 21.19.
In your patience (says our Savior) possess your souls. There is ^active
patience, which is the souls quiet waiting for the promise, while it goes on
doing his will. It is opposed to a souls making haste. Of the Believer it is
said, He that believes makes not haste. Christians, I know many of you have
had patience: Abide in your patience, those that can wait on the Lord, without
limiting the Holy One to the uncertainties of years and months, in the end
shall not be ashamed. You cannot abide in Christ, if you cannot abide in
patience: God will be waited for; Les patience therefore have its perfect work.
Say not to your Lord, Will thou at this or that time restore the Kingdom to
Israel? It is not for you to know times or seasons. It is an ill principle,
that has hitherto kept thee in the ways of God if this be all, because by
such a time thou expectedst sensible encouragements. What have thou to do, but
to perform thy duty, and to wait for the mercy, if thou have hitherto thus or
thus walked, because God required it of thee, and it was thy duty. The will of
God is the same still, and consequently, thy engagement the same still. But I
proceed to the third thing by which I opened this branch of Exhortation.

3. Abide in thy Obedience. Faith, and patience, and hope are all parts of
obedience: but I understand here by it, an ordering of thy conversation still
in exactest conformity to the will of God. Duties of Obedience fall under a
double head, as our conversation more immediately respects God or man.

1. Therefore, Whatsoever acts, or ways of Worship, thou have formerly
performed, and walked in, in conscience to the command of God, those abide in.
Men alter, God changes not. What was the rule of his Worship is so still, if
thy foot formerly swerved from it, thou have reason to reduce it, if not, take
heed how thou forsakest it. The Lions Den did not scare Daniel from praying to
the God of Heaven as he was accustomed. Acts of Worship are immediate homages
to God, they are the souls approaches unto him. A Christian stands concerned,
to be very curious and diligent as to them: I know nothing which formally
distinguishes true and false Worship, but the immediate command of God for the
one, and the want of it for the other. Think it not a light matter how you
worship God. If you any way fail as to the immediate, or mediate object; It is
Idolatry (of all sins the highest) than which nothing so soon divorceth a soul
from Christ, and therefore in Scripture it is compared to whoredom, the only
just moral cause of a Divorce, and the highest offense in conjugal relation.
Babes keep your selves from Idols, (says our blessed Apostle.) If the failer
be in the external mode, it is Superstition, or what the Apostle, Col. 2.23.
calls Will Worship, no light transgression, Who has required it at your hands?
It is not enough for any to tell you the Acts of Worship are commanded, so were
the Sacrifices which Jeroboam made Israel to transgress by. If the failer be in
the inward manner of performance, then the sin is hypocrisy, take need of all.
Abide in the Acts of Worship which Christ has prescribed, an Angel from Heaven
cannot be allowed you to dictate any thing new as to them. Abide in the manner
of Worship for which you find a Divine Rule; n^ fear of transgressing in
sticking close t^ the word there, I am sure the lea^^ swerving is not without
its danger. When I speak of the manner of worshipping, I exclude from it such
circumstances, as are necessary to Acts o^ Worship as they are humane acts
without respect-to Religion. These are variable by men according to
circumstances of prudence, but for other Variations I understand them not. Do
not only abide in your acts of more public Worship, but o^ more domestic and
private Worship t^ Be not ashamed to own the teaching o^ Christ to your
Children and Servant to own praying in your families, etc. to own public and
private Sanctification of the Sabbath, have you practiced these things. O abide
in them.

2. Abide in your Obedience to God in the just performance of your duties
toward men. Abide in your holy an^ just, in your meek and humble conversation.
Christ expounds our abiding in him, by our continuing in his words, and his
words abiding in us, Joh. 15.7.
John 15.7. Holiness and godliness of conversation is never the worse for the
discouragement it meets with in the world. O abide in it: No abiding in Christ
without an abiding in universal holiness. Thus far I have opened the
Exhortation: Shall I need add any Arguments to enforce it? Surely, I have said
enough, in the confirmation of the Proposition. But I shall sum that up here,
and add a word or two.

1. Do it with respect unto God. It is the will of God concerning you: It is
the way to glorify God. I have spoke to both these.

2. Do it with reference to your selves. That you may have the presence of
Christ with you, John 15.4. Abide in me, and I in you. That you may preserve
your union. That you may bring forth fruit, and much fruit, John 15.4, 5. That
you may not be branches cut off, cast forth, withered, to be gathered up, for
everlasting burnings. That you may evidence your selves to your selves, and to
others also, to have had, and have a true and real union. That you may be
entitled to all the privileges of the Gospel, especial to this, John 15.7. T^
ask what you will of God, and you shall receive it. These I have opened, and
more. That you may show your selver to have that constancy which becomes men,
That fortitude which becomes Christians, the want of which is the highest
reproach, both in the world and in the Church of Christ. That Christ may not be
ashamed of you, when he shall come in the glory of his Father, and with his
holy Angels: But further yet. Consider your selves as you are in the Text
represented, 1. As children. 2. As little children.

1. As children, that is a relative term, and the next question is, who is your
Father? Our Savior has answered it when he bid his Disciples, Call no man
Father on Earth, for one was their Father in Heaven, Mat. 23.9. And again, when
he taught his Disciples to pray, saying Our Father. Where should the child
abide, but in his Fathers will, in his Fathers love, in his Fathers house:
because you own God as your Father, therefore abide in him.

2. We are the children of the Apotles and Prophets, they are no fountains of
being or good to us, but from them under Christ we derive our faith: therefore
the Apostle faith, We are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets: and the Apostle tells the Corinthians, though they had many
Instructers, yet not many Fathers. Look back upon those first and greatest
Disciples, and see what they did, you shall not find an Apostate amongst them.
Peter indeed in an extremity of temptation, for an hour was ashamed of his
Master; but he went out you know and wept bitterly. Yet their temptations were
greater than yours; you have not ^t resisted to blood sighting against sin. You
that are the children of so great Fathers; the followers of so great examples:
Abide in him.

2. Consider your selves as little children. Little is a term of weakness and
ufirmity. It speaks you, 1. Unable to absist in your selves. Take the Vine from
the wall, it dies; take the branch from the Vine, it much sooner dies: You
are little branches that cannot live in your own sap, cannot stand in your own
strength. 2. It speaks you unable to resist any opposition. In the work
(says our Savior, John 16.) you shall have trouble. That you may grapple with
this opposition, that you may not fal^ in a day of trial, abide in him. In m^
(says he) you shall have peace: be ^ good comfort, I have overcome the world.
He it is that must be your peace, your strength, your support. When the
Assyrian comes into the Land, when the World, the Flesh, the Devil all set
themselves in utmost opposition to your souls. This is the way for little
children to be strong, and to quit themselves like, men in the day of trouble.
Abide therefore is him out of love to your selves.

3. Ahide in him out of some respect to us, who have been the Ministers o^
Jesus Christ to you: I should not have instanced in this, had it not been
before me in the Text, That when he shall oppear, we may have considence, and
not ^ ashamed, before him at his coming. God has secured unto his faithful
Servant in the work of the Gospel, their happiness under all the frowardness,
rebellion and backslidings of the people committed to their charge. Ezekiel. 3.18,
19.
If they live them warning, they have delivered their own souls. 2 Cor. 2.16.
We are a sweet sapour to God, both as to those that are saved, and as to those
that perish. Isaiah comforted himself in this, Isa. 49.5.
Though Israel be not gathered, yet I shall be glorified. -- My judgment is
with the Lord, and my work with my God. This now would be enough to an
hireling. Yea, the Lord knows far less than this satissieth many Ministers,
such as are called so. They are not ashamed almost to speak it. Let us have but
their Tithes, and let the Devil take their souls. Whether they speak it or no,
their miserable starving some at nurse, others it their own dry breasts, their
carelessness to feed the flock of Christ, the stones which they give them
instead of bread, the Scorpions they feed them with instead of fish, speak it
plain enough. But this is not enough to a godly Minister. My little children
(says the Apostle) with whom I travel in birth, till Christ be formed in you.
Paul labored to present his people a pure and ch^ Virgin to Christ: and says
that he come wish himself accursed, and separated fr^^ Christ for his Brethrens
sake. The godly Minister is touched with a zeal ^ the glory of God, with a true
^^ for the people of God committed to l^ charge, and desires they might be
approved, though himself should be a^probate; he blusheth, and is ashand for
the hardness of heart, the St^ borness, Rebellion, and Apostasy of his people.
How (says he) shall I lo^ God in the face another day as to the soul? He has
an ambition in the gr^ day to speak after his Lord and Mester. Of all those
whom thou have give me, I have lost none. Now breth^ If you love them that love
you (says our Savior) what reward have you How inexcusable will you be, if
you love not them who love you. But if you have any love for the Ministers
Christ, who have spent themselves the service of your souls. If any kindness
for us, if you would be our ^ and crown, and glory, not our trouble and grief,
and shame in the great d^ when our Lord shall appear. Abide in him. Now abide
in him, that you may have a Crown for your own heads, and help a Crown on to
our heads; that when Christ shall appear you may have confidence, and not be
ashamed to look the Captain of our salvation in the face, as all renegadoes
will; and that we may have confidence, and come forth cheerfully when the Lord
shall ^all us out in the day of judgment, and be able to say, Lord, here are
we, and those whom thou have given us. Thine they were, trusted to us; and they
have kept thy word.

I will add but one word more to his branch of Exhortation.

4. Whether should you go? This Peter considered, when our Savior said to him,
Will ye also go away? Lord, (says he) whether should we go? thou have the
words of everlasting life. God complained of his people, Jer. 2. that they
committed ^oo horrible evils, forsaking the fountain ^living waters, and
digging up to themslves cisterns, broken cisterns that would hold no water.
This must be the case of every Christian, not abiding in Christ. But to speak
more distinctly.

1. What faith will you embrace There Is nothing so dissonant to the rational
nature of man, than to believe a lie. Whatsoever pretends to a divine truth,
and is not bottomed on Scripture, is no other.

2. Where will you fix your hope and considence? Christ is the hope, and the
alone hope of his people, whosoever pureth hope or considence in any thine else,
trusts to a bruised reed and a broken staff.

3. To what course of life will you turn. Will you again go back to the onion
and garlic of Egypt? Will you lick ^ your former vomit, and verify the
proverb, The swine returns to the walloning in the mire again? Let me speak you
as the Apostle to the Romans, Who fruit had ye of those things of which you
have been ashamed? Have you mourned for your former courses in vain? with you
repent of your repentance? with you (because your Lord delayeth h^ coming) eat
with the gluttons, and drue with the drunkards, and fall to smiti^ your
fellow servants? Take that of o^ Savior concerning such servants, Matthew.
24.49, 50. Matthew. 24.49, 50, 51.
The Lord of that servant shall come in a day that he looks not for him, and
in an hour that he is not try are of, and (verse 51.) shall cut him ^sunder,
and appoint him his portion with hypocrites, there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth. Once more, Whether will you go? to what society will you
addere? Take the company of professors with all their faults, they are the best
society in the world, I mean not the best with reference to a Christians
spiritual nature and temper, but the best is men. None more than they, none so
much as they live up to the principles of humane nature and reason. The
drunkard, the unclean person, the covetous worldling, the profane curser, and
swearer, and blasphemer of the holy name of God, the unjust man that defrauds
and cheateth his neighbor, the fawning flatterer, the godless atheist, are so
far from living like Christians, that they live not like men. Leave the flocks
of Christ's companions, of the stricter sort of professors, and find an assembly
(if you can) not full of these spots, there may be a severe Cato, a just
Aristides, a composed Seneca amongst them: but Oh! how rare are they! Would you
be glad. Sirs, to stand amongst these at the day of judgment? would you be
willing to have your portion with them? If you would not, let not your soul
enter here into their secrets, to their assemblies let us your honor be
united. But enough is spoken to this first Branch of Exhortation to them who
through mercy yet is their first works.

I shall finish this discourse with one branch of Exhortation more, 2. Exhor.
To those that have not abode in Christ, pleading with them that they would
return. Here let me first show you the persons to whom I speak. Then I shall
plead my Masters cause with them with a few arguments. In the opening the point
showed you that men and women may have a threefold state in Christ.

1. The first Sacramental, having been listed in the Lords Army, given up their
names unto him, the Apostle says, we are baptized into Christ.

2. The second Professional, as members of the Church which is his body, having
walked with some Church of Christ in the Ordinances of the Gospel, and made an
outward show of living within the Gospel compass.

3. The third real, and more inward and spiritual, as having been by the grace
of God the distinguishing grace of God, taken out of the wild Olive of a
natural estate and condition, and ingrafted into Christ, who is the true Olive,
and made true partakers of his grace. From the first and second state there may
be a toral and final apostasy, from the last, a sad and gradual apostasy, but
neither total nor final.

First then, so many as have been baptized into Christ, and since their baptism
have lived in the service of the world, of sinful lusts and pleasures, instead
of the service of God: I say, so many have not abode in Christ. Oh! that they
would remember the Covenant of their youth, that by the smart punishments which
they see earthly Princes inflicting on them, that take their Oaths of
Allegiance, and then turn Traitors; that take their press-mony, and then refuse
to fight for them, nay, instead of it openly fight against them: they would
collect what dreadful vengeance they must expect, who in Baptism have engaged
themselves to Christ; and (as it were) taken an Oath of Allegiance to him, and
after this are found so far from serving Christ, that they are in the thickest
of his enemies. Is there such a thing as treason and rebellion against earthly
Powers and Princes, and is there none against the God of heaven? Shall an
earthly Prince be judged just in tormenting to death a traitor to his Crown and
Dignity, and shall not the Lord of Lords, and the Ruler of Princes be judged
just in taking exemplary vengeance upon those that are traitors to his Majesty?
Is it an odious thing to be a traitor to a man, and is there no odiousness in
being traitors to the glorious God? Every person that has been baptized into
Christ, and after this lives in drunkenness, uncleanness, profane and open
sinning, defying God and his Word, is such a traitor. Do these men abide in
Christ, these that do not abide so much as in moral virtue? these that have not
yet attained to the perfections of a good Heathen? Oh remember your vows,
(Christians) remember your baptismal vows to the great God, remember his Name
into which you were baptized: Were you baptized into the name of the devil, or
into the name of the world, or were you baptized into Christ? You that abhor
the names of traitors and rebels to your Prince, abhor also the name and thing
of treason and re^lion to the glorious Son of God.

Secondly, So many as have made a more explicit profession of Religion, not
only entering their names into Christ's Muster-roll, (as every baptized person
does) but who have showed themselves in his Artillery-ground, worn his colors,
actually put themselves under ^he conduct of his Officers in his Church, and
walked with the Church of God; and after this have gone out from them, not to
another company whose profession was more strict and exact, but to associate
themselves with ^he children of the world, for whose ^ecks the yoke of Christ
is too strait. ^hese are some of those who do not abide in him. And is there
any time that does not afford either a Demas, that forsakes the ways of God to
embrace the present world; or some Di^trephes, that loves the pre-eminence.
Some or other, who either from impatience of dishonor and reproach, or a
desire of honor, places of trust, repute, etc. or fear of a prison and danger,
or out of a principle of covetonsness for a piece of bread, or for the gaining
of a great estate, will not the sert the holy and right ways o^ God.

Thirdly, Such as have indeed tasted (...) the distinguishing goodness of God,
having not yet perfectly put off the old man, (...) laboring under a body of
death, may (...) the law of their members be brought in some captivity to the
law of sin for a tim^ It Is true, their union with Christ abides indissoluble,
but in an hour o^ temptation they may (possibly) fa^ away, not totally, not
finally, but foully abating of their commumon with God waxing cold in their
love and zeal for the glory of God. Now to all these (...) would direct the
close of my discour^ speaking to them in the language of the Prophet, Jer.
3.13. Turn unt^ me, you backsliding children, says the Lord. Turn, turn, why
will you die, O you sons of men! I shall mostly for arguments (to enforce this
Exhortation) confine my self to that excellent Prophet, in the second and third
chapters of his Prophecy, to which I shall desire you to turn your eyes.

1. Consider in the first place, What God has done for you. Thus the Lord
impleaded the Israelites, Jer. 2.31. give me leave to alter the words a little,
Was the Lord ever unto you a wilderness, or a land of darkness? Is it not he
that has made you? that has preserved you ever since you hung upon your
mothers breasts? Has he not sent his Son to die the accursed death of the
cross for you? Is it nothing to you that he has admitted you to be baptized
into his Name? to live within the pale of his Church, under the constant
droppings of the fountain of life? Has not he for some of your souls done
greater things, in plucking you as brands out of hell fire? in making a
particular application of the blood o^ Christ to your souls? And can you
forsake such a God as this? Has not ^e who died upon the Cross for you
deserved so much at your hands, as to watch with him in one hour of temptation?
Have you thus requited the Rock of your salvation, O you unthankful souls? Are
you afraid of a nick name, or a prison for him, who was not afraid of a Cross
for you?

Has the Lord brought you under the light of his Gospel, showing you the right
way of the Lord, when the^ Pagan world, where are ten thousand^ under more
valuable circumstances ((...) to humane estimation) than you, lie in darkness,
worshipping devils and stocks instead of God? Nay, has he brought you into the
purest light, to live in the Reformed Church, when a great part of the
Christian world lies in the darkness of Popish idolatry and superstition? Yet
further, Has the Lord illuminated any of you with the common light (at least)
of his Spirit, so as you have tasted of the heavenly gift, Heb. 6.5, 6.
and been made partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of
God, and the powers of the world to come? And after this are you gone away?
What will you answer the God of your mercies another day? But yet further. If
any have tasted the distinguishing grace of God, and been made partakers of his
saving grace, which is communicated but to one of a City, or two of a Tribe, to
a few, a very few, if you should abate in your strictness, if you should not
abide in the closest communion with the Lord Christ; How will you ever behold
the face of Christ with confidence? O let the reflection upon the former
kindness of ^od to you prevail with you, to repent and do your first works.

Secondly, What iniquity have you ^ound in God, that you could not abide (...)
him? This argument the Prophet uses to backsliding Israel, in Jer. 2.5. I
here make an appeal to the consciences of those who have formerly walked with
the Saints of God in visible communion, and themselves made a profession of
those ways, from which they have turned aside, and which, it may be, they now
persecute. What in^^ quity did ever you find in the ways of Go^^ I know what
the world says of the courses of pure Religion, and of the professors of it.
Acts 24.5.
Tertullus (the Rom^ Lawyer) charged Paul with being (...) mover of sedition, a
pestilent fellow, (...) that profaned the Temple. The me^^ the world speak the
same langua^^ still. But I appeal to you, did you e^ find any such thing in the
principle^ practice of severer piety, and p^^ communion with God? This, the
thing makes my heart to tremble (...) many professors, who are turned out the
right ways of God. The cla^^^ of an ill-tongu'd world are so lov^ that I am so
charitable as to many, (...) to believe, that in the midst of the^ rage they
are thus far justifiable, (...) lieving that they ought to do many this against
those whom they hear so ^^ported of. These are nearer pardon great deal, than
the Apostate is. He h^^ known the way of righteousness, he ha^ walked in it,
his conscience tells h^^ that those whom he thus deserte^ and possibly
persecuteth, are more ri^^teous than he; that they are such as desire nothing
but herein to exercise himself to keep a good conscience void of offense both
toward God and toward men. That there is nothing to be found against them,
but in the matters of God. That their ways are more ^oly, more righteous, than
the ways of others: and that nothing but the lust (...) his own heart has
enticed him out of them, or can entice any from them, who has any thing of the
reason of a man, or Religion of a Christian, yet he ^bideth not in them, but
embraces a present world in defiance of his known duty. What shall the end of
this man be?

3. Consider how tenacious others are of their sinful and vain courses. Jer.
2.10, 11. Pass you over (says God by the Prophet) the Isles of Chittim, and
send unto Kedar, and consider diligently and see if there be such a thing. Has
a nation changed their gods, which yet are no gods? but my people have changed
their glory for that which does not profit. Give me leave to allude to it. Pass
ye over to the Mahumetans, whose Idol is a sordid person, whose course and so^^
of Religion is a bundle of nonsense an^ blasphemy; yet will not they forsa^^
their profession. Send to the blind ^^pists, who have nothing to say for they
superstitions but, They believe as (...) Church believes; yet how rarely is
o^^ of them proselyted? Look up among the blinder sort of Proteltants, w^ have
got some forms of Religion, (...) they can neither give themselves (...) others
a rational account of what they believe or practice, yet how true is the
generality of them to their blind devotion? Shall the knowing Protestant only
be the reed which every wi^^ will shake? Did not the very foundation of your
Religion allow you (...) judgment of discretion, a liberty to prov^ all things,
requiring you only to ho^^ fast that which was good? Were you like others
forced into your practice, or did you upon deliberation, and weighing of
principles and practices, choose the way wherein you chose to walk, as that
which was most conformable to the will of God? Have you a better evidence for
the contrary now? Bring forth your strong arguments. Have you one but what is
drawn from your impatience of suffering, your ambition, our covetousness of
filthy lucre, etc? See amongst the Heathen there be such thing to be found. Oh,
let it not be (...) that those who worship they know (...) what, are yet more
sure to their ^osession, than you who know what (...) do, and that salvation is
in that ^^y wherein you have walked.

Fourthly, Consider what it is that you (...) done. The Prophet tells you,
(...). 2.13. You forsake the fountain of ^ing waters, and dig up to your selves
^ken cisterns that will hold no water. ^od is the Fountain of living waters,
the creatures are cisterns that will ^^d no water. The pure Ordinances God are
fountains of living water. ^^d is the Spring, Ordinances are the ^^ntains,
which this Spring fills. ^he waters are the Graces of Gods ^irit,
communicated to the souls of ^s people in and by his Ordinances. ^he Ordinances
are the wells of sal^^tion, out of which our souls draw ^^e water of life. If
these wells be kept pure, the souls of Gods people are treshed by them, and
grow fat in (...) use of them; Going on from strength strength, till they
appear before God Sion. If they be corrupted, according the tincture they have
received, the are more or less dangerous. There is fountain, you know, that is
kept clear how pleasant, how wholesome are streams of it? There are fountains
(...) which men have thrown mire and (...) how unwholesome are their water how
unpleasant are they to the (...) how unsavory to the taste? Have you forsaken
God to embrace the wo^^ in the credit, honors, profits of (...) You have
forsaken the fountain of ^^^ing waters. (He must needs be so, (...) the
fountain of all good, he in whom live, move, and have our being) have dug up
to your selves cisterns, ^^ken cisterns that will hold no water. You will find
it so when ever the providence of God brings you to be a third if ever your
conscience aches, if ever you have a thought rise up in arms against you, if
eyer you come to be within view of the grave; (and that you (...) do one day)
if ever you come to have a prospect of hell, you will find all the treature but
a cistern, a broken cistern that will hold no water. I have heard of an
Emperor brought to that digress, that he cried out, A Kingdom for ^^ cup of
water. O take heed that you ^e not another day heard crying out, will give all
my credit, all my honors, all my places of trust and profit, (...) an hours
peace of conscience, for ^ne smile from my angry God, for one ^rop of water to
cool my tongue. You ^aye forsaken the pure Ordinances of ^^od for the
inventions of men; you have forsaken the fountain of living wa^^s, you have
dug up cisterns that ^ill hold no water. Here Is the name ^^ the means of
grace, but where is the ^ung? What presence of God do you ^^d in them? What
strength do you trive from them? What sweetness do ^^a taste in them? Where Is
your for^er spiritual joy, peace, satisfaction? (...) it not an Image in your
bed in^^ad of an Husband, a dream in your ^^uls, from which when you rise up
^ou are still an hungry, in stead of a feast fat things?

Fifthly, O that you would consider (...) it has been with your souls since
you (...) your defection. To this God calls (...) backsliding people, Jer.
2.14, (...) 16, 17. Is Israel a servant? Is he (...) home-born stave? Why is he
spoiled? (...) young Lions roared upon him, and yelled they laid his land
waste; his cities (...) burnth without an inhabitant. Also (...) children of
Noph and Tahapanes (...) broken thy head. Have thou not proc^^^ this unto thy
self, in that thou have (...) saken the Lord thy God when he led the by thee
way. It may be worth the (...) flection for you to consider, how G^^ has dealt
with you, as to what you have most proposed to your self mean, the getting of
the world, whether in the profits, or honors, or (...) dit and reputation of
it. If the ba^slider gets not this, he gets nothing and let me tell you, it is
not ordinary (...) the providence of God to suffer him the far to prosper. Has
God since that ti^^ blessed you in your estate, in your children in your trade,
etc? Or has he blas^^ you? If the latter, Have you not (...) cured this unto
your selves, in that ye (...) forsaken the Lord your God when he led you by the
way. But it may be you cannot yet see divine vengeance thus pursuing you, there
is a time when poenalis nutritur impunitas, God fatteth up some with the May
of the world to the great day of slaughter, (though ordinarily these be such as
never made any profession: Judas that had been a Disciple, quickly disgorged
his thirty pleces, you know) That which I would have you principally enquire,
is, how it has been with your inward man, as to your spiritual concerns. St.
John in his Epistle to his Host Gaius, wishes above all things, that he might
prosper, and be in health, even as his soul prospers. If there should be a
Doeg, that has got anything by his treachery to Christ, and the interest of
his Gospel; I would ^eg of him to consider, whether his ^oul also prospers,
and be in health as his outward man is. You have pretended formerly to know
what belongs to an inward serenity of mind, to peace of conscience, etc. Have
you at any time since your change found leisure to speak ^o your own souls, and
say, Is it peace? If you have not, you have been very careless of Eternity; If
you have, what has it answered? Have you gone to bed with as much satisfaction
in your spirit, after a day spent at a play, or aprofane meeting; as you did
heretofore after a day spent in a religious meeting, or at a fast? Have you had
no more melancholic thoughts, no more sad reflections, no more terrors than
before? Has not the evil spirit sometimes so troubled you, that you have been
forced to send for a Minstrel to play it off? Have not the images of those
righteous servants of God whom you have been reviling, whom you have been
accusers of, and instruments to hale into prisons, ruin, and as much as in you
lay to make an end of, sometimes appeared to you in your dreams, and disquieted
you in your sleep? Have you not heard, though not a voice from heaven, (God
will not so much honor you, who have so much spit in his face) yet a voice
from your own conscience, Soul, soul, why persecutest thou Christ? What evil
have thou formerly seen in that way wherein thy self did walk worthy of this
death, or these barbarous bonds? Do you see what servants, what home-born
slaves you have made your selves? How the children of Noph and Tahapanes have
broken your head? O return into the right ways of the Lord, return to your
first Husband, speak sincerely, Was it not then every way better with you than
now?

6. Consider seriously with yourselves, if a day of trouble should come, (as
certainly thou art not the only person exempted from the incurnt, ances and
accidents to which mortality is exposed and subjected) would any of those
things or persons help you, to which you are turned, and whom you have
gratified in your departing from the right ways of God. The Professor not
abiding in Christ, usually makes choice: 1. Of New Principles: 2. New Practices
in his conversation: 3. New Friends, and a New Society.

1. New Principles; he must have a seared conscience, that upon strict
Principles, can build a loose practice, and retain the truths of God in
unrighteousness. Therefore the Backslider has ordinarily an Almanac faith,
calculated for the Meridian of his present practice. For example, it was the
old faith of Professors, that all men and Women are by nature children of
wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. That they remain in this state of wrath, till by the hearing
of the word (the holy Spirit working with it) faith be wrought in them, and
they be brought to Receive the Lord Jesus Christ, and to believe in him, John
3.18.36. Till they be regenerated, and born again by the Spirit of God, John
3.3, 5. that is, till old things be passed away, and all things become n^w with
them, for he that is in Christ is a new creature. That true faith where ever it
is, purifieth the heart, works by love, to God, to his people; in a strict,
universal obedience to all the commandments of God. As to which, they must have
a presence to will, though they may (in many things) want stength to perform.
That who so thus believes, and is thus regenerated, is justified by the
imputed righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ alone, and being justified,
sins not, wilfully and presumptuously, or does not lie and abide in sin; but
though he sometimes falls by sin, yet he by and by purifieth himself, and
rises again by repentance. And it is the business of his life in all things,
to make the word of God a light to his feet, and a lanthorn to his paths. Thou
have possibly collected another system of practical principles. That every one
who is baptized is justified and regenerated. That to believe, is nothing else,
but to be persuaded of the truth of the Scriptures. That indeed a man may fall
away from his justified estate in Baptism, by actual sins, but a slighty
acknowledgement of his sins, in a formal confession, or when he comes to dye,
will make up all again. And if a man lives in Obedience to what he calls the
Church, making the dictates of men the rule of his practice, without any
particular enquiry whether they be according to the Scriptures or no, he shall
not need fear salvation. I confess this shows an easy way to Heaven, if it
were as sure. But suppose a day of trouble now to thy soul; suppose now thy
conscience awakened, either whiles thou art in thy full career, in thy
prosperity, or when thou come to dye, and some such Texts as these fall into
thy thoughts at that day, John 3.18. He that believes on the Son has
everlasting life, and be that believes not, is condemned already; because he
has not believed on the Name of the only begotten Son of God. Romans 8.1. There
is no condemnation to them that are in Christ, wh^ walk not after the flesh,
but after the Spirit, v. 5. They that are after the flesh (...) mind the things
of the flesh, they that (...) after the Spirit do mind the things of the
Spirit. ver. 6. To be carnally minded i^ death. ver. 8. They that are in the
flesh cannot please God. ver. 13. If you live after the flesh you shall dye.
Neither ^^cumcision avails any thing, ^^uncircumcision, but a new creature.
Suppose these, or other such like Scriptures, should stick fast to thy thoughts
in an evil day, what should relieve thee? Will it relieve thee when tho^ come
to dye, to remember tho^ were baptized in thy infancy? Will no^ thy thoughts
reflect: There are thousands that were baptized will be damoned. Simon Magus
was baptized, ye^^ the gall of bitterness and in the bands of iniquity. Judas
in all probability was baptized, yet a Son of perdition? Will it relieve thee
to think thou have believed the Scriptures to be the Word of God, and Christ to
be the Son of God, so do the Devils believe and tremble? Will it relieve thee
to think that thou have been obedient to the orders of the Church? Do thou
not see, that those are most universal in that Obedience which is so called,
whose lives proclaim the greatest opposition to the plain letter of Scripture
in almost all the moral precepts of it? Shall they also have peace?

2. For thy new Practices. Heretofore thou were wont to pray in thy family,
and to instruct them in the things of God; to spend thy time in reading the
holy Scripture, to spend days in fasting, prayer, communion with the Saints of
God, (Believing thy obligation from a moral Precept, to keep the Lords Day
holy) thou were wont in it to exercise thy self in reading the word, hearing
of it, in prayer, instructing thy children. Now thou have forgotten thy family
duties, thy chamber practice in Religion, thy religious care of thy children
and servants, and all thy Devotion is turned into a little Formality, of which
thou make no great conscience neither; Thy Sabbaths are spent in vain and
idle discourses, and in a vain conversation; and if any acts of devotion still
continue, possibly they are such as to which God will say to thee, Who has
required these things at your hands? Where did I ever speak a word to you or
your Fathers of such homage to be performed to me, nor did it ever come into my
heart. The time on other days which thou were wont to spend in fasting, is
now spent in feasting; what was wont to be spared for hearing Sermons, is now
spent in hearing Plays! Hark my friend, shall thou not one day think thou
be sick unto death (as Hezekiah was Isa. 38.1.) will the Providence of God
think thou never speak to thee, saying, Set thy house in order, for thou
shall dye and not live. Will thou upon these practices be able to say, as
Hezekiah, ver. 3. Remember now O Lord I beseech thee, how l^^ have walked
before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which was
good in thy sight. Does thy conscience tell thee these things are good in the
sight of the Lord. Such an absurd verdict may possibly be given in by the
conscience of one muffled up in ignorance, but thou have known, thou have
proved better things, thy conscience must tell thee, the courses which I
formerly took, were better than these. Thou after thou have escaped the
pollution of the world, 2 Pet. 2.20.
through the ^nowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, art again
entangled therein and overcome. Thy latter end is worse than thy beginning: It
had been better for you never to have known the way of righteousness, then
having known it, to turn from ^he holy commandment delivered unto you.

3. For thy new Company. Thou heretofore were a companion to those that ^eared
the Lord. The Excellent on the Earth were those in whom thou did delight, or
at least, pretend to do so. Ministers of the Gospel, who had (beside their
habit) something else to approve them such, powerful, constant Preachers of the
word, that knew h^^ to speak a word in season to the weary, how to satisfy a
doubt, resolve case of conscience, give to every o^ their portion, etc. People
who math a conscience of their ways; a^ though they had possibly their error
and failings, yet they were not such, (...) the very light of nature and reason
showed abominable, such as cursing a^ swearing, blaspheming the God who^ they
served, reviling persons an things, that had ought of his Im^^ and
Superscription upon them: The art now become a companion of soe^ such I mean as
the Scripture calls (...) lewd, profane persons, Sons of B^^ that live without
any yoke, either Scripture, or Moral Principles: the catest with the Glutton,
and sit with the Drunkard, and thy Chair is set (...) them who sit in the
seat of the scorns^ and whiles they are smiting thy on^ fellow servants, if thy
hand be not w^ them, yet thy heart is; if thy ^ throwest no stones at the
Lord's S^phen's, yet thou hold the clothes them that do it. Will thy day of
v^tation (think thou) never come? Send in that day for those that have sat
at the Tavern with thee, and see ^f they be able to speak a word to thy ^oul
weary of life. Remember Saul who had rejected Samuel enough, when he was in
distress, he goes to a Witch, and who must she raise up but Samuel? What
satisfaction will thou have ^n an evil day, in a dying day, from those whom
living thou have preferred to be thy companions, before such as have feared the
Lord. I shall shut up this Head with minding you, that by this Argument, God by
his Prophet Jeremiah endeavored to reduce backsliding Israel, Jeremiah 2.28.
Jer. 2.28.
But where are thy gods that thou have made thee? Let them arise if they can
save thee in the day of trouble. I will only add one thing for thy termor. It
is like enough that in the day of trouble, God may leave thee to fetch thy
relief from these empty cisterns. When Judas's conscience smote him, God left
him to his Masters the Scribes and Pharisees alone to comfort him, (how cold a
cup of consolation they afforded him, the Gospel; tells you When the Jews had
apostatized, and the Philistines and Ammonites oppose^ them, and they cried unto
the Lord they met with a rough answer, -- ver. 13. Jude 10.11, 12, 13, 14.
I will deliver you no m^^ Go and cry unt^ the Gods whom you ha^ chosen, and
let them deliver you in the day of your tribulation. Take heed the the
Providence of God speaks not that language to your souls in the day o^ their
tribulation. Go and fetch their comfort from the principles, practice and
company which you have chosen.

7. I will add but one Argument more. That shall be from the mercy (...) God
which he has for backsliding children, making timely returns unto him This is
an Argument which the Prophet Jeremy largely insisted upon, Chap. 3. v. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 12, 13, 14, 22. First, He shows them, that this is above the mercy
of men. If a m^ puts away his Wife, shall he take b^ again? etc. It is very
observable, that the Jews defection chiefly insisted upon by the Prophet, was
in matters of Divine Worship, where the sin charged upon them, was the highest
in genere suo, ido^try, which is a failer in the object of Worship, either more
immediate, or me^iate: and therefore expressed in Scripture by the sin of
whoredom (which is the highest error in conjugal relations.) There Is no sin so
separates a people or person from God as this sin. Superstition which is failer
in the more external manner and rites of Worship, is a great sin, but something
lower than this. Now God comparing the case betwixt him and them, to the case
betwixt a Man and his Wife, that had dealt falsely with him, tells him, that in
case of a ^ivorce, a man does not use to be re^onciled to his Wife: yet Jerem
3.1. Return again unto me (says the Lord) ver. 5. Will he reserve his anger
for ever? Will he keep it to the end? Again, v. 12. Go and proclaim these words
to the North, and say, Return thou back sliding Israel, ^ith the Lord, and I
will not cause mine ^nger to fall on you, for I am merciful, ^aith the Lord,
and I will not keep anger for ever. Only acknowledge thine iniqui^y, that thou
have transgressed against the Lord thy God, and have scattered thy ways to
strangers, under every green tr^^ and you have not obeyed my Voice, says t^^
Lord, Turn O back sliding children, sa^^^ the Lord, for I am married unto you,
a^^ I will take you, one of a City, and two (...) a Tribe, and bring you to
Zion. An^ again, ver. 22. Return you backslidi^^ children, and I will heal your
back sliding Oh that I could hear you saying as i^ the next words of that Text;
Beh^^^ we come unto thee, for thou art the L^^^ our God. Truly in vain is
Salvatin hoped for from the hills, and from (...) multitude of Mountains, truly
in the L^^^ our God is the salvation of Israel. (...) vain is salvation hoped
for, from course of profaneness, formality, or superstiti^ or from any
righteousness of your own In vain is peace of conscience, in va^^ is any good
thing hoped for from them; in vain is any blessing of Go^ in this life hoped
for from them. (...) the Lord is the salvation of people: (...) the faith of
Christ; In the Love (...) Christ; In a strict obedience to the Gospel of
Christ; In a close walki^^ with God. In these things is the hop^ the salvation
of people, the true pea^^ and tranquillity of conscience. Return ^hen with the
Prophets words in your ^outh, with which I shall conclude, We lie down in our
shame, Jer. 3.25.
and our con^sion covers us, for we have sinned against the Lord our God, and
have not ^eyed the voice of the Lord our God.

FINIS.
Psalm 42.1, 2. As the Heart pants after the water brooks: so pants my soul
after thee, O God.

My soul thirsts for God, for the (...) ving God, when shall I come, and
appear before God?


THE Title of this Psalm is, To the chief Musiti^ for the Sons of Corah. (...)
remember Justine Ma^tyr answering the Jewish Question; Why w^ use not Music in
our Gospel Service as the Jews did; says it was, (...), for the Church in her
infantil estate, Just. Mart. Quest. Resp. 107.
though singing be not so, an^ therefore still continued. However that Music
was in David's time (though since ceased) a Divine Institution, not merely
introduced, by the discretion of the chief Magistrate, we are assured by 1 Chronicles. 28.11.19. which speaks it no president for Humane Inventions, in Acts,
or Modes of Divine Worship. Korah was a Levite, he perished in his gainsaying
against Moses, as you read, Number. 16. But his children died not. Nu. 16.1.
To these it seems by holy David, according to the Pattern, he had from the
Spirit of God, 1 Chronicles. 28.12.13. The charge of the Music was committed, 1 Chronicles. 6.37. Who was the Author of this Psalm some question: judging it one of
the Sons of Corah, and so interpreting it by the Genitive Case, V. de Muci ad
loc.
a Psalm of Instruction, (...), thinking it composed in the time of the
Captivity of Babylon. But the Spirit that breaths in it is so like the Spirit
breathing, ^salm 63. and Psalm 84. That I rather judge holy David the Author of
it: V. Mollerum ad loc. etc.
and that it was composed by him in the time when Saul hunted him out of Judea,
so as he could not (as formerly) enjoy the Institutions of God, which is the
great business he lamenteth in this Psalm, expressing his earnest longings for
them, and raising up hi^ soul to an hope and confidence i^ God, that he would
one day change his estate. It is termed Maschil, a Psalm of Instruction, and
may generally serve to instruct us in the frame of a gracious Spirit what it
will be, and our duty what we ought to do under such a dispensation, when
either by any natural or moral causes we are hindered from a communion with
God, in hi^ public Institutions for Worship: for of such, it is apparent David
speaks both from ver. 2. When shall I come and appear before God? and ver. 4.
where with sadness he remembers, how he (...) wont to go to the House of God
with the multitude.

The Proposition I shall insist on, i^ this.

Prop. Under the severest dispensation of God to gracious souls, there will
(...) found in them a singular thirst after G^^ in his Institutions of public
Worship.

Who ever was the Author of this Psalm, the Language of it speaks a godly
gracious heart: if it was not the man, it was certainly a man according to Gods
heart. The dispensation he was under, was sad enough, if he were in the
captivity of Babylon (as de Muci and others think:) or if it was David
separated from the Tabernacle, by the Violence of Saul. The dispensation was
every way sad enough. Yet under these circumstances, see the temper of this
gracious person: he cannot enjoy public Institutions, but he can look after
them, and long, he can with Daniel, open his window toward Jerusalem, and
pray. He cannot drink but of the Wells of Salvation, but he can thirst for the
waters of them, he cannot appear before God, but he can say unto God, When
shall I come and appear? In fine, his Enemies have taken away his food, but
they have not taken away his stomach; In the prosecution of this point. I
shall, 1. Open the Metaphor of thirsting, panting, breathing. 2. Show you the
singularity of the gracious souls thirst. 3. Thirdly, give you the causes of if
and prove the point. 4. Lastly, Make some short appliction.


1. Thirst is a natural affection: caused through the want of some liqu^^ thing
to cool and refresh our natur^^ parts always attended with a de^^^ of the
thing thirsted for: so it implies, 1. An apprehended suitableness (...) some
object, to the creatur^ wants, that is thus affected to i^. 2. A sensible want
of it, we thi^^ not for drink, when our (...) match and mouth is fille^ with it.
3. A desire and endeavor after i^


1. Every gracious soul apprehends (...) suitableness in Gods Institutions to
(...) wants. That there is such a suitableness, I shall demonstrate anon, this
(...) not apprehended by every soul, but (...) every gracious soul it is, which
preceedeth from his spiritual illumination and sense of his condition, to which
(...) unregenerate soul is a stranger. 2. It may possibly be, that a gracious
(...) may want thissuitable spiritual food: ^e may be hindered by natural
causes, ^^kness, etc. by moral causes, he may be ^s David in the Land of the
Philistines, ^s the children of Israel in Babylon. He may be at home, but the
wells may be ^^pped, through the violence of men, ^e pits may be dry, through
the heat ^f persecution, they may be so poisoned with Idolatry and
Superstition, (as (...) the Popish Countries) so fouled with the dust of humane
inventions, ^nwholsomely mixed with some little ^f Divine Institutions, that he
may ^ant the Institutions of God, and he will be sensible of the want. 3. His
soul will be enlarged in desires after, what he does not, or it may be cannot
at present enjoy. This I shall sufficiently evidence in showing you:
2. What singularity there is in the thirst of a gracious soul after Divine
Institutions.

1. Observe the Metaphor in the Text. ^s the Heart pants or brayeth; The word
translated Heart, (...)
properly signifies the Female. The word translate^ brayeth or pants
properly signifiet^ the sound that those creatures make. The Heart of all other
creatures, is observed by Naturalists, to be more exceeding thirsty than
others: for which I find three Reasons assigned.

1. They for the most part feed i^ montanous, V. De M^ci Mollerium ad loc.
dry, desert places, which more want moisture. 2. They say they ordinarily
swallow Serpents: whose heat of poison inwadly more inflameth them. 3. When
they have been hunted they (...) they cannot rest till they have found o^ some
waters in which to refresh themselves. The Metaphor you see import some
singularity in thirst. Now the singularity of a gracious souls thi^^ will
appear in three things.
1. In the object and end of it. The you have in the Text. So pants (...)
soul for thee O God. My soul thirsts for God, for the living God.

1. In the ultimate object. The ultimate object of a gracious souls thi^^ is
not the Institution or Ordinance, b^ the God of that Ordinance. Thus here in
the Text. So Psalm 63.1. My soul thirsts for thee: my flesh longs for thee.
ver. 2. To see thy power, and thy glory. An institution of God, is like another
thing to a gracious soul, if God be not in it. As Absalom said, What should I
do at Jerusalem, if I may not see the Kings face. So says a spiritual heart,
what shall I do at a Prayer, at a Sermon, at a Sacrament, if I meet with
nothing of God there. A gracious soul desires an Ordinance, not as a man
desires a picture to please his sense, but as he desires a perspective; that by
the means of it he may see a Star, or the Moon, or an object a far off. And
this is a singularity; an hypocrite if he desires to see the Vail, yet he
desires not to look through the Vail, what communion with God, in a prayer, in
hearing the Word, in a Sacrament means, he understands not, and Ignoti nulla
cupido. He may desire an Ordinance; as thinking his attendance there, the road
to Heaven, or the way to repute in the world, or a bit to stop the mouth of his
Natural conscience, barking for some show of Religion; or as a pleasant Song,
according to those in Ezechiel, Chap. 33.32. But what the presence of God in
the Ordinance means, this he understands not, nor does he thirst after it.
Hence a Formalist, if he has been at Church, is satisfied, let the Prayer and
Preaching be what it will (provided it has tickled his sense) yet his stomach
is stayed, and he wonders every one is not as content as he. The ultimate
object of a gracious souls thirst is not his Fathers House, but his Fathers
face in his House. If he has not seen that he comes away a-thirst from the
best wells. 2. In the mediate object. The mediate object is the performance. An
Hypocrite if he has any desire to an Ordinance, yet he is very careless, as to
the rites, and manner of the performance. It is not thus with a gracious soul.
The reason lies partly in what I said before, that the ultimate object of his
thirst is God: the presence of God in an Ordinance: he knows nothing of this
can be expected, where God is not sanctified in the duty by a regular
performance of it, and a strict observation of the rule, as to it, which God
himself has prescribed: he knows that in matters of Worship, God is more
eminently jealous; that of all sins, none so provoke God, none so soon separate
him from a people as errors in matter of Worship. This makes his regulare
appetite languid, and weak as to religious performances, where God has indeed
appointed the thing in the general, but man only has presumed to direct the
manner, for which also was sufficient direction in Gods word. His thirst is
after peace, and unmixed Ordinances. 3. As to the End: The gracious heart
desires the sincere milk of the word, that he may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. 1
Pet. 2.2.
that he may profit by it; he thirsts after public prayer, that he might pour
out his soul before God, and receive an answer of peace; he thirsts after a
Sacrament, that in it he may have a communion with Christ, that he might in it
receive the communications of the virtue of the blood of Christ to his soul,
further strengthening, quickening, or comforting him. The hypocritical formalist
thirsts after these things, only that he might stop the mouth of natural
conscience, or that he might appear to men to have something of Religion, or
for some such low and unworthy end. Thus the thirst of a gracious heart has a
singularity in it, as to the object and end.
Secondly, It is singular as to the degree and strength of it. As the heart
pants after the waterbrooks, says the Psalmist. A formalist thus never
thirsts, he has never such an appetite to an Ordinance, but he can either
attend it or let it alone. When he is hottest, tell him of a Play, or a Market,
and he can turn aside out of the Church-path thither: if he be seen at a
Sermon, or a Prayer, it is rather out of wantonness than appetite: hence a
little thing turns him aside, and a little serves his turn; four hours at a
Comedy is too little, one at a Sermon, half of one in a Prayer, is too much. If
he has not a Sermon at his door, he is not thirsty enough to go a mile to hear
one. The gracious soul goes from City to City, from strength to strength,
passes through Cities, and streets, and broad places. Psalm. 119.20. Psalm.
119.20.
My soul breaks with the longings it has to thy judgments. Psalm. 84.2. My
soul longs, yea, Psalm. 84.2.
even faints for the courts of the Lord, my flesh cries out for the living
God.

3. The thirst of a gracious soul is singular in the constancy of it, and its
insatiableness. Psalm. 119.20. My soul breaks for the longing it has to thy
judgments at all times. A formalist has his fits of thirst, but they are but
at some times, when the good mood comes upon him; and he is quickly satisfied,
quickly cloied. A gracious heart may have a greater thirst upon him at some
times than at others, but the edge is never off his spiritual appetite, nor is
he ever satisfied; he could (as to his spirit) his flesh indeed is weak) be
always hearing lively and powerful Sermons, always praying; he is troubled to
see the Glass so soon out, and the shadows of the evening so soon stretched
upon the Lords days, and cries out to God, Blessed are they that are always
before thee. He blesses the Sparrows and Swallows. that can make nests at the
Lords Altars.

4. In fine, there is a singularity in this. The thirst of gracious souls is
real and spiritual, the thirst of other souls is dissembled and carnal. An
unregenerate man, whether profane and carnal, or formal and moral, may prefend
a thirst after divine institutions, but he does but pretend. What a stir did
the generality of these make for Sacraments, when they have them with all the
circumstances they desired, how little do they come at them? What longing did
they pretend formerly to some forms of Devotion, which now they enjoy, how
seldom are they at? how slightly do they attend? And as their thirst is
pretended more than real, so it is carnal wherein it is real. There is a carnal
part in Divine institutions. The Apostle tells us the Jews had carnal
ordinances imposed on them; Heb. 9.10.
he says they were but until the time of reformation, i. e. until the Gospel
times. Such was their Music, their Levitical gay garments, their ceremonial
rites, their worldly Sanctnary, which had the golden censer, the golden pot
that had Manna, etc. Such institutions as pleased the outward senses, but did
not inwardly affect the heart, nor had much influence upon that. In opposition
to these, Job. 4.24. we are commanded to worship God in spirit and truth. Under
the Gospel there is a carnal part also in Ordinances. In Prayer, in Preaching,
the wit and neat composure or pronunciation of the Prayer or Sermon, they are
but the carnal part. Now take an unsanctified heart, if it has any thirst
after any thing that has the name, or looks like a Divine institution, it is
after the carnal part. You will see their copy, Ezech. 33.32. And lo thou art
unto them as a very lovely song of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play
well on an instrument. Hence they mock at a Prayer that is not dressed up in
fine language, and mock at Sermous that are not full of Sentences of Authors,
pieces of wit, quibbles, and such like vanities, which (to use the term in the
Prophet) are but like the souls bread mixed up with man's dung, which makes the
gracious soul nauseate it. The hunger and thirst of a gracious soul is quite of
another nature, Psalm. 119.140.
Psalm. 119.140. Thy word is pure; (says David) therefore does thy servant love
it. The more plain, and spiritual, and scriptural, the more quick and powerful
a Sermon is: the plainer and more spiritual the Prayer is, the more a truly
gracious soul thirsts after it, the more it allayeth his thirst and
satisfies his soul. Other preachings and prayers, which are rather starched
Orations, and exercises of wit, and ostentations of parts, he sees so little
of God in, so unlike the copies in holy Writ, so disproportioned to their end,
that he will have nothing to do with them as long as he can enjoy any other,
and feeds upon them as men do upon carrion and dung, only when they can come by
no better food. This I have showed you the singularity of^ gracious souls
thirst after divine institutions.

That there is such a thirst, such^ singular thirst, is evident from this
instance in the Text, and that of David expressed Psalm. 63.1, 2. -- my ^o^
thirsts for thee, Psalm. 63.1, 2.
my flesh longs for th^^ in a dry and thirsty land, where no water is. To see
thy power and thy glory, as I have seen thee in the sanctuary. Psalm. 84.1, 2.
And again, Psalm. 84.1, 2. How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts. My
soul longs, yea, even faints for the courts of the Lord, and my flesh
cries out for the living God. It is evident from the diligence of Gods people
in attending upon such institutions; it was prophesied of the Gospel times,
that many should say, Isa. 2.3.
Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, (...) the house of the
God of Jaccob. He will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths. Though
there were very many corruptions crept into the Jewish worship, yet our Savior
ordinarily went to their Synagogues, and aways to the Passover: and as to the
last he says, Luke 22.15. Luke 22.15.
With de^^ have I desired to eat this passover with you. He thirsted not after
their inventions and traditions, those he condemned, reproved, bare open and
frequent testimony against; but he thirsted after his Fathers institutions,
though his Soul stood not in that need of them that we do. It is evident from
the experience of every gracious heart, who finds this thirst within himself.
But let us in the next place enquire the causer of this thirst, whence it is
that in every gracious soul there is such a thirst, such a singular thirst
after Gods institutions. I shall assign a threefold cause.

1. The strictness of the Divine Precept. 2. The apprehension of the
suitableness in them to the vacuities and wan^ of the soul. 3. A Christians
experience of his former advantage from them.
1. The strictness of the precept. Waiting upon Gods institutions is a great
piece of a Christians obedience. Of old, C^^enmcision, Sacrificing, the
Passover, al^ fell under a strict precept; for the mo^ part with a commination,
The soul the did them not should be cut off from b^ people. We do not find the
like threatening under the new Testament, but^ gracious heart fears the
analogy o^ the one to the other, will evince it dangerous to neglect them.
Whether (...) does or no, he is one that rejoices i^ the Lords commandments
above riches and cries out. O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes.
Psalm. 119.14.
He is sensible that these are pieces of his homage to God, such pieces of
homage as God eyeth in a special manner, and wherein his soul draws nigh to
God, this makes him thirst af er them. But this is not all.

2. He so well understands the state of his own soul, and the-nature of divine
insitutions, that he apprehends in them an ^^esding suitableness to his souls
wants. This highly increases his spiritual thirst. Let me here open a little
this saitableness of divine institutions to the flate of the best souls on this
side of heaven.

1. The best of souls are growing, but ^^ver come to their full growth. Now the
^^titutions of God are the souls food and ^^ment; in order to this growth. The
mark which is set in a Christians eye is, The fullness of the measure of stature
which is in Christ. Perfection. Being holy as Christ is holy, perfect as our
heavenly Father is perfect. These are high marks; every good Christian levels
at them, none hits them. St. Paul himself had not attained, but this one thing
he did, forgetting what was behind, he pressed on to what was before. A good
Christian never stands still, but is always moving, adding to his faith,
virtue; to virtue, temperance, etc. Growing in grace, and in the knowledge of
Christ. Going on from strength to strength. Now the institutions of God are the
means of growth, they are the souls food and nourishment 1 Pet. 2.2. As new
born habes desire the sincere milk of the word, that you may grow thereby.
Psalm. 119.130. The entram^ of thy word gives light, it gives understanding to
the simple. They make wise the simple, enlighten the eyes. By them the servants
of God are warned, etc. As well then can a growing child not hunger and thirst
after food, the prop^^ nourishment of its body; as soon m^ a man not hunger and
thirst for his m^^ and drink, by which his soul is kept^^ life, as a Christian
not hunger and thir^^ after the institutions of God, by which he grows, and
by which he is preserved in his spiritual state.

2. Though the weakest of Gods childr^ be in a better state than the best
unreg^^ rate man, yet none of their souls are in persect health. Now the
Ordinances of God are their spiritual physic. The child of God, while he lives
on this side heaven, is like a man or woman that has a weak crazy
constitution, he is not always alike ill disposed, nor always complains of the
same distempers; but it is seldom that he is not complaining of one distemper or
other. One while of an hard heart, another while of an heavy, ^ull, and dead
spirit; one while of a sad and dejected spirit, another while of a di^racted
vain spirit, etc. some ailment or other he always carries about with him, and
will do, while his body of death abides in him, the fountain of all spiritual
diseases. One while he is buffeted by ^^atan, another while he is pressed with
^s own corruptions. Now the Ordi^^nces of God are the leaves of the tree of
life, appointed for the healing of the Nations. David was sadly distempered
with a temptation from the prosperity of the wicked, while he was in adverfity,
till he went into the sanctuary. Psalm. 73.13.
Hannab was of a troubled spirit, till she went into the tabernacle to pray,
then her countenance was no more sad. Psalm. 119.81. My soul faints for thee,
but I hope in thy word, verse 50. And so in many other Texts. As soon therefore
may one laboring under daily pain, weakness, and distempers, not desire
deliberately what shall heal him, as the child of God no^ thirst after the
institutions of God which are All-heal to his soul. The gre^^ and easy means
for his spiritual cure.

Thirdly, The gracious soul is always looking after God, but never in this
liffully sees him. Gods institutions are a^ glasses to the soul, by which it
has a cleare^ and fuller sight of God. The power and glory of God are seen in
the Sanctuary Psalm. 63.3. Next to the beholding o^ God face to face it this
beholding of him in duties of communion with him. O^ what a communion with God
does the soul of a godly person oft-times enjoy in a Prayer, in a Sacrament, in
the hearing of the Word, and every sighted God is exceeding sweet. Thus I have
opened to you the second thing, which is the cause of this singular spiritu^
thirst.

3. A third is, The Saints experiences God in Or dinances. There is no gracious
soul, but at one time or other, in Prayer, in hearing the Word, in receiving
the Sacrament, has tasted and seen how good the Lord is. Now it is of our
nature, having tasted that which we have found good and excellent, the more to
long for it.

But I shall add no more to the Doctrinal part of this discourse, I shall now
come to the Application.

In the first place we may learn what to judge of those, 1. Use, In truct.
who either despise Gods institutions, or at least are very indifferent to them.

1. There are too too many that despise them, they mock at Preaching, at
Sacraments, at Prayer, they like a Play better, or see no need of them at all:
some out of a principle of profaneness, fordid souls, that savor nothing of
heaven and heavenly things, nothing of that noble end for which man is created,
or to which he is obliged to direct his actions, whether they have souls or no
they scarce understand: or if they have, whether they differ from the sensitive
souls of Dogs or Swines, they consider not. What the natural and animal life
means they understand, but what the spiritual life means they understand not.
The drunkard thirsts after his cups of wine, or other liquor; the voluptuous
man after his pleasures, the covetous man after wealth: but for those holy
institutions of God, which are pabulum animae, those precious things by which
men's souls live, they understand them not, they trample them under foot, and it
may be rend them who bring them to them.

Others there are that are not altogether thus bad, but yet are very
indifferent as to these things; they can hear a Sermon, and they can let it
alone, whether ever they be at one or no, whether ever they sit at the Lords
Table or no, whether ever they pray or no, they are very mdifferent. O how
unlike is the spirit of these men to the spirit of holy David? What would you
say to a child that should be born, and never cry for food? would not you sit
it had nothing in it of humane nature? or that it would not live long^ You may
as certainly conclude conceming such souls as these, that they have nothing in
them of the Divine Nature, and they do not live at all the life of grace, nor
ever will live the life of glory. There is no sadder sign, either of a dead
soul, dead while it lives, dead in trespasses and sins; or of a decaying
perishing soul, than the want of this spiritual appetite, this hungring and
thirsting after the institutions of God.

Hence (secondly) observe, 2. Br.
How necessarily precious the true able faithful Ministers of the Gospel must
be to gracious souls. They are the earthen vessels, which bring this heavenly
treasure. It was said of old, Blessed is he that comes unto us in the name of
the Lord. And Romans 10.15. Romans 10.15.
How beautiful are the feet of them that bring glad tidings of peace. The
Ordinance of the Ministry in this has the pre-eminence of other institutions,
because by it we come to the enjoyment of all other public Ordinances. How
shall they hear without a preacher, (says the Apostle) and how shall they
preach except they be sent? Ordinances of public communion with God, being
justly precious to gracious souls, the key to them, the hand which brings them
must needs also be precious. I say, true, able and faithful Ministers.

1. True Ministers. Every pretender is not so, there were Prophets of old,
there are Ministers now in the world, whom Christ never sent. Under the Gospel
there were false Apostles, that brought (...), high fine words. Those whom God
has sent are easily distinguished from others, not so much from the particular
Church that sends them, which may disser in her external Rites and forms of
mission, but from their ability and faithfulness, the two following things.

2. Able Ministers. 2 Cor. 3.6.
Able to what? To read a Prayer, or a Sermon, a little ability serves for
this. Able to teach, able to pour out his peoples souls unto God in prayer, to
speak a word in season to the weary, to instruct the ignorant, resolve the
doubting, confirm the staggering. Through Gods assistance to open the eyes of
the blind, Acts 26.18.
to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God.
Able to open the whole counsel of God unto people. To divide the word of God
aright, showing themselves workmen that need not be ashamed.

3. Faithful Ministers. A man may be able that is not faithful; that is faithful
Minister that does the Lords work faithfully, feeding the souls of people with
food convenient for them, not with notions and language they understand not. A
faithful Minister is one that considers his end, to convert, build up, and
perfect souls to eternity, and proportioneth due means, and applies them
faithfully to that end. He preaches in season, out of season; rebukes,
exborteth, with all faithfulness, meekness, authority, gravity, etc. that he
may save his own soul, and the souls of others. He administreth holy
institutions, according to the rule his Master has given him, and durst not
err from it. Now I say it is impossible, but such as these should be exceeding
precious to gracious souls; and for the same reason others must be as vile and
abominable to them. As they are the cheats of immortal souls, and that in
things of highest importance and concernment; such as instead of being means to
convey the waters of life to them, are the means to keep them from them, and to
deceive them with the puddle waters of men's fancies. But I shall not dwell
longer on this.

Thirdly, 3. Br.
Observe from hence, That a good Christian is to be judged much from his
affection to Ordinances. As in other pieces of his duty, so in this, he is not
so much to be determined from his actions, as from his affections. St. Paul did
the things which be would not, and could not do those things which he would,
but yet he delighted in the Law of God as to the inward man. So it is here.
Presence at Gods Ordinance will not conclude a Christian indeed, formalists and
hypocrites may be present; Isa 58.2.
Yet they seek me daily, (says God.) A godly man may be absent, David is
forcedly absent. Or it may be as 1 Samuel 2.17. 1 Samuel 2.17.
The Priests were so vile, and their administrations so irregular, that Gods
people may (as they did there) abhor the offering of the Lord. But here is the
difference, A wicked man, though he drinks, yet does not thirst; his going to
Ordinances is like the drunkards going to the alehouse, more to satisfy his
lust than to quench any thirst; he has a lust to appear to be something, when
he is nothing, to give what credit he can to some particular person that
administreth, or to some particular way of worship, or to run thwart to others.
The godly man, though he cannot, though he dare not always drink, yet he always
thirsts. A temptation may awe him from drinking at the purest and most
wholesome waters of the Sanctuary. Or some mixture may make him afraid, but
nothing can keep him from a due thirsting after Gods holy and pure Institutions.

In the next place therefore, Spirit of Christians breaths in us yea or no.
Grande est Christianum esse non dici. It is a small thing to be called
Christians, it is a great thing to be a Christian indeed. If thou be so, thy
soul will thirst after the institutions of God. As a newborn babe thou will
desire the milk of the Word, that thou may grow thereby. And that thou may
not deceive thy self, consider what thou have heard.

1. Thy thirst will be after God in the Ordinance. For thee, for the living
God, says David. If thy thirst be such as can be allaied without any thing of
God, I mean, any influence of God upon thy soul through the conduit of the
Ordinance, it is no more than a formal hypocrite may have. What say thou,
Christian? Is this the temper of thy soul? Thou longest for an hour of prayer,
to hear a good Sermon, and when thou have had thy desire, art thou unsatisfied
still, unless thou have found God coming into thy soul in Prayer, and speaking
to thee in the Sermon, this speaks a Christian indeed, if any thing less than
this will satisfy thee, thou will fetch nothing of evidence from it, it is no
more than hypocrites may do, who take these attendances for their
righteousness, and have a kind of thirst to them, that they may have something
to glory in before God.

2. Thy thirst (secondly) will be after divine institutions in their purest and
most powerful administrations. The end of a Christian in waiting upon God in
holy institutions, being partly that he might pay an homage to God, i. e. do
what God has required of him as his duty, and partly that in them he may meet
with God, and find his presence and power. His thirst must necessarily be thus
circumstanced, for he argues thus with himself, Has God any where prescribed
me this service or mode of Worship? If not, how can I think to please or do
homage to him by an action which he never required of me, nor did it ever come
into his heart to direct me any such thing? Again, Wherefore should I desire
Ordinances, but that in them I may see the presence and power of God? Can I
expect either the presence or power of God in humane iffventions? And as his
thirst is after the most pure, so it is after the most quick and lively
administrations; after such praying where the heart is most melted, and poured
out like water before the Lord. Such preaching, where the Preacher comes
closest to the soul, and does not play off in generals only, as if he were
afraid to touch the sores of souls, or to tell people of their sins. For a
judicious Christian, though he knows the efficacy of the Ordinance, does not
depend upon the purity or ability of the Administrator; yet he also knows, that
in this period of time God uses not to work miracles, but to concur with
probable means, means that have some rational tendency to the end; and suitably
he observes, that God in the dispensation of his grace, ordinarily co-operates
with such Ministers as live their Doctrine, and speak the Oracles of God as the
Oracles of God; with plainness, gravity, life and power. He knows the end of
preaching is not scratching a peevish humor, nor tickling the ear, but
affecting and changing the heart. Psalm. 63.1.
David desired to see the power and glory of God in his Sanctuary.

Thirdly, If we truly thirst after Divine institutions, we will not despise a
plainer draught, provided it be wholesome. God distributeth his gifts even to
his Ministers variously: to some he gives more excellent abilities as to the
same acts. Some are not only able to preach the wholesome Word of God, but as
good Cooks, they are able to make the wholesome food of the Word appear more
lovely by handsome language, apt similitudes, neat allusions. Others have not
this ability, yet it may be open and apply the Word of God faithfully. I must
confess, the best of Christians have cold, and feoble, and teachy stomachs,
that they have need of all due art to commend their food to them: yea, and this
excellency of gifts in some is the special privilege of some, with which God
ordinarily blesses them in order to some more ^^inent services for souls, than
others ^^all be honored to do. And therefore ^^cannot blame Christians,
knowing the dullness and deadness of their hearts, ^^ desire the best advantages
they can give themselves, and (where choice is) ^o desire to sit under the
ablest Mini^try. Austin once wished to hear Paul ^ the Pulpit. But yet the soul
that truly thirsts after Gods institutions, ^^ill not despise his spiritual
food, hough it be not brought him in a Lordly dish; He considers thus with
himself, It Is the word that nourishes my soul, not the wit, not the quai^^
expressions are which it is served to me, the good of these is determined in my
carnal part. I must love the word, because it is pure, not because (...) is
wittily delivered, and the matte^ neatly couched. A good stomach we say,
needs no sauce. Therefore though in a time of choice and plenty a gracious
heart will prefer the able^ Preachers, who can give the word mo^^ advantage by
their parts. Yet as eve^ then he will not despise the performances of him who
has the meane^^ gifts and abilities (provided that h^ does not handle the word
of God deceitfully, or negligently) so in a tim^ of scarcity he will much less
do it.

Fourthly, The soul that truly ^^^eth after Divine Institutions, will em^^^^^
what he can, when he cannot enjoy wh^^ he would. When I say, he will embrace
what he can: I mean what (...) is satisfied in his conscience that (...) may
enjoy without sin. Sin is such (...) thing, as nothing can tempt a gracio^^
soul to it, he knows that it is impossible he should please God by an action
wherein he presumptuously sins against him, especially too in matters of
worship, where he is more especially jealous, he knows participation of
Ordinances is not absolutely necessary to salvation; if therefore he cannot
hear a Sermon, or receive a Sacrament, but he must before or in it, defile his
soul with sin, he rather chooses to forbear the Ordinance, than run the guilt
of the sin. But suppose circumstances such, that a good Christian cannot enjoy
every institution, but some he may. I say, he that has a true spiritual
thirst, will enjoy what he can, when he cannot enjoy what he desires. The
Disciples would gladly have heard Paul (...) the Synagogues as they had wont,
Acts 19.8. 9, 10, 11.
^^swading the things concerning the Kingdom of God. But when men come to be
hardened, and to speak evil of the righteous ways of God before the multitude,
so as Paul can speak no more openly: those that are true Disciples will hear
him though in the school of Tyrannus. If Paul cannot Preach at midday, Acts
20.7.
and break bread, they will hear him till midnight. I do not speak here to
plead for those coetus antelucani; which the Heathen so much scandalized
Christians in Origens time for, but only to show you by these instances, that
it is no new thing for Christians to make any shift to taste any thing of
Christ in his Ordinances. The Ancients justified the Christians of those days
for those meetings, though in times of liberty they had not been Eligible^ If a
Christian truly thirsts after Divine Institutions, if he cannot go with the
multitude to the House of God, yet he will not omit the homage of two o^ three
gathered together in the Lords name. Jo. 20.19.
The Disciples when they could not assemble openly, nor have door open for fear
of the Jews, yet they assembled and shut the doors, and enjoyed the
Institutions of God, and Jesus cam^ and stood in the midst amongst then and
said, Peace be unto you. It argue^ not a thirsty and ingenuous, but a wanton
and teachy soul, when it will make use of no means of Grace, because h^ cannot
enjoy all under such circum stances as he desires.

5. Fifthly, Who so has the true Spirit of a Christian in this thing, will be
content for the enjoyment of Gods institutions to encounter some difficulties.
We use to say, Hunger will break through (...) stone wall. We see what those
natural ^assions will do in brute creatures, and (...), reasonable creatures.
The spiritual ^unger and thirst will do much more with a Christian, and in
reason must, as the preservation of a spiritual life, and the prospect, and
hope of that life which is Eternal, is more valuable than the preservation and
enjoyment of a natural life.

6. Lastly, A true Christian when he cannot enjoy Divine Institutions yet will
(...) crying after them. When shall I come ^^d appear before God, says David:
and again, Psalm 27.4. Psalm. 27.4.
One thing have Ide^^nd of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell
in the House of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the
Lord, and to enquire in his Temple. But by this time methinks I hear some good
Christians say to me.

Case. Is this indeed the temper of every true Christian, May I then conclude
my self a true child of God, if I find such a thirst in my soul after God in
his Ordinances, though I do not meet with those enjoyments of God in his
Ordinances which I desire? Says another, If this be true, I Am much afraid of
my self, I do not find such a thirst as you have mentioned, or if any, yet not
after all Ordinances. No^ is it so even a temper as I desire. Sometimes I am
passionately desirous of them, or of some of them: at other times me think I
find too much of an indifferent Spirit in this point: I even force my self
sometimes t^ my duty, at other times I can attend them, but I do not find such
a desire to them, as (...) would do: but could almost be content to live
without them What shall I judge of my self i^ this case?

To this case which is complex, containing: the cases of different souls, I
shall speak in some few Conclusions following.

A Real, Spiritual, vehement thirst after God, in Divine Institutions, 1. Concl.
will (I think unquestionably) speak a true Christian. I say a true thirst, not
pretended and feigned, a spiritual thirst after the pure, divine, substantial
part of the Institution, separated from the less significant circumstances of
the administration after God in the Ordinance, when the enjoyment of the
presence of God, and communion with him is made the ultimate object, and
Ordinances are desired for that. This thirst I say will argue one to have
tasted of the grace of God: For, 1. We find no record in Scripture of any such
thirst, but in truly honest and gracious souls. 2. Whence can such a thirst
proceed, but from the new nature, making choice of its spiritual food? Those
that walk after the flesh, mind the things of the flesh, Those after the
Spirit, do mind the things of the Spirit. Romans 8.5.
In Ordinances, the carnal man can mind nothing but the carnal part: he is more
pleased with the noise of the Music, than the matter of the Song; with the
tone, and method, and behavior, and phrase, and wit of the Preacher, than the
spiritual convincing matter of the Sermon: more with the tone and language of
him that prays, or ministers in prayer, than with the pouring out of the
soul in prayer; it argues a spiritual man in duties to mind the things of the
Spirit. In them, 3. Again, A Christian is not to be judged from his success in
duty, nor from his action, but from his affection and temper to it. The success
is from God, and is various, as it pleases him to deal with a poor soul. In
his action he may be hindered of his will, by the encumbrance of the body of
death, which cleaves to the best of Gods children, and brings the Law of his
mind in captivity, to the Law of his members. So that were a Christian before
me that could say no more than this, My soul longs, yea, even faints for
the Ordinances of God, I cannot say, that when I enjoy them, I find so much in
them, of peace, or satisfaction as I desire, but yet my heart beats for them,
I could be content to be a dweller in the House of the Lord, always hearing
his word, always at prayer, yet I cannot hear as I would, nor pray as I
desire. I should not doubt to say, Be of good cheer, thy soul is in a good
condition: Flesh and blood has never revealed this to thee, this thirst, this
passionate desire, comes from him that has called thee to be partaker of his
distinguishing grace. There is no such thirst found in any unrenewed soul.


Secondly, As it is with the natural body, the appetite may decay, 2. Concl.
but the body cannot long subsist without some appetite: so it is with the
soul; there may be some decay in the spiritual appetite; but the soul that has
a truth of spiritual life, cannot long subsist without some spiritual appetite
to Divine Institutions. I say, there may in a gracious soul be some thatement
of spiritual appetite to Divine Institutions, which may be caused, 1. From a
plenty of them: through our natural corruption: when we are full we wax wanton;
when the Israelites had a fullness of Manna, Nu. 21.5.
Number. 21.5^. They cried out, Our soul loatheth this light bread. 1 Sa. 3.1.
1 Samuel 3.1. The word of God was precious in those days, there was no open
vision: intimating, it was less precious, when it was more common. We have seen
sad experiences of it. Have you seen persons delicately sed with plenty of
choicest meats, pingle at a good and wholesome dish before them, scarce knowing
where to pick a bit to please them, or how to advantage their stomach with
Sauce rare enough, and turning it away when there has been but a little error
of a Cook in roasting or garnishing it, o^ in the cleaness or brightness of a
dish it has been served up in: When an hungry laboring man, has presently
sell greedily to it, though without any Sauce and in a plain dish: Such a sight
you might lately have seen in the House of God amongst us, how nice and
squeamish were Christians, how little cared they for an honest Sermon, if not
delivered with such a grace, such an authority and gravity (as was the gift of
God to some particular persons) with such neatness of method and ^hrase, as was
not the portion of every faithful Minister to serve them with. This proceeded
only from our corruptions in regard of our plenty of spiritual enjoyments. 2.
Secondly, Such an abatement of spiritual appetite may proceed from the
pre^^minancy of some particular lusts or corruptions. It is no wonder if the
young man that eats coals and dirt, or the man whose stomach is clogged with
crudities and noxious humors, abates in his appetite to his due food. A child
of God, though he does not seed (...) coals and dirt, lusts and corruptions, ^s
his daily bread, as natural and unregenerate men do, yet he may sometimes have
a vitiated pallat (a stranger ^ay come even to David's house) there may be a
time when iniquities may ^^^ail against him, when the Sons of lerviah may be
too hard for him, and (...) such a day, there will be an abatement of the
spiritual appetite to its ^oper food. 3. Sometimes this abatement may be caused
from some discouragement which the soul has received at the Ordinance. It may,
and it often does so happen, that the soul of a Christian finds not that
satisfaction at Sermons, at Sacraments, in hours of prayer, which he expected;
and hoped for; but it may be he returns from the Ordinance more sad than he
went, and this from day to day, and this discouragement abateth his appe^ite,
he hungers, he thirsts still, but not with such a degree, as he formerly
found, under better encouragements. 4. Lastly, It sometimes happens by his
listening to some powerful Temptation* A melancholic fancy, or an ill report
of our food from others will often spoil our natural stomach, and at least
abate our appetite. We see it often in melancholic persons, either some odd
fancy of their own, or some idle story of another persuading them the meat is
not proper for them, will take them of their stomach, the same unhappy humor
will do it as to our spiritual food, especially if advantaged by any suggestion
of the Envious One, who knows our advantage from the institutions of God.


Upon those accounts (amongst others) I say it is possible that the appetite of
a good Christian may abate, or seem to abate, as to his proper spiritual food:
but a soul that truly lives the spiritual life cannot long want an appetite,
any more, than a body can long live without appetite to meat.

Thirdly, It is very possible, that a jea^^s Christian may mis-judge himself as
to his spiritual thirst: 3. Concl.
and this 1. Either ^^dging he has none, when he either has not so much as he
desires, or not so much as he has formerly had, or not so much to one Divine
Institution as to another.

1. When he has not so much as he desires. The truly gracious soul is
exceeding covetous, as soon may the ^^ave, or the barren womb, or any of those
things Solomon mentions as insatiable be satisfied; as the gracious soul ^^y, I
have enough of any gracious disposition; now this a great error to conclude a
total want of the thing, from a partial want only relating to a degree.
Besides, a gracious soul is naturally exceeding jealous and suspicious; jealous
of Christ's love to it; suspicious of its own love to Christ, and this indeed
makes it take advantage to misjudge it self, from the want of a desired degree
of grace. 2. Secondly, When it does not find such a vehement thirst as it has
formerly had, either in the beginning of its Conversion, or it may be at some
particular times since: though a gracious soul never wants an appetite to the
institutions of Christ, yet there are times when its appetite is greater, and
thirst stronger and more vehement: as First, 1. In the beginning of its
Conversion When the soul has received the first powerful impressions of the
word upon its conscience, and is first raised to a lively hope in the promise.
Oh how sweet then is every opportunity of hearing, prayer, etc. It is the
observation of Divines, that in this time affections are always strongest,
passion for God always highest; the reason i^ because the souls taste is then
most imperfect; its sense of mercy quickest. The Woman loves her Husband as
well afterward, as upon her first marriage: but not so passionately afterward
as at first. 2. After some restraint from those enjoyments, whether from
natural or moral causes. God in the Prophecy of Amos threatens a famine of
hearing the word of the Lord. Then (says he), they shall run from City to
City, to seek one who shall speak to them in the name of the Lord. 3. In the
beginning of some spiritual desertion: Cant. 3.2. at this time the Spouse rose,
and went about the City, in the streets, and in the broad ways seeking him
whom her soul loved. I say in the beginning, for many times in the process of a
desertion, temptations arise upon the soul from the discouragements which it
meets with in performance of spiritual duties. Now it is an erroneous judgment
to determine that we have no spiritual hunger and thirst, because we have it
not in so great a degree.
3. Thirdly, A soul may be afraid, o^ at least not so fond of an Ordinance
after discouragements met with in it, and yet may have a true thirst to it. A
man eats, and is continually sick after h^^ meat, it will make him not to be so
fond of his meat; yet he may have mind enough to it; he sits down with a kind
of fear to his meat, yet he has an appetite to it. 4. Fourthly, A temptation
may prevail upon a soul. That he shall dish^^nour God, or increase his own
damnation by waiting upon God in such or such an Ordinance, this makes him he
dare not do it, yet his appetite to it may be good enough.
It is very possible, 4. Concl.
that a Christian may have a more singular, special appetite to one Ordinance
than another. There is no reason for this in the Ordinance. All Ordinances have
the same stamp of Divine Institution upon them; an attendance upon them, all
falling under the same Authority of Divine Precept; all of them being under a
like Ordination for the beginnings or perfectings of grace, yet there is a
reason for this in our self-love; which enclineth every one most to desire and
delight in those institutions, in which he has ^et with more sensible
manifestations (...) the presence, power and goodness of ^od: hence you shall
find some Chri^^^rs more delighted in prayer, others ^^re in hearing the word.
Though (...) fault of this be the corruption of ^r hearts, yet it is no more
than is the ordinary weakness and infirmity of the (...) precious souls; and
therefore a Christian finding this has no reason ^o mis-judge himself as
totally wanting ^is spiritual appetite.

The want of appetite to any institution (...) Christ, 5. Concl.
is what no gracious soul ought ^^llow himself in. I told you before, ^t they
all have the Image and Super^^^ption of the Lord Jesus Christ upon (...). They
all fall under an equal ^^^ority of Divine Precept. Then (...) says holy
David) shall I not be asha^ed, when I shall have respect to all thy
^^mmandments. They are all (as I ^^d before) under an ordination for our (...)
advantage, and are the proper ^^d of Christians; and there can be no reason
assigned for a partial respect to any institution of Christ's, but some
selfishness in us. If therefore this be thy temper (Christian!) that thou an
enamoured, and exceeding fond upon one Ordinance, of another not so Look upon
it as thy infirmity, not condemning thy self for it as one not at a^ thirsting
after God in his institutions but as what thou ought not to allow thy self
in, but to groan under, to search the cause of it, and not to leave thy soul
until thou have brought it in to a more even temper.

Lastly, 6. Concl.
As a total want of this spiritual thirst after Divine Institutions
unquestionably speaks a dead soul; one that has nothing of the life of grace
but is dead in trespasses and sins still, an^ never tasted how good the Lord i^
so a faint decaying appetite to them, argue a declining and a decaying soul.
Let (...) be upon what principle it will, whether of looseness, not being able
to be^^ the strict yoke of Christ, and to kee^ thy self so close to duties: Or
from a dream of a state of perfection, an^ a life of God above Ordinances. The
reason is plainly here. There is no such thing as absolute perfection here.
Ordinances are the souls food: and while a soul lives on this side of Heaven,
it cannot better live without them, than the natural body can live without
water. Observe I pray you,

1. Spiritual life lies in spiritual ^nion with Christ. All life consists in
^nion, the natural life in the union betwixt the soul and body. Eternal life
(...) nothing else but an union with God in glory: so spiritual life is nothing
but the souls spiritual union with Christ.

2. All Union is preserved by communion i^ mutual communication: the natural
union which is betwixt the soul and body is preserved, by the souls
communication of its self to the body in various influences. Eternal life will
be maintained by Gods communications of himself to the souls of his people
glotified, and their communications of themselves unto him: His shining upon
them with glory, their beholding him with love and satisfaction. The spiri^^al
union that also is maintained by Christ's communication of himself to the soul,
and the souls reciprocal communications of it self to Christ; God upholds,
strengthens, quickens, comfort the soul; the soul eyeth God, adereth to him,
trusts and hops in him, and fetches down what is in Christ home to it self
by these exercises of grace.

3. All communion betwixt Christ and a soul is either by secret impressions,
acts and influences, or else by Ordinances. By secret impressions, acts and
influences, and these are more ordinarily on Gods part, and more especially on
our parts in and by Ordinances. It is true, the soul has its soliloquies, and
silent acts of communion with God; it may, and that out of an Ordinance,
meditate on him exercise an act of faith, love, hope, etc. All which are acts
of communion with God; but those are more eminently performed in duties of
Worship, and infinitely helped and advantaged by them. It is true also, that
God sometimes out of a more public and open act of Worship may communicate
himself to a soul, and doubtless does, it may be by night while it is upon his
bed, while it sits alone in the house; but most eminently in Ordinances: David
saw the Lords power and glory in his Sanctuary. It was his promise of old,
Wheresoever I record my name to dwell, there will I meet my people and bless
them. God of old you know was wont to appear betwixt the Cherubims; when
Christ's Disciples were met together once and again after his resurrection, then
Christ came in amongst them, and said, Peace be to you. The Promise under the
New Testament is, Where two or three are gathered together in my name. I will
be in the midst amongst them.

Hence 4. The soul spiritually united (...) Christ, must as naturally thirst
after ^ivine Institutions, as the body after the ^^ans of preserving the union
betwixt ^^e soul and it.

The decay of this thirst must needs ^^gue a decaying soul: for as Hezekiah
^^id Isa. 38. (either of Promises, or Af^^ctions, I know it is variously
inter^^eted) By these things men live. By ^^se things the union betwixt the
soul (...) Christ is maintained. And as the ^^t of appetite in the body to
proper food argues the stomach filled, o^ cloyed with noxious and perniciou^
humors; so the want of this Spiritual appetite, speaks a soul clogged with some
pernicious lusts and corruptions. But I have insisted too long upon this branc^
of Application.

I shall finish this discourse with on^ word of Exhortation. Exhort.
That you would keep alive this spiritual thirst after the Institutions of God,
and that under tho^^ circumstances which you have heard. Yo^ have heard (and I
hope I need not repeat it to you) how great an evidence it is of a gracious
heart, how much (...) was the temper of the Saints of God who have lived before
us; I need no^ speak more by way of Argument in the case. I shall only
prescribe some directions in order to it, and I have done.

1. Keep alive in your souls the true notion of them. The true notion of them
is this, They are appointments of Christ so^ our salvation, and in the
performance (...) which he has promised to meet the soul that seek him. So
long as Ordinance are apprehended as Institutions of Christ they will be
precious to all those (...) whom Christ is precious. The soul ^eareth
concerning the Sacrament of the Supper, Do this in remembrance of me; and it is
presently enflamed with a de^^re to the Ordinance. Should I not (...) says an
honest soul) remember him that died upon the cross for me, I will remember his
death until his coming again. Go preach the Gospel to every crea^^re: He that
believes, and is baptized ^^ll be saved: And again, He that hear^^ you,
hears me. The gracious soul ^adeth this. Should I not hear Jesus Christ,
says the soul? Indeed if the ^^eacher instead of preaching Christ, ^^eacheth
himself, or preaches contra^^ to what is apparently the revealed ^^th and will
of Christ, the case is ^herwise: but it is impossible an Or^^ance should be
administered according to the institution of Christ; but a ^acious soul
retaining a true notion of ^^se institutions, must thirst after it: ^ecially,
when he considers them as ^itutions for the good of a soul, (...) in the
performance of which, he (...) promised to meet it. Indeed the (...) is
otherwise, if it once falls under a mistake in the due notion of Ordinances. If
it once fancieth, that Preaching is nothing but making an^ Oration, an exercise
of parts or wit^^ and therefore the quibbling Sermons are best. The soul of a
gracious person does not lie so near the air as to desire to be delighted in
such pleasing sounds. If once a Christian comes to apprehend religious
performances, but as politic constitutions, for keeping people in some awe, or
under some such other mean notion; Its thirst after them is spoiled. Though it
be something to an honest heart, that the Politic State under which it lives
has need of them, to keep people from degenerating to Beasts: yet it is more
to it to consider; Its immortal soul has need of them, to keep it from
everlasting burnings, from troubles o^ conscience, etc. But, 2. Secondly, Keep
but a watchful ey^^ upon your own hearts: Know your selves your own wants and
weaknesses, and you need no more (considering what I said under the former
head) to bring you to an appetite, or to preserve in your souls a due appetite
to Gospel Institutions; he that observes the proneness of his heart to wax
hard, will easily understand the need he has of the word to soften it; he that
considers his own forgetfulness of what his Lord has done for him, will thirst
after the Sacrament of the Supper that he may in it remember the Lords death
until he come. Whosoever observes his own weakness to spiritual duties, to resist
strong corruptions, will thirst for the Word and Sacraments to strengthen him,
he that considers his daily need of Divine influences will thirst after an hour
of prayer, that he may beg them from God. In short, there is no soul is
indifferent to Ordinances, but he who never tasted how good the Lord is, who
either knows nothing of God, or nothing as he ought to know it; study thy
self, understand thy own state, that is enough. 3. Keep your selves under the
purest and most lively administrations. I call those the purest
administrations, where there is nothing, or least of man's mixture, where
Ordinances are administered most exactly according to the Divine Rule. The
Doctrine of the Perfection of the Scriptures, is a point we defend against the
Papists. All Protestants grant it as to matters of Doctrine, why they should
not also agree, that it is so, as to matters of Worship and Discipline, I can
not tell. As to acts of Worship they all yield it too, as to circumstances of
humane actions in Divine Worship, viz. such as no humane actions (as such) can
want, none can deliberately contend for it. The Question is concerning
Ceremonies, or if they will call them so, circumstances of Worship. In very
deed it will be a nice distinction, and such as can abide no test, to
distinguish betwixt an act of Worship, and a circumstance of Worship. I mean
such a circumstance as is not appendant to the action, from its nature, and
necessarily, but affixed to it by men without any necessity. But not to digress
here into that dispute; The more strictly a Gospel Institution is administered
according to the letter and examples of Christ and his Apostles in Holy Writ,
the more there is of God in it, the more of Divine presence and influence is to
be expected in it, and from it, The more plain and Scriptural a Sermon is, the
more authority it comes down with upon the conscience. The honest heart says
to the quaint and oratorial Preacher, to the quoter of Fathers and Schoolmen to
justify what he says. Paul I know, and Jesus I know. The Old Testament I
know, and the New I know, but for Augustine, and Hierom, and Aquinas, who are
they? Possibly worthy persons in their Ages: but it is the word of God, not
their dictates which command the conscience. For your high phrased Preachers,
they signify nothing to the conscience, the hearers, (as Luther was wont to
say) intelligunt ^^bum art super se compositum ideo nau^^nt: they loath the
word thus can^^ied up in the language of men puffed (...) in the conceit of
their own parts, and desirous to seem some thing; when indeed they are nothing
but folly and vanity. There is abundance of ^reaching is good for nothing but
to ^oil good Christians stomachs to hea^ing, and to make them loath their food,
by reason of the fantastic sauce: if you would keep your appetite to
Ordinances, keep the purest and most lively administrations of them. 4.
Fourthly, Remember the days of old, the years of former times. I doubt not but
many of you, have heretofore tasted how good the Lord has been, you have
tasted it in a Sermon, convincing you of sin, working faith in you, bringing a
word in season to your souls, that has even ravished your souls with the joy
of it. You have enjoyed much of God in a Sacrament, in a few hours of prayer.
Oh, let not the memory of those good days to your souls, go out of your
hearts; and if you remember them, you cannot but long for more of them. It is
almost impossible to imagine that a soul, that ever in earnest tasted of God in
Ordinances, should not cry out, Lord evermore give us that bread: those that
grow weary of Divine Institutions, are such as never experienced the goodness
and excellency of them. 5. Watch against the prevailing of lusts and
corruptions. It is ordinarily experienced in the natural body: A soul stomach
has no appetite, or very little and teachy: noxious humors in the stomach
blunt the edge of it to its proper food. It is as true to the soul, suffer
pride, vanity of Spirit, any spiritual, or sensual lust, to prevail upon you,
you will soon lose your appetite to spiritual things. Keep your soul clean from
these things, and your appetite will be sharp. 6. If you would keep your
appetite to Divine Institutions, improve them when you have them. Indigested
meat corrupts the stomach, and takes off the edge of it. The reason for this
is; This thirst after Ordinances, as it is first caused from an apprehended
suitableness in them to the souls needs, so it is increased, by the souls
experience of the truth of that apprehension. This it never has without an
improvement of the Institution: I mean such a ruminating upon it, such a
digestion and application of it, as the soul may suck out the juice and virtue
of it, and find that a Sermon is not to his soul, as a tale that is told, nor a
Sacrament as a mere morsel of bread, and a draught of Wine. Would you keep
alive your thirst after Divine institutions, when you have heard a Sermon, go
sit alone, think of what you have heard, what truth you have been instructed
in, and call to your souls to remember, and believe it, what sin you have been
convinced of, and call again to your souls to consider it, and to avoid it.
What duty you have been admonished of, and call to your souls to arise and do
it. 7. Lastly, Beg this great blessing of God. You beg, or should beg an
appetite to your bodily bread, much more to your spiritual food. Christians, I
doubt not, but in these times of spiritual scarcity, you beg Sermons of God,
you beg Preachers of him who is the Lord of the Harvest. In this you do your
duty, but let not this be all. Beg stomachs for your selves, as well as mouths
for us. I am afraid it was too great a decay of this spiritual thirst, that
brought on Gods dreadful voider, and brought the Wells of Salvation to so low a
state, as you see them. If you could by begging of God recover your appetite
again, I doubt not, but he who feeds the young Ravens when they cry, would
also hear and feed you: and in his Fatherly Providence so order it, that you
should not have Scorpions instead of Fish, and Stones instead of Bread. Nor as
the Spouse, be smitten and wounded, Can. 5.7.
and have your vail taken from you, by pretended Watchmen, whiles you are sick
of love, and ask them in your distress, Saw ye him whom my soul loves.
FINIS.
Jer. 14.19. Have thou utterly rejected Judah? Has thy soul loathed Zion? Why
have thou smitten us, and there is no healing for us? We looked for peace, and
there is no good, and for the time of healing, and behold trouble.s
THE words I have read are agreed by all to be the words of the Prophet
Jeremiah, he was one of those Prophets who prophesied last in Judah, before
their carrying away into the seventy years Captivity of Babylon, chap. 1.2. He
prophesied in the days of Josiah, and in the days of Jehoiakim, and so to the
end of the eleventh year of Zedekiah, which was about forty years: He began to
prophecy in the thirteenth year of Josiah, Jer. 1.2.
and prophesied eighteen years during the reign of Josiah, then three months
during the ^^ign of Joachaz, or Jeconias; and eleven years during the reign of
Je^iachim, a second son of Josiah, and three months more during the reign of
^^hoiachin; and eleven years during the ^^ign of Zedekiah. At what time he
^ophesied what we have in this cha^^er recorded is not expressed, proba^^y
before the death of Josiah. The ^^ticular judgment which God at his time had
given him a prospect of, ^as a Dearth, as in verse (...) dearth ^^rough want of
rain, (...)
(as the Hebrew lord signifies) and so the Text mak^^h it plain, verse 3. The
Nobles sent their (...) ones to the water, they came to the (...) and found no
water. verse 4. The (...) was chapt, there was no rain on (...) earth. ver. 7,
8, 9. The Prophet ^on the prospect of this-dreadful ^^dgment, puts up a fervent
prayer to God. To which the Lord returns an angry answer, verse 10, 11, 12.
(...) short, he bids Jeremiah pray no more for them, for he would consume them
by sword famine and pestilence. As there is an acceptable day, a day when the
Lord will be found, so there is a time when his Spirit shall no longer strive
with man, his patience shall no longer be tired though Noah, Daniel and Job
pray they shall but deliver their own souls the decree is gone forth. Verse 13.
Jerem tells the Lord, that there were a breed of Prophets sang another tune to
this sinful people, and told them they should have peace, and neither see sword
no^ famine. Thus Jannes and Jambres resisted Moses. Such wretches have been in
all ages, when the Devil gets (...) commission to seduce a people to ruine^ the
instruments he uses to execute (...) are profane, ignorant, lying Priests.
Th^^ was the way, you know, Satan to^^ God he would seduce Ahab to go an fall
at Ramoth-Gilead. I will go, (sait^ he) and be a lying spirit in the mouth
(...) his Prophets.

The Lord tells Jeremy, Verse 14.
these Prophets were not of his sending, they prophesied lies in his Name,
false visions, divinations, things of naught, the deceit of their own hearts:
yet without doubt these were the generality of the Jewish Ministers, men
brought up in the Schools of the Prophets; and in the orders of their Church,
and clothed with an external call to their works. Even under the Law God
allowed his people a judgment of discretion, and did not oblige them to believe
what their Priests said without any examination of it. It is possible regular
Priests and Prophets may not be sent by God, nor ^ught people to look upon them
so, when they find them speaking contrary ^o the Word of God. But Oh! it is a
^angerous thing for the Ministers of truth to become the messengers of lies!
for us to corrupt the Word of God. Dangerous it is to our selves. Verse 15.
Tell these Prophets, (says the Lord) By sword and ^^mine you shall be
consumed. It is dan^^rous for the people, If the trumpet ^^ve an uncertain
sound, who shall prepare himself to the battle? If the Ministers try, All is
well, God is well pleased; do wickedly still, you do God good service in it.
The interpretation be to the enemies of all good men. How easily are people
hardened and encouraged in vile courses. Verse 16.
But shall their Priests words save them? No. The people (says God) to whom
they prophecy shall be cast out in the streets of Jerusalem, because of the
famine and the sword, and there shall be none to bury them, their wives, their
sons, and their daughters: for I will pour their wickedness upon them. The lie
of the Prophet never justifies the credulity of the people. God expects that
his people should search the Scriptures, and examine whether those things the
Minister speaks be conformable to his Word or no; and yield no further assent
to what they say, then what they find ground for there.

After this, Verse 17.18.
God directs the Prophet to act the person of a mourner before the people,
upon a prospect of his judgments to come, as if they already were come. Oh! how
loath the Lord is to destroy a people amongst whom he has once had a Name! How
shall I give thee up, O Ephraim? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I
set thee as Zeboiim? Jeremiah knowing he had to do with a gracious God, that
sometimes repents himself of the evil he has threatened, and brings it not
upon a people, sets himself to prayer as the proper means (if any would do) to
avert the vengeance of God.

His prayer begins with the words of my Text, and holds on to the end of the
Chapter. In which you have.

1. A servent Expostulation, Have thou utterly rejected Judah! has thy soul
loathed Zion! Why, etc. 2. A sad representation of the state of the people.
1. They were smitten, and there was no healing for them. 2. Their expectation
was frustrated, We looked for peace, and there is no good, and for the time of
healing, and behold trouble. 3. Here is an humble though more general
confession, We acknowledge our iniquities, and the iniquities of our fathers,
for we have sinned against thee. 4. An earnest supplication, expressed in
several terms, and backed with several arguments, closely couched. The Terms
are, 1. Do not abhor us. 2. Do not disgrace the throne of thy glory. 3.
Remember. Break no^ thy Covenant with us.

The Arguments are, 1. For thy Names sake. 2. We are the throne of thy glory.
3. Thou have made a Covenant with us. 4. Thou art he alone can^^ give showers,
the vanitie^ of the Gentiles cannot cause rain.

5. Lastly, here is the Prophets declared resolution, to trust in God, and wait
o^ him, verse 22.
My Text, as you see, contains only the two first general parts of this
excellent Prayer of the Prophet.

The first I called his fervent expostulation, Have thou utterly rejected Judah
(...)* Has thy soul loathed Zion? Why ha^^ thou smitten us, and there is no
healing for us?

Have thou in rejecting rejected, (...)
in reprobating reprobated Judah! Those that are critical in the Hebrew,
observe the word signifies to reject a thing with scorn and disdain, as vile
and contemptible; it is used (as in many other places). Hos. 4.6. Because thou
have re^ected knowledge, I will also reject thee. Hos. 4.6.
Lam. 5.22. But thou have utterly rejected (...) Lord, says the Prophet, Lam.
5.22.
have thou ^^terly rejected Judah? what Judah, the remainder of the people, the
seed of Abraham thy friend, which was so ^^ear to thee. Judah, of which it was
said, In Judah is God known: have thou ^tterly rejected this Judah? Has thy
(...) loathed Zion? (...)
The word used is much of the same signification with the other, only it
signifies something more of the affection set against an object: it is used,
Ezech. 16.45. Ezecth. 16.45.
to ex^ress the alienation of a lewd woman's ^eart from her husband. It is also
used, ^evit. 26.44. Levit. 26.44.
a place to which one would think the Prophet here has home special respect:
And yet for all that, when they be in the hand of their enemies, I will not
cast them away, neither will I abhor them to destroy them utterly, and to break
my covenant with them; for I am the Lord their God. But I will for their sake
remember the covenant of their ancestors, etc. Very like the Prophet eyeing
that promise in the Law, cries out, Has thy soul loathed Zion? Zion, there is a
great argument couched in that word. All the dwellings of Jacob were dear to
the God of Jacob, but the Psalmist says, God loves the gates of Zion more
than all the dwellings of Jacob. Zion was the name of a Mountain, at the foot
of which Jerusalem, and in it the Temple stood; thence it is called the
habitation of Gods holiness, his dwelling place, and it is put for the Church
of God. Lord, says the Prophet, this is Judah, against which thine anger
smokes: have thou utterly rejected Judah? There are but two Tribes and an half
left of that people, whom thou chosest to draw nigh unto thee; have thou
rejected them, utterly rejected them? In this Judah is Zion thy Temple, the
place which out of all the earth thou chosest for thy habitation, and in which
above all thou did delight; has thy soul abhorred Zion! She was as thy
Spouse, and thou lovedst her; does thy soul now loath her? As to the form of
the words, you see they are by way of Interrogation. Interrogations in
Scripture sometimes add force to Affirmations and Negations. Has the Lord as
great a pleasure in sacrifices, as in obeying his commandments? that is, he
has not. And so some would have it here: then the sense is this, Lord, I know
thou have not utterly rejected Judah, thy soul has not abhorred Zion; which is
true as to the spiritual part of his people. Has God cast off Israel? (says
the Apostle) God forbid: he has not cast off the people whom he fore-knew. But
all are not Israel that are of Israel. Then the words have in them the force of
an argument: Lord, I know thou have not utterly cast off thy people, thy soul
has not abhor^^^ them; therefore spare them as to this judgment. So he pleads
from Gods certain spiritual love to a part of the people, formerly for the
whole. But I must confess I think this not the sense. Interrogations sometimes
are the language of persons inquiring for further certainty and satisfaction:
so I take it here, as if the Prophet had said, Ah Lord! is the decree gone
forth? is there no hope? art thou not to be spoken to for this people? have
thou utterly reprobated them? If not, etc. It follows,

Why have thou smitten us, and there is no healing? These words have in them an
Interrogation, and an Expostulation. No soundness (in the Hebrew) Here the
Prophet begins to represent unto God the state of the people. 1. They were
smitten, already smitten with a dearth. 2. And in Gods purpose smitten with an
approaching sword, and captivity. He owns God as the primary efficient cause,
Thou have smitten; he adds, and there is no healing. (...)
The word used in the Hebrew signifies health or soundness, and healing or
cure. And so the complaint denotes two things. 1. (...) universality of the
judgment, they had no part sound, no foundness. 2. The desperateness of their
distemper, they could find no cure, no remedy, no healing, their State
Physicians were of no value, they had tried, but they could no help, no
healing: he Expostulates with God, not enquiring the cause: Jeremiah was not
signorant of cause enough in this people to justify God in the severity of
this dispensation, but he speaks like a troubled man, who would gladly have had
it otherwise with his people if God had pleased.

2. He further represents the sadness of this peoples case, in this, that their
expectations were frustrated. We looked (...) peace, and there is no good, and
for the time of healing, and behold trouble. There is nothing difficult in the
words, they only signify the disappointment which God had given them in their
great expectations. The words may ^e understood either of the generality of the
people, who might have presumptuous hopes, or of Gods own people, who upon that
great reformation which Josiah had began, looked for peace: ^oth were deceived,
no peace, no good came, but more trouble, more disturbance still: I intend not
to speak to every Proposition might be drawn from these words. I shall only fix
upon one, and that founded upon the words in the latter part of the Verse: We
looked for peace, and no good came, for the time of healing, and behold trouble.

Prop. It pleases God in the wisdom of his Providence, often times to give
people great disappointments, in their expectations of peace, and healing; as
to their outward concerns.

You may if you will take it in these two branches.

1. People are very prone in evil times and disturbed times, to look for good,
to look for healing. 2. It pleases God often times to give them great
disappointments in their expeciations. Trouble instead of peace^ wounds instead
of healing. I say,
1. It is natural to us in evil and disturbed times to look for good, and to
loo^ for an healing.

It is true, this Proposition is not universally verified in the Sons of men,
and the thing depends (though not wholly, yet in a great measure) upon the
sutural disposition. There is much truth in that Maxim of Physicians and
Philosophers, Mores. sequuntur humores. Where any persons are more inclined ^o
melancholy, and that humor more prevails, persons so inclined are more
disposed to fears, and jealousies, and suspicions. Where some other humor
prevails in the body, the person is more inclined to hope, and presume so as
you shall generally find men and women thus divided. Some are more naturally
disposed to fear the worst, to be suspicious and jealous of every thing: others
^^e naturally inclined to hope the best, and to promise all good to themselves;
and the most of people, either from this Natural cause, or some Moral ^ouses
(for they also have some inscience on us) are very prone to look ^or good, for
peace and healing: and this ^s not only ordinary to the more ignorant and
sinful sort of men: but even ^o Gods own people. The wicked cry ^^ace, Peace,
when there is no peace to ^^e wicked, says the Lord. The Mother of Sisera
looks out at the window (when her Son was dead with agnail struck through his
temples) and cries, Why is his Chariot so long incoming? Have they not sped?
Have they not divided the prey? The false Prophets daub with untempered mortar.
Three hundred false Prophets spoke good to Ahab, and bid him go up to
Ramoth-Gilead and prosper. Nor are the better and wiser sort, Gods own dear
people exempted from this infirmity, Even David says in his prosperity, I
shall never be moved: nor are we only vain in prosperity to promise our selves
a stability in that state; but in a time of adversity, we are as ready to
promise our selves a quick deliverance and freedom from it. When the children
of Israel were carried captives into Babylon, they would needs believe their
deliverance should be speedy; So as Jeremiah on purpose writes a letter to
them to take them off this vain conceit, Jer. 29.5. Build you houses and dwell
in them, and plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them. -- And seek the peace of
the City whither I have caused you to be carried captive. The matter needs no
proof from Scripture, we find it true in all our experiences; that we are very
prone to nourish up false expectations in our selves, and to promise our selves
good. The error is common, the causes not difficult to be assigned, which are
partly Natural, partly Moral.

1. For the natural cause I assigned it before. The most of peoples natural
temper, as disposing them to wish good to themselves, so enclining them rather
to hope the best, than to fear the worst: Hence you will observe, that all
Christians are not thus mistaken, you shall find some of more ^ad, melancholic
tempers, as much ^rring on the other hand, crying out like the Infidel in the
Book of Kings (if they hear any talk of good) If the Lord should make windows
in Heaven, this could not be: like Thomas they will believe nothing which they
most desire without a sensible demonstration. But the moral causes of this may
be assigned variously: and they are different according as the soul is which is
thus affected. In wicked men,

2. The general moral causes are presumption, and looking at second causes.

1. I say in the first place Presumption an unjust assurance they give
themselves of Gods favor toward them, and consequently, of his blessings upon
then There is an Atheist that believes (...) God at all, but thinks that all
thing fall out by chance; and so he is n^ concerned to regard a Deity; and it
(...) no wonder, if he promises himself well. But those that will with the
mouths own a Supreme Being an^ Moderator of all things, yet are to^ ready to
promise themselves his favor, and consequently the blessing that attend it:
The Lord foresaw (...) Generation, who when thy heard all the Curses of his Law
would bless them selves in their heart, and say, they shou^ have peace, Deuteronomy
29.19.
though they walked according to the imaginations of their own heart adding
drunkenness to thirst. Now th^^ presumption in sinful men, either arises from
Atheism, the persons n^ believing there is a God, or that he (...) not what he
is; or Unbelief, not giving credit to the word of God; which says There is no
peace to the wicked. Or from Error, eying some particular sins, for which they
will believe all the wrath of God is powered out upon them; or Eying some
particular performances, which they think sufficient to reconcile God again to
them, though before he was displeased with them: and when that sin which is all
the guilt they can see is expiated or reformed; (...) those particular
performances, which they lay all Religion upon are done, they ^ook for good,
and healing, when it ^^ay be in truth, those things which ^^ey so eye, do
rather provoke God ^^ther, than at all abate of the wrath which he has began
to pour out, (...) probability this was the cause at ^^is time in Judah. It is
not expressed whether this Sermon of the Prophet ^as in Josiah's time, or in the
time of (...) Sons. Josiah was a good Prince, he ^tored the true Worship of
God, dejoyed Idolatry, etc. His Sons restored (...) There were unquestionably
different complexions of this people. Some Josiah's time expected good, and
healing from his reformation: others ('it is like) in his Sons time expected the
same from their restoration of former Superstitions and Idolatry. Both
presumed looking for peace, and there was no good, for healing, and behold
trouble.

2. The cause of Gods own peoples error in this kind is partly Presumption,
partly mistakes concerning his mind and promises, partly, eying second causes
too much. I say partly Presumption. Even the best of Gods people are ready to
lay too much upon particular reformations, and particular duties. We are too
ready to impute all punishments to some particular sins, and to lay all
Religion upon some particular duties; and when those sins are reformed and
expiated, and those duties done, we are ready to conclude all will be well, and
presently to look for peace and healing.

2. Partly mistakes of Gods mind and promises. Godliness has the promise of
this life, and that which is to come There are great promises, even of the good
things of this life, made to the Church of God in the general, and to believing
souls in particular; and God expects, that we should give credit to them, and
wait in hope for them; but we are troubled with the Disciples curiosity, who
came to our Savior, and said, Master will thou at this time restore the
Kingdom to Israel? We are impatient, and know not how to wait, and thence are
very prone to inform our selves (if possible) of the time, and too credulous to
take ungrounded informations, and build up our hopes upon them. Hence our
prying into dark Prophecies, and making various conjectures upon them, our
listening so readily to such as will pretend to a skill in them, or to
extraordinary Revelations, Visions and Impressions, and building up too great
expectations upon our own conceits, or others dreams. What a late example have
we had as to the year 1666. That must be the year when the Jews should be
converted; Rome ruined, etc. What expectations were raised in many of that
^ear, merely (as it appears) from a mitake of the mind and Promises of God. The
year is past, no such thing is brought ^o pass; We looked for peace and
healing, behold no good, but trouble still.

3. Another cause is, Gods own people too much eying secundary causes. The
unbeliever lays all upon them; the Child of God lays too much upon them.
Hence if he sees such a position of them, as to the eye of his reason appears
probable to produce some good effects to the Church and people of God, he
presently concludes, all will be well; not attending to the power of the first
cause as he ought to do, nor considering (as he ought) the guilt of the people,
or the person for whom he would hope well, which may provoke God to lay a bar
before second causes, that they shall not work according to our expectations.

But I have spoken enough to the first Branch; I come to the second, which is
the Proposition as I laid down.

God in the Wisdom of his Providence does often give people great
disappointments in their expectations as to outward peace and healing.

I shall not need insist upon the proof of this, it is so plain in the Text; We
looked (says the Prophet) for peace, and behold no good, for healing, and
behold trouble; and in our daily experience: To say nothing of vain persons,
how often are the expectations of the most considerate sober sort of Christians
frustrated concerning the public: concerning their own private concerns.
Concerning the public; They look for reformation of disorders and abuses.
Behold more corruption! They look for healing of breaches. Behold the
Providence of God still follows them on with breach upon breach, and there is
no healing. They looked for glorious times, they see sad and miserable times.
That de facto this is true, cannot be denied; it will not be amiss for us to
take a little pains, to enquire into the causes of it. These issues of
Providence, having often times but ill issues upon Christians faith and holiness.

1. It must first be laid down for a Principle, That as no Evil, so not this
Evil happens without Gods doing. God has an hand in these frustrations of
our expectations. 2. It must also be acknowledged, that God has said, Psalm.
9.18. Prove. 10.28. Prove. 23.18.
The expectation of the poor shall not perish for ever. It is made as a curse
upon the wicked, That their expectation shall perish; They shall be ashamed of
their expectation; but the expectation of Gods people shall not be cut off.
For the clearing of this little difficulty, you must distinguish, 1. Betwixt
Gods peoples expectation for the fulfilling of the Promises of, and necessary
to another life; and their expectation for the fulfilling of the Promises,
relating to the (...), or things which concern this life. 2. Betwixt their
warrantable and due expectation, and their irregular, and unwarranted
expectation. 3. Thirdly, Betwixt their expectation of those good things, and
their expectation of them, now or then, at this or such a time. This being
promised, the answer is easy.


1. The Exoectations of the Saints, as to eternal life and salvation, shall not
perish. This hope shall not make ashamed; no nor yet, as to such influences of
grace, as are necessary in order unto it, they expect to be saved, and they
shall be saved; to be sanctified yet more and more, and they shall be
sanctified; to be preserved by the power of God through faith to salvation, and
they shall be so preserved. 2. The expectations of the Saints, as to other good
things, may fail as to circumstances of degree or time, but they shall not
utterly fail. The expectation of the poor shall not perish for ever, says the
Psalmist. Has God promised his Church a time of peace and tranquillity? It
shall have it, though it may be not in that year we expect it. Has God
promised that the gates of hell shall not prevail against his Church? and do
they expect the fulfilling of this promise? It shall be fulfilled, their
expectation shall not perish for ever. But if they will expect, that the gates
of hell shall not prevail against any part of his Church, or any person of it,
or that deliverance shall come to his Church in such a way, in such a year, by
such means; here they may fail. 3. Finally, no regular expectation in Gods
people of any thing, which he has promised shall fail. The reason is, 1.
Because the Promise cannot fail: Heaven and earth may pass away, but not one
jot or tittle of what God has promised shall fail. 2. Because the expectation
which God has wrought in his peoples hearts, is the work of the holy Spirit,
which cannot lie, nor teach his people to expect a lie. So then, the reason of
the disappointments of Gods people in their expectations lies in the error of
their expectation. Now this error must be as to circumstances. For the
Promises made to the Church, and the people of God in particular, being for all
good things, they can be guilty of no error as to the thing expected; but with
respect to circumstances, which may make things not in themselves simply and
absolutely good, at this or that time to be evil.
The chief circumstances considerable in this case, are those of

Time. Place. Persons. Means.
First, The error may be in the circumstance of time. That God who has
plainly revealed his will as to a time when it shall go well with his people,
when be will restore the Kingdom to Israel, when the fullness of the Gentiles
shall come, has concealed the particular time when these things shall be. He
that has plainly said, The rod of the wicked shall not rest on the back of the
righteous, has not told us how long it man be on their backs. This has opened
a door for those who are too curious to be enquiring into the times and seasons
which the Father has reserved in his own power: and when they think they have
found out something to guide them, they presently raise a great expectation
upon it, and no wonder if they meet with a disappointment. The vision is yet
for an appointed time, if they could have tarried, it would not have lied; but
they could not wait for it, they made haste, and no wonder they have no good
speed: no wonder they are disappointed, the promise is where it was, the word
of God is not frustrated, only their mistimed expectations are disappointed.
This was doubtless the cause of the great disappointment in the year 1666. the
things people looked for in that year shall most undoubtedly have a being, and
be in their season brought to pass: The Jews shall be called, Antichrist shall
be destroyed, the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in, and (it is more than
probable) that the Church and people of God before the end of the world shall
have a year of Jubilee. Now many Christians, too too hasty and curious in
search of secret things, desiring as the Disciples to know when these things
should be; They search the Scripture, and finding a dark sentence, Rev. 13.18.
that the number of the beast was 666, conclude the year 1666 the particular
year when God would at least begin to do these things. 2. A second error may be
as to the circumstance of place. It is hard to fix promises to particular
places. God of old had promised not utterly to reject his people Israel, (which
the Apostle interprets as to Israel in a spiritual sense, the people whom he
fore knew, Romans 9.) the people of Israel upon those promises expected, that the
Tabernacle at Shiloh, and afterward the Temple at Jerusalem, should never be
rased, nor the City of Jerusalem, and the Nation of the Jews never forsaken.
And without all doubt many that feared God in that Nation, had some such
strange expectations, and therefore under all judgments would still expect an
help at last; God dis-appointed their expectations, yet failed not in his
promise. Under the Gospel, Christ by his word has secured his Church, That the
gates of hell shall not prevail against it; now for people to apply this
promise to this or that small part of the Universal Church, and to conclude,
that the gates of hell shall not prevail against the Church of God in England,
or in Scotland, or Holland, or the like, and to build an expectation suitably
upon it, is unwarrantable. The ^^tes of hell, which shall not prevail upon the
whole Church, may prevail against this or that part of it, whose sufferings may
be sad enough, and yet the promise not fail. 3. A third error may be as to
Persons, and that, 1. As to persons that shall receive this mercy. 2. As to
persons that shall be Gods instruments, in bring (...) about the desired mercy.
1. As to persons that shall receive the desired mercy. Promises, as to outward
mercies, are more limited to the purity and holiness of a people, than those
made as to spiritual and eternal good things God has said, I will heal your
backslidings, and God will save his people eternally, (notwithstanding their
backslidings) but for outward prosperity and selicity, it is no where promised
to a backsliding and impure people. Supposing therefore a people that
radically are good, and the Lords people, but a revolting backsliding people,
and continuing in their revoltings without dup repentance, if they build up
expectations for the fulfilling of divine Promises as to outward prosperity and
felicity, while their soum is not taken off, but bolleth into them, they will
most probably be disappointed. 2. As to persons who shall be Gods instruments
in bringing about the mercy desired. And here let me only observe two things to
you.
1. No great expectations can be builded upon profane persons. I do not say, no
great things for the good of Gods people may be done by them. I know Cyrus was
Gods servant, to proclaim liberty to the Jews: and oft-times God has made the
wrath of men to praise him. Pharaoh shall keep the seed of Jacob alive, and
provide for them in a time of famine.

But I say, expectations cannot be raised on these foundations: If the Assyrian
does Gods work, howbeit he means not so, says God. As the wife Faulkener
makes use of the ravenous quality of the Hawk to serve his turn, and make it
get that for him which the Bird gat for it self; so the wise God will make use
of an Assyrian, an Egyptian, a Cyrus, an utter enemy to his people, and make
his selfish politic designs to serve his everlasting purpose; but here is no
ground for Gods people to build expectations.

2. Nay, secondly, Be the persons never so holy that appear to us probable to
do us good, no certain expectation can be raised upon them. Who would have
thought that Moses and Aaron should not have been Gods instruments to have
carried his people over Jordan, and set their feet in Canaan; yet they, did
not, they sinned at the waters of Meribah, and so died on mount Nebo: holy men
may fail, and provoke God to cut them off. So that to build expectations upon
any particular persons, is to lay a foundation for our disappointments.

4. The fourth and last error may be as to particular means. It is true, God
does most of his works by means, but he wonderfully varies in the nature and
kind of means he uses: sometimes he does it by what we call fair means;
sometimes by force, and what we call foul means. The people of Israel shall be
delivered our of Egypt by the ruin o^ Egypt, yet not by sword and battle, but
by plagues and the Red Sea. They shall be (by the sword) delivered from the
Canaanites, they shall by a Proclamation of Cyrus, without any plague or sword
be delivered from Babylon. Mean which appear to us probable, possibly shall not
do the work: what appear to us improbable, and likely to work quite contrary,
that shall do it. Oh the depth of the ways and judgments of God! how
unsearchable are his judgments, how are his ways past finding out.

Thus I have, as shortly as I could, opened the Proposition to you: I shall now
come to the application of it.

1. Is not this Scripture this day fulfilled in your ears? May not we in our
addresses to God, say, O Lord, have thou utterly rejected England? has thy
soul ^athed thy Church there? Why are we ^itten and there is no healing? We
looked for peace, and there is no good; for healing, and behold trouble. That
God deals with us as a people rejected and hathed, is apparent. Our Fathers
are ^one, our Prophets, where are they? We see not our signs, nor is any
Prophet to tell us how long? We have ^en the Sanctuary of the Lord polited, his
Ordinances defiled; we have ^eard our Sabbaths mocked at: The Lord has covered
the Daughter of ^^r Zion with a cloud in his anger, and not remembered his
footstool in the day of his wrath. As to our Civi^ concerns, How does the City
sit solitary that was full of people, how is she become a^ a widow? She that
was great amongst the Nations, and Princess amongst the Provinces. May not we
say, Why are w^ smitten, and there is no healing? Are no^ we smitten in our
spiritual things? yea^ and with a dreadful smiting too. Have we that preaching,
those Sacraments that communion of Saints, which w^ formerly had? Have we those
convictions and conversions of souls unto God, those mournings under the Word
of God, such affected hearts as formerly? I am sure I speak to those wh^ know
we have not. We see not the Word of God go forth with that power and life, to
rouse up secure souls, to convince and to change the hearts o^ sinners; to
strengthen, confirm an^ comfort the wearied souls of Gods people as formerly.
We are full of dea^^ sapless, dry, unprofitable discourses (...) Pulpits; but
where is the power of the Lord in his Ordinances? where are the weeping eyes,
where are the trembling souls we have formerly known? where are the cries of
them we have formerly heard, Men and brethren, what shall we do to be saved?
This is a smiting, (brethren) and a dreadful smiting too: it is true, it is not
in the most sensible part to the generality of people, (the Gadarenes you know
came, and besought our Lord to go out of their Country) they have not now so
many Sermons to disquiet them in their beds of lust, and make their heads to
ache; but to them that fear God, and truly understand and judge of the interest
of a Nation, it is, I say, a dreadful smiting, and that in the tenderest part,
and possibly the cause of other smitings too. But are not we smitten in our
persons? (...) men will not believe they have souls, ^et they know they have
bodies. Has ^ot God smitten us with a dreadful Plague, not paralleled either
in our days, (...) the days of our forefathers? Has ^^t God smitten us both
in our persons ^^d estates with a consuming War, and ^^ce that with a dreadful
Fire, hardly ^o be paralleled in any modern story? And is there yet any healing
for us? again, May we not say, We looked for peace, and no good; for bealing,
and behold trouble? Did not we in the year 1660 look for good, for peace, upon
that miraculous revolution, but did any good come? instead of it all these
dreadful judgments of God have succeeded. Did not we again the last year, upon
the peace with our neighbors, look for good, did not we look for prosperity,
freedom of trade? have we seen ought of it? or ought answering our
expectations? What shall we say to these things? How has God disappointed us
in all our expectations? Nay rather, what shall we do in this day of
perplexity? Let us, first, Examine, whether we be under such circumstances, as
we can regularly and warrantably expect that God should smile upon us, and
fulfill those promises for temporary good things which he has made in his Word
to his people. And, 2. accordingly as we find our state, let us be persuaded to
apply our selves to our duty.

Under these two heads I shall bring whatsoever I shall speak by way of
application of this Doctrine.

First, circumstances be such as we can warrantably expect any good, any peace,
any healing. And here we must distinguish betwixt, 1. the generality of the
Nation: and, 2. Gods peculiar people in the Nation. As to the former I must
confess my heart is sad, he that looks upon all orders of persons in the
Nation, will find them wallowing in such guilt, as I fear it will be hard to
produce an instance of any Nation under heaven that ever was under the rod, and
let go, no better reformed. What prodigious unheard of wickednesses have been,
and are committed every day? what murders? what prodigious lusts? what horrible
swearing and cursing? what Sabbath-breaking? what injustice, oppression do we
hear of, and see every day? Never was the holy Name of God so prodigiously
blasphemed, never such oaths, such curses as we hear in our streets; never did
those that desire to walk godlily meet with more scoffs, derisions, hard
speeches, and harder actions; never Religion made so much the scoff and jear of
those that understand it not. We may if we will (under these circumstances)
look for peace, but if any good come; we may look for healing, but if we see
not trouble, yea, and one trouble like one wave upon another; we are certainly
mistaken in calling the Scriptures the word of God, Jer. 7.9. Will you steal,
murder, commit adultery, and swear falsely, etc. and come and stand before me,
etc. Do men think all the day long to make the streets ring with the cries of
oaths, curses, blasphemies, noises of drunkards, groans of widows and
fatherless: and then make amends for all with an Anthem, and Lesson on the
Organs, and hearing or reading prayers at Mattens and Evensong. Oh horrible
vanity! O prodigious ignorance of the nature and mind of God! Will their
egg-shells wipe your filthy mouths clean enough think ye? No, no. Sirs, be not
deceived, God is not mocked. God may bring us good and peace sometimes,
poenalis nutritur impunitas, in further vengeance: he does not punish the
Israelitish daughters when they commit whoredom, nor their wives when they
commit adultery. But it were strange for him, having his rod taken out, to lay
it up again while we are no better. Sure I am, under these circumstances (what
ever a gracious God may do) we can expect no good.

What shall I say for the seven thousand in England, who have not bowed their
knee to Baal, nor kissed him with their lips, those whom God has kept from the
pollutions of these evil times, and the general debaucheries of their
neighbors. May they look for any good? may they expect any healing, and not
suspect any disappointment? Truly as to them I know not well what to say; God
has kept them from being involved in the generality of the National guilt, and
has kept up their hearts for him and his Ordinances in a time of great
defection and backsliding. This speaks well.

But yet, 1. I cannot tell how far God may have been provoked with the former
sins of Professors. 2. Though they must be in a great measure acquitted from
the idolatry and superstition, swearing, cursing, blaspheming Gods holy Name,
impudent Sabbath-breaking, mocking and jeering at Religion, murders, thefts,
unlawful lusts, oppressions, injustice, perjuries of the Nation: yet with them,
even with them sins may be found against the Lord their God, which how long
they may keep their wounds from healing I cannot tell. Let me propound a few
questions to you that fear God, and would look for peace and healing.
1. Have you peace one with another, and are the breaches amongst. your selves
healed? How should we expect the world should be at peace with us, who cannot
be at peace with our selves? What can we look for less than that the great
Shepherd of the sheep should make use of dogs to worry us, and drive us
together, while we can bite and devour one another? Are the world and you,
think you, nearer a kin than you are to your brethren? Can you expect God
should make his enemies to be at peace with you, when you cannot be at peace
each with other? If the Lambs cannot lie down together, how can you expect the
Lions should lie down with the Lambs? You know next to Christ's precept, Have
salt in your selves, was that, Have peace one with another. Certainly that
distance in affection and communion which true Christians kept at one from
another, was not the least of the provocations which has made God angry with
them all. I instance not differences in opinion; there must be such, there will
be such, till we all see in a clearer light than this world affords: but I say,
distances in affection first. I thank God I have learned, that difference in
judgment in things not necessary to be believed in order to salvation, is no
more justifiable cause to me for distance of affection from my brother, than
the difference of his countenance from mine is. I say further, distance in
communion. That the members of the same body, and under the same head, should
refuse communion with other, is certainly a strange disorder. Do Gods
Ordinances belong to Christians with reference to their several forms, I
wonder, or as they are all believers in the Lord Jesus Christ. Certainly faith
in Christ, evidenced by an holy life, intitleth any Christian to communion with
those who profess the same faith, and live the same life. Christians, is this
wound healed? I bless God I think it is in a great measure; but Oh that it did
not bleed at all. 2. Have you sufficiently mourned and been humbled for former
wantonness under Ordinances. We have had times of great liberty for preaching
and enjoyment of Gods Ordinances; have you not forgotten how you played with
your wholesome food in those days? how hardly it went down? if you fancied the
least error in the Cookery, if the sauce was not more pleasing to you than
your meat. One Minister was thought by some too Legal, another it may be judged
by another partly too Evangelical. Are not you glad of the gifts and parts of
those godly Ministers, which heretofore were despicable in your eyes? Have you
mourned for this wantonness? 3. Since the hand of God has been against you,
have you not been more ready to quarrel with God, or at least to rage against
instruments, than to be angry with your selves for the deserving cause of these
judgments? If you have, God has not yet attained his end upon you; the
rottenness, the proud flesh is still in the wound, which must be eaten out
before you can reasonably look for cure. It was well said of the Church in the
Lamentations, Let us search and try our ways, Lam. 3.40.
and turn again unto the Lord. If Ephraim says once, What have I done? God
will quickly say, Is Ephraim my dear child? The end of Gods afflicting his
people, is their turning, humbling themselves, and acknowledging of their
offenses. 4. How have you walked with God in the time of your sufferings? Have
you been a Law unto your selves, whiles the rod of Discipline has not been
drawn out against you? have you walked orderly? Little could be seen as to your
walking in communion, but how have you walked in your families? how have you
kept up your private communion with God? what have you been in your houses, in
your closets? By the answer which your consciences (secretly examine) shall
give to these Interrogatories, you may know much whether you may warrantably
look for peace and good, yea or no.
But, take heed how you look, that you may not meet with disappointment.

1. Do not in your expectations prescribe to God, either as to time, or as to
persons, or as to means. He that has promised his people deliverance, has not
the certain time of it. The case was otherwise with the Jews. God had told
them, they should be in captivity just seventy years. Mercy comes always best
in its season: God knows times better than we, and has reserved the knowledge
of times to himself. Trusting in God upon the credit of his word, and waiting
for him, are things highly acceptable unto him; but limiting of him is as much
dishonorable to God. It is ten to one but he who thus limiteth the Lord, will
be disappointed. God will convince us, that particular times is a secret we
cannot find out: and it is a very ill influence which ordinarily
disappointments of our expectation in this kind have upon us. That Is a good
Christian that steadfastly believes the matter of the Promise, and patiently
waits upon God for the fulfilling of it till his good time come. It is a sad
effect that some men's giddy confidence upon the year 1666 has produced. Some
have acted since, as if, because God failed their expectation in that
circumstance, he were henceforth to be believed and trusted to more. Take heed
of such an error as this. 2. Let not your expectations either kinder your
prayers, or make you more unfit for a continuance of sufferings. None can build
an infallible expectation of good in the outward concerns of this life, (I mean
sonsible good) for any particular Church, nor for any particular person: Gods
own people may have so finned, that as to temporal judgments he will not pardon
them. The Nation (of which they are a small part) may have sinned to such a
height. Indeed were we never so certain, yet our expectation should not hinder
prayer: Holy Daniel taught us this, he never prayed more heartily than when he
understood by books that the time of the captivity was just expiring. True
faith never hinders prayer, (it is the Mid wife that helps the mercy unto
light.) And take heed that your expectation does not discompose you as to
further sufferings: An ungrounded expectation of deliverance from an evil under
which we groan, does often make us very unfit to bear it longer than the
expected time of delivery. 3. If your expectation be frustrated blame your
selves, but take heed of accusing God. Let God be true, though every man be
found a liar. It is most certain God deceives none, themselves deceive
themselves. It is blasphemy in the heart to say, God can lie. There is no harm
o^ thy owning thy self mistaken. 4. Expect nothing from vile persons, no^ by
vile means. It is true, God has of^ ten made use of Pagans, and profan^ men,
and the sins and corruptions o^ his people, and of others, as means t^ bring
forth his glorious works in the world; but these are matters for ou^
admiration, not objects for our expectation. The fulfilling of Gods promise^
can be regularly expected in none, bu^ in Gods way. 5. Suspect all thy
expectations, whiles thou find in thy own heart, or in the hearts of others,
whom thou look upon as dear to God, a prevalency of corruptions. I have
before given you the reason of this, God may deliver a people that have
revolted, but an instance cannot be given, nor a promise named for Gods
delivering a people, justifying their revolting, and continuing in it. 6.
Expect not much in a course of probabilities. The reason of this lies in Gods
usual deliverances of his people, which have been upon the greatest
improbabilities; Out of Egypt and Babylon, when one would have thought there
had been least likelihood. The cry of the Bridegrooms coming usually is at
midnight. There Is most ground of a spiritual believing hope, when there is
visibly no hope. In the mount of the Lord it shall be seen. 7. Let thy
expectation of outward good be proportioned to the promise of it, in which is
always to be understood a reservation to God's wisdom. All is not good that we
think so. Thy expectation cannot fail if it be commensurate to the promise; if
it be not, it has no foundation to stand upon, and can have no certainty.
Remember that in all promises of this natures the judgment of the particular
good, whether under present circumstances it be so or no, belongs unto God.
Expect deliverance from evils of this nature, and the collation of good of this
nature, if God in his wisdom sees it good for thee, or that part of his Church
wherein thou art. But a further expectation, it is more than I know if any
promise will allow thee.
FINIS.
AN APPENDIX To the foregoing DISCOURSES.

OR, An Addition of some necessary and seasonable Directions to Christians, in
order to firmer perseverance in their profession, and better observance of
Divine Institutions.

By the same Author.

Gal. 6.16. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and
mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Revel. 3.10. Because thou have kept the word
of my patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall
come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon the earth. Printed in the
Year 1668.

The joint advice of some Ministers of the Gospel to their People, for the
reviving the Power and Practice of Godliness, especially in Families, and the
propagating the Knowledge and Fear of God in those Societies.
Dearly beloved Brethren,
WE being Ministers of the Gospel, who have formerly received a charge of some
of your souls, knowing how great the concernment of Gods glory in the
preservation of Religion, and the propagation of it in the power thereof is;
and having observed some decays thereof in present Professors, from the life,
zeal, and power thereof in our forefathers: and withal how many temptations
are daily offered to the corruption which yet remains in the best, to divert
them from the straight and narrow way which leads to the Kingdom of God. That
through our negligence, the study and powerful practice of godliness (wherein
England has been famous above any other sort of Christian people) may not
abate, and Religion evaporate into a mere formality; and the souls of you, our
Brethren, might not be hindered of that joy and peace which usually attends a
strict and close walking with God, have thought fit to propose our serious
thoughts unto you, for the revival and preservation of Religion, wherein we
shall rather give you a copy of the conversation of our fathers, who walked
with God in their generation, than propound any new thing unto you.

There are three things in Religion observed as the glory of England, wherein
our Church has exceeded other Reformed Churches.

1. The diligent practice of Family Worship. 2. The strict sanctification of
the Christian Sabbath. 3. The severe personal strictness in the Conversation of
Professors.
And as these things have been the the beauty of England, so we doubt not but
they have been the strength of it.

We therefore as Ministers of Christ do beseech you (and so much the rather, by
how much our condition in respect of public communion is more sad than in
former times) that you would join with us in your particular places, so much as
in you lies, to recover unto God an England, that ancient Revenue of his glory,
which he has formerly had from our fathers in these things.

1. The first thing which we commend unto you is the promoving of Family
Religion, and that both in reference to the weekday, and to the Lords day.
Families are the lowest Societies, and such wherein we have further advantages
to propagate Religion, than in any others, and that not only in respect of our
daily converse in them, but of the authority with which God has there clothed
superiors. They are the Societies in which alone every private person (who is
the Head of the family) is a King, Priest, and Prophet. And he that cannot rule
his own house well, is by the Apostle determined unfit to rule the Church of
God. In order to which we propound,

1. That every one who is Head of a family would by a constant deportment to
his or her children or servants, vindicate the honor which God in the Fifth
Commandment has reserved for him; neither by too much familiarity, divesting
himself of his authority; nor by too much severity, estranging the hearts of
his Relations from him; but by a wise gravity so deporting himself, that while
his relations fear him, as being in the stead of God unto them: they may also
love him for his tenderness to them, both in their temporal and eternal
concernments. In order to which we desire Christians to consider, That he or
she is rarely dishonored by his child or servant, who have not by too low and
unhandsome carriage dishonored themselves before them; God ordinarily
vindicating the honor of superiors, till themselves have unduly prostituted
it; that they may read their sin in their punishment.

2. That being clothed with this authority from God, you would make it your
business to vindicate his glory, not enduring any in your families, who after
due admonition, and the use of other means to reclaim him or her, shall live in
the practice of any moral vice, or what shall have an evident appearance of it.
If any therefore in your families shall be given to drinking, swearing, lying,
profaning the holy Name of God, reviling of his people, any species of
uncleanness, or any other scandalous sin, (if they be such as you can turn
away) if they will not be reclaimed, remember the resolution of David, Psalm.
101.6, 7. If they be such as either by natural obligation, or moral contract
you are obliged to keep, let it be your business to endeavor all possible
ways, by instruction, admonition, correction, begging the help of others to
reclaim them, that their sins may not be laid to your charge. Consider with
what face he can blame the Magistrate for not punishing these offenses, who
neglects it in his own family, where the body to be ruled is less, and his
authority, as to some kind of punishment, far greater than the Civil
Magistrates is. And as a means in order to this we desire,

That giving your children and servants all due liberty of recreation,
especially with such company as you shall commend to them, you would restrain
them, as much as may be, from Plays, Fairs, Meetings for Dances and others
Revels, and from Recreation at undue hours.

3. That seeing an ability to read the Scriptures, and other good Books, is the
foundation of all knowledge, you would not only see to the bringing up your
children to this capacity; but if the providence of God casts any under your
roof that cannot read, you would exhort, encourage, and by all means help them
till they attain this faculty. What knows the Master, but he may thus be a
means to save the soul of his servant, by bringing him to the knowledge of God?
We urge this rather, because we observe diverse well disposed persons grown up,
miserably disadvantaged for the want of this.

2. The family being thus ordered and disposed, is prepared for a joint
communion with God. And surely, if there were no Scriptures evincing Worship, a
family-duty, such as that of Joshua, resolving with his house to serve the
Lord. Cornelius, fearing God with his whole house, and praying there about the
ninth hour of the day. David's walking in his house in a perfect way. Abraham's
instructing his household. The Prophet Jeremy's imprecation upon the families
which call not on the name of the Lord. The mutual prayers of husband and wife,
1 Pet. 3.7.
which the Apostle hinteth that he would not have hindered. Daniels praying in
his house thrice a day, (which we cannot tell how it should have been proved
against him, had he done it alone.) We say, that were there none of these
evidences from holy Writ, yet every Christians reason can tell him, that the
providence of God has cast us into family societies, not merely for natural
and civil ends, but for to be joint blessings each to other in those things
which he has commanded us first to seek.

Now if any desire to be more particularly instructed concerning those duties
which God expects from families, we answer,

We know no act of divine Worship but may be performed in so small a society as
that of a family, if a lawfully ordained Minister be the Head of it, or
assumed, into it for that time. But we shall only speak to those duties which
God expects of every family, without any respect to a Minister in it, etc.
Those we conceive are reducible to four heads.

1. Reading in the Book of the Lord. 2. Prayer. 3. Praise. 4. Instruction.
1. For reading the holy Scriptures. That this is a family-duty does appear
from that of Moses, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 9. where we are commanded to have the Law of God
wrote upon our posts, and the gates of our house. From that of the Apostle,
Col. 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you; (a Metaphor drawn from members
of Families which dwell together) For the further proof of this duty we commend
you to an excellent Book, called Family Religion further revived, by Mr. Philip
Goodwin, Printed at London, 1655. and to a Book of Mr. Whites, for the
profitable reading of the Scriptures, Chap. 9. 2. For Prayer: We are commanded
to pray always, and who so considers that the Law of God requires it of
single persons; and of the first and least society, that of a man and his Wife,
1 Pet. 3.7. cannot think, 1 Pet. 3.7.
that a man is excused from it with his children and servants. It is the
blessing with which the Superiors in families ought to bless their
infeririours. 3. For Praise; by singing of Psalms. As praising of God is a
natural duty; so the doing of it by Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs (which
are the three titles of the Psalms of David) is commanded by the Apostle. In
the same place where God says, I will be the God of all the families of
Israel, Col. 3.16.
and they shall be my people, Jer. 31.1, 2. he also, ver. 7. says O shout with
joy, and sing amongst the Nations. 4. Instruction is a general duty. God
commends Abraham for it, Genesis 18.17. For the matter of it; in our present
discourse it is In the things of God. Now this may be done several ways; 1. By
Catechizing; which is by experience found the most plain and familiar way of
teaching, and that by which the Papists confess, the Protestant Religion has
been highly advantaged in the world. We therefore urge this in a more especial
manner upon all the heads of families, as the nearest way to bring those under
their roof to the knowledge of God; and the establishing of them against the
errors of the sinful times wherein they live. 2. By repeating of Sermons to
them; an ancient and profitable duty, wherein every Christian is a
fellow-worker with, and a preparer of the work of the Holy Spirit of God, Joh.
14.26.
whose work it is (says our Savior) To bring to remembrance the things we
have heard of God; By opening the word of God read unto our families, (which
though it be not a work to which every private Christian is fit, yet may be
profitably performed, if any Christian will but take the pains to spend a
little time before duty in fitting himself for it) by reading the Annotations
upon the Chapter, or any of those profitable Notes wrote by Mr. Ainsworth on
the five Books of Moses: Mr. Jackson upon all the Historical Books of
Scripture: Mr. Dickson upon the Psalms: Mr. Calvin on Job, and Deuteronomy, and
Daniel: Dr. Willet on Genesis, Exodus and Leviticus: Mr. Hutchinson on the
small Prophets: Mr. Dickson on Matthew: Mr. Hutchinson on John: Mr. Fergusson
on Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, and many others.

4. By occasional discourses of Religion, and applying Scripture unto our
relations, according to the Precept, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8, 9.

5. By examining their children and servants what they remember, upon hearing
Chapters read, or Sermons preached, or repeated.

2. Particularly we commend unto Christians, A more extraordinary care to
inform their families, concerning the true Nature of Worship in general,
concerning the several acts of Gospel Worship, and the right way and method of
performing of them, as well the external, as internal manner, by which means
they will not only be armed against temptations to Superstition and
Will Worship which is abomination to the Lord; but also kept from a formal, and
perfunctory, slighty service of the great, and living God. And the better to
enable Christians to do this, we do by the blessing of God intend to contribute
our pains to the utmost in some exercises of this nature.

3. If any one ask us, how often these duties are to be performed? We answer,
that we have in this no stated rule: but as we are sure, they cannot be too
often; and reason teaches, that they should be so often, as to reach their
ends. So the Scripture does not obscurely hint some kind of Instruction and
Prayer to be used Morning and Evening, Deuteronomy. 6. We are commanded to talk to our
children of the Law of the Lord, when we lie down, and when we rise up: God of
old required a Morning and Evening Sacrifice. David, Psalm. 55.17. and Daniel,
Chap. 6. v. 10. prayed thrice a day which possibly may hint to us, that those
who have more leisure from the world than others, ought to spend more time than
others in this worship: But we should press upon our Brethren,

1. That none of them would omit praying and reading the Scriptures, or some
other way of instructing their families, twice each day, viz. in the morning
and evening. The morning is an excellent time; 1. Because no excuse can be for
the omitting it; It may be done, and is fittest to be done, before the world
calls us off. 2. It is the time when our spirits are most refreshed and fit
for duty, when worldly occasions have not seized on our thoughts. 3. We are bid
to say, Prosper thou the works of our hands upon us, and that is the time when
the works of our hands begin. 4. It is commended to us by many Scriptures,
Psalm. 5.3. Psalm. 59.16. Psalm. 88.13. Psalm. 92.2. Psalm. 119.147.


The Evening is also a proper time.

1. To beg pardon for the sins of the day, and to give thanks for the mercies
of the day, and to beg the Protection and sleep of the night. 2. The work of
our hands is done, and it is reasonable to beg Gods blessing upon it. 3. Our
sleep is the image of death, and many never rise from their beds, it is
reasonable we should therefore commend our spirits, and the spirits our of
relations to the Lord. 4. It is commended in Scripture, Psalm. 141.2. Psalm.
55.17.
2. That if possible these constant duties may be performed, before we be
disadvantaged for them. Either, 1. By intermedling with the world; or, 2. By
inclinations to rest and sleep; which usually make the performance of religious
duty late at night, or after supper, a very slightly perfunctory serving of God.

3. We commend the Reading of the Scripture, repeating a Sermon, or singing of
a Psalm before prayer; not only as duties in themselves, but as excellent
means, to call home the thoughts, prepare the heart, and fix the mind to a more
steady contemplation of God, and devotion toward him in prayer.

4. We commend to our brethren, the repeating of Sermons, and Catechizing to be
at least once performed every week, besides on the Lords Day.

5. For singing of Psalms; It is proper for the Sabbath, but never out of
season; we leave that and occasional instruction of families out of the
Scripture to private Christians, as God shall give them opportunities, and an
heart thereunto. Only commending them as duties fit to be sometimes done, and
not wholly omitted by any.

2. Having thus far offered you our thoughts for the Family Worship of every
day; We come in the next place, to commend to you the special sanctification of
the Lords day: where we shall not speak to the more public solemn
sanctification of it, but keep our selves within the bounds of the private
house.

We know our Brethren understand, that by the fourth Commandment God has
reserved a seventh part of our Time to himself: That what should be the seventh
part, under the old dispensation of the Covenant to the Jews, was determined by
God to be the seventh day from the Creation: That our seventh part is
determined by the practice of the Apostles, who were wont to meet and sanctie
the first day of the Week, counting the seventh from our redemption, when the
world was as it was created anew.

That we are tied to the sanctification of this day by the fourth Commandment,
none can doubt; but he must question whether there be ten Commandments, or no;
or whether the fourth be a Moral Law. Nor can any sound reason be given, why
the fourth Commandment should not concern Christians, as much as any of the
other nine.

Hence it is plain, that it must be kept as a day of holy rest from labor and
recreations, at other times lawful: and to spiritual services public and
private.

These being the confessed general duties of Christians, as to the
sanctification of the Sabbath, we shall only offer some Propositions for
particular practice, in reference to these general ends.

1. That all heads of families take care, that no kind of civil labor
necessary to be done, which can be done before, be left to be done in any part
of the Sabbath: For no work can be justified on the Sabbath, as a work of
Necessity, which though necessary to be done, might yet have been done before
that day comes. 2. That all Christians would endeavor, but those especially
whose callings in the world, do not so much hinder them; the Evening before the
Sabbath, to direct their family-duty as much as they can, both as to
Instruction and Prayer, to prepare the several persons of their family, for the
Sabbath. 3. That all heads of families would take care, that on the Morning of
the Sabbath, they, their children and servants rise up from their beds, either
as soon as on other days, or at least so soon, that the necessary business of
the family may be dispatched, and family duties performed before they go to the
public service. 4. That those of their families who are not employed in any
necessary work of the family, whiles all the rest be ready, employ their time
(being once ready) in reading the Scriptures, or other good Books. 5. That the
heads of families so order the rising of their families that morning, that they
may have full time to do their household necessary business, and also to attend
family duties. In which we conceive it is the duty of Christians that day, to
spend some more time than on other days; because it is a day wholly dedicated
to the Lord. 6. We commend to our brethren, as part of their family duty, that
morning to instruct their families in the Nature of Worship, the several acts
of it. The true manner, both of the outward and inward performance. The
morality of the Sabbath, the true way of sanctifying of it. To which purpose we
recommend to them Mr. Sheppards Treatise of the Sabbath, clearing the morality,
and Mr. Bernards threefold Treatise of the Sabbath. 6. After the public
service in the morning, and dinner (which we think that day should be moderate)
we recommend to our brethren (if they have time) the calling of their family
together, repeating the Sermon heard to them, or examining them about it, and
prayer, and the like we again recommend to them after Evening Sermon, and
before Supper. 7. We commend singing of Psalms to our Brethren as a special
duty of the Sabbath, we find that David composed Psalm 92. on purpose for the
Sabbath. We desire that our Brethren would not omit it, at least to do it once
every Lords Day. 8. Finally, We beseech our Brethren, that they take especial
care of all within their gates on the Lords Day; that they profane not the
Sabbath by unnecessary work, sleep, or recreations. It is a day of rest, but of
holy rest: A day of rest, and therefore profaned by labor that is worldly and
unnecessary. An holy rest, and therefore profaned by excessive sleeping (which
is natural rest) idleness or recreations, which are but a Civil rest.
3. Having thus far offered to our Brethren our thoughts in reference to their
families, we conclude with a word or two in reference to their personal
conversation.

1. We suppose our Brethren conscientious in matters of Justice, to remember to
do (in their callings) to all, as they would be done to; to take heed of all
gross, and scandalous evils, and shall only mind them of some things which God
requires of them, wherein they are to do more than others, as having received
more from God, and being under a more special Covenant and Obligations, as also
of some duties specially to be practiced, with reference to these times,
wherein (if ever) Christians are by the Providence of God called out to a more
winning conversation, and to a more prudent conversation, fulfilling that of
our Savior, Be you wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves.

1. In reference to the first, We seriously commend to our brethren,

1. Private prayer in their closets according to our Saviors precept, Mat.
6.6. (at least to be performed once every day.)

2. Private reading the Scriptures: the example of the Eunuch, Acts 8. shows
how much God has owned it, and is pleased with it.

3. Private self-examination, 2 Cor. 13.5. Psalm. 4.4.

4. Private Meditation commended, Genesis 24.63. Josh. 1.8. Psalm. 1.2. Psalm. 63.6.
Psalm. 119.15, 23, 48, 78, 148. Psalm. 104.34. Psalm. 119.97. If Christians would
be particularly instructed in this duty, we commend them to Mr. Joseph
Symmonds; Three excellent Treatises Printed at London, 1653. one of which is
upon this subject.

2. As to the prudent conversation of Christians, and something of their
farther duty in these times; we recommend to our Brethren,

1. As much as in them lies, to avoid all meetings of people at feasts, or
otherwise: Where they foresee they may probably be engaged in discourses, which
will either tempt them to any thing that is sinful, or to discover their
opposition to such courses of others, in a place where probably their speaking
will but make them odious.

2. As it is their duty at all times to do good to all (though) more especially
to those of the household of faith. And to love their enemies, to do good to
them that hate them, etc. So more especially to be careful of it in these
times. That whereas men speak evil of them, 1 Pet. 3.16.
as evil doers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse their good conversation
in Christ: 1 Pet. 2.12.
yea, they may by your good works which they shall behold, glorify God in the
day of visitation.

3. That above all, even to the worst men, They render their dues, fear to whom
fear, honor to whom honor, owing no man any thing, but to love one another;
and remembering, that Love works no ill to his neighbor; according to that of
the Apostle, Romans 13.7, 8.

4. That they do not give holy things to Dogs, nor cast pearls before Swine,
but wisely watch all advantages, where they may meekly, and acceptably, and
seasonably apply any word to their neighbor, to convince him of any sin; or
duty, forbearing it where they see any in any madness of passion, or the like.

5. That if God calls them to suffer any thing in the doing of his will, they
remember to do it, with meekness and patience; and also with Christian courage
and boldness, committing themselves to him that created them, and who will
judge righteously.

6. That they Remember their Brethren who are in bonds; as if they were bound
with them; considering that themselves also are in the body, Heb. 13.3. Hebrews
10.34. Coloss. 4.18. Phil. 1.7.

7. That if they discern any of their Brethren overtaken in a fault, they would
endeavor to restore such a one in the Spirit of meekness, considering
themselves also lest they be tempted; according to that, Gal. 6.1. and if need
be, they further acquaint some godly Ministers with it.

8. That (especially at such a time as this is) they cover and conceal the
weaknesses of each others; and avoid all manner of exceptions one against
another, or reproaches of each other for any particular differences of
persuasion in the things of Religion, as to such who are agreed in the two main
things. 1. The Doctrine of faith: 2. A joint study to promove practical
Godliness.

9. That they take especial heed, that no particular provocations from any of
their brethren upon civil accounts, be a temptation to them to turn Persecutors
of them: i.e. to seek a revenge upon them for matters concerning their God, it
being certain that none can deserve a persecution from his Neighbor.

These things (our dearly beloved Brethren) are all which at present we shall
commend to you. The nature, and reasonableness of them is such as we are
assured they have an evidence to all your consciences, either as necessary, or
highly useful, only as we are prone to make excuses in any duty; and especially
where the revival of it may seem to condemn our former neglect; so we are
afraid least (as to that part which relates to the order and worship of
families) we should hear some excusing themselves. Either, 1. From want of
time: or, 2. From want of fit matter in their families: or, 3. From want of
parts and abilities; or, 4. From the want in the world of servants that will be
brought under such discipline.


1. As to the first, we know there is a great difference of men as to leisure,
and therefore (as we said before) we believe more of this nature is required
from a Daniel, or a David, than from a private person: but,

1. This cannot be pleaded as to Sabbath Days Service.

2. It cannot be pleaded as to Morning duties, there the time may, and ought if
need be, be redeemed from sleep.

3. So that all the dispute is about one half hour at night: and we leave it to
every Christian that is serious and conscientious to think, whether this plea
will not argue a greater want of a good heart. Besides if this duty be
necessary, we hope that our brethren, who, let their trade and business be what
it will, will find a time to dine and sup, because they are naturally
necessary; will also find a time for these duties which are spiritually
necessary.

2. As to those who complain that their families neither do, nor can consist of
fit matter for these duties. It only reaches to Catechism, and that too only,
as to servants; for surely Parents can command their children. As to them we
say, Servants are either Apprentices, or hired by the year, or by the day; for
the latter sort, they are not properly members of our families. For the former,
doubtless, Masters have a great power over them; and though if they be
stubborn, they cannot directly force them to this, yet they may keep them to
such a strictness in labor, that they will be glad to purchase some relaxation
there by a complying in this with the desires and endeavors of Governors for
the good of their souls. For yearly servants, it is true they are but transient
members of our family, but for their hired time, Governors have the same power
over them, as over Apprentices; and there is no question, but better may be
provided, if they will not comply. Besides, Servants that shall thus refuse,
must be 1. Either such as have some particular different Persuasion in
religion, who it may be understand much of the Principles of Religion: or, 2.
Such stubborn refractory pers^ns, as will be kept under no better Civil
Government than Religious, and so unfit to be continued in our houses. But we
are verily persuaded that they are very few, who by fair and gentle treating
with them might not be brought to this order: however, as to children the
duties may proceed.

3. For those who complain for want of parts to discharge this work: The plea
only holds as to prayer, and set discourses on Scripture. We should therefore
commend to Christians.

1. That no heads of families be patient till they have learned to read, the
want of this being a most inexcusable sin in these days, wherein are so many
means for it.

2. That as many as possible would learn to write, and practice writing; and as
many as can would learn to write Characters, writing by Characters being of
infinite use in this work.

3. Though we cannot commend Christians tying themselves to forms of prayers
made by others; Yet rather than not pray at all, that Christians would read a
Prayer Morning and Evening to their families out of some good Book, such as the
Practice of Piety, etc. at least at first setting up such a Reformation.

4. That no Christian would rest here, but being assured, that the gift of
prayer is attainable by any Christian, that will take pains, that they would
use all means to attain unto it, and to that end, we shall not only be ready
our selves to give such as come to us Directions; but we earnestly commend unto
them, the reading and study of Dr. Wilkin's Book concerning the gift of prayer.

5. As to opening the Scriptures, and from them speaking to people. Though we
could wish that as many as have time and leisure, would apply themselves to get
such knowledge as might enable themselves by study to find out the sense of a
Text. Yet in regard that all cannot do that, we have before commended to our
Brethren some such English Books, as may in this be helpful to them: And in
regard every one has not an ability to purchase such Books, we shall only
offer it to our Brethren; whether four or five might not join together in
buying such an English Library as they shall be advised to, each sharing in it,
that so the whole number may be amongst them all, and ready to be mutually
Aent: and if they please, they may so agree, as when any one dies, the others
may purchase his share at a certain rate.

The most of these things Brethren (especially which concern the Worship of God
in their families, and the private Sanctification of the Sabbath) though we
believe them to be in a great measure the practice of many of you, and from
your Parents you have been instructed in the practice of them: yet considering
the great moment the reviving of Religion in families is of, at such a time as
this, and the great neglect in many families, occasioned possibly, for that
some had not such good examples, in the families of their education, we have
thought good to use the Apostle Peter's expression, 2 Pet. 3.1. To stir up your
minds by way of remembrance.

Thus we conceive God may be glorified, our own souls, and the souls of all
under our charges highly advantaged, Religion would be revived, preserved and
propagated, and much of the glory of the Professors of England recovered; and
the Adversaries of Religion and Godliness would gnash their teeth, to see every
family become a Church, and the Nursery of that Religion, and lively practice
of Godliness, which by so much profane scoffing, they endeavor to discourage,
and by so much activity they labor wholly to extirpate.

FINIS.

