Mr. Woodward's Sermon at St. Mary-le-Bow, December. 28. 1696. Before the
SOCIETIES for Reformation of Manners.

THE DUTY of Compassion to the Souls of others, In endeavoring their
Reformation. Being the Subject of a SERMON Preached December the 28th 1696. At
St. Mary-le-Bow, Before the Societies for Reformation of Manners in the CITY of
LONDON. Published at their Request. By JOSIAH WOODWARD Minister of Popler.

London, Printed by J. Darby, and sold by A. Bell at the Cross-Keys and Bible
in Cornhil, and other Booksellers, 1697.

Price stitched 4 d,

TO THE SOCIETIES FOR Reformation of Manners In the Cities of London and
Westminster.
IT is a Divine and Blessed Work, my Honored Brethren! to which you have so
heartily and effectually applied your selves. And may the God of Heaven and
Earth prosper your Handiwork, or rather, his own Work in your Hands.

The Reformation of wicked People is ever very requisite, but in the present
height of our Impieties it is not only seasonable, but of absolute Necessity to
be done without Delay; lest our Iniquity, which has visibly been our
languishing Distemper, should speedily become our utter Ruin; which shows the
Unreasonableness of such who call your Zeal an unseasonable Heat.

And as far are they from Truth, who call it a meddling with things which do not
belong unto you; since God makes it your bounden Duty in that Text which is the
Subject of the following Discourse. And as little Reason have they to call it
Cruelty, since God there calls it Charity, and assures us that the contrary is
Hatred in the very Heart. So that my Text is both your Commission and
Vindication. And truly, it is your Plea of furthering this your excellent
Design by the publication of this Sermon, which alone induces me to consent to
it. For I know no greater Good that can possibly come upon this corrupt World,
than its Reformation; yea, I do not see how any Good can come unto it, or abide
with it, without this. And this is indeed a direct way to prevent not only the
Calamities of Kingdoms, but the Eternal Miseries of Humane Souls.

And therefore it cannot but be matter of great Joy to all good People to hear
of your successful Progress in this your pious Enterprise. What exalted Praises
will they offer to God, when they hear of your Order, Courage, and Unanimity in
a Work of such absolute Necessity; and when they understand that Thousands have
been brought by your means to legal Punishment, for their abominable
Enormities; and that Multitudes of scandalous Houses, which were the odious
Nurseries of Uncleanness, have been suppressed by you; and that public Vice
and Profaneness is manifestly checked, and in a way to be rooted out by your
exemplary Diligence, Zeal, and Expense in this great Undertaking? As it is more
particularly related in an Account of the Rise and Progress of the Religious
Societies of Young Men, lately published.

It was indeed impossible that an Affair of this general and important Nature
could have been carried on with any probability of Success, but by the
conjoined Prudence, Power, and Cost of an Associated Body of considerable
Persons. And blessed be God who inclined the Hearts of so many of you to unite
together in an Affair of such difficult and discouraging Circumstances; and
that he has guided your Motions in it with such irreproachable Justice and
Prudence.

For your Method of Procedure against Offenders is so strictly Legal, and your
Rules of Management so Prudential, that you have not only drawn many to
incorporate with your Societies, but have very much silenced the Calumnies of
all but vicious and unreasonable People against them.

So that when your noble Design, your just Proceedings, and your considerable
Success comes to appear to the World in a true Light, it cannot reasonably be
questioned, but that you will gain all the Honorable and Sober part of it (by
the pure worth of your Cause) to pray for you, support, and vindicate you,
according to their Place and Power.

For, how can the Magistrate, who would be thought Righteous in his Place, or
faithful to the Vows of his Religion, or to the Oath of his Office; in the
least decline his Assistance to that which so manifestly asserts the Authority
of God over Men, and so directly suits the very End for which Magistracy was
ordained in the World?

And will not every Minister of the Gospel of Christ depart from his Sacred
Character, yea, revolt from his Lord and Master, if he be wanting to assist you
in any thing proper to his Function?

Yea, every private Person who has or desires to have a clear and comfortable
Conscience, or has but a just Sense of Moral Decency, and of Civil Government,
will find himself in Duty and Interest obliged to join with you, in a
seasonable informing against Vice, and endeavoring to suppress those
intolerable Impieties which have so long been a Reproach to our Religion and
Government.

So that Peoples agreeing with you, or being against you in this your
Undertaking ( which all the Sense of Mankind must pronounce Pious and Just)
will be a sort of a Test to discern Religious and Virtuous Minds from others:
In which, I pray God, none be distinguished to their Reproach here, and
Condemnation hereafter.

But as our Blessed Lord himself was injured, reviled, and opposed when upon
Earth: So, you must expect (yea, I know, you have experienced) the injurious
Treatment of a sinful and perverse Generation. But here you are to tread in the
Steps of your Savior in his Sufferings, as well as in his Doings: And with
him, pray, That such may be forgiven by a Merciful God, who do they know not
what against him. And whilst you bring poor senseless Sinners to undergo the
just Penalties of the Laws, let your Prayers follow them, that it may indeed be
an effectual Method of their Reformation.

But there is one Great Thing wanting yet to accomplish this desired Amendment
of wicked People, (the want of which I have heard some of you lament) which is,
A due Provision of Work and Workhouses to employ the Hands of the Poor, which
otherwise will most certainly be misimployed in sinful and vicious Courses.

If we ask any Thief, Strumpet, or other Malefactor; What it was that brought
them to their wicked way of Life? They usually reply, That it was their want of
an honest Employment, and that they did it to get Bread. And it is very probable
that they speak the Truth: For had they been bred up to diligent Labor, and
been inured to Business, it is very likely, that neither the Devil nor their
Lusts had ever gotten such Dominion over them.

Nor indeed is there any probability of reclaiming them, but by such means as
these. Were every Malefactor who is sent to the Prison, kept there strictly to
the utmost bodily Labor that they are capable of, and this for a competent
Time: And had they withal, the Benefit of frequent Prayers and Sermons suitable
to their Condition: This would make their Prison a proper House of Correction
and Instruction too. And when they had once found the Benefit and Comfort of
honest Labor and a good Conscience, it might be hoped that most of them would
never return back again to their former course of Life. Whereas now, if a Felon
be sent to the Jail, he there finds the most inveterate Villains in the whole
County for his Companions and Tutors, and he has leisure in abundance to con
over their Lessons, so that he becomes sevenfold more a Child of Hell than
before, if he escapes the Gallows. Or if a Slut be sent to Bridewell, and be
there severely lasht, and then set free again: it is true, she comes out
corrected, but not at all amended; for still the first Cause of her
Misbehaviour continues; and if want of Employment brought her to her former ill
Life, it will be like to reduce her to it again. And thus they harden in their
Vices, and the Keepers of those Prisons find them their constant Visitants.

And, alas! what pity is it? And what a shame in truth to such a Wealthy City
and Nation! Yea, what a Reproach to the Faith and Charity of Christians, that
due Provision is not made to employ the Poor? For want of which, not only our
Prisons and Houses of Correction, but our very Almshouses seldom answer the
End of their Foundation.

And therefore it would be one of the hest Charities in the World, if a
competent Number of Gentlemen and Wealthy Citizens, expert in Manufacture,
would endeavor to obtain an Act of Parliament in this behalf; and in the mean
time contribute to a common Stock, and employ it to this End. And it would
become every Person of Ability to contribute toward it, either by giving
something to the Fund, or taking the Goods thus wrought from off their Hands
that out of Charity employ the Poor.

It can scarcely be imagined, that People could better serve their Generation
than in this Method, or more administer to the Glory of God and the common
Benefit of Men. For who can sum up the Advantages that would accrue to any
State by the ceasing of the Vices of such multitudes of People, and the Income
of their Labors? And if this were generally encouraged, the Wealth arising
from it in time, would probably be a visible Reward of the Charity of it in
this World; as it has been demonstrated by several Ingenious Pens.

The good God vouchsafe to prosper all necessary Means of a General Reformation
of Manners amongst us, that we may appear (from the highest to the lowest)
worthy of the glorious Name of a Reformed People. Which is the earnest desire
of,

Gentlemen, Your assured Friend and Servant, J. W.

Errat.] Page 23. lin. 11. read Harvest.

The Duty of Compassion to the Souls of Others.
LEVIT. XIX. 17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine Heart: thou shall in
any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him.


IN the Rage of a devouring Pestilence, it is the Care of every wise Government
to shut up the Persons infected, and to make a Mark over their Door, that all
People may shun them, to prevent the spreading of the Contagion; yet with a
just Compassion to the poor People who lie under the dreadful Distemper, and a
diligent use of Means for their Recovery.

And if our Faith had as quick and effectual Apprehensions as our Senses, we
should be as much concerned to prevent the pernicious growth of Sin, which is
certainly the greatest Plague to Cities and Kingdoms, as well as to Families
and particular Persons. It has been the destruction of one World already, and
the gross and general overflowing of it is at this Day a pregnant Symptom of
the approaching Ruin of the other.

A public Sinner does not only sin against his own Soul, but against the
Community of which he is a Member; yea, against the World in which he lives.
The Mischiefs which attend his Sin are general, and spread widely and
universally. For hereby the Governor of the World is dishonored and provoked,
and the common Father of Mankind is disowned and defied. So that there is no
Person but is concerned to hinder and prevent the Sin of another; and upon the
view of any such Transgression, he has just cause of Offense and Resentment
given him: and therefore he does at once hate both his Brother's Soul, and his
own, if he quietly connives at it, and tamely passes it by; which is directly
contrary to the Law of God in the Text, Thou shall not hate thy Brother in
thine Heart; thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer Sin
upon him.

In which words, the Holy and Righteous God binds this Duty upon the
Consciences, not only of Ministers and Magistrates, but of every Man, That he
maintain a vigilant and constant Concern for his Brother's Soul and Salvation.
Next to our own Welfare, we are to have a kind and charitable Concern for our
Brother's. Our Brother; that is, every Person who having the same Nature, and
deriving it from the same God, is a Brother as to all points of Duty required
by the common Lord of all. And therefore these words are an authentic Ground
for this Point of Doctrine,

Observe. That there is a great want of Charity to the Souls of others, in those
who make no Attempts to rescue them from the Power of any known Sin. Thou shall
not hate thy Brother in thine Heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke him: As if
it were said, you may in your Lips, and in your other Carriage pretend what
Kindness you will to others, but if you induce them to sin, or indulge them in
it, all your glavering Professions of Friendship are mere sham and paint; yea
they are real and hatred, an Artifice to subvert and destroy them for ever.
Like the Tyrant's Engine (mentioned by Sir W. Rawleigh) which was composed in
the shape of a beautiful Woman, and contrived with that exquisite Art, that it
would rise up and embrace any Person before whom it was placed, and at the same
time stab them with a Multitude of mortal Wounds when it grasped them in its
Iron-arms. And truly the Embraces of sinful Companions are alike fatal; it is
the twisting of the old Serpent about them, full of Venom and deadly Poison. It
is Hatred in the Heart, says the Text, if you rebuke not your sinful Brother,
but negligently suffer sin to lie upon him, and sink him into the pit of
Perdition.

So that we have here three parts of spiritual Charity recommended to us. And
these are enforced and pressed upon us by three considerable Motives: And my
speaking to each of these will be the proper Method to open and apply the Duty
of the Text.

I begin to consider the threefold spiritual Charity injoined in the Text. The
first of which is,

I. A vigorous desire of the Happiness of our Brother's Soul. -- Thou shall not
hate thy Brother in thine Heart. The positive Injunction impli'd in this
Expression is, Thou shall bear an inward and hearty Affection to thy Brother
(that is, to every humane Creature) and thou shall especially love his Soul,
and do whatever thy Place and Capacity enables thee toward his Eternal
Salvation.

And indeed a real Christian cannot do otherwise; the Spirit of Christ will
constrain him to it. For, if we have not so much of the spiritual Zeal and
Temper of Christ, as to seek the Glory of God, and the Salvation of Men, We are
none of his. A worldly, carnal, and unchristian Spirit sways that degenerate
Soul, who seeks his own, and not his Brother's Good. Yea, such a one gives a
very shrewd Suspicion, that he does not heartily seek his own Spiritual and
Eternal Welfare: For he that knows and feels the due import of those two words,
Eternal Salvation, and conceives something of those innumerable, exquisite, and
endless Woes, which are summed up in that one word Damnation, will be sensibly
moved to pity such as he sees passing on directly toward the pit of
Destruction. He will beg his Brother by all the Entreaties he can use, that he
would not resist his own Mercies, nor destroy a Soul for which Christ died:
Yea, he will use a sort of Violence with him (if there be any in the
Perswasives, Rebukes, and Remonstrances of Love) to restrain him from
Self-destruction, and to bar up his Way to everlasting Torment.

And this Christian Affection to our Brother must not end here; namely, in a
pious Exhortation and Admonition only. But it is further required in the Text,

II. That our Love to Men be exercised in a seasonable (and if need be, in a
sharp and severe) Reproof of an offending Brother. This is comprehended in the
word Rebuke. -- Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor. Thou shall not be
diverted from this good Office in any wise. Thou shall not fear his Anger, nor
the World's Censures, nor any Temporal Damage which may come to thee by so
doing. Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor when he gives thee cause to
do it. Thy Neighbor, that is, He with whom thou conversest, for he is for that
time thy Neighbor.

But here we must observe the Limits of a few Cautions.

(1.) Our Reproof of our Neighbor must be managed in a Method suitable to his
Station, and our Relation to him. An Elder (says the Apostle) is not to be
rebuked, but entreated as a Father, 1 Timothy 5. 1. Which implies, that the
natural Father is likewise to be treated with the same Respect; not insulting
over his Nakedness, but pitying his Infirmities. And Elihu wisely observed,
That it is not fit for every one to go bluntly to a King, and tell him that he
is wicked, or to say to Princes that they are ungodly, Job 34. 18.

We see with what Respect and humble Address, the Persons who accompanied
Naaman, corrected his Passion. The Men were grieved at their Master's rash
Resentment of the Prophet's Message, and were unwilling that he should turn
away without a Cure of his Leprosy: whereupon (it is said) that they came near
and spoke unto him, and said, My Father, if the Prophet had bid thee do some
great thing, would thou not have done it? How much rather then, when he says
to thee, Wash and be clean? 2 King. 5. 13. And we find, that this kind and
gentle Application to him won upon him effectually; their forcible Argument
convinces his Judgment, and their humble Respect softens his Heart to embrace
it; and so it came to a desired Effect, to the Cure of the Disorder of his Soul
first, and then to the Cure of the Distemper of his Body.

And indeed the prudent Management of this Affair is the taking the Instrument
by the right Handle, and so the most likely way to the desired Success; which
introduces a second Caution, namely,

(2.) That in the case of rebuking any Person, we should take care to time it
well. The proper Season is very material in the Administration of this
spiritual Physic. The Physicians of our Bodies decline the giving of a Dose,
tho never so excellent, in the Extremity of the Paroxism. And truly a Person in
a Passion, or in Drink, or the like, must have time for the Height of his Fit
to sink, that he may come to the Use of his Reason, before his Cure can be
attempted with any Probability of Success.

Had Abigail reproved Nabal when he was very drunk, and in a violent Passion,
as it seems he was when he sent that railing Message to King David, it is very
probable that her self might have had the second Part of the same Outrage, as
the only Effect of her Reproof, and Reward of her Pains: But she did more
wisely; She said nothing to him more or less till the Morning-light; but then,
when the Wine was gone out of Nabal, she lays open all the Parts of his
desperate Folly and Rudeness before him; and applies it so home to him, that
his Heart died within him, 1 Samuel 25. 36, etc.

So that the prudent Timing of our Rebukes is very conducible to their taking
place upon the Person to whom they are applied. But then we must beware, on the
other hand, that our convenient Season be not like that of Foelix, a mere trick
to shun the Duty, never thinking of it more. It is of the two, better to
mistake the Time of a Duty, than wholly to omit the Performance of it. Again,

(3.) We must not understand the Words of the Text so as to countenance the
Popish Cruelties for their own Superstitions. It is true, we must not suffer
Sin upon our Brother or Neighbor; and rather than let him alone to perish in
his Vices, we may and ought to deliver him up to the Civil Magistrate, that the
Delinquent may suffer the light Inflictions of legal Punishment here, in hope
that he may be awakened by these, to shun that everlastiug Anguish which will
inevitably come upon him, if he goes on in his Iniquity.

But then, it must be a Transgression of the moral Law, or some Sin against the
plain Revelation of God's Will: in which case the Offender's Conscience (if he
has any) will applaud both the Evidence against him, and the Judge who decrees
his Punishment: for his own Heart will be both an impartial Evidence and
Avenger against him, whenever he comes to himself.

But as for the bloody Methods of the Romish Inquisition, where innocent
Persons are tortured, racked and burnt, because they will not pollute their
Faith and Consciences by things of Man's Invention, and by Doctrines not only
beside, but against the express Will of God: The Voice of all good Christians,
yea of all Mankind, sends forth a loud Cry to Heaven against them: And every
body sees, that the beating out of Peoples Brains is no good Means to bring any
Persuasion into their Heads; and that those of the Trent-Council spoke rather
after the tyrannical Temper of Popery, than according to the Rules of
Argumentation, who were for answering Luther's Books by Fire and Faggot applied
to the Author. This is a very inglorious Conquest, like Herod's Victory over
the poor Infants, of which this Day puts us in mind. But there is not the least
Affinity betwixt the inhumane Persecution of good Men, and the legal Punishment
of wicked ones. That is diametrically opposite to this, for that crushes the
best of Men, this chastises the worst: That puts Men out of the way of their
Duty, this brings them into it: That injures the Conscience, this relieves it:
That locks up the Gate of Heaven, this puts a Bar in the Passage to Hell. And,
in a word, that is uncommanded by God, yea it is forbidden by him; but this is
the express Will of God, which is the strongest Argument in the World to
enforce it upon every sensible Conscience. And this leads me to the third Part
of spiritual Charity in the Text: namely,

III. That we ought to use all lawful and suitable Means to reclaim the open and
obstinate Transgressor; -- Thou shall not suffer Sin upon him, i. e. Thou shall
diligently pursue all proper Means to pull this Firebrand out of the Fire. Thou
shall appeal to the Minister, and to the Magistrate; not against the Man, but
against the Sin: Thou shall tell it the Church, (Mat. 18. 17.) Thou shall
inform the Bench (the Seat of Justice) of it, ( Deuteronomy. 13. 8.) That all fit
spiritual Censures and temporal Chastisements may be applied to him in time,
that his Soul perish not to all Eternity.

And surely this cannot be disagreeable to the Rules of natural Affection, or
Christian Charity, or humane Friendship, since the very Parents amongst the
Jews were to appeal to the Magistrates of their City, to punish even with Death
their Son who was a Drunkard, or a Glutton, and an ungovernable Rebel; as we
read Deuteronomy. 21. 19. And however severe this may seem to the Person who fell
under this exemplary Punishment, it was certainly a Kindness to the Community;
which must needs find that good Order and sober Behavior was maintained by
this strict Law; which was the Benefit proposed in the Institution of it, viz.
That all Israel might hear, and fear, and do no more any such Wickedness, (ver.
21.) And that such good Laws as these might not prove useless, for want of due
Information and Prosecution, it was a standing Rule and Statute in the Jewish
Government, That in all great Enormities, such as heard or saw the Fact were to
be Informers and Witnesses against the Offender, tho it were a Friend as dear
as their own Soul, or a Brother of their own Blood: yea, they were to be the
Executioners too; as we read, ( Deuteronomy. 17. 7.) The Hands of the Witnesses shall
be first upon him to put him to Death, and afterward the Hands of all the
People: And this (it is said) was the only way to put away the Evil from among
them. So that in such a Case where the Bowels of Nature, and the Endearments of
Friendship begin to struggle against the Administration of Justice, and the
public Good, the Love and Fear of God must turn the Balance, considering that
our overlooking of any gross Sin is a taking the Guilt of it into our own
Bosom: yea, it is a spreading and diffusing of the Curses due unto it upon the
Face of the whole City and Nation in which we dwell.

So that it is very manifest, That the due Ministration of Justice is
absolutely necessary to the Happiness of any State, in order to suppress Vice,
and support Virtue; and so to procure the Blessings, and avert the Judgments of
Almighty God, the Righteous Governor of the World.

Now, the Tribunal of Justice is seated on these two Pillars, viz. First, Upon
due Information against Offenders; Secondly, An impartial Execution of Justice
upon them, according to the Proof of the Fact.

As to the first, viz, Information against the impudent and profligate
Contemners of the Laws of God and Men. The desire of God's Glory, and Men's
Salvation may induce us to it; and the Love of Virtue, and the common Good,
must needs enforce the Practice of it: Or however, the Laws of God ought to
constrain us to it, and the Fear of God's Wrath should awaken us to wash our
Hands from the Guilt of other Men's Sins. For you are unjust to the Offender's
Soul, and your own, and to the public Good, if you neglect it.

And, as for the vulgar Odium, and the common Reproaches against such
Informers, they are vain and senseless, and are merely contrived by the lovers
of Sin (and the invisible Patron and Promoter of it) to be a Shelter and
Subtersuge for Vice and Profaneness.

For every Body knows, that without Legal Evidence, there can be no Legal
Punishment. And tho the Magistrate be the best in the World, yet if the Crime
be not duly proved and testified before him, Justice it self will bind his
Hands, and chain his Sword.

Had not the People who heard the Blasphemy and Curses of the Son of Shelomith,
gone and told Moses of it, Lev. 24. 11. the Wretch might have cursed on, and
blasphemed as long as his Breath would have served him to do it. But they that
heard him, did better; they went forthwith and informed the Magistrate of it,
as they were in Duty bound; and so the Curses of Man were stopped, and the
Blessings of God procured.

And O! where is the love of God, or of Virtue, or of the Souls of Sinners, or
of the Public Good, if we are discouraged from so good and necessary a Work,
by such unreasonable Cavils as are usually made against it? Alas! what Love of
God have they, who will not speak a good word for him before the face of his
Enemies? Or what Courage have they in the Cause of God, who cannot bear an ill
word, or a Nickname for his sake? And what a poor and pusillanimous Soul is
that who dares not be good in ill Company, or in evil Times?

Ah! what insupportable Shame and Contempt will be poured out on those at last,
who are now ashamed of Christ and of his Doctrine! How will they be able to
stand before the great God? or to show their Faces before his Holy Angels,
those zealous Ministers of his, who do his Pleasure; or before that noble Army
of Martyrs, who counted not their Lives dear when ever they might glorify God
by such a Sacrifice? Yea, who shed their Hearts Blood for the sake of Religion,
with greater Resolution than many now speak a few good words for it, either in
reproving of Vice, or informing against it.

Let us, for Shame, awaken out of such a tepid and torpid State. A brutish
Stupidity is a shameful Reproach to a Man; and Spiritual Insensibleness is much
more so to a Christian: and therefore let every one that bears the Name of
Christ be zealous and indefatigable in his Work, and courageous and undaunted
in his Cause.

Do you see a Person so void of Reason, as well as Faith, as to profane the
sacred Name of God in vile and blasphemous Language? You must in any wise
rebuke the Wretch, and not only so, but deliver him up to the Magistrate, as
the People did in the like Case, Lev. 24. 11. They went and told Moses of it.

See you a Person so void of God's Fear, as to profane that Day which God has
blessed and sanctified? Dare he expose his Wares on that Sacred Day, or follow
his Sports or Vices? See that you suffer not this Sin upon him, but suppress it
by all lawful Ways and Means. As pious Nehemiah, Neh. 13. 17. who not only
threatened and drove away such as brought their Goods to be sold, but contended
with the Nobles of Judah, who suffered it upon the Sabbath.

The same Care should be taken to reform not only plain and downright
Drunkenness, but unseasonable and immoderate frequenting of Public Houses,
which are not designed to cherish the Vices, but to supply the Necessities of
Men.

And partieular Care must always be taken to root out that nasty Sin, which
above others deserves the Name of Uncleanness; and to brand those impudent
People with public Shame and Correction, who dare proclaim their Impudence in
the very Streets, and before the Sun.

By these Sins a Land is greatly defiled, and the Wrath of God highly incensed
against it. And therefore it becomes every Christian to set himself
courageously against them, and to rejoice in an Opportunity of doing such a
piece of Service to his great and good Master, as to bring them before the
Magistrate to receive condign Punishment: That the World may see that there are
some who dare be as bold and vigilant for the Honor of the Prince of Light, as
some others are in the Service of the Prince of Darkness. And tho your
Adversaries will cry out of a Beam in your own Eye, we are sure these are not
Motes which you endeavor to pull out of theirs; nor can they with any Reason
or Justice, apply those words of our Savior to you, Mat. 7. 5. unless they can
prove you abundantly more guilty of that Sin for which they are punished, than
themselves.

And as to the second Point, which is necessary to support our Religion, and
the public Good, namely, The impartial Execution of Justice upon profane and
licentious Persons: This is the Magistrate's peculiar Province; and blessed be
God, that (as we have good and excellent Laws against Profaneness and
Debauchery, so) we have some righteous Magistrates who duly put them in
Execution. The good God raise up more of these Laborers, to cut down this ripe
and exuberant Vintage of Vice, the Fields of which are grown even white unto
Havest.

O! what an Honorable and Divine thing is Magistracy duly exerted in its
proper Acts! How venerable is that Person in the sight of Angels and Men, who
piously uses that Sword wherewith the God of Justice (to whom Vengeance
belongs) has girded him withal! Ah! let none dare to wear that Sword in vain,
lest it be drawn at last forth against themselves by the Almighty God, as David
did Goliath's, to the destruction of him that wore it.

Truly I here testify to you, that I know no other way for Magistrates to shun
this, but by their present and impartial executing of Justice upon Evildoers,
and supporting them that do well. This is indeed a blessed Work, and will
receive a glorious Reward at last from God the Righteous Judge.

It is so God-like, to distribute just Punishments to such as do Evil, and to
support Religious and Virtuous Persons; that the Magistrate who does it in the
Integrity of his Heart, will find Favor with God, and Esteem among Men. It is
indeed more than a single Good; there is a Constellation of Virtues and
Advantages in it; it will glorify God, and credit our Religion; it will make
our Public Affairs Prosperous, and our Nation Happy. It will make the Name of
such a Magistrate truly Honorable, and his Conscience serene: yea, 'twill make
his Life Comfortable, his Death Hopeful, and his Eternity Blessed.

And to press this further, let us consider the Motives expressed or implied in
the Text, which tend to fix Holy Purposes, of setting in good earnest to this
Duty, in every Person according to his Station and Capacity. And this will be
the proper Application of what has been said.

Motive 1. Let us therefore remember in the first place, That it is Hatred to
any one, not to rebuke him for his Fault. For indeed it is the greatest
Declaration of God's Wrath toward a Sinner, that he expresses upon Earth, when
he will no more reprove nor correct him for his Offenses: As in that dreadful
Expression, Hos. 4. 17. Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone. Let him be
no more disturbed, either by Reproof or Affliction, but let him securely
persist in his Sin, and harden in it, and perish. And can we be content that
our Remisness in our Duty to our Brother's Soul, should draw on him these
direful and eternal Plagues?

It is a part of the Law of Nature, as well as a Statute in Israel, That no
Person hate his Brother in his Heart; but that he be very kind and
compassionate toward him. We are to live by the mutual Kindness of each other;
this is the end of our incorporating into Societies. And indeed, this is
suggested to us in the Frame of Nature.

Our good and wise Creator has so ordered the state of Humane Life, that no
Person (of what Rank or Condition soever) can subsist without the Help and
Assistance of others. We are born naked, destitute, and impotent, and should
not survive our Birth many Hours, except some Eye pitied us, and did the common
Offices of suitable Ministration to us. And thus we live many Years by the
Kindness and Charity of others; being in our Infancy not only unable to provide
our own necessary Food and Raiment, but even incapable of feeding or dressing
our selves, tho the Means of both be provided to our hands.

And when a Man comes to maturity of Years and Strength, he is absolutely
insufficient to supply his own wants of himself, but must crave the helping
Hands of many others, both as to the necessaries of his Soul and Body. And it
has pleased the common Father of all Men, to give peculiar Accomplishments to
the various Individuals, suitable to the Exigencies of the universal Kind. And
the thing in which one Man excels, is providentially fitted to make up the
Defects of the rest, by Him who distributeth to every one severally as he will.

And the Case is the very same, if we are considered as Christians. We are
often minded in the Gospel, that we are Members one of another, and are to have
the same Care of one another Welfare, as the Members in the Natural Body;
where the least part has its necessary Use, and the greatest cannot say to it,
I have no need of you. And this is one end of our Blessed Savior's uniting us
in a Church, or Christian Society; that we might be like Stones in the same
Building, where each Stone supports, and is supported by some other, 1 Pet. 2.
5. And in Truth we so often want, not only the Counsels, but the Rebukes of a
faithful Friend, that these are sometimes the greatest Kindnesses they can do
us.

So then, every Excellency in Man, whether it be Spiritual, Moral, or
Political, infused or acquired, is a Talent put into the Hands of that Person
by the common Father of Men, to be employed for the Good of the Community; like
the Bulk of an Estate given to the eldest Son, for the good of the whole
Family: Which is the first Consideration proper to move Men to do good to the
Souls of others, and to rebuke them upon Occasion.

Motive 2. We are to remember our near Relation to every Man; He is thy
Brother, says the Text, a sharer in thy Nature, a partaker of thy Blood. And
except the Bowels of Humane Nature are perished in thee, thou can not but
feel a painful Regret when thou beholdest one of thy own Kind going in the way
of Destruction. Can you find in your Heart any tendency to verify that severe
Reflection upon Human Cruelty which some have made, namely, that one Man is
many times a Wolf and a Fury to another? This is a Carriage worse than that of
Barbarians; for they show Kindness to the Miserable, Acts 28. 2. Yea, it is
worse than the savage Brutes; for the fiercest of them seldom prey upon their
own Kind; and the very Swine run at the Cry of their Fellows to help and
succor them. Can Man then that was made after the likeness of God, be so much
of a Devil to his Brother, as to indulge his Sin, and further his Course in the
ways of Damnation? Surely, in such Persons, Righteousness, Charity, Tenderness,
and Humanity it self is perished.

Motive 3. The Text further moves us to do all the good Offices of Piety one
toward another that we can, by minding us, that he is our Neighbor. -- Thou
shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor. He is your near Associate, his Lot is
providentially cast near unto you, that you might help and succor him.
Friendly Assistance among Neighbors, is a mutual Debt; and every one with whom
we converse, is for that time our Neighbor. We must therefore endeavor to put
a stop to his Sin, in order to prevent his Ruin.

If you see your Neighbor's House on Fire, all the Neighborhood will cry
shame upon you, if you get not out of your Bed, tho it be at Midnight, to help
him quench the threatening Flames, that he be not ruined by them. And will you
not be as vigilant to keep your Neighbor from falling into those Flames which
can never be quenched? If not, there is a deplorable Defect both in your Faith
and in your Charity.

Upon the whole Matter; since God lays this Duty of suppressing the scandalous
Sins of Men upon every Person's Conscience, according to his Station and
Capacity: Can any of us that have any sensibleness of Conscience, evade the
Charge and binding Force of it?

Will you (like Gallio) care for none of these things? Or will you lull your
selves to sleep with Felix his shifting excuse, fancying that you may hereafter
have a more convenient Season to do it? Or will you turn short with churlish
Cain; and even ask God to his Face, Whether you are your Brother's Keeper? Yes
truly; God has so far made you the Guardian of your Brother, that if you see
him about to cut his Throat, you must stay his Hand if you are able; or if he
be Blind, and in his mistake be going directly upon the Mouth of a Pit, you
must discover his Danger, and dissuade him from it, or every Body will deem you
Accessory to his Death. These are Cases in which every Body is convinced that
he ought to succor his Friend, yea, his Enemy; and needs no Casuist to
determine the bounds of his Duty in so plain a Matter. And what? shall we have
more Care about the Body of our Brother, than about his Soul? And shall we be
more concerned to prevent his Temporal than his Eternal Ruin?

And does not he whom Satan has blinded, need the Direction of those whom God
has inlightn'd, as much as he who has lost his Bodily Sight? And has not that
infatuated Soul, whom Lust and Passion has put out of his right Mind, need to
be bound with Chains, and to be rigidly dealt with, as much as any poor
distracted Creature in Bedlam?

It is true, neither of these sorts of mad People will at present give you
Thanks for your Pains with them, because, during their Lunacy, neither of them
have Sense enough to discern, that what you do is for their Good. But you must
wait the Recovery of their Senses, and then they will be exceeding thankful to
you, and bless the Time in which they were acquainted with you, and praise God
who put it into your Heart to do them such a Kindness.

And if it shall so please God, that by all our Informations, Admonitions and
Reproofs, we become instrumental to gain but one Soul from the Power of Satan
to God; it will be an abundant Recompense for all our Labors and Sufferings in
it. For then all the Good he does, and all the Glory which he gives to God,
will in a great measure redound to our Advantage in the other World, which
should mightily invigorate our Endeavors of this kind; and if they be but
hearty and diligent, they cannot wholly miscarry.

But there are some who frequently make use of a proverbial Speech in this
Case, to hinder the progress of this blessed Work, tho it be but little to
their purpose; which is, That every Vessel must stand upon its own bottom. And
thus far it is true, That every one must principally answer for his own Sins to
God. But it is as true, That we may be partakers of other Men's Sins, 1 Timothy 5.
22. And that if we are sharers in their Guilt by Connivance, or a sinful
Silence and Neglect, we shall also share in their Punishment. Hence it is that
we are advised, Rev. 18. 4. That we partake not of the Sins of Babylon, that we
receive not of her Plagues.

And as to the Case of public and scandalous Sins, the whole Community is
concerned to bring the Transgressor to due Punishment: for we are often assured
in the Book of God, that there is no other way to put away the Evil from the
whole Body of the People, which is ever liable to the Vengeance of God, where
such Enormities are unpunished, Deuteronomy. 13. 5. Deuteronomy. 19. 19. and 21. 21. So that
we must conclude, That such as frequently hear or behold those Vices and
Impieties which the Laws of God and Man condemn, and yet never endeavor to
bring them to a just Rebuke and Correction, are Sinners against God and Men:
and next to the principal Acters, these Connivers at Sin are the Instruments of
pulling down the Curses and Plagues of God upon a Land. For in the Case of
uncertain Murder, Deuteronomy. 21. the Elders of the City were to protest, That their
Eyes had not seen the Fact, as well as that their Hands had not done it. And,
alas! how great are the Dangers of this our Nation, by reason of this
deplorable neglect of doing Justice upon public Wickedness. Vice has so long
been uncontrolled, that it is now grown Impudent: yea, it has been so long
encouraged by great Examples, and dandled upon the Knees of some Magistrates,
who ought to have trampled it under their Feet, (and with Samuel, to have hewn
it to pieces, as he did Agag, before the Lord) that it is grown Monstrous,
Scandalous, and Crying.

And therefore, as you would be found Lovers and Servants of God, and not
Fighters against him: and as you would avert, and not pull down his Judgments
upon your Native Land; I earnestly entreat you, yea, I charge it upon your
Consciences (as my Text impowers me to do) that you seriously and resolutely
set your selves from henceforth to a vigorous Prosecution of all legal Methods
of Reformation, as you would prevent the Judgments of God on Earth, and avoid
the Vengeance of his Eternal Wrath.

I shall now conclude all with a few practical Inferences from the whole.

Infer. 1. We may from what has been said perceive, what a gross Mistake the
pretended Kindness of Compartners in Sin is. If it be Hatred not to rebuke a
Person for Sin, what a fatal Enmity is it to lead him into it, and caress him
in it? The filthy Acquaintance of the Adulterers and Adulteresses, and of all
sinful Companions, is not only Enmity against God, but against themselves also.
They trip up each others Heels, and tumble in each others Arms into the
bottomless Pit. The Rebukes of the Text have infinitely more kindness in them,
than such treacherous Embraces, tho such abandoned Creatures have not competent
Sense to perceive and value it.

Infer. 2. Since God requires us to rebuke the Sins of our Companions in the
Text, how difficult shall we find it to be innocent in ill Company! It Is very
uneasy in some Tempers, to reprove a Friend, or a Superior; and it is more
uneasy to a tender Conscience, to omit a proper Season for Reproof. And
sometimes a defect in your Zeal may cause you to slip the fit Opportunity; and
this will be to your wounding, when you reflect upon it with due Seriousness
and Tenderness: So that you will always find your Integrity and Peace best
preserved by a careful shunning of vain and loose Company, as much as possible.

And in truth, this demonstrates the usefulness of those Religious Societies,
which are of late erected in this City, which I pray God confirm and increase.
For it is an invaluable Benefit for young Men to know what Conversation is
proper for their Intimacy; and where they may join themselves with those who
are going toward Everlasting Bliss. The want of such edifying Company (and the
Poison of the contrary) has been the Ruin of many a hopeful young Man and Woman.

Infer. 3. Lastly, How sad a Thought is it, and how should it cut us to the
Heart, That there is so little Zeal for God in a Nation of professed
Christians? How unlike are the most of those who bear the Name of Christ, to
him of whom it is said, The Zeal of thine House has eaten me up? Yea, how
unlike are we to those Primitive Christians, whose holy Fervency carried them
through the most threatening Dangers, whose Religion scattered the gross Fogs of
Profaneness and Superstition with its bright and warm Beams, and made the
Christian Name Illustrious and Honorable in the World?

O Sirs! as we love our Lord and Savior, let us act something like our Holy
Profession, and our infinite Hopes: Let our whole course of Life demonstrate
that we are indeed resolved for Heaven: Let our Speeches savor of our Holy
Faith; and let us continually breathe of God, and the things of his Eternal
Kingdom; and let it be seen in all Places and Companies, that we cannot bear
the appearance of any Contempt of the Great God, and of his Holy Will and
Authority.

Truly if ever our Holy Religion regains its Primitive Reputation and Renown,
it must be by the exemplary Purity, Zeal, and Fervor of its Professors; even
by a general, vigorous, and resolute Opposition to Vice, and a zealous and
conscientious Practice of all Christian Duty. To which Holy Frame, I beseech
God to raise every Soul of us, that we may not only escape the Pollutions of
this World our selves, but be a means of pulling others out of the Mire of Sin
here, and of saving them from the eternal Vengeance of God, which will
otherwise be their Portion for ever.

Consider what has been said, and the Lord give you Understanding in all
Things.

Amen.
FINIS.

