A Word in Season FOR Christian Union To all Protestant Dissenters from the
Church of England, Especially those of the Ministry.

By an hearty Well-wisher to them, and the Established Religion.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1680.

A Word in season for Christian Union.
SOme will say, The times are such, as we know not what to say or think, but I
am sure they are times wherein we all ought to think and do. To think what may
conduce to the pleasing of our gracious Sovereign, and preservation of our
Religion, and to do it with all speed. We have reason to believe from his
Majesty's frequent Proclamations and Protestations of his Resolves to maintain
and preserve the Protestant Religion, as now established, that all our lawful
endeavors to do the same, will be grateful and acceptable to his Majesty,
whatever some Malcontents may suggest to the contrary. Now our business is
seriously to consider what on our parts is meet to be done toward this great
end. The Papists are our greatest and most dreaded Adversaries. Now if we may
take our measures from the Enemies own Maxim, Divide and Reign, Union is the
most likely way to our preservation. And since Unity and Conformity to the
established Church is the proper means, and required of all by Law, why should
we hazard all, and resolve to see the utmost of the Game, rather then yield
obedience to that Law? I fear, upon serious thinking, it will be found there is
more of Deception, Interest and Will, than of Reason or Religion in our
standing out. For would our dissenting Brethren of the Ministry plainly tell
the People, how far they are from those Oaths and Covenants, whereby they
themselves (as they say) stand bound; And that those obligations required now
of the Ministers are not required of the People. Would they faithfully inform
them, what they dare not deny to be true, that the Church of England is far
from all Idolatry, and sound in her Articles and Constitutions; that this is as
Soul-saving Doctrine preached by her Ministers, as by any others; that they may
go to the Public Assemblies, and join in the Public Ordinances without
sinning in so doing; that they may be built up in their most holy Faith, and
instructed to lead a religious life there, as well as elsewhere. In a word, if
they would convince them, that Ceremonies cannot, ought not to fright us from
the substance. That in an established Church, not infected with Heresy or
Idolatry, nor defective in any part of Religion, it is duty to bear with much.
Which is the Judgment of a very late considerable J. Corbet's Kingdom of God
among men. page 172.
Author on their side. All which is true, and granted by many of the most
admired men of their Party, doubtless the Meetings would be thinner, and the
Public Churches fuller than they are. And as for you of the Clergy, if you
would lay aside Prejudice, Popularity, and Self-interest, and seriously
consider a few things, methinks you might bring both, them and your selves too,
to some reasonable Friendship with the Church of England. As, 1. That many of
you (my Brethren) were Episcopally Ordained, and have vowed Conformity to the
Church of England. Which Orders and Obligations you have not openly retracted
and declared void and null: and so are bound still by them; they being in their
own nature as obligatory, as any other which you have since taken. For the
former Oaths and Obligations you took upon in obedience to lawful Authority, a
considerable circumstance, which in the latter you cannot pretend to: unless
you will have that to be Law, which the longest Sword establishes as such;
which I presume you will not avouch, because you may easily foresee whither
such a Principle will lead you. 2. That while you refuse Conformity to the
established Church, you dwindle into a thousand Factions; And are so confused,
that multitudes of your followers, like the dispersed Jews, know not what Tribe
they are of; who is their Head, what their Government, or whither they tend. As
suppose a Man should take an account of the swarms in the private Meetings, and
ask them what Judgment or Persuasion they are of? not one in an hundred can
tell you. Because in truth they know not the difference between Episcopal,
Presbyterian, Independent, etc. understand not what those cramp words signify;
Nor indeed some of you their Teachers. I have heard some of your Brethren (and
none of the most inconsiderable neither) affirm themselves Presbyterians, who
upon examination and discourse proved themselves Independents. And the truth
is, as the case stands with you, you are most of you Independents as to
practice. And those very Men of the Ministry, who were wont to decry that
Faction both in the Pulpit, and through the wider mouth of the Press, now herd
with them, whom they heretofore judged to stand at a greater distance from
them, as to the power and placing of the Keys, the administration of, and
admission to the Sacraments, than the Church of England. And therefore whereas
all dissenting Protestants are hudled together under the name of Presbyterians,
I think it were more proper under the title of Independents, who are certainly
the greater number. 3. If also it were well weighed, that what the Magistrate
requires, in order to your admission into the established Church, cannot be
made by the Word of God so apparently sinful, as it is apparent by that Word,
that Obedience to Magnistrates is a Duty. I need not cite the many plain Texts
that require the latter: I wish you (my Brethren) would publish the Text as
plain for the former. If you cannot, as I think (if I am not mistaken in my
Bible) you cannot, the meanest Logician will tell you, you leave a certian Duty
for an uncertain; and run upon, and persist in a known Sin, to avoid that which
is only doubted, and disputed to be so, which men of your great Reason and
tender Conscience (one would think) should not be guilty of. 4. Nor is it
unworthy your thoughts, who are of the Ministry, how far you have owned the
King's Supremacy, by accepting the Indulgence his Majesty was pleased once to
give you by his Royal Proclamation. When his late Majesty of pious memory K.
Charles the first, required your Conformity, you obeyed the Parliment against
him, and fought many years against the King's Supremacy, by the Ordinances of
Parliament. And now when his present Majesty granted you an Indulgence, without
the Parliament, or consent of the Law made by King, Lords and Commons, then you
owned his Supremacy: which is as much as to say, the King has a Power for you,
but none against you. Or when he yields what you desire, it is lawful to obey
him; but if he denies, you will disown him, and deny his Authority. And I am
induced to believe there is no dissenting Party, but would own his Majesty's
Supremacy in establishing them. If his Majesty would set up the Presbyterian
Government, they would applaud it. If the Independent, they would justify it;
whatever the established Law of the Land is, or says to the contrary. And why
is not his Majesty's Command (together with the Law) to conform to the Church
as now established, as binding as any, and as reasonable to be obeyed and
conformed to, as if his Majesty should enjoin either of the former? 'Twill be
an hard question for you to answer, whether the King with the Law, or the King
without the Law, is to be obeyed? And yet I think, decide it which way you
will, the decision of it would end in your condemnation. I have not forgot how
frequently and violenty that text, Romans 13.1, 2, 3. [he that resists; shall
receive to himself Damnation] was used to be urged and pressed in the late time
by you: but now, with the Ceremonial Law, you have abolished it; as if the Holy
Ghost had designed it in favor of those Governors, and that Government which
you would have set up only, and no other. I pray God some of you don't find at
last, that, and such like Divine Precepts, as forceable now, as ever you once
thought them to be. --

5. Besides, It Is no light matter, that you suffer those many amongst you to go
on quietly in the breach of their late Oaths, Sacraments, and Subscriptions,
which they took, and laid themselves under, in a seeming obedience to the Law:
which they gave all the Testimony and assurance to our Governors, that Tongues
and Hands, Words and Letters could express, that they were and would be
conformable to the Government as then established, both in Church and State.
Tho it is to be feared many of you took the Test, only to save your Bacon. For
some did not stick to disgorge themselves of it soon after in your private
Assemblies, by a seeming Repentance, and feigned Confession, how sorry they
were for what they had done; to the just provoking of his Majesty, contempt of
the Law, dishonor of you who accepted those Retractations, and reproach of the
Protestant Religion, which you would have the sole credit of being defenders
of. These things I know (my Brethren) to my grief, and could find you out some
of these Penitents, if need were. And pray tell me, what any Papist or Jesuit
could do more, to save their Stake, adn elude lawful Authority? Well, a day
will come, when these Oaths will make them sick in good earnest; I mean not the
taking of them, but their making no Conscience to be true to them. Friends,
it is not time aday to dally and play the fool with God, and our own
Consciences, but to lay these things to heart, and to resolve in your mind,
whether these things considered, it will not make most for the Glory of God,
the pleasing of his Vicegerent on Earth, the peace of your own Consciences, the
preservation of our Religion, and dishearting of our common Enemy, to unite and
join your selves speedily and heartily to the established Church. The Enemy
then could with no color feign and fix Plots upon you, of seeking to subvert
the Government, which your Schism and Dissension gives them advantage to do.
And if ever Popery creep into and get possession of the House, it is Division
opens the Door to it. And it is not all your talking finely to the People
against Popery can ever overthrow this Vanity. For the Eternal Truth has
spoken it, that an House divided cannot stand. And tho it is commonly talked
among you, that the Church of England is coming apace to Popery; yet a serious
consideration and unprejudiced Reason will inform you better: or if that
cannot, time will, that she is the chief Bar to keep it out. And that the best
course you can take to this end, is to strengthen her hands, by joining with
her. Both together may do it, without her (what ever is pretended) you never
can. 6. And to draw toward a Close, let me entreat you to consider a few
Apothegms or Maxims (or call them what you will) which I suppose may be the
more taking with you, because they were drawn up and published by a dissenting
Brother in the late Times, and looked on as very found then, and I hope they be
not now grown rotten with Age. They are against allowing any Toleration or
Liberty of Conscience, in those Times had been infallible, and there could be
no Conscience at all in those that differed from them. Hear what he says, and
pardon me that I conceal his Name, till I have further occasion. He lies close
in the little hole over the Oven, is very loath to be exposed this cold Weather,
and I have a little the more respect to him, because of his age. 1. First
(says he) Augustin's Tongue had not owed his Mouth one penny rent, though it
had never spoke word more in it than this, Nullum malum pejus liberate
errandi. 2. He that is willing to tolerate any unsound Opinion, that his own
may be tolerated though never so sound, will for a need hang God's Bible at the
Devil's girdle. 3. It is better to live in a Church united, though a little
corrupt, than in a Church, whereof some part is incorrupt, and all the rest
divided. 4. Liberty of Conscience can be nothing else, but a freedom from Sin
and Error, and Liberty of Error nothing but a poison for Conscience 5. Religio
docenda est, non coercenda, is a pretty piece of album Latinum for some kind of
throats that are willingly sore. That Is a choker! Without doubt the Man thought
the wheel would never turn; That they who are then atop, would never more be
underneath. 6. Toleration turns the Church, Christ's Academy, into the Devil's
University, where any Man may commence Scismatick per saltum; and he that is
Filius Diabolicus, or simpliciter pessimus, may have his Grace to go to Hell
cum privilegio, and carry as many after him as he can. This is as biting as
new-made Mustard: but who can help it? it is the sauce of his own providing, to
make your meat go down the better; and if it relished well then, why is it
disgusted now? 7. They that think they have found a way to Heaven, who cannot
find the way to Church, have found a way thither that was never of God's
making. Good again. 8. It Is dangerous sailing by their Compass, who pretend to
have discovered the North-West Passage to Heaven. True as the former. The good
old man has many more of the same stamp, but here are enough put together to
amount to a full conviction, that your Principles and Practices then were
different from what they are now. Separation, or not joining with you, was a
sin, and not to be allowed upon any pretense whatsoever. But now any pretense
must justify Non-communion with the present Established Church. He that talked
against you and your Church Government then, was a profane fellow, and a
malignant: but he that babbles most against Ecclesiastical Government now, is
hugged as a zealous and good Christian. For shame, my Brethren, show your
selves Christians, and yield what you can, rather then hazard all. And account
it your honor, as well as honesty, at last to return to your Duty. Walk by
that golden Rule, the sum of the Law and the Prophets, Do to all Men, as you
would they should do unto you. And press Conformity upon your hearers now, as
much as you used to do when you ruled in the Church. Tell them plainly there is
never a Prayer in the public Liturgy, but they may safely join in it, for it is
put up to the true God, in the name of Jesus Christ, for things agreeable to
his will. And desire them for God's sake, and for Religion sake to conform as
far as they may, without sin. And lead them on to this by your own Example; And
we will desire no more, and give you our hearty thanks for doing this, though
but your duty: But if you still remain inconstant to your Vows and Promises,
and wilful in your ways of Separation, and by your Example and preaching
encourage others to follow after you, I must for once tell you, you do amiss,
and it is Iniquity, even the Solemn Meeting. Isa. 1.13.



FINIS.

