Imprimatur,

Dec. 30. 1674. Ex Aed. Lambethanis, THO. TOMKYNS.

A SERMON Preached at the OXFORDSHIRE-FEAST, November. 25. 1674. In the Church of
St. Michael's Cornhill, LONDON.

By John Woolley M. A. and late Fellow of Trin. Coll. in Oxon: And Rector of
St. Michael's Crooked-lane, LONDON.

LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwell, for R. Royston, Bookseller to His Most Sacred
Majesty, at the Angel in Amen-Corner. MDCLXXV.

To my Honored Countrymen, the Oxfordshire Gentlemen: And particularly to the
Stewards, Mr. SAMVEL SKINNER. Mr. THOMAS CROSS. Mr. JAMES PAVL. Mr. MARTYN
STAMP. Mr. JEFFERY FLEXNEY. Mr. THOMAS HASLEWOOD. Mr. EDWARD COLLINGWOOD. Mr.
EDMUND WANSELL. Mr. PHILIP BVRTON. Mr. FRANCIS SMART. Mr. THOMAS ROVS. Mr.
EDMUND HASLEWOOD. Mr. THOMAS BARRET.

Honored Countrymen,
THE chief thing which I have to say to you at present is, To beg your pardon
for my telling the World, how poorly you were provided with a Sermon, who had
taken such excellent care in all things else, to the Honor and Content of your
Countrymen. However you may partly thank your selves for it; since being
straightened in your time, I knew not upon what occasion some of you were pleased
to hope, That I could in 13 days provide any thing worthy your selves, or the
Honor of your Assembly. It might indeed have been more both for your Credit
and mine own, if I had declined this public Service, till Age and Experience
had added Strength to my Eloquence, and Authority to my Person: But I must
confess, I took this Task upon me, out of that eagerness and fondness which I
had to be publicly known and owned as one of your Countrymen. And herein I
consulted more my own Credit than yours; since it is more real Honor to be
reckoned among you, my Countrymen, than I can possibly lose in the Printing
this Sermon, though it were far worse than it is. Wherefore I again entreat
your pardon, and good opinion for me. Nor is it to be supposed, that while I am
pleading for Charity and good Nature, I my self should be excluded from having
any share in them. When you go on to read this Sermon, as you will find many
faults and weaknesses in it, so you will I hope find some Arguments which may
persuade you to excuse them. So that you have here a very just opportunity to
practice what I have recommended to you. Now having said this, I take my leave
of you: Beseeching Almighty God, to increase the Honor and Gallantry of your
Design, by continuing this Yearly and Charitable Solemnity; by furnishing our
Country with Stewards as Generous as Faithful, and as Good every way as you
are; And with far far better Preachers than I was:

Who am, Honored Countrymen, Your most faithful and most obliged Countryman,
JOHN WOOLLEY.

GENESIS xiij. 8. And Abraham said unto Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray thee,
between me and thee, and between my Herd-men and thy Herd-men: For we be
Brethren.
THere are in my Text two General Parts, which I shall consider in this Sermon:
And the first of these two Parts, is, Abraham's generous Condescension, his
eagerness and forward compliance for Peace and Friendliness, contained in these
words, And Abraham said unto Lot, etc.

In the other part of my Text, is, Abraham's Reason for this kind and peaceable
temper, to be maintained between Lot and himself, For we be Brethren.

Now that I may in some measure promote, what I hope does naturally grow in
your Bosoms ( Honored Countrymen), namely, a large, open, and diffusive
Charity; a gallant, friendly temper of mind: I say to this intent, I have
chosen out for you the Example of our Father Abraham; great in his Wealth and
Honor, but greater far in his Faith and Charity: An Example known of and
approved by every one of you, I am persuaded: An Example by Gods Providence
preserved to us, and to our days, through the many spoils, changes, and
different events of three thousand six Calvisius Chronol.
hundred and odd years; and this not without Gods special design to be followed
by us also in these later Ages. For we cannot imagine, that the Holy Ghost
intended we should read the Scriptures as we do a Chronicle of our own Nation,
or as we do a Story of Caesar and Pompey: But that we should read, and mark,
and learn to do as Abraham did. Gods Providence in giving and preserving to us
the holy Scriptures, being a far nobler design than to entertain our fancies,
or furnish our discourse; it being, among other things, to make us kind and
peaceable, gentle, meek, and complying; as you will find Abraham to have been
in the Story of my Text. By his Example then we are to learn our own duty; by
his demeanor in this place and in this affair, we are all bound to manage our
own lives and behaviors. This is the Apostle's way of Preaching, I am sure,
Heb. chapter 11, 12. And it is St. James's command also, chapter 5. v. 10.

And this I have said by way of Preface, to justify my intended Discourse,
which shall be by way of Example, (it being the most ingenuous manner of
dealing with you), and to show you the force and value of such an Argument:
Hoping, that you will with candor and reverence hearken to a Discourse of the
same nature, though it come far short of the Apostle's Preaching, as to the
circumstances of Gravity and Eloquence.

To begin then: We find from the 11th Chapter of this Book of Genesis v. 31.
that Abraham was indeed Uncle to Lot, though in this place he calls him
Brother; a compellation among Kindred not unusual in those times, and in those
Countries; Lot being the Son of Haran, which Haran was the Brother of Abraham,
as by the place does appear. Abraham then, you see, was Lots Superior, as to
the line of Kindred, and the common Rules of Civility and Good-manners.

Again, Lot was a Fatherless Child, desolate and without a Parent: As being the
Son of that man, who is particularly remarkt ('it was it seems a strange thing),
I say, Lot was the Son of that Haran, who is particularly remarkt to have died
before his own Father, Genesis 11. 28. Lots condition then, when Abraham took him
into his own Family, was so much the more sad and calamitous, as being so
strange and unusual: And hereupon (as may be supposed) good Abraham takes him
into his own Family; deals as tenderly with him, as he would have done with his
own Child, furnishes him with Flocks and Herds, with Lands and Possessions. Now
Abraham, we may be sure, was very great and powerful; his very Countenance was
an honor and support: Yet this Abraham takes with him Lot the Orphan, makes
him sharer with him in the variety of his Travels and his Fortune; gives him
the honor of his Company, and the protection of his Power. And upon this score
also was Abraham far greater than Lot; much the better man every way; as being
Lots Uncle and Guardian, as being Lots Prince, and Lots Benefactor: Yet behold!
even to this young man, to this Lot his Nephew and Pupil, to one beneath him,
and beholden to him, is Abraham thus kind and condescending. He stands not upon
the punctilio's of nice Honor, or the fond appointments of a Ceremony: But
though a Prince high and mighty, generous and munificent; yet he stoops down,
and humbles himself to be at peace with his Inferior; to be at peace with one
who was bound by the Laws of Nature and Nations, by the Laws of Thankfulness,
Custom, and Good-manners, to have submitted unto him: That is, Abraham looks
upon Honor and Majesty, stateliness and austere distance, to be mere trifles,
when compared with Love and Charity; when compared with gentleness,
benevolence, and just compliance. Abraham, even mighty Abraham, addresses
himself to one that should have waited upon Him, pays respect to his inferior,
casts off all the Robes of Majesty, and exposes himself naked to Scorn and
Contempt, rather than loosen the Cords of Friendship, or break asunder the
Bonds of Peace.

And this should we also do. We should be any thing rather than unkind or
uncharitable. We should in all our conversation be courteous and affable, kind
and familiar to each other, though Providence and a successful industry, have
placed any of us some steps above our Brethren. God has set no man so much
higher than another, but that we are all within a Call: Even he that sits at
the top, may with a very calm and gentle voice of Peace reach the Ears of him
that lies below. We are indeed something above one another, but it is a very
small matter, it is only as the Members in the same Body, (which is the
Apostle's instance, and not mine); I say, 1 Cor. 12. 27.
some men are indeed higher than their Brethren, but it is as the Head is above
the Hand: Though one be the Servant and the other the Master, yet we can with
little or no pains, nay often to our own ease, stoop down our Head to lean and
repose it upon our Arm; and with as little pains can the Hand be lifted up to
feed, and stroke, and refresh the Head. In short, every one of us here present,
may at one time or another, be a comfort and support, an ease and pleasure to
each other; the highest to the lowest, and the lowest to the highest: He that
is rich and great, may comfort and make glad the Souls of the poor ones; and he
that is poor, may oblige the rich good man, by affording him opportunities to
gratify his own just desires of doing good. Thus may we all in our several
places be serviceable to one another: Nor are we to live at such a distance,
but that we may be within the compass of a neighbourly conversation, and a
familiar acquaintance.

But what is more to my present purpose: If any of us (my Brethren) should
chance at any time to fall out and quarrel about Flocks and Herds, Lands and
Possessions (which God forbid); I say, if this should happen, as I hope it will
not, yet it is no discredit, you see, no sordid abject debasement, even for the
best of you to begin peace and reconcilement with your offending or your
offended Brother. It will be no disparagement to your Courage, to your Birth,
or your Quality, if great men, as in other cases, so in this also, take place,
and have the precedence, to begin the methods of peace and forgiveness. Abraham
in my Text did so, you see; and for this stands high upon the Pillars of Fame
to this very day: He condescended, and as it were submitted to his offending
inferior: And yet for all this, I appeal to your own Souls and Consciences,
whether any of you ever thought the worse of Abraham for it. It Is indeed a very
common thing, to see a poor man crouch and cringe to his better: But 'twill be
spectaculum Deo dignum, to speak with Seneca, 'twill be a sight worth the view
and approbation of God himself, to see a great man condescend and entreat for
peace with a poor man: I say, 'twill be a sight pleasing to God and his holy
Angels; inasmuch as it is the common practice of Heaven so to do, or else God
never had been, never would be reconciled to us miserable dust and ashes. How
beautiful a thing then will it be, to see a man not puffed up with his Riches and
Honor, as with a Poison or a Disease; but by the weight of his abundance pressed
lower, and bowed down to his poor desolate Brother.

And I the rather commend this to you (my Brethren) because it often happens,
that a great man may promote peace and friendliness, when a poor man dares not.
Many men are not stubborn, but modest; they are not froward and peevish, but
very bashful; they are indeed willing, but cannot be so bold, as to proffer
peace, or even to ask forgiveness. They are not like the sturdy Oak, which will
not bow even to a Tempest; but like the Hair of our Head, which will bend and
bow to any thing, but is apt to be blown aside by every Breath. Such are many
men, willing enough to comply with peace, hugely capable of being bowed to any
shape; but the blast of a great man's mouth, some few blustering words quite
discourage them, they fly into Corners, and there pine away in secret and in
scorn. This is a consideration of high Morality, and worthy of your noblest
Charity: And from whence I could heartily wish, That you who are great and
good, would learn to pity such men, to call and invite, to encourage and
persuade your meaner Brethren to be Friends, if ever interest or a sad accident
cast discontents among you.

But on the other side, suppose it be stubbornness in a mean man (as Poverty is
often froward and peevish, and we must bear with it), I say, suppose it be
stubbornness in a mean man; yet it becomes men of Parts and Education, to teach
Clowns their Duty, with calmness and gravity, with good words and prudent
behavior, to soften and polish such rude and ungarnisht minds. It Is such men's
Disease and Distemper to be quarrelsom and froward; And it is the good man's
Duty, even to help and pity them in this condition: For we are not to suffer a
Convulsive man to lie in the Fire, into which his angry Sickness has cast him,
though in the taking him up, his Disease, and not he, strike us on the Face, or
smite us on the Breast: For we are to remember, that in such a case he will do
as much even to himself. And this I say, not to encourage the Clown in his
clownishness, or the froward man in his frowardness: But to show you, that
Peace and Love, Friendship and Charity, are to be procured at any rate; And
that the rich man ought to seek peace, and ensue it (as the Apostle speaks)
when the poor man will not, or rather dares not offer at it.

But farther, because this Day's business, and my Text oblige me to a larger
Discourse of Friendship and Unity; Give me leave again to recommend to you the
Example of Abraham, in this following method.

And first, Let us take notice of Abraham's willingness to be at peace, from
the manner of his endeavoring after it, expressed in these words, Let there be
no strife, I pray thee, etc.

Secondly, Let us take notice of Abraham's willingness to be at peace, in the
matter in which this quarrel was like to be; namely, in the matter of worldly
gain, in Lands and Possessions; together with the extent of it, it was like to
grow even among their Servants also, among their Herdmen, etc.

As to the manner of Abraham's address; you have partly seen it already, in his
applying himself to Lot, his Nephew and Inferior; and it is farther expressed in
his humble words, and gentle entreaties, Let there be no strife, I pray thee. I
pray thee! What lowly, meek, and friendly language is here! He that could have
commanded, entreats; he that was Lord and Master, prays and beseeches for
peace. What melting Language was this! How must this dominari affectibus, rule
and control the Passions, far more than the Eloquence of Cicero or
Demosthenes! or to put it into the phrase of a better Orator than both these,
His words indeed are sweeter than honey, yea than honey, or the honeycomb. Nor
was this civil and obliging Language a fit of Courtship, or a good humor only;
but the usual and frequent practice of this mighty Prince. An instance of whose
courteous behavior, fit to be taken notice of by all proud and morose men, we
have in Genesis 23. where also the very Heathen, the Sons of Heth, may upbraid our
Quakers, and such like untaught and illiterate Clowns. The Story in short is
this:

Sarah was now dead; and Abraham, though grief might have made him sullen,
comes and treats friendlily and obligingly with the Sons of Heth, about a
burying-place; and they do it in such language, and such a manner, that even
the Courts of civilized Nations cannot exceed them. So early and so natural is
the practice of civil words, respectful Behavior, and honorable
Compellations; for at ver. 5, 6, we thus read:

And the Children of Heth answered Abraham, saying unto him, Hear us my Lord,
Thou art a mighty Prince among us, in the choice of our Sepulchers bury thy
dead. Ver. 7. And Abraham stood up, and bowed himself to the people of the Land
--. And so he does again at the 12th Verse. He does not, it seems, think it
inconsistent with his Religion, or inconsistent with his Honor, to bow his
Body, and pay his respect even to the Heathen, in whose esteem he was a mighty
Prince. He takes their awful and civil compellation of Lord, and gives them
back his bodily Complement; though as far from Superstition, and as tender of
Gods Honor, as any of our morose Pretenders can be. Let those men therefore
consider this, and go not you into their ways, a main part of whose Religion it
is, to be unmannerly, both to God and to man.

But to return to my Text: We are to take notice in it, of Abraham's kind and
meek language, of his praying and beseeching, even while he was at odds with
his Nephew. Which may be remembered to the conviction, and be it spoken to the
shame of us Christians; who in a contest or a quarrel, in a small pet, or some
trifling disagreement, do rail at and backbite, do slander and abase each
other. Cursings and evil-speakings are our frequent Arguments, and we shoot out
our arrows, even bitter words. This enrages and envenoms the Wound, adds
bitterness to the Gall, turns a Dispute into a Frenzy, and makes that Madness
which should be Reason.

But on the other side; when do we hear such language as this in my Text, or to
whose Ear has the report come? Let there be no, etc. between me and thee, I
pray thee, my Brother. I beseech thee for peace my Friend; Come, let us agree,
and dwell together in Unity. No, we are so far from such meek and tender
Expressions, so far generally from entreating for peace, that when men speak
unto us of it, we make our selves ready for Battle. We will not move one step
forward to be at peace: But we fix our selves, and sit down in the Chair of the
Scornful, Ep kathdra loimn, In cathedra pestium, as Tertullian of old reads it
out of the Greek Tert. lib. de spectac. sub. initio.
Translation of the Bible. The Scornful man is a Pest and Infection; his Breath
poisons the Air, and blasts the credit of all that come near him. Such cruel
things are bitter words, that they are and may be compared to what we fear most
of all, even to the Plague and Pestilence. Let us therefore avoid all such
unnatural and reproachful words. Let our Discourse, even in Disputes and
Controversies, be amiable and obliging, be courteous, peaceful, and
condescending. And let all such men know, who are given to a proud and haughty
speech, that Abraham, a better man than the best of such Scorners, chides them
severely in this Example, and though he be dead, yet speaks. Nor must they
look to dwell in his peaceful Bosom, or to have one drop of water to cool those
tongues, which beforehand are set on fire of Hell, as St. James expresses it.
Cap. 3.


Wherefore, Beloved Countrymen, seeing these things are so, Let us wholly
conform our language and behavior, our endeavors and our entreaties, to peace
and friendship. If our Enemies curse, let us bless; if they revile, let us
beseech. And who can tell, but a soft word may melt that man's heart, who will
not be corrected with Scorpions, nor subdued with a rod of Iron? Thus have I
done with the manner of Abraham's address, his peaceful and kind approaches;
hoping, that your Education and good manners, your natural goodness, and your
Christian Piety will improve this Example to the public honor, quiet, and
advantage both of your selves and others.

As to the remaining part (in which I shall be short), namely, the matter of
this debate and growing quarrel; 'twas about Flocks and Herds, about Fields and
Possessions: And no wonder, for Riches and Gain have made Breaches in the
closest and most compact Friendships. These have made Fathers cruel, and Sons
disobedient; have torn Families into pieces, and scattered blood and ruin
among the dearest Relations: And therefore it being the common fate of mankind,
to quarrel for such mean concerns, I cannot but conjure you, by Charity and
Religion, by the Honor and Remembrance of your Country, and lastly, by this
great Example, That you quarrel not about such things. Suffer not your selves
to be hurried by this common Stream into the wide Sea and open Tempests of
wranglings and disagreements. Waste not your Time, and your Estates, and your
Charity to boot, in long and vexatious Suits at Law. Prefer your Charity before
your Riches: Prefer the peace of God, and of your Neighbor, and of your own
Consciences, before wealth and abundance, before your profit or your pleasure.
For here also Abraham is your Example, and bids you do so; who rather than fall
out with his Nephew Lot, gives him his choice, and parts with a Land that was
well watered, Even as the Garden of the Lord, like the land of Egypt, as thou
come to Zoar, Verse 10, of this Chapter.

But if necessity, and domestic prudence to keep our own, cast us upon
disputes and controversies; Go first, and entreat for peace, pray to God for
his help, and to thine angry Brother for his compliance: Try all the arts and
methods of peace; so shall thou have the Blessing of Abraham, even the eternal
Blessings of the Peacemakers.

And this we must do, not only between our selves and our Neighbors, but
between our Servants and their Servants; according to the extent of Abraham's
Charity here in my Text, Let there be no strife between my Herdmen and thy
Herdmen. We must take care to spread and enlarge our Charity, and to let it
drop down from our Head to the Skirts of our Garments, even to the meanest that
belong to us. Servants are sometimes petulant and querulous, froward and
talkative; and many a man by upholding an unmannerly Child, or a pragmatical
Servant, has enraged his Neighbor, and lost his Friend. It Is therefore our
duty to teach our Children and Servants modesty and civil language: To plant
peace in the tender youth, and to fix it in the basest dispositions. We are to
increase the Dominions of Charity, and to enlarge the Curtains of her
Habitation, that she may dwell even among the meanest of the people; that is,
we are to deal our love and good nature, as we do our Bread, even to all our
Family.

Lastly, When we are made Friends with any man, as we must cease to do evil, so
we must learn to do good to him and his. Many men say, when they are agreed
with a Neighbor, I am friends with him at last, but I have done with him, I Will
take care never to deal with him more. This is the common Rhetoric of cruel
men, and the Eloquence of worldly wisdom. I do not forbid Caution and just
Prudence in such cases; but I say, we must do as we find Abraham doing in the
next Chapter to my Text; not only reconciling himself to Lot (as here) even to
his own Loss, but venturing his own Life and Fortune for him, against the
combined force of his barbarous Enemies. We must, when we are made Friends with
any man, assist him with our Strength and with our Riches, with our Counsel and
with our Interest, and that too in his greatest necessities. Our Lives and our
Discourses, our Wealth, our Servants and Children, all that we have are to be
disposed for Peace and Charity. We must plead the cause of the absent, and
entreat those we meet face to face: And we must allow men to plead for
themselves, and to make their own excuses; and not be as cruel to one another,
as we are told the Heathens were to our Forefathers, the Christians, who
allowed to all men, even to the most vile Malefactors, an Advocate to plead for
them, save only to the Christians. Wherefore, as I said before, so I say again,
Let us be kind and familiar, courteous and affable, entreating and easy to be
entreated; For

We be Brethren: The Second General of my Text, namely, Abraham's Reason for
this kind and peaceable temper to be maintained between Lot and himself, For we
be Brethren, etc.

Now a Brother carries in its Name all the endearments of Nature, the strongest
and most valiant Arguments for Love that can be. Even those Christians of old,
who were so famous for loving one another, could not find out a fitter name
than this: And though the Heathens scofft at them for it, yet they stood to
their name of Fratres, of Brethren, and made it good by their Practice; so
loving and so friendly, that they had every thing common but their Wives. And
indeed the Love of Brethren is the very Seed and Root of Kingdoms and
Societies, of Cities and Commonwealths: And the eternal Rules of Peace and
Justice must be first maintained in private Families, or else there can be no
such thing as Public Weal and Society. The Reason then which Abraham gives for
Peace, is the most plain and natural, the most agreeable and convincing
Argument in the World. Nor may we think Abraham so little skilled in Passions,
in the Arts of Eloquence and Persuasion, as not to apply the most suitable
Topic in a matter his Soul so much desired.

But farther yet: The Hebrew adds more strength and luster to Abraham's
Argument; nor can I well see, why this Reading I am about to mentin, is thrust
out into the Margin, unless it be to comply with the Greek Translation. For in
the Original it runs thus: (...) For men Brethren are we; Bib. Polyglot.
followed by the Syriack also, and Chaldee Translations: For Men Brethren are
we; that is, we are Men as well as Brethren; our Nature as well as our Kindred
bids us not to quarrel. It Is beastly indeed, and inhumane. It Is like the Wolves
of the Desert, and the Lions of the Wilderness, and not like Men: From whose
very name goodnature has its Title, and is called Humanity.

But farther yet, there is more in this Argument still: We are, says Abraham,
Anashim, Achim, perishing, mortal Brethren; and therefore, let us not quarrel:
we have enemies enough beside, the Devil and his Angels, Death and Sickness,
and ten thousand accidents, to consume and to dissolve us; yea, and the very
Air does prey upon and devour us. We are sickly, perishing Brethren, and
therefore let there be no strife between us. This is in short the sum of
Abraham's Argument. And give me leave to expostulate the case with you also;
For are not we such also, my Brethren? Are not we mortal, fading, sickly
Creatures? Therefore, let us also be at peace. For what an ugly sight is it, to
see two weak dying men grasping for a Morsel they cannot swallow, or for some
pleasant Toy which they cannot enjoy; to see them scratch at, and offer
violence to each other, to employ that small leisure which their Features have
from Pangs and Convulsions, in threatening Looks, and ghastly Menaces. And such
are we, perishing Brethren, every day going to our long home, and therefore let
us not quarrel at our parting; but like Friends that are taking leave, let us
employ that little time we have, in shaking hands, in love and kindness, in
Charity and good wishes: For though Menander an Heretic (in Irenaeus) bragged
Iren. lib. 1. cap. 21. Edit. 1625. Colon.
that his Disciples, when once baptized, could neither wax old, nor grow sick;
yet time and death gave him the Lie, and we are all Anashim Achim, perishing
Brethren for all that. Thus have I enlarged on Abraham's Reason: And this
Argument is to remain upon our Consciences and our Memories also ( Honored
Countrymen) For we are Brethren: Brethren in the same great Family, the Church
of Christ: Brethren in the same Protestant Religion: Brethren of the same
County, and most of us Brethren in the same City: We are tied together to Love
and Peace, by all the Obligations of Religion, of humane nature, and of humane
frailty: We, even we, are under all those Obligations with which wise and
peaceable Abraham prevailed over his Nephew. Let us therefore be at unity, as
Brethren in an House; let us agree and consent to do good; yea, let us rejoice
together for the good of others: Then shall this Solemnity be a Solemnity of
Blessing; and Agpe may be the Name for our Feasts; they may be Charity it self,
as the Meetings of the Ancients were called: And it is (God be thanked) in our
Power to be so. In order to this, give me leave to recommend to you at this
time two Circumstances, wherein it were to be wished we could all agree: And
then I have done.

First then, Let us be united in our Religion: For if Abraham complied so much,
and took such care to be at peace in worldly Affairs; How much more should we
strive to be at peace in our Religion, whose very business is Charity, and
whose Gospel is a Gospel of peace? Consider your tender Mother, the Church of
England, and be not easily persuaded to think amiss of her; of her who has
prayed and entreated her disobedient Sons to come to her, who has divested her
self of many innocent and honorable Privileges, to satisfy the weak and
discontented: And I hope no man would have her go naked, would strip her of all
her decent Ornaments, to content the Pride and Avarice of her disobedient
Children; those Children whom she would have gathered under her wings, as a Hen
gathers her Chicken, and they would not. There are indeed many Pretenses and
Suggestions, many Scruples and Objectins, which I may not answer now; many
Jealousies and Fears of Popery and Superstition: But it is well, if the Romans
do not serve us, as one of them did the mutinous Jews of old; for Pilate, as
Eusebius Eusebius. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 6. Joseph. lib. 2 de bello Judaic. c. 18.
tells us out of Josephus, I say, Pilate, when he was made Governor by
Tiberius, and when he could not hope the Jews would ever suffer him to bring in
his Emperors Standards and Images openly into the City (for the Jews abhorred
and detested such things, and the forenam'd Josephus a Jew reckons it among
Solomon's Crimes, his making the Similitude Joseph. Ant. l. 8. Lat. Frob. 2 Chronicles. 4.
of Brazen Oxen under the Molten Sea, and of Lions on his Throne); I say, this
Pilate contrived to bring those Images into the City in the dark night, and
covered too, and veiled over: But when he had once got them in, it cost the
Jews many tears and lamentations, much danger and more sorrow, before they
could get them removed again. And let us take care, and I pray God we do not
find Popery and Superstition, Images and Idols maskt under the Garments of Zeal
and Reformation, brought into this Church; which was once, and is still the
Glory and Support of the Protestant Interest.

But secondly, That which I chiefly design at this time, and I humbly beg you
all to agree in, Is a Generous, and Free, and Charitable Supply for your Poor
Countrymen: For those, who mourn in secret, and dwell in the low Tabernacles of
Smoke and desolate want: For those, who themselves also would have made a part
of this Solemnity, had not God in his Providence disposed them to a sadder
Entertainment. Remember the Fatherless and the Widow, whose cry comes up to
Heaven, even now while we are paying our Devotions toward it: Those, who
sustain the necessities and hardships, the cold and hunger of the whole year
upon the hopes of being comforted by the Bounty and Charity of this day. Nor
need I use many words, to persuade you, my Brethren: For, besides the ties of
Religion and natural Compassion, methinks we of all other men, have the
greatest Obligations upon to be Charitable: We were born in that County, which
is blessed with an University, the very Seat and dewlling place of Charity. She
lies scattered indeed in private Bosoms, and has now and then taken up her
Lodgings in other places: But in your Country is her Mansionhouse, there is her
Throne, and place of abode. It was in your County that she first appeared in
State; and 'twas Oxford, that was blessed with the early designs of Charity, that
being the place where the two first endowed Colleges of Christendom were built,
as Cambden Cambd. in Oxfordsh. p. 381. Eng.
assures us. From your County one of our best Kings ( Charles the Martyr always
excepted), namely, Edward the Confessor, At Islip.
began his life: And another of our most valiant Kings, Richard the first, took
in his Cambden ibid. At Oxon.
great Spirit from your Air. Thus Honorable and Famous has your County been,
even above any County in the World; and has but one Equal, and that in our own
Nation too.

Let us not then degenerate from the Credit and Honor of our Native Soil; but
let us be a Repute to our Country, and a Support to our poor Countrymen. Let
part of that Charity which dwelt among your Forefathers, posses your minds:
And let us answer the expectation of the World, and the hope of our poor
Brethren at this Day.

For beside our Religion, and the Genius of our Country, even Nature and Pagan
Philosophy bids us be Charitable to the Indigent. And Aristotle an Heathen can
advise, That the Arist. l. 6. polit. c. 5.
rich are bound to supply the poor with Necessaries. Nor can I imagine, what
can hinder any of us from this natural and pleasant Duty; unless we detain that
from the poor, which we design to bestow upon our sins; unless we forbear to
give that, which we have already devoted to Wantonness, Intemperance, and
costly Follies. It concerns us therefore, to be more Temperate and Sober, and
then we shall be more Generous and Charitable. Let us spend less upon our
Vices, upon our gaudy and vain Apparel, upon costly Banquets, and endless
Quarrels; and then we shall have enough to satisfy the just Conveniences of
our Quality, and yet enough to spare to the empty Bowels and craving
Necessities of the poor. And here I may recommend to you the frugal Modesty in
Diet and Apparel of the ancient Christians; whose Women (which in most Nations
are allowed to be clad somewhat more delicately) observed a wonderful Plainness
and Gravity. For Tertullian in his Tert. Apol. cap. 6.
Apology for the Christians, tells us of their Women, Aurum nulla noverat
preterquam unico digito, etc. The Women wore no Gold, nay scarce knew any, but
their Wedding-Ring. But the contrary was an early Vice, even in the Church,
especially among the Women; whose Ornaments and Apparels, colored Garments and
painted Petticoats, Tertullian sticks not to call the Invention De cultu faem.
l. 2. c. 10
not of men, but of evil Angels: But 'twas his advice, and from him let me give
it you, to take care of this Vice; and to remember, that Gravity in Clothes,
Plainness and Decency in Apparel, are the Maintainers of those two most
excellent Virtues, Modesty and Charity. Nor may we think, that this advice of
his proceeded from the Necessity of the times, or the Poverty of the
Christians: For the same Father tells us, nay and Apolog.
he tells the Heathen to their Faces, That the Christians gave more Money away
in the Streets, than the Heathens spent upon their gods and their Altars, upon
their gaudy and their costly Superstitions. And what was the reason, why the
Christians did and were able to do so much? Why, I can give it you out of the
same Father, (since I have began Tert. Apol. cap. 43.
to speak out of him), namely, because they were temperate, chaste, and sober.
For when the Heathens complained, that the Christians were a sort of
Close-fisted men, that they spent no money at all; he bravely answers, But I Will
tell you, says he, who are they that complain, they are the Brothel-houses,
and the Taverns; they are the Ministers of Lust, and Luxury, and Vice, that
complain, and none else. And let all such complain, yea for ever complain among
us also.

And if we are curious to know, how the Christians spent their Money; the same
man Apol. cap. 39.
tells us, They had a Box, wherein every one monthly cast in what his Charity
and Estate allowed. And this went, non potaculis, non epulis, not to maintain
Gluttony and Drunkenness; but to relieve the poor, to bury the poor; to
Children without Father or Mother, or any subsistence; to the Aged, to the
Imprisoned, and such like poor Christians. Nor can I conclude with, and I think
you cannot take a better pattern, than this; nor can you grudg, I hope, to do
that once a Year, which the ancient Christians (who were under worse
circumstances than most of you are) did once every Month.

Thus have I from the Example of Abraham recommended to you Love, and Peace,
and Condescension: And from the ancient and best Christians have I recommended
Bounty and Charity to the Poor and Distressed: What remains, but that we go and
do likewise, having the fear of God before us, while we are Feasting together,
and the Charity of Christians, when we have done? And having minded you of
these two things, namely, of Temperance at our Dinner, and of Bounty after it;
I will conclude with a part of Scripture, which I hope you will all remember,
taken out of Nehemiah, chapter 8. ver. 10.

Go your way, eat the fat, and drink the sweet; and send Portions to them, for
whom nothing is provided.

And then, as it follows, This day will be holy unto our Lord; neither shall ye
be sorry, for the joy of the Lord will be your strength.

To whom, the Eternal Creator, Three Persons, and One God, be Glory and Honor,
Might, Majesty, and Dominion, now and for ever. Now the God of Patience and
Consolation, grant you to be like-minded one toward another, according to
Christ Jesus. And, The Blessing of God Almighty, the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost be among us, and remain with us this Day, and for ever more. Amen.
The End.

