THE Types Unvailed, OR, The Gospel picked out of the Legal Ceremonies; whereby
we may compare the Substance with the Shadow.

Written For the Information of the Ignorant, for their help in reading of the
OLD TESTAMENT.

By Tho. Worden, Minister.

Christ is the end of the Law to every one which believes. Romans 10 4. I came
not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it, Mat. 5. 17. The Law is good if a man
use it lawfully, 1 Timothy 1. 8. Wherefore the Law was our Schoolmaster to bring
us unto Christ, Gal. 3. 24. London, Printed in the Year, 1664.

To his most endeared Friend Mrs. Mary Atkins Widow, Greeting.
My Christian Friend:
BEing bound by many Obligations and Ties of love and service to serve you as a
Christian in what I am able, I knew not wherein I could better express it
(wherein I might indeed be serviceable to you) then in presenting you with this
Piece; the Lines of which have been in part the fruit of my Prison Meditations:
Wherein, as in a Glass, you may see, to your great admiration, the wonderful
glory of Christ which lay hid under the ashes of those Jewish Types; the which
when duly read and inquired into, show you the blessed statue or representation
of Christ's Church, together with the hidden work of Christ intrinsecally
wrought by him in the minds of his dear Children upon their Conversion, the
thoughts of which has made me deeply to bewail the loss that some weak
Christians have sustained, who out of ignorance and blind conceitedness of
mind, slight the reading of the Books of Moses; because (as they say) it is the
Law, who judge that the Law in no sense has any thing to do with them, or they
with it; and as S. Paul said to Timothy, 1 Timothy 1. 7. They (in speaking of the
Law) understand not what they say, neither indeed what they affirm. I do not
say the Ceremonial Law is any way binding to us, I am so little either a Jew or
Papist, but I say it is instructive to us, having the Gospel to compare
therewith, so says S. Paul, Gal. 3. 24. And the more we read it and peruse it,
the more we see into the Gospel by it, and the more is our comfort raised
thereby in the substance, which is Christ. I do confess I am the meanest of
Christ his Servants to attempt such a work as this is; but when I consider that
he that had but his one talent, was accursed for the Non-improvement of that,
and that out of weakness God brings the greatest strength sometimes, and that
out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings, he sometimes brings out matter of
praise to Jesus Christ. Upon these considerations I was encouraged to send
forth these Lines unto you, hoping that God will make them both acceptable and
profitable to you, and it may be to other souls likewise; I know men of greater
parts and gifts have commented on these things already, whose Volumes are
answerable to their gifts and parts very large, which every ordinary capacity
could not fathom, neither could every ordinary purse procure: Therefore did I
take the boldness, for the profit of such, to appear in Print in this Piece.
You must not expect it altogether free of Correction, I hope-both you and any
else that shall meet with it will overlook common Infirmity, and make
favorable construction of my honest Intention; for the Lord knows my heart,
that if I had affected popularity more then singleness of heart to God and his
people, I should not have dared to put Pen to Paper in this work: Therefore for
an Apology for those errors and common infirmities, that you or any other may
meet with in this Tract, I must tell you that I was only left to my Bible, and
my Meditations which I had in Prison with me, being denied the use of any other
helps in this business, as to that outward means, which other men are attended
with, you your selves do partly know that my Library of Books which I did use
to consult with lay for the most part in my Pocket, the which I diligently
searched in Prison, which made my Task more then ordinary; but I hope I was not
left to my own wisdom alone in my labors in the Production of this Book, And I
likewise hope God will not leave you or any else that shall read this Piece, to
your bare reason in the reading of it, but will accompany it with his holy
Spirit: That you may understand it to your great profit and comfort, is the
desire of him who subscribes himself yours and the Churches faithful Servant
while I live in the body,

THO. WORDEN.

The Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, Gal. 3. 24.
THat which I shall do in this Piece is to give you my Conceptions of the
Mystery of Grace which lies hid under the Levitical Types and Shadows of the
Law: I shall first set down the Types as I find them in order set down in the
Books of Moses, directing you to the places of Scripture where to find each
place, for your better satisfaction.

TYPE I.
I Shall begin with the Paschal Lamb, which is spoken of in Exodus 12. 2. which
was a great Type both to them and all generations since, down all along to the
coming of Christ, which was called a Passover, because it did preserve the
Israelites from those several Plagues which passed through the land of Egypt;
the manner of it was thus, That because Pharaoh would not let the Israelites go
to serve the Lord, after he had nine Plagues poured out upon him and his
people, the Lord sent him the Tenth Plague, which was, That a destroying Angel
should pass through the land of Egypt in one night, and should kill all the
first born, or eldest, both of their children, and cattle, which were in every
house in Egypt: Now that the Israelites which were amongst them might not be
touched with this Judgment, the Lord ordered them that every Family should kill
a Lamb the night before, and strike the Door-posts of their houses with the
blood of the Lamb, which was to be a sign to the Angel, that he was not to
k^ll any one in that house; but that he must pass over that house to the next,
where the blood of the Lamb was not sprinkled on the doors; This you may read
in Exodus 12. 2. and in verse 22, 23. Besides, there was another Type in the
Passover of the Lamb; for they were to Eat it; and the manner of it was thus:
First, The Lamb was to be without blemish; and as to the manner of eating it,
they were to Roast it with fire. 2. They were to eat all the Lamb at once, they
were not to leave any of it remaining until the morrow, Head and Legs, with
all the Appurtenances, were to be eaten, Exodus 12. 8, 9, 10. 3. The Sauce with
which they were to eat the Lamb with, was Bitter Herbs: And the Bread with
which they were to eat it, was to be unlevened Bread, Verse. 8. with Numb. 9 11.
4. They were to eat it with their Loins girded. 5. With their Shoos on their
feet. 6. With their Staff in their hands. 7. In have, for it was the Lords
Passover, Exodus 12. 11. And lastly, This was to be done by every particular
Family; every family was to choose a Lamb for its self, unless the family were
too few in number, if it were, then the next family were to join wi^h them, and
so they were to eat it together, Exodus 12. 4.

TYPE II.
The second Type was The children of Israel their passing through the Red Sea,
just at their coming out of Egypt, Exodus 1. 4.
IN which are these things to be considered:

First, The peoples great Distress, verse. 10 31.

Secondly, The cause of their Distress, which was Pharaoh's great Army Marching
behind them very dreadfully, with full purpose to destroy them, verse. 10.

Thirdly, We may take notice of their Leaders, and those were Moses and the
Angel; which Angel without doubt, was Christ, Exodus 14. 19. 21. For as Moses
conducted the people, so the Angel did conduct Moses.

Fourthly, Moses stretched out his hand and the Waters were divided, Exodus 14.
21.

Fifthly, The People go through the Waters, and by going through are delivered,
Verse 22.

Sixthly, The same Waters, which were Waters of Salvation to the Israelites,
were Waters of Destruction to the Egyptians, Verse 27. 28. of the same Chapter.

TYPE III.
Another Typical State was their being led into the Wilde^ness.
IN which are these things to be considered.

First, Their cross motion up and down in the Wilderness; sometimes this way,
sometimes that way; sometimes toward the good Land, sometimes quite contrary,
and back again, as you may Read at large in Numb. 33.

Secondly, The Food they lived upon, while in that condition, was Manna from
Heaven, Exodus 16. 4. with verse. 14. 15.

Thirdly, The Water they lived by, and drank of, was Water out of the Rock,
which came out by Moses his striking of it, Exodus 17. 5, 6, 7.

Fourthly, We may not omit this passage; As soon as the Israelites were
delivered from the Egyptians by the Red Sea, and brought into the Wilderness,
the first Waters they drank of, were Waters of Bitterness, or Bitter Waters,
which such called Marah, Exodus 16. 22, 23 But this was done by the appointment
of God; For the sweetning of those Waters again to the people, Moses was to
take a Tree which God showed him; Mark, that not every Tree would do it, but
that only which was of Gods directing or choosing; and Moses was to cast the
Tree into the Waters, which done, the Waters that were bitter before, became
sweet, and the people could drink of them, Exodus 16. 25.

Next we are to consider the Nature of the Wilderness; It was a place of Rocks
and Mountains, Hills and Valleys, Deuteronomy. 8. 5. A place that afforded few
Springs, or Pools of Water; a place that no Corn grew in; a place of Doubts and
Fears; Sometimes assaulted with Enemies, as Og King of Bashan, the Moabites and
Midianites; then Balaam comes up with his bitter Curses against them, Numb. 22.
5, 6.

This place might likewise be called a place of Wonders, because of the great
Miracles which God did for them, in delivering them out of all their
Temptations; and in preserving them all along to their Canaan, Psalm. 88.
Likewise you may see the Discouragements that they met with in their way to
Canaan, by the false Spies, Numb. 13. 28, 29, 30, 31. Likewise you may see the
Bunch of Grapes brought from the good Land, Numb. 13. 23. and yet
notwithstanding they could not believe for their comfort.

There was likewise in the Wilderness-condition, other Types held out to them,
both for their and our Instruction; As the Cloud, which always led them up and
down, See Exodus 40. 34, 36, 37, 38. compared with Numb. 9. 16, 17.

TYPE IV.
The Brazen Serpent which was set up upon a Pole in the Wilderness, Numb. 21.
6, 7, 8, 9.
THe occasion of that Type was this, Because of those hot, stinging, fiery
Serpents which the Wilderness did produce, which had destroyed many of the
People; God in mercy to the Jews caused this thing to be made, called a Brazen
Serpent; and it was to be set upon a Pole, for this purpose, viz. That at what
time any of the People should be stung by these stinging, venomous Beasts, that
if they should but look up to the Brazen Serpent set upon the Pole for that
purpose, they should be presently Cured, although it might be that the wounded
party might be at such a distance from the Pole, as that they might not be able
to reach it with a bodily eye, yet if in obedience to the Ordinance they did
look unto that Point, where they conceived the Brazen Serpent stood upon the
top of the Pole, so doing would procure them immediate health, Numb. 21. 6, 7,
8, 9.

TYPE V.
There was likewise another Type given out to them in the Wilderness which was
called a Tabernacle, the fashion, form, and manner of it you may see at large
set forth to you in Exodus 36. 37, 38. Chap.
BUt for the better observation of it, I shall cast the many particulars of it
into a briefer compass then it is handed out to you in those abovesaid
Chapters, without doubt it was a most glorious piece of work to behold, the
like could not be produced in all the Earth, for glory and excellency, as
appears by the materials of it: Read Exodus 35. 21, 22, 23. as also if we
consider how wonderfully and beyond measure those were fitted by God, for the
framing of it, who were designed for the work, read Exodus 35. 25. with 30, 31,
32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, Verses.

Now the Tabernacle it self consisted of these particulars. First the
Tabernacle it self, which was the case or Tent which comprehended all the other
things in it prepared for the Worship and Service of the Lord, Exodus 36. 13.
ver. which was made of several Curtains of fine twined Linen, of blue Purple
and Scarlet, with Cherubims of cunning work, Exodus 36. 8. ver. and these were
made with loops of one side, and tacles of Gold on the other side; and so
fastened together all round the sides and ends of it, Exodus 36. 13. In the which
there was a glorious thing made and set which was called the Ark, which was
overlaid with pure Gold, having a Crown of Gold round about it, Exodus 37. 1, 2.
Ver. Likewise in the Tabernacle there was the Mercy-seat placed, which had two
Cherubims placed at the two ends of it, Exodus 37. 6, 7. whose faces looked
still toward the Mercy-seat, ver. 9. Now in the Ark did Moses put the Tables
wherein the Law was written, Exodus 40. 20. And then did he put the Ark with the
Tables of the Law in it under the Mercy-seat, and covered it over with a veil,
v. 20. There was likewise in this Tabernacle placed a Table overlaid with pure
Gold, Exo. 37. 10, 11, which was placed at on side of the Tabernacle, Exodus 40,
22.

And there was likewise made a Candlestick of pure Gold, Exodus 27. 17. which
was made of this fashion, it parted from a foot or two high into six Branches,
three going one way and three another way. There were three bowls made like
unto three Almonds, with a knop and a flower to every Branch, but in the stem
of the Condlestick below the parting was four bowls with their knops and their
flowers, Exodus 37. 18, 19, 20. Verses, the use of the Table was to hold the
Shewbread, and the Candlestick was put over against the Table in the
Tabernacle, Exodus 40. 22, 23, 24. There were seven Lamps made also of pure
Gold, Exodus 37. 23.

The Snuffers of these Lamps were of pure Gold, these Lamps were to be lighted
and always kept burning before the Lord, Exodus 40. 25. and they were to be set
when burning against the Candlestick, Numb. 8. 2, 3.

Then there were two Altars to be made, which did likewise stand in the
Tabernacle, the one to offer ^ncense upon, which was always to burn before the
Lord, and this Altar was overlaid with pure Gold, Exodus 37. 25, 26. with Exodus
40. 26, 27. Verses, the other Altar was overlaid with Brass, unto which was
added, Pots, Shovels, Basins, Flesh-hooks, Fire-pans; this Altar was four
square, and at every corner there was placed a Horn, Exodus 27 1, 2 3. Verses.
The use of which Altar was to offer the slain Sacrifices and burnt-offerings
upon it, Exodus 40. 29.

There was likewise made a great Vessel of Brass, and it was called the Brazen
Laver, in which the Priests were to Bath and wash themselves at all times, when
they went about the Service of the Tabernacle in appearing before the Lord,
Exodus 40. 30, 31, 32. Verses. Now all these things were put into the
Tabernacle, through which Tabernacle God did apper to the people, and out of
which he gave the knowledge of his holy will, Exodus 40. 35. with Lev. 1. and
11. ver. Now all these things in the Tabernacle, together with the Tabernacle
it self, was to be anointed with holy Oil, Exodus 40. 9, 10.

Lastly, all this Inside glory was covered over with uncomely coverings which
were made of Goats hair, Exodus 36. 14. and of Ram-skins dyed red, Exodus 36. 19.

TYPE VI.
The next Type I shall mention is the High Priest, which had likewise a very
great signification going along with it, to those who by the eye of faith could
see through it.
IN which are these things to be considered.

First, The place out of which the High Priest was to be chosen.

Second, The Qualifications by which he was to be chosen.

Third, the Consecrated garments which he was to administer in.

Fourth, The manner of his Consecration.

Fifth, The work he was to do for the people, when chosen for them.

First, the place out of which the High Priest was to be chosen, It was not out
of any other place then themselves; he must be called forth from among his
Brethren, Numb. 18. 6, 7, 8, Verses.

Second, as to the Qualifications by which he was to be chosen, he was found to
be the meekest man that would be found (through all the tribe of Levi.) He must
be a man brimful of bowels of tenderness, mercy, and compassion.

Third, as to the Garments the Priest was to administer in before the Lord,
they did consist of those particulars.

First, the long Holy Robe which did reach down from the neck to the feet of
the Priest, which was made very glorious, as appears by that rich matter with
which it was made, Exodus 39. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Verses, which was of Scarlet, of
Purple, of Gold, of fine twined Linen, likewise there was a Breast Plate made
for the garment four square of a plate of Gold, a span in breadth and length
every way, Exodus 39. 9.

Now in this Breast Plate of Gold there was engraven the names of the twelve
Tribes of Israel in Letters set in rows with precious stones, Exodus 39. 10 11,
12, 13, 14. Verses there was likewise set in the Breast Plate the Urim and
Thummim, Exodus 28. 30. Now this plate by chains of Gold was tied about the
glorious Robe, that so the plate with the names in it might set strength upon
the High Priests heart, Exodus 39. 19, 20. ver. with Exodus 28. 29, 30. at the
Hem of this glorious holy Robe was tied several Bells and Pomgranates, a Bell
and a Pomgranate, a Bell and a Pomgranate round about the hem of the Robe,
Exodus 39. 25, 26, with Exodus 28 35.

There was also a glorious girdle made, wrought with Purple, blue Scarlet, fine
twined Linen, and Gold, and this the Priest was to wear about his loins, Exodus
39. 5. Exodus 29. 5.

Then there was a glorious Miter made, which was to be put upon the Priests
head when the holy garments were to be put on, Exodus 39 28. ver. and Exodus 29. 6
ver.

Also there was a plate of pure Gold to be made, in which was to be engraven
these Letters (or words) Holiness to the Lord, Exodus 28. 36, 37. and this was
to be fastened to the Miter upon the forehead, and it was for this purpose,
that the peoples services might be accepted to God, for whom the Priest did
administer, that those failings the peoples duties were accompanied with, the
Priest was to take them all upon himself.

Then this plate of Holiness on the forehead bear out the Priest before the
Lord; Exodus 28 38. ver. there was also a glorious Crown of Gold made and it was
to be put upon the Miter, Exodus 29. 6, 7. ver. The high Priest being thus
attired, we next show you his Consecration, or being by order made capable to
administer before the Lord, which is as follows.

Moses was to take a young Bullock and two Rams without blemish, and unlevened
bread, and unlevened cakes tempered with Oil, and offer this with the bullocks
and two rams unto God for the Priest, Exodus 29. 1, 2, with 19, 20. Then was
Moses to take a vessel of anointing Oil and pour it on the Priests head and
anoint him, Exodus 29. 7. Which ceremony showed,

First, the right it gave the Priests.

Second, it signified his endowments fitting of him for his Office.

Third, it signified his Holiness, Levit. 8. 33. this done then might he
administer before the Lord, not else; Wherevvith this consecrating oil was
made, you may see Exodus 30, 23, 24, 25.

That which was appointed to consecrate the Priest withal, he was to eat, Exodus
29. 32, 33.

Lastly, the work that the high Priest was to do; in which there are these
things to be considered.

First, The place where he was to administer, and that was within the veil,
where none but the High Priest was to enter, Levit. 16. 16, 17. the people were
to stand without at the doors of the Tabernacle, and having brought their
offerings, the Priest in his attire was to go in, and offer it before the Lord
for them, Levit. 1. 3, 4, 5. with Levit. 14. 21, 22, 23,

Secondly, the Priest was to take the blood of the sacrifice, and to sprinkle
the mercy-seat therewith, Leviticus 16. 14, 15.

Thirdly, He was to offer up strong prayers by the burning incense Altar to God
for the people, praying God to pardon their sins, and that he would accept
their persons and their sacrifices, and would be their God, and would bless
their souls with his heavenly blessing, sRead Levit. 16. 12, 13. with Levit. 6.
6, 7. verses.

Likewise the Priest was to cast fresh Incense into the fire that was on the
Incense Altar, that so a^ cloud of Incense might arise to God, Levit. 16. 12,
13.

Fourthly, The Priest was to take notice of every uncleanness that should be
found amongst them, either in person, garment, clothes, or in their houses,
Levit. 13. from 1. to the 16. ver. with Levit. 14. from 34. to 40. ver.

Fifthly, If any man had sinned either ignorantly or wilfully, the Priest (upon
his coming) was to offer sacrifice for him, and it was pardoned, Levit. 4. 13,
14 15, 16, 17, 18. with 28, 29, 30. verses. So Levit. 5. 17, 18. verses.

Sixthly, By the powerful intercession of the Priest he was to interpose
between the wrath of God and the people (at such times as the people by sin had
provoked God) read Numb. 16. 46: 47, 48. verses. There was one ordinance
observed amongst the Jews, that we may not omit, though it be a little out of
its place, which was this, A standing sacrifice of two lambs, which were to be
offered, the one in the morning, and the other in the evening through out the
whole year, Exodus 39. 38, 39.

TYPE VIII.
The Land of Canaan.
THis Type is called by Paul their rest, Heb. 3. which was the end of all their
sore travels and weary journeyes, and great temptations; a Land of delight,
full of fatness, abounding with all manner of ease and plenty; a Land flowing
with milk and honey, Numb. 13. 27. where was no want of any good thing, Deuteronomy.
8. 7, 8, 9.

Now this Canaan was an inheritance given by God to the people freely, Deuteronomy.
19. 1.

Secondly, It was an inheritance divided proportionably to each of them by Lot,
Numb. 26, 54, 55, 56.

Thirdly, They were to march in an armed posture to this Land, and they were to
fight for it; yet not without their leader Joshua, Numb. 35. 11, 12, 13, 14.
Deuteronomy. 7. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Yet this is observable, that when they
came out of the red Sea, there was not a sword amongst the people: but those
waters which through the mighty power of God were made to deliver them, the
same waters by Gods appointment were made to cast forth weapons to them, as
Josephus writes, page 51 of his second Book.

TYPE IX.
The assigned Cities of refuge, which were six in number.
THe use of which was, that if any man had committed murder by an accident, if
he did immediately repair to any of these Cities, the Officer (which was
appointed for Executioner (did overtake him) he was not to dye, provided he did
not go out of the City until the death of the present High Priest, Numb. 35.
11, 12, 13, 14.

Another thing was the Covenant which God did make with them in Exodus 24. 8. In
which are these things to be considered.

1. The Covenant it self, Exodus 24. 8.

2. The parties covenanting.

First, The one party was God, Exodus 24. 3. The party on the other side was the
people, ver. 3.

Secondly, The terms propounded between both parties.

First, On Gods part to the people, ver. 3. with ver. 7. Deuteronomy. 7. 12, 13, 14,
15.

Secondly, The peoples accepting of the terms, ver. 3.

Thirdly, The person mediating between both the parties, ver. 1. 2, 3.

Fourthly, You have the ratification of the Covenant.

In which are these things to be considered.

1. The conditions between both parties, read v. 7.

2. The peoples accepting those conditions, v. 7.

3. The sealing of the Covenant, in which we may note two things.

First, There was the life of something slain, ver. 5.

Secondly, With the blood of it the Covenant was signed between God and the
people, ver. 6. 7, 8. Deuteronomy 26. 17, 18.

Next, I shall speak as the several kinds of sacrifices, and so shall conclude
the Types of the Ceremonial Law. Now those sacrifices were of two kinds or
sorts, which they offered. 1. Of things sollid. 2 Of things liquid or moist;
those sollid things, they were of two sorts. First, of things living. Secondly,
Of things that were dead. The sacrifices of things living were either bullocks,
Lev. 16. 11. Goats, Lev. 18. 15. Rams, Lev. 16. 3. Lambs, Levit. 18. 2, 3. or
young Pigeons, Lev. 1. 14.

Now these sacrifices were all to be put to death, and their blood to be poured
out upon the Altar, to make an atonement to God for the people, and they were
to be sacrifices either without spot or blemish. Besides, there was a Goat
offered to God which was alive: for the people called the scapegoat the manner
of offering this Goat to God, you may see in Lev. 16. 7, 8. 9, 10. with 21. 22.
verses.

A second sort of sollid sacrifices, were of things without life, as meal, or
flower: now these things were to be bruised, or broken.

Now the liquid kind of sacrifices was of oil, wine, or water; and this was to
be poured out upon the ground, Exodus 29. 40. The oil was oftentimes put to the
making of a certain sort of little thin cakes, which they called wafers,
appointed likewise for sacrifice, sometimes of thanksgiving; sometimes it was
ordered to be put to the sacrifice for a vow: Levit. 7. 12. 16. Those were
called meat offerings, and peace offerings. Levit. 7. 9, 10, 11. and this the
Priests were to eat, Levit. 24. 5, 6, 7, 8. besides those moist sacrifices were
to be poured out upon the ground.

And thus have I finished the order of the Types, I next come to the
explanation of them. I shall begin with the Paschal Lamb which the Jews did eat
in Egypt: first I shall show you who it did type out, and then make some
spiritual use of it to your advantage,

CHAP 1. Concerning the Lamb which was eaten by the Jews in Egypt the night
before their departure; as also the manner how the Lamb was eaten by the Jews.
THis Lamb typed out Jesus Christ to come, by whom alone salvation is to be
had; therefore when John the Baptist, who was a forerunner of Christ, came to
reveal and to make him manifest to the world, he holds Christ forth to the
people under the Metaphor of a Lamb, John 1. 36. Behold the Lamb of God: to
this agrees the words of Paul, 1 Cor. 5. 7. when he was a pressing the
Corinthians to a discharge of duty, in casting forth the incestuous person from
among them, which else as leaven, would leaven the whole Church (with guilt at
least) he grounds his exhortation on this point, For Christ our Passover is
sacrificed for us: where you see he gives Christ the very name that was given
to the Paschal Lamb. So Peter in his Epistle, when he is a treating about the
price of man's redemption, 1 Pet. 1. 18. 19. verses, says Peter in the 18.
verse, We were not redeemed with silver and gold from our vain conversations,
received by traditions from our fathers, but by the precious blood of Christ,
as a lamb slain without spot or blemish, verse 19. for so it was required of
the Jews in offering of the paschal Lamb, that it should be a Lamb without
blemish, Exodus 12. 5. So read Revel. 6. This title of Lamb is given unto Jesus
Christ, Rev. 6. 15, 16, 17. The rich men and the great men, and the chief
Captains, cried to the hills fall on us, and cover us from the presence of the
Lamb for the great d^y of his wrath is come.

What is the reason think you here, that Jesus Christ should be so much dreaded
by the great men as well as the poor men at his next coming; for these words
have relation to his next coming. I will not here undertake to determine
whether this appearing here of Christ be at or before the general Judgment
day: as to that I shall refer you to abler judgments, who have commented on
the thing: but without doubt the reason why our Lord is by John in that place
set forth so dreadful to men under the metaphor of a Lamb, is because the Lamb
was a type of his Priestly Office; which includes the greatest of grace and
offers of love to mankind that can be.

Now for the men of the earth, be they rich or poor, yet if they shall live or
dye, abusing of, and trampling upon this freely proffered grace, and richly
offered love: this turns this grace and rich love, and mercy into the
dreadfullest of judgments against men, Read Matthew. 11. 21, 22, 23, 24, with
chap. 12. 42. and 2 These. 1. 8, 9.

Thus you see that the Lamb in Exodus 12. was a type of Christ.

CHAP. 2. I now come to show you how the action of the Jews in eating the Lamb,
together with the place, time, and manner of eating the Lamb, does agree to the
work of God upon the souls of his people, while on this side Heaven; together
with his various dealings with their conditions in this life, which as in a
glass, those that are spiritual may see it answer face to face.
FIrst, the place that the people were in when God provided this Lamb for them;
It was Egypt, a Land of darkness, abounding with all manner of idolatry and
profaneness, a Land which knew not God, Exodus 5. 2. a land of bondage, of
heavy burdens, of cruel taskmasters, that required brick to be made without
straw, Exodus 5. 6. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. the officers of which place would often
beat the people of the Jews, ver. 14. besides so cruel were the Taskmasters to
the poor Israelites, that they would not hear the peoples cries, Exodus 5. 16,
17.

To this agrees, as in the ante-type, the estate or condition that the
creature is in before he comes to Jesus Christ, which estate or condition we
call natural or carnal, which simbolizeth very well with the land of Egypt, in
which the children of Israel were when they did eat the Lamb.

For first of all, Egypt was a place of darkness, so is the natural condition
of mankind; it is full of darkness and ignorance: it is wholly deprived of the
saving knowledge of God and Christ. A man by nature knows little of that
blessed life, light, power, which the true knowledge of God teaches a soul; he
knows not what it is to have Christ dwelling in him (by his spirit) nor what
it is for a man to live in Christ by believing; much less does he know that
great and blessed mystery which Paul speaks of, 2 Cor. 3. 18. But we all with
open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the
same image, from glory to glory, by the Spirit of the Lord.

Alas, to tell a carnal man of living by believing, what a mystery is this to
him, of worshipping God in the Spirit, of praying in the Spirit, of making the
Blood, and Flesh, and Spirit, and promises of Christ, his daily food; of eating
the hidden Manna, of having the white stone, with a new name written in it,
that none can read but he that has it, Rev. 2. 17.

Alas, what a paradox is this to a carnal man; to tell such a man of Christ
within him, and of a spiritual Kingdom within him, and a light within him: and
so from hence to bid him turn to it, and live obedient thereunto, and to
hearken to the teachings of it for salvation.

Alas, one had as good stand over the grave of a dead man and bid him arise, or
one had as good speak to a blind man and bid him see: therefore I think that
such a doctrine preached by many in our days, is an empty doctrine to help
blind men to see, or dead men to a state of spiritual life: therefore says
Paul, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The carnal man receives not the things of the Spirit of
God, for they are foolishness unto him (neither can he know them) because they
are spiritually discerned: also Paul tells you, speaking of a carnal man, that
his understanding is darkened, and alienated from the life of God, through the
ignorance which is in them, through the blindeness of their heart, Ephesians. 4.
18. therefore when the Scripture speaks of the bringing home of a soul to God,
it calls it a deliverance from the power of darkness, Col. 1. 13. a state that
affords no light, no knowledge of God in Christ, it gives us no acquaintance
with God, as a reconciled God in Christ to a poor soul; therefore it may well
be compared to Egypt for the darkness of it: that is the first particular.

Secondly, Egypt abounded with all manner of profaneness and false worship:
for they knew not God, Exodus 5. 2. how well does this agree with the state, or
the natural condition of fallen mankind, O what kennel so vile, so no^some,
what jakes so foul, what Goal so loathsome, what hell so black, as the hearts
and lives of wicked men: therefore when our Savior gives a description of the
inward parts of such men (says) That out of their hearts proceeds evil
thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness, and
blasphemies, Mat. 15. 19. and to this agrees the 14. Psalm ver. 2. 3, which
says, The fool has said in his heart there is no God: they are corrupt, they
have done abominable works, there is none that does good, no not one: the Lord
looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that
did understand, and seek God: they are all gone aside, they are altogether
become filthy; there is none that does good, no not one: so says John, 1 John
5. 19. The whole world lies in wickedness. My brethren, where can you go, into
what Land, Country, County, City, Town, or Family, but you may blush to see
the common profaneness of it, to your great grief: what swearing, lying,
couzening, theeving, brawling, fighting, and revelling is there abounding
amongst men: how do the most men tumble and wallow in the filth of uncleanness:
how are some buried up head and ears in their pride; how do others glory in
their oppression. O how are others drowned in their malice; how like swines do
others reel up and down in their drunkenness; what treachery, and deceit and
falsehood dwells there in the minds of men, one against another, as the Prophet
speaks, Micah 7. 4, 5, 6. The best of them is as a briar, and the most upright
of them sharper then a thorn-hedge. Trust ye not in a friend, put ye no
confidence in a guide, keep the doors of thy mouth from her that lies in thy
bosom; for the son dishonors the father, the daughter rises up against the
mother in law; a man's enemies are the men of his own house. To this agrees the
words of Paul to the Ephesians, chap, 2. 2, 3, Where in times past you walked
according to the course of this world, according to the prince of the power of
the air, the spirit that now works in the children of disobedience: among
whom ye had your conversation in times past in the lusts of the flesh
fulfilling the desire of the mind, and of the flesh, and were by nature the
children of wrath even as others.

Therefore it is that David when he was forced to fly into Gath among the
Philistines, because of the profaneness of the people cried out, Woe is me
that I dwell in Mesech, and am constrained to live in the tents of ungodliness.

Secondly, As this agrees with Egppt for profaneness, so for false worship:
It is natural for men in a carnal concondition to worship God in a wrong
manner; as a good man said once, every man is born with a little Pope in his
belly. To set up a false worship is the first thing a carnal man puts himself
forth in.

This is the reason that the greatest part of the world lies drowned in false
worship, and ante-christianisme, it is because they are carnal and blind, and
so want the light of God, his holy Spirit to guide them into the truth. Where
will you expect to find fish but in the water: where would you see birds but
in the air; where would you expect to find four footed beasts, but upon the
earth: so where would you find poor, blind, carnal men and women worshipping,
but in their false forms, pictures, images, and rejected ceremonies: you may
see how stiff the Pharisees stuck unto these things, Matthew. 15. 1, 2. but you
may see our Saviors answer, Ver. 3. with 8, 9. You know Paul the Apostle
tells the Saints in his day, that they had been worshippers of stocks and
stones, dumb idols: to this agrees our Saviors words, John 4 22 speaking to
the poor carnal woman of Samaria. You worship you know not what. This is is
most certain, that the world for want of sight err in every thing.

So that you see how well the natural estate of mankind does agree with the
Land of Egypt for false worship, or for worshipping God in a false manner.

Again, Egypt was a place of hard bondage, and cruel burdens, a place that
required brick to be made without straw, Exodus 5. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
besides the officers of the place would often beat the people if they failed of
ought of their work, ver. 14. they would also refuse to hear the peoples cries,
ver. 16, 17.

This answers unto the covenant of works, which every carnal man and woman in
the world is bound unto by nature, and lives under. This covenant, even to
fulfill it in the exactest measure thereof. This covenant was made with us in
the state of innocence, which requires perfect obedience in thought, word, and
deed, and not only perfect obedience, but constant, continual obedience to the
last breath, Deuteronomy. 6. 5. with Gal. 3. 10.

So that if a man fails but in one point of the Law of Works, he is guilty of
the breach of the whole, James 2. 10. Now this Covenant of works does not only
reach the outward actions of the body (as some think) but the inward motions,
intentions, and purposes of the mind; for so our Savior expounds this
Covenant, Mat. 5. 20, 21, 22, with 27, 28. verses. Now as the case stands with
the creature with respect to his fall, this covenant of works may well be
compared unto Pharaohs taskmasters, and those that yet live under it, to the
Jews in Egypt, who were under the power of those Taskmasters, Exodus 5. 10,
11, 12, 13. 14, 15, 16, 17. verses.

For first of all they required of the Jews, brick to be made without straw,
ver. 10, 11. so does the Law require full and perfect obedience of the soul,
both in body and spirit as ever it did. Says the Law, Bring me forth the full
tale of obedience, according to my commands: let not ought of the works be
deminished which ye should do in soul and body; I will not abate one jot of it,
bring forth the full tale of your duties, let not one be neglected, if there be
you shall dye the death; and perform them in such a manner, as I have required,
or expect death without mercy: what you do, see it be perfectly holy, without
the least stain of sin in it, in thy prayings, in thy fastings, in thy
mournings, in thy hearings, in thy alms, in thy works of mercy, in all that
thou do; see that there be not the least vain thought in it, nor the least
stain of hypocrisy in it; if there be, thou shall be damned to eternity:
Likewise see that it be constantly so with thee from thy birth to thy death. If
in all thy life thou shall but miscarry in a word or thought, I will pour out
all my plagues and curses upon thee, Matthew. 12. 36. with Gal. 2. 10. I will not
regard any thing that thou have done in my service before, (though thou have
served me to the last hour of thy life, with all thy strength, and with all thy
power;) yet if at last thou shall offend in one word or deed thou shall dye the
death, a death eternal, of soul as well as body, Ezekiel. 18. 24. Deuteronomy 27. ver. 26.

Now when the soul comes to be awakened to the voice of the Law, how is it
overwhelmed with amazement and horror: like the Jews under their taskmasters,
how bitterly does the soul bewail his condition, crying out with Paul, Romans 7.
24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from so cruel a bondage as
this: (Thus the soul falling down flat on the ground, cries out of his
condition, because of the hard usage it has from the Law, that it should
require the full tale of brick, and yet deny straw.) O says the soul, I want
strength to perform the least service or duty. O Law, says the soul, what no
mercy, no pity, consider my weakness, how unable I am in my self to perform the
least duty as I ought. (O Law I pray thee accept of what I can do) no, says
the Law, I take no notice of what thou art not able to do, but what thou art
bound to do, Luke 17. 10. I require no more then is my due; if you cannot give
it me, look you unto that, for my part I will have my full tale of perfect and
constant obedience here in this life; or you shall give me satisfaction in hell
to all eternity. Do not tell me you want strength or ability to perform, go get
you that where you can, look you out the straw your selves, I shall give you
none; but let not me miss of my tale of brick, Gal. 2, 10. with Ezekiel. 18. 24.

Thus you see how parallel the language of the old covenant runs with the voice
of the Egyptian taskmasters, to the Israelites under them. Besides in Exodus
14. we find that Pharaohs taskmasters did beat and abuse the Israelites very
much in their work.

This very well suits with the old covenant of works: O what lashes and blows
does it give those that live under it. First, In the conscience within: O what
thunder claps have some men had within them (from the Law.) O how has it made
some men to roar, and to cry out at midnight upon their beds, for their breach
of it. How dreadfully did it lash the conscience of Cain, and how did it dog
Judas, until it dogged his neck into a halter: therefore does the Scripture
pity those that are under it, crying out, a wounded conscience who can bear:
those that have been under the lash of the L^w in the conscience can say, never
was poor man in Turkey in the like misery (they would have exchanged conditions
with the veriest slave in all the world) night and day terrified with dreadful
sounds of the wrath of God, and the judgment day to come, showing the soul his
portion in everlasting burnings, where he shall seek for death, but death shall
be far from him. Although the soul runs to his duties, and does what he can
to pacify the Law; but alas, all to no purpose; for the Law quarrels with him
about every duty; so that here is the Dilemma the Law has all his in, they
shall suffer one way or other, if they do not live holy and strict in their
lives, then he comes upon them with his curses and plagues: If they do live
holy and as unblameable as they can, yet the Law curses them that way, because
it is an obedience full of spots and defilements, Luke 17. 10.

Secondly, The Law lasheth men externally, as well as internally (in the
conscience.) O what plagues and punishments upon body, estate, and relations
has it brought home on some men for their disobeying of it: You may see a
whole file of curses, plagues, punishments, judgments, and afflictious hang up
upon the bar of the Law against its offenders, Deuteronomy. 28. from ver. 15. to 38.

Lastly, The officers of Egypt would not hear the bitter cries of the poor Jews
under their burdens, ver. 16, 17. how well does this agree with the old
covenant of works, what little mercy does that show any that are under it, how
little is it affected with their cries and tears: could men cry to it for mercy
as loud as ever heaven thundered, it would be to no purpose, could men weep so
much blood out of their eyes as there is water in the Sea, the Law would not
take any notice of it, Ezekiel. 18. 24. This Esau tried Heb. 12. 16, 17. For after
he had sold his birthright he found no repentance, although he sought it
carefully with tears.

Alas friends, the Law knows no repentance; repentance is a fruit of the new
covenant of grace, (not of the old.) Thus you see both how the Land of Egypt,
with its taskmasters, together with their carriages toward the Israelites
does agree, as the type with the state of nature, in which carnel men are in;
together with the old covenant, and his carriage toward those that live under
him.

CHAP. 3. I next come to speak of the eating of the Lamb, together with the
circumstances belonging thereunto, which agrees very well with the Ante-type,
as we shall show you in the next place.
IN which there are these three things to be considered.

First, The occasion of the Lamb.

Secondly, The manner of eating it.

Thirdly, The benefits the people had by eating the Lamb.

First, The occasion of the Lamb, which was to save the people from that
general judgment which was to pass over the whole Land of Egypt.

This shows the exceeding love and mercy of God to the whole world, who by
Adams Garden, transgression, and their own actual sins, all are liable to the
destroying Angel of Gods Justice, which will certainly pass over the whole
earth with a flaming sword of God, vengeance, to execute it on offenders, Romans
1. 18. For the wrath of God is revealed against all ungodliness, and
unrighteousness of men who withold the truth in unrighteousness. Heb. 10. 36.
For if we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there
remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking for of
judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversary: so Jude 14.
15. The Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute judgment upon
all, and to convince all that are ungodly amongst them of all their ungodly
deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which
ungodly sinners have spoken against him. 2 These. 1. 7. 8. The Lord Jesus shall
be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels, in flames of fire, rendering
vengeance on those that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Thus you see the whole world lies open to the destroying Angel of the justice
of God, which will pour it self forth to the scorching of the earthly minded
with the most dreadfullest of fires, 2 Pet. 3. 10.

Now that men might escape this dreadful storm which the heavens look black
with, over the heads of sinners, God in mercy has provided poor sinners (which
are in their Egyptian state of sin and uncleanness) I say he in mercy has
provided them a Lamb to eat, which Lamb is his Son Jesus Christ; upon eating of
which they really escape the hands of the Justice of God, John 3. 16. God so
loved the world that he gave his only begoteen Son, that whosoever believes
in him should have everlasting life, and not perish: which Son of God is
elsewhere called the Lamb of God, John 1. 36. the which, whosoever takes and
receives (and eats in as their food by believing, shall live by him) and so
be free from the destroying Angel, John 6. 54.

Secondly, As to the manner of eating the Lamb, we may note these things; but
first it was a Lamb without blemish: this Lamb relates (as you have heard) to
Christ, which shows the spotlessness of his nature, which was innocent and
pure, free from the least tincture of sin: for though our Savior took our
nature upon him, that so he might become a sacrifice to God for sinners, yet he
took not our nature upon him as sinful, Luke 1. 35. Therefore does Peter
entitle our Savior a Lamb without spot and blemish, 1 Pet. 1. 19. For if he
had not been so, it had not been possible that ever the Law could have been
satisfied; therefore it is said, that there was no guile found in his mouth.

But then as to the manner of eating this Lamb. Exodus 12. First, they were to
roast the flesh with fire, ver. 8. This is that dreadful portion which Jesus
Christ past under for sinners, in standing under the curse of the Law; which
bitter agony confl^cted so in his soul, as if all the torments of all the
damned in hell had been upon him at once, Luke 22. 24. And being in an agony,
he prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood
falling down to the ground. A sight of which sufferings of Christ Abraham had
presented unto him, Genesis 15. 9. with 17, 18. verses: for when God made a
Covenant, or rather confirmed the Covenant with Abraham, God caused a burning
lamp, and a smoking furnace to pass between the sacrifices, showing of us that
none can partake of the Covenant of Grace, but such as have satisfied the old
Covenant by presenting it a sacrifice which will endure the wrath of it: Now
none but Christ can do this for the soul; and this was Christ which Abraham in
this Type saw by the eye of Faith, which as a Lamb was roasted in the smoking
furnace and burning lamp of Gods wrath for sinners. Therefore when the soul
would take in Christ, he must take him as a Lamb roasted with fire, which shows
the sufferings of Christ's soul for sin.

Secondly, They were to eat all the Lamb, head and legs, with all the other
parts belonging to the Lamb; nothing of the Lamb was to be lef to the morrow,
Exodus 12. 9, 10, 11. verses.

This shows us after what manner Christ, the Lamb of God, is to be closed with
by a soul that intends to have real benefit by Christ; not a piece or a part
of Christ (will serve the turn) but a whole Christ, or no Christ at all: Christ
is distinguished in a threefold respect (as a Priest, Prophet, and King) the
profane will accept of one part of Christ, the hypocrire of two parts of
Christ, but none but the gracious soul cries for a whole Christ. The profane
wicked Esau would close with the Priestly office of Christ, that so the guilt
of his sin might be purged away, and the anger of God for sin mittigate: but to
subject to the Kingly office of Christ, here he sticks, he cannot endure Christ
should reign over his soul, he loves his sins too well then to part with them
for Christ: so that although with Cain and Judas they that are wicked may
sometime seem to cry out under sin, you must know that they are not so much
offended with sins nature, as sins punishment: so when they seem to desire a
Christ, it is not for love, but fear; it is not that Christ should rule in
them, but that he should deliver them from Hell, which they fear they are
falling into.

2. The Hypocrite can go farther then this, he can take Christ in two parts of
him (both in his Priestly and Prophetical Office.

First, In his Priestly, that sin may be pardoned, he better agrees with
sins nature then sins punishment, though he likes it not upon his back, as
the profane person does; yet he is not much in dislike with it in his heart:
there is some secret sin, which is his dellilah in affection, though he seem to
be an enemy to it in conversation; yet however he could be glad if Christ would
by his blood get it pardoned, but he loves not that Christ as a King, should
get it murdered.

Secondly, He takes Christ in the other office as a Prophet, if that would do.
Now Christ as a Prophet, his work is to reveal and make known the deep things
of the Father to men. Now some hppocrites love to know much, though not to
practice any farther then his credit prompts him to it: yet being given to
ostentation, he may covet out after many notions, that so he may advance
himself in the spreading of them, as Simon Magus, Acts 8. 18, 19. but no
farther of Christ can the Hypocrite make choice of.

But now the sound Beleiver takes a whole Lamb. O give all Christ, and every
part of Christ, says a poor soul which takes Christ aright. O not only
Christ to dye for me, but to live in me by his holy Spirit: not only Christ to
save me, but Christ to reign over me, and to rule and govern me by his royal
Law in my heart. O a Christ to get down the power of sin in me, as well as a
Christ to raze out the guilt of sin against me. O every part of Christ is
precious to a sound Believer, 1 Pet. 2. 7. So says the Church, Cant. 5. 10.
Christ was the chiefest to her of ten thousand, because he was white as well as
ruddy. Christ was precious for his holiness, as well as his merits and
sufferings.

So that this is the thing as to eating the Lamb, the manner of it: the Lamb
Christ, he must be wholly closed with, a soul must take a full of Christ, or no
Christ at all.

Thirdly, The sauce with which they were to eat the Lamb was bitter herbs,
Exodus 12. 8. which shows the frame of Spirit the soul is usually in that
truly closes with Jesus Christ: that is, he is under a real repenting frame of
heart, because of sin. O how bitter is the least sin to a soul which truly
receives Christ: that which was the darling of the soul before, is now gall
and wormwood to the soul: the soul looks on his sins as that which pierced a
dear Savior; therefore it is what pierces the soul, Zach. 12. 10. They shall
look upon him whom they have pierced, and mourn over him, and be in
bitterness, as one for her firstborn. Those that think they have eaten the
Lamb Christ without the bitter herbs of repentance, it is much to be doubted
whether they ever eat of Christ at all; it is not a bare notional work in the
head, but a work attended with a heart broken for sin, a heart full of godly
sorrow, and repentance, for its rebellion, and stubbornness against Christ.
Peter wept bitterly for his sin, Matthew. 26. 75. David and others have eaten
much of this kind of bitter sauce with the Lamb: it is the believers continual
sauce all his life long.

Secondly, The bitter herbs is meant those afflictions and temptations which do
accompany the life of a Believer in this life for Christ his sake: our Savior
calls it a taking up the Cross, Luke 9. 23. which is a thing most bitter and
contrary to flesh and blood: therefore says Paul when he made choice of this
Lamb Christ, I consulted not with flesh and blood, Gal. 1. 16. For flesh and
blood cannot endure the bitterness of that state in which Christ is to be
found. Nothing but persecution, disgrace, trouble, loss of good name, yea, and
life it self that attends the way of Christ; therefore says Paul, 2 Timothy 3.
12 He that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution, he must
suffer: there is a necessity you see, that the Lamb must be eaten with bitter
herbs. Those that will not eat the sauce shall not taste of the flesh of this
Lamb, Luke 9. 23. Unless a man deny himself and take up my cross and follow me,
he cannot be my disciple.

There be a great many would catch at the flesh of this Lamb Christ, were it
not for the bitter sauce which lies in the dish with Christ: many love to
shear in a Christ, but not in the Cross; they love the Crown, but not the
sufferings which belong to the Crown: therefore says our Savior, Strait is
the gate, and narrow is the way which leads to life, and few there be that
find it. Job found bitterness in the dish where the Lamb lay, Job 13 26. Thou
writest bitter things against me: but did Job (as many do) leave the meat for
the bitter sauce; no, no, Job 13. 15. Though thou kill me, yet w^ll I trust in
thee. O how happy had some been, had they with Job still kept to this
resolution; but the ways of Christ were too bitter for them: but I fear those
will find their sweet meat of this worlds good, attended with the bitterest
herbs at last.

Again, they were to eat the Lamb with unleavened bread, Exodus 12. 8. with
Numb. 9. 11. This st^ll points at a soul eating Christ a right, which is the
ante-type, which shows us thus much.

1. That Christ must be really closed with, and not feignedly; there must not
be any thing of the leaven of hypocrisy in it, not for any by end, but out of
love to Christ.

2. It must be void of the least love to sin, if there be any love reserved to
any corruption, Christ cannot enter the soul upon such terms, 1 Corinthians 5.
8. Let us keep the feast, not with the old leaven of malice and wickedness, but
with the unleavened bread of sincerity, and truth. Heb. 12. 15. Looking
diligently, lest any man fail of the grace of God, lest any root of bitterness
spring up and trouble you, and thereby many be defiled,. Heb. 3. 12. Take heed
brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing
from the living God: therefore says Peter, if you would as newborn babes
receive the sincere milk of the word that you may grow thereby; you must first
lay aside all guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and evil speakings, 1 Pet. 2.
1. 2. That is, all sin must be forsaken, and cast out of the affection, or no
Christ received into the heart: the love of the world, the love of lust, pride,
honor, pleasure, ease, whatever has been near or dear to the soul, he must
utterly protest against, or no Christ, Jer. 4. 14. O Jerusalem, wash thine
heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved; how long shall vain thoughts
lodge within thee. So Isa. 1. 16. 18. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil
of your doings from before me, cease to do evil; come now and let us reason
together, says the Lord, though your sins be as scarlet, yet I will make
them as white as snow, though they be red as crimson, yet shall they be as
white as wool.

So that you see there must first be a putting away the leaven of sin, before
there can be a eating of the Lamb Christ Jesus: truly therefore such persons as
dream of having Christ, and yet retain the old leaven of sin, are mistaken.

Fourthly, The Jews were to eat the Lamb with their loins girded, Exodus 12. 11.
Girding of the loins sometimes signifies resolution to some great work, Psalm
18. 32, 33, 34. Sometimes it signifies truth and faithfulness in the person so
girded, Rev. 15. 6. Here it signifies haste or readiness to be gone from the
place where they were in before, Exodus 12. 11.

Now all which significations may be taken into one head and applied to the
eating of the Lamb Christ Jesus. For first of all, the loins of a souls mind
must be girded as to resolution, that intends to eat the Lamb Christ. A soul
must resolve to go through thick and thin with him, through a thousand
discouragements with Christ, sometimes from within, sometimes from without;
what from inward doubts, and what from outward troubles, a soul will find it a
hard thing to go on in this way for heaven; those daily taunts, scoffs, and
jeers, that the soul passes under for Christ, from day to day; sometimes from
its relations, sometimes from its fellow servants who live in house with him,
and so likewise from its wicked deriding neighbors.

I say these things considered, the soul is many times casting away its hope,
and crying out with the Psalmist, Psalm. 73. 13. Verily, I have cleansed my
heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence to no purpose. Therefore the
loins had need be girded, that so the soul might not cast away his confidence
which has great recompense of reward, Hebrews 10. 35.

Now it is the overcoming soul shall wear the Crown, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. Rev. 2.
10. and the soul that endures to the end the same shall be saved, Mat. 24. 13.
Therefore says our Savior, a soul must first count up the cost (when he makes
out after this Lamb Christ, whether he can hold out to the end with him,
whether he can run the loss of fathers love, mothers love, brothers, sisters,
husband, wife, children, kinsmen, and neighbors love for this Christ; whether
a soul can part with credit, honor, riches, carnal ease for Christ, whether he
can follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, Rev. 14. 4. For he that looks back
is unfit for the kingdom of God, Luke 9. 62. So Heb. 10. 38 If any draw back,
my soul shall have no pleasure in him; and says Peter, The last estate of such
men is worse then the beginning, 2 Pet. 2. 20.

Therefore when Peter would exhort against faintings and discouragements, ^e
bids men gird up the loins their mind, and be sober, and hope to the end for
the grace that is to be brought unto them at the revelation of Jesus Christ, 1
Pet. 1. 1, 13.

Secondly, take girding of the loins as it imports truth and faithfulness: In
this sense the soul ought to gird up his loins, if he really intends a through
and full closing with Christ, he must resolve to be Christ's in faithfulness; as
the wife takes her husband, she takes her husband, and only him, she is not to
reserve any part of the marriage bed to any other; so in faithfulness is the
soul to take Christ, resolving that no cursed sin or lust shall shear in the
marriagebed of its affection with Jesus Christ: so says the spouse speaking of
Christ her Husband, My beloved is the chiefest to me among ten thousand, Cant.
5. 10. He is mine and I am his, Cant. 2, 16.

2. The Wife takes the Husband to be hers for ever during life, not to part
and fling him off at her pleasure; therefore says Paul, Romans 7. 2. The woman
that has a Husband is bound by the Law to her husband as long as he lives.

So in like manner is Christ to be closed with by a Christian, never to part
more, either in this world or that which is to come; to be Christ's in sickness,
as well as in health, in poverty as well as in prosperity, to be Christ's in bad
times as well as in good times, to winter and summer with Christ.

There be a great many that can put on Christ, and pretend to Saintship, and
can call him Husband in good days, but they can as quickly cast their Christ
and all away again in bad days: when Christ seems to be clothed with the
riches, honors, credit, and gain of this world, then it is he that can court
him with some seeming service; but when he comes to be uncloathed again of
those things, and with Job to be set on a Dunghill of reproach and scorn through
poverty, then they fly back as fast again from Christ as ever they come to
Christ; and with Peter, cursing and swearing, they never knew such a man, Mat.
26. 73, 74. And like the Jews who could cry Hosanna to Christ, when he was set
by the people upon the Ass colt; but when in a suffering state upon the Cross,
Crucify, cruc^fie him; but let such know, this not to eat the Lamb with the
loins girded in truth and faithfulness.

Lastly, Girding of the loins signifies haste or readiness to be gone from the
place where we were before; therefore it is observed that the Jews went out of
Egypt speedily upon the girding of their loins, Exodus 12. 37.

This shows the speedy motion souls are to make from that cursed state of
nature, sin, and ignorance; after their closing with Jesus Christ, the soul is
not to stay there one night longer; there must be not only a total, but a
speedy separation from sin and nature: the soul that truly closes with Christ
never looks back again upon his former condition, but he loatheth himself for
it, he never thinks on it but he hates it, as Paul speaks, What fruit had ye in
those things whereof ye are now ashamed, Romans 6. 24. O when the soul looks back
upon his carnal Egyptian state, and sees what a blind mad fool he was
(together when he considers what sad ignorant works he always brought forth,
when he looks back upon his drunken, roaring mad, singing bouts in the
Alehouse, his running to so many Wakes. Revels, Bull-baitings, May Pole
Dancings: O how much does that soul which eats the Lamb indeed mourn for it,
O how does he blush before the Lord under the thoughts of it, wondering at the
infinite patience of God, that he should be now out of Hell, wondering that God
should accept of such a rebellious wretch, such a sinful slave as he sees
himself now to be) to such a blessed Banquet and rich feast, as the roasted
Lamb comes to: now on goes the girdle about his loins, and away he goes, flying
out of this condition as Hell it self: an instance you may take for this
purpose in Luke 15. 17. In the Prodigal Son, And when he came to himself he
said, How many hired servants of my Fathers have bread enough, and to spare,
and I perish for hunger: I will arise and go to my Father, and will say, I have
sinned against heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy
Son, make me as one of thy hired servants, Luke 15. 17, 18, 19. You see the
Prodigal could no longer stay in this condition, when he comes to be sensible
of the evil of it; but he girdeth up his loins, and puts himself into a posture
fit to be gone from all his old delights and sinful pleasures, his old filthy
companions, he flies from all, he dares not stay an hour longer with them,
Psalm 45. 10. says Christ in that Psalm, Hearken O daughter, and consider,
incline thine ear, forget also thy own people, and thy fathers house. Thus you
see the soul is to leave its old carnal estate and condition, if he means to
eat the Lamb Christ Jesus: Therefore those that are so confident they have
taken Christ, and yet are not come off their old Egyptian carnal condition,
truly are much mistaken, says Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 1. If any man be in Christ he is
a new creature; all old things are past away, and behold all things are become
new.

For a man to make an account he is in Christ and is a good Christian, and yet
to live a drunkard, a swearer, and a cheater; a hater of Gods people, a
despiser of godliness, to live in adultery, and uncleanness, to live loose in
his family; if this man have closed with Christ, then so has the Devil also,
it cannot be; light and darkness cannot dwell together, 2 Cor. 6. 15. What
concord has Christ with Belial; so ver. 17. Wherefore come out from among
them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing.

Certainly my Brethren, there is no more fellowship wi^h the unfruitful works
of darkness after eating the Lamb; the soul must immediately arise, and be
gone, from his old sinful condition.

Our Savior would not allow the young man so much time as to go to bury his
Father, Mat. 8. 21, 22. therefore the language of the Lord to such is, Micah 2.
10. Arise ye, depart, for this is not your rest, because it is polluted, it
shall destroy you with a sore destruction.

The next thing we are to take notice of before we leave this particular, is
the other two parts of the Travelers accoutrements (which is) his staff in his
hand, and his shoes on his feet, Exodus 12. 11.

First the staff, Now you know the use of a staff in a Travelers hand is to
help him on in his journey, it succors him, it stays up his body from falling,
it helps him over difficult and dangerous place? This staff leads us to the use
of the grace of believing, which a soul should beg earnestly for at Gods hands,
that so after he has eaten of the Lamb Christ, he might be enabled to travel
his journey from Egypt through the wilderness of this life; to his Canaan of
rest and glory hereafter: for it is less possible that a soul should travel
through the wilderness of this world to Heaven hereafter, without the grace of
believing, then it was possible for the Jews to travel to their temporal Canaan
without their staff. O how does Faith succor and relieve the soul all along in
his way to Heaven; when the soul is ready to give over, and is yielding up the
ghost, how does this staff of believing raise him up again, and puts a new
life of confidence into the soul again. Thus it oftentimes set up David upon
his legs again, Psalm 27. 13. I had fainted unless I had believed to see the
goodness of God in the land of the living, like a staff under weariness it did
stay up and support David. O how did this staff of Faith succor and relieve
Habbakuck, Hab. 3. 17, 18. Although there be no fruit in the vine, and although
the fig tree does not blossom, and there be no herd in the stalls, and the
flock should be cut off from the fold; yet will I joy in God, and rejoice in
the God of my salvation.

O what a deep ditch did the Psalmist leap over by this staff of believing,
Psalm 73. 25. My flesh and my heart fails me, but God is the strength of my
heart, and my portion for ever. Hence it is that Habakkuk says, The just man
shall live by his faith, Hab. 2. 4. That is for the support it gives a soul in
dangerous times; it is this grace that keeps a soul above water: this was it
which carried David through all his trouble, this was it lifted him up out of
the horrible pit, Psalm. 40. 2, 3. this was the staff that led the Jews through
the Red Sea, this led Jacob over the Jordan of his difficulties, Genesis 3^. this
staff led him into Egypt, and this staff brought out Joseph his bones ( Jacob
his son) out of Egypt again, Hebrews 11. 22.

And this was the staff the Apostles traveled by all along in their journey
(in this life) 2 Cor. v. 7. For we walk by faith, not by sight. Mark, we walk
by faith, It is what the traveling Christian must carry in his hand at all
times, in the pilgrimage he spends in this life.

Lastly, The Jews had their shoes on their feet, Exodus 12. 11. The shoes you
know are what greatly helps a man to a comfortable going on in his journey
[without which well he cannot travel.

Now Paul shows you what it is to have the feet well shod, Ephesians 6. 15. Having
your feet well shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace; that is, a
soul that takes in the Lamb of God, and thereby has bound himself to fly out
of his carnal, profane, Egyptian sinful life and conversation, had need first
of all well furnish himself with the word of God, with the threatening part of
it to drive him, and prick him on, with the examples of others lives therein
written to draw, him with the promises therein to persuade him, and with the
hope of eternal life, true joy, and sweet felicity, to allure him, or else he
will find it a hard matter to come quit of his old condition and carnal
conversation.

Therefore says Paul, Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, Col. 3. 16.
So says David, Thy word have I hid in my heart, Psalm 119. 11.

O you young Christians, for to you I speak, you that would eat the roasted
Lamb Christ, and would come out of the Egypt of your carnal, ignorant, blind
conditions. O hearken to my advice, you must be well shod with the preparation
of the Gospel of peace. O says Christ, Search the Scriptures, John 5. 39. O be
much in reading of your Bibles, let them not lie idle, get as much of them as
you can into your hearts, that you may be able to wrestle with flesh and blood,
against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual
wickedness got into high places, Ephesians 6. 12.

O beg hard at Gods hand, that he would imprint his word upon your hearts, and
cause you to grow in the knowledge of it more and more, that so you may have to
answer every temptation that you shall meet with in your way to your spir^tual
Canaan. You know the shoes are useful to keep the feet from the gauling; truly
so is the word of God well applied, very useful to keep the conscience from
gaulding and corrupting. for look how it is with a man with sore feet, he halts
and tumbles, not able to keep his ground; so it is with a man under a gaulded
conscience, he cannot stand steady in any place, but reels from thing to thing,
from place to place, and cannot stand long any where at a time: now the word of
God will help this, either as applied, or eyed.

1. As applied, so will it help the gaulded conscience, Psalm 107. 20.

2. As it is applied by the soul as its rule to walk by, so it prevents from
corrupting; for as the shoes keeps the feet from gauling, so will the word of
God keep the conscience from corrupting (if it be carefully observed as the
souls rule to walk by.)

So you see what it is to eat the Lamb (a Lamb roasted) to eat him with the
loins girt, the staff in the hand, and the shoes on the feet.

CHAP 4. The next thing to be noted in the Type (or Hiisory) is this, the Lamb
was to be eaten by every particular Family, unless the Family were too big;
then they were to take the next adjoining to it, and so they were to eat it
together, Exodus 12. 4.
THis in the Ante-type shows us thus much by way of information.

First. That all the particular Churches of God in the world have a like right
to Jesus Christ; for though there be one body or Church Universal spread over
the earth, yet this universal body is distinguished into so many little bodies
or Churches, as Providence thinks good: Hence it is that you have the Holy
Ghost speaking of seven Churches in Asia, Rev. 1. 4.

Like wise we read of a particular Church, which was in Aquilla and Priscilla's
house, 1 Cor. 16. 15. A slender foundation for a national Church; and yet all
these distinct societies have all aright alike to Christ, as the families of
the Jews were all alike to eat the Lamb: therefore says Paul, There is one
body, and one spirit, even as ye are called by one hope of your calling, one
Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God, one Father of all, who is above all,
and through all, and in you all, Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6. Through all ages in the
world every Church in particular has had a like benefit by Christ (so that the
weakest Church in the world, if it be a true Church, may claim as large a
portion in the heart of Christ, as the flourishing'st Church in the primitive
times, when the Apostles were living. You see though Israel were a great body,
yet they must be divided into several little Bodies when they come to eat the
Lamb, and yet a Lamb for every family or little body of eaters; so that none
need to doubt in any age of the world, though the number be great, which have
eaten of Christ, yet there is enough in Christ to satisfy all that are to
come: therefore is Christ called a fountain set open for sin and for
uncleanness, Zach. 13. 1, 2. In that day there shall be a fountain opened to
the house of David, etc.

2. It shows the benefit we have by eating the Lamb Christ, for we are by it
made partaker of families right and order; every soul by Christ may say, (now I
am through grace) of the Family of Heaven, and I shall have a childs portion
with the rest of the true Israelites: though it goes hard with me in this life,
though I am poor and low in the world, yet its enough that I am of the household
of Faith, my name is listed in heaven for my daily allowance, both for me and
mine in this life, and I shall have my full portion of glory with the rest of
my Brethren hereafter, [I shall have that inheritance that fades not away.] O
to be an adopted Son of God, what a privilege is this, O how should this bear
up the heart under all discouragements, to have a right to all the excellency
of glory and glorious attendance, that there is laid up for the heirs of it, as
Paul says, That which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered
into the heart of man to conceive the things which God has prepared for those
which love him.

Thus much is to be observed by the Jews eating the roasted Lamb apart (by
particular families.)

One thing more is worth our noting, which is, that the Lamb was to be eaten
that night, nothing of the Lamb was to be left until the morning, Exodus 12.
10. Which shows us thus much, that delays are dangerous in this case, for a
soul to put off any thing of Christ (after he is convinced of the need of him)
though it be but for the morrow; the soul may never have the proffer more: read
that place in Hebrews 3. 7, 8. In which place a soul is called upon to take
Christ to day, meaning at the first offer, or else you may never see a Christ
more in mercy for ever: read Isaiah 55. 6. Therefore the exhortation is for men
to seek the Lord while he may be found, and to call upon him while he is near;
men will know that God will not always be found, and if any are like to find
it so, they are such souls as put by Christ until to morrow, they have not time
to mind the thing; there is yet something of more weight to be minded, some
worldly interest, which must be set on wards farther first, before they can
attend this matter. Read the danger of setting Christ aside until to morrow, or
of setting something more necessary (as such think) before Jesus Christ; read
Luke 14. 16, 17, 18. 19, 20. with 24. Therefore take this along with thee soul,
remember the Jews were to eat the Lamb at the first offer, that which they set
aside until the morrow they were not to eat, but to burn with fire, not to eat
it again: read Exodus 12. 10. O Christian have a care thou do not undo thy
soul this way, by setting aside some of Christ in a dish until to morrow,
crying out, you are too young yet, or, you would sport your selves a little
longer with your corruptions, or your merry companions, I say, take heed of
that.

CHAP. 5. The occasion of eating the Lamb.
I Now come to speak something about the occasion of the Lamb, which was this,
because of the destroying Angel which was to pass over Egypt on purpose to
destroy their firstborn; for the safety of the Israelites, God in mercy to
them, ordered them to take a Lamb, and kill him; the blood of which they were
to take, and strike the door posts of their houses, which was for a sign to the
destroying Angel, that in his passing through the land, where ever he should
see that blood on the door of the house, he might pass over that without doing
the least injury to it; and so from thence to the next house where the blood
was not on the doors; there the Angel was to do his work of execution, Exodus
12. 7. with 12, 13, and 22. verses.

This thing shows us the great reason why God the Father sent Christ into the
world, it was that sinful mankind might not perish by the destroying Angel of
his Justice, which will certainly pass through the Egppt of this world, and
eternally slay all those that shall be found in their sins Christ shall come in
flames of fire, rendering vengeance on those that know not God, and obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 These. 1. 8. 9 Who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power.

Now to prevent this mischief, and the execution of this plague upon miserable
men and women, the Lord sent in a Lamb into the world, which was his Son Jesus
Christ, that so men might be delivered from wrath through him, John 3. 16. Acts
4. 12. But this must be done, the Blood of this Lamb Christ must be taken, and
by the hysop of Faith dipped in the Basin of Gospel Ordinances, striking the
door posts of the heart therewith: this done, the destroying Angel of Gods
Justice looking upon it, comes to be satisfied, and hurts not that soul, and
becomes that souls friend: Therefore says John, Behold the Lamb of God which
takes away the sins of the world, John 1. 29.

But not a bare looking upon the Lamb will content the Justice of God, but the
taking of his Blood out of the basin of the Gospel, or dipping therein the
hysop of believing, and applying of it to the heart and conscience; so to do
contents the Justice of God: therefore says the same Apostle, The blood of
Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1. 7. Meaning the guilt of our
sins.

To this agrees the words of the Apostle, Heb 9. 13, 14. For if the blood of
Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer, sprinkling the unclean,
sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh, how much more shall the blood of
Jesus Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to
God; purge your consciences from dead works to serve the living God.

Thus have I showed you the mystery of Egppt, and of the Lamb eaten by the Jews
there; likewise you have seen the manner of eating the Lamb, together with the
bread and sauce with which the Jews were to eat the Lamb: also you have seen
the mystery of their striking the door posts of their houses with the blood of
the Lamb; as also the mystery of the destroying Angel you have seen opened;
together with the sweet harmony it makes to the work of God upon the hearts of
his people; which when well considered will make a soul cry out with the
Psalmist, Psalm. 77. 19, 20. Thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the great
waters, and thy footsteps are not known: thou leadest thy people like a flock
by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

CHAP. 6. The Israelites passing into the Red Sea a Type of Christ.
I Now come to the second Type, which was Gods leading the Israelites through
the red Sea, Exodus 14. which was done just after their eating of the Lamb, and
coming forth of Egypt: In the which are these things to be noted.

1. The peoples great distress, ver. 10. 11.

2. The cause of their distress, which was Pharaohs Army marching behind them
with an intent to destroy them, verse 10,

3. We may take notice of their Leaders, which was the Angel and Moses, Exodus
14. 19. with 21. Which Angel without doubt was Christ; for as Moses guided the
people, so did the Angel guide Moses.

4. Moses stretched out his hand, and the waters were divided, ver, 21.

5. The people go through the waters, and by that means were delivered, ver. 22.

6. The same waters which were waters of salvation to the Israelites, became
waters of destruction to the Egyptians, ver. 27. 28.

But first we find the children of Israel greatly distressed: this answers to
the condition that the soul is in under the conviction of sin, full of trouble
and despairing thoughts about his condition; how often is the heart overwhelmed
and drowned in horror, not knowing what to do, nor where to go to find any
comfort: what secret gnawings and pangs of inward travel are there roving to
and fro, in the soul of one under the conviction for sin, night and day; it
banisheth all comfort from him, all his best of outward comforts are imbittered
to him; no comfort in wife, in children, in friends, estate, or treasure; he
cannot find any place to rest the sole of his foot upon with ease, every
moment looking out for the executioner to overtake him; if abroad he is afraid
the heavens will fall upon him, he dreadeth every tree he passes by, every
wall he goes along by, he leapeth off it, fearing it will fall upon him: if at
home, then he dreads every hole in his house, expecting a devil in every corner
of his house: some of which distress you may see upon the hearts of the
converted Jews, Acts 2. 37. Which made them cry out to the Apostles, Men and
brethren, what shall we do. Likewise you may see it hot upon the Jaylors heart,
Acts 16. 29, 30. Who came forth trembling to the Apostles, crying out, Sirs,
what shall I do to be saved.

David was acquainted very much with this kind of trouble, Psalm 38. 2, 3, 4,
5, 6. For thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presses me full sore:
there is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger, neither is there any
rest in my bones because of my sin, for mine iniquities are gone over my head
as a heavy burden, they are too heavy for me, my wounds stinck and are corrupt
because of my foolishness; I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I go
mourning all the day long, for my loins are filled with a loathsome disease,
and there is no soundness in my flesh: Likewise you may read Acts 9. 6. that
Paul had his part in this distress; Paul trembled under it, and being
astonished, cried out, Lord what will thou have me to do. I must acknowledge
this work, for the measure of it is not in all alike, for it oftentimes falls
out in this thing much according to a persons rate of sinning before his
conversion; but for the kind of this work, if men and women cannot speak
something of it in some measure, it is little sign that there has been a work
wrought (in truth) on that soul: you may see when the Scripture points you to
the most clearest Gospel work of conversion that we read of in the whole Book
of God; it points it out by the great distress that first it brings on the
minds of men and women, Zech. 12. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.

2. The cause of the Israelites distress, it arised from the Egyptians
marching behind them with full purpose to ruin and destroy them, Exodus 14 10.
The ante-type of this Type shows the cause of the souls abovesaid distress,
which is the letting in of the souls guilt of sin upon him, which does (like a
huge army) pursue the soul day and night, and like so many devouring Lions with
open mouths standing ready to devour the soul, which makes the soul (as the
Jews did) oftentimes to cry out for a grave to bury his distressed body in,
judging death to be preferred before l^fe: and the way to end these endless
miseries is to lay violent hands on life (but that proves but a leaping out of
the drying pan into the fire) there is no trouble in the world like to this
trouble; a man had better stand in the field against all the Armies and Cannons
in the world, then to stand to behold a guilty conscience. O the dreadful
shreeks and doleful sounds which it makes in the breast of a man when awakened:
take an instance or two from the word of God, Psalm 32. 3, 4, 5. When I kept
silence my bones waxed old, through my roaring all the day long; for day and
night thy hand was heavy upon me; my moisture is turned into the drought of
summer: I acknowledge my sin unto thee, and my iniquity have I not hid: So
Psalm 38. 2, 3, 4. For thine arrows stick fast in me, and thine hand presses
me sore: there is no soundness in my flesh because of thy anger, neither is
there any rest in my bones, because of my sin; for mine iniquities are gone
over my head, and as a heavy burden they are too heavy for me: so Psalm 40, 12.
For innumerable evils have taken hold on me, and have compassed me round about;
so that I am not able to look up; they are more then the hairs of my head, so
that my heart fails me. So Psalm 90. 7, 8. For we are consumed by thine
anger, and by thy wrath we are troubled; thou have set our iniquities before
thy face, our secret sins in the light of thy countenance: Let the poor soul
run where he will, yet he shall not be able to avoid the thunderings of an
awakened conscience, but like so many swarms of Bees flying round his ears,
crying always to him, we are thy works and we will follow thee; we will follow
thee in the field, and in thy house, we will be with thee at thy table and at
thy bed. Job 20. 23, 24. When he is about to fill his belly God shall cast the
fury of his wrath upon him, and shall rain it upon him; while he is eating he
shall flee from his iron weapon, and the bow of steel shall strike him through.

My friends, the guilt of a man's sin it will go to the grave with him, it will
lie down with him in his Sepulcher, and his grave shall cast it up again:
therefore says Job, The heavens shall reveal his sin, and the earth shall rise
up against him, Job 20. 27. Thus you see both the distress, and the cause of it
upon a poor soul under an awakened conscience, and how it answers to the Jews
distress at the red Sea.

3. We may take notice of the next particular, which is this, That that means
which proved a ground of relief to the Jews in their distress, the peoyle were
guided thereunto by Moses: from whence we may note these things.

First, That though man knows how to sin himself into trouble; yet he knows not
how to get himself out of it. The Jews knew no way out of this trouble,
therefore begun to cry out for graves to bury themselves in the place: so is it
with the soul under the sense and sight of sin, knows no way to escape out of
that dreadful condition in which he sees himself to be, nothing but death on
every hand, wrath gone out from above against him, hell beneath opens its
mouth to receive him; and thus the soul is oftentimes put upon to seek out for
his grave to bury himself in, knows no other way to save himself, but eternally
to destroy himself both in soul and body like Judas.

Second, If the soul have met with any relief in his distressed condition, let
him know it came not from himself, but he was guided thereunto by a special
hand of Christ: The Jews were led to their means of refreshment by Moses, who
was a Type of Jesus Christ.

Have thou met with comfort and refreshment from such a Sermon, from such a
Minister, such a Christian Friend, such a Meeting, or in reading of such and
such a Book, consider, thou were led unto that means for comfort by the special
hand of Christ, and thou should eye his hand in it, that love, and praise,
and obedience might be rendered him for it; therefore says Christ, With loving
kindeness have I drawn thee, Jer, 31. 3.

Third, If any soul wants relief in such a condition, then let him make unto
Jesus Christ for it, for he is thy leader in this case, as Moses was the Jews
in the other: Read Deuteronomy. 18. 15. A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up
unto you from among your Brethren like unto me, him shall you hear. Now where
were the Jews to go in a time of danger bu^ to Moses: So soul, if ever thou
would have ease and refreshment thou must go to Christ alone; some run to
creatures, and think to find comfort there; others run to their duties and
works of mercy, and thinks to get it from thence: again, there be some that
will send thee to thy inward quallifications, or work of God within thee, as
they call it, or the light within the soul. (I am not hereby undervaluing the
works of grace, as they are signs or evidences of our union with Christ,) but I
send thee to thy true leader Christ, who is at the right hand of God, to make
daily intercession for such as thou art, Romans 8. 24. O look out and look up to
him by faith, for this is the way to it, Isaiah 45. 22. and chap. 44. 3, 4.

Fifthly, The next particular is this, Moses stretched out his hand over the
waters and the waters divided, Exodus 14. 21. This act in Moses leads to behold
the necessariness of outward means, contrary to the opinion of many in our
days; which because we read in the Scriptures of God his teachings within in
the heart, and of the holy anointing that shall teach them all things; from
hence they conclude against all outward teaching.

Question, What was the reason that God had not caused the waters to go back
without the stretching out of Moses hand.

Answer. Not but that God could have done it, but God thereby shows us thus
much, that it is his pleasure in the effecting of the greatest salvation, and
deliverance for his people, ordinarily to bring it about to them by outward
means.

Our Savior was able to open the blind man's eyes without clay and spittle; a
way more likely to put out a man's eyes, then to recover any man's sight, John 9.
6. But it is to show his pleasure, touching the use of outward means: why could
not God have thrown down the walls of Jericho without sounding of the Rams
horn; and why could not God have caused water to come out of the Rock without
striking of it, but to show it is his pleasure ordinarily to use it in his
administrations to the sons of men: therefore it is our duty to wait upon God
in it.

Now to the stretching out of Moses hand in this outward salvation, answers the
preaching of the Gospel by God his Ministers, which is the outward means of the
eternal salvation; for therein is the arm of divine grace and love revealed
and stretched out to poor sinners. This Isaiah calls the revealing of Gods
arm, Isaiah 53. 1. Lord who has believed our report, and to whom is the arm
of the Lord revealed: So that whatsoever some men say to the contrary, yet God
has had a special regard in all ages to the outward means of teaching the
word: If God had been minded only to have left men to the inward teachings of
his Spirit, why did he take so much care to supply the ages of the world with
Prophets and Apostles, was he not as well able to teach the world by those
inward teachings only, as now: why does the Apostle say in Ephesians. 4. 8. with
12. 13. that he gave both gifts and Apostles, Pastors, and Teachers, for the
work of the Ministry, until the Saints be perfected, and come unto the measure
of the fullness in Christ.

If God were not minded to teach his people that way, why did God bid Philip
join himself to the Eunuchs Chariot to instruct him, Acts 8. 29. If God had
been minded only to have left men to the inward teachings, was he not as well
able to have taught the Eunuch by his Spirit only.

Again, could not God have taught Cornelius, Acts 10. 3, 4, 5, 6. only by his
Spirit, and so have saved Peter a labor; yet you see God would do nothing
until Peter was come. I do not plead for outward teaching without the inward,
but both must go together; so that the stretching out of God his arm in the
Gospel, may well be compared to the stretching out of Moses hand over the red
Sea: for as the one was a means to let the Israeli^es through the red Sea for a
temporal salvation; so is the other a means to let a soul into the red Sea of
Christ's Blood for an eternal salvation, which leads me to the next particular.

Fifthly, The people go through the waters, and are saved from their enemies,
Exodus 14 22.

This leads us to the usefulness of the Blood of Jesus Christ, through which
all that are saved do p^ss by believing: for as the Jews had perished without
mercy by Pharaohs Army, had they not passed through the Red Sea; so will all
men unavoidably perish by the guilt of their sins, without they wade by faith
through the red Sea of Christ his Blood, 1 John 1. 7. The blood of Jesus Christ
cleanses us from all sin. Romans 5. 7. Being justified by his blood we shall be
saved from wrath through him. Heb. 9. 12. By his own blood he entered once into
the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us: so ver. 22. Without
shedding of blood there is no remission. Rev. 1. 5. Who has loved us, and
washed us in his own blood from our sins; for thou wast slain and have redeemed
us by thy blood unto God, out of every kindred, tongue, nation, and people,
Revel. 5. 9. So that this shows us if ever a soul would have deliverance from
his sins, which dogs him up and down from place to place, he must fetch it in
from the blood of Christ, held out to his soul in the Gospel. O my friends, you
that have the guilt of sin set open to you, would you have it washed away, and
you that have the anger of God and his wrath flaming hot against you, would you
have it quenched; O then fly you in all haste to the blood of Christ, O drink
it in by believing, and this will give your hearts ease, nothing else will do
it. O look on Christ on the Cross bleeding for you, get as near the Cross as
you can in your thoughts, and strive to get under his wounds, and open thy
mouth wide, and drink thy fill of blood, adding to it this firm persuasion,
that the worth and efficacy of this blood will save thee; thou may assure thy
self that it will, and if ever thou gettest peace into thy troubled soul, it
will come and must come in this way, for that peace which comes into the soul,
which came not in by this way of faith, will in the end prove the greatest
sorrow, Isa. 50. 11.

Sixthly and Lastly, The same waters which proved waters of Salvation to the
Israelites, were waters of Ruin and utter Destruction to the Egyptians, Exodus
14. 27, 28. It was a full and total Deliverance to the Jews, and a full and
total Destruction to the Egyptians.

This leads us to behold the wonderful benefit that those have by the blood of
Christ, that wade through it by believing.

A full Redemption from all their sins at once, the Red Sea took off the whole
of Pharaohs Army at once, not a man left to carry back tidings what became of
his fellow; so is it a full Redemption that we have by the Red Sea of Christ's
blood, a Redemption from the guilt of all sin, there is not one left to carry
back news what is become of the rest; all sin past, present, and to come,
original sin, and actual sin, sins of all sorts and sizes, public and private
sins, sins of Childhood, Youth, Manhood, and Old Age, sins committed in all
relations, conditions, and capacities whatsoever, yea all sins with all their
circumstances, John 1. 1. 7. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all
sin, there is not one of them shall rise up to a souls Condemnation more, Romans
8. 1. There is therefore now no condemnation to a man in Christ Jesus, who
walks not after the flesh, but after the spirit.

Secondly, It is a total salvation, it is for ever, the Jews were never
troubled with that Army more, therefore said Moses, stand still, behold the
salvation of God: The Egyptians whom you see to day, you shall see no more for
ever, Exodus 14. 13. Such a salvation has the Elect by the Red sea of Christ's
blood, it is a Redemption from sin for ever, not for a year, or two, or ten,
but world without end: Therefore says our Savior, it is eternal life which I
give my people, and they shall never perish, John 10. 28. Jer. 31. 3. I have
(says God) loved thee with an everlasting love, so John 13. 1. Where its said
of Christ having loved his own, He loves them to the end.

CHAP. 7. The next condition the Children of Israel was in after their
Deliverance from the Red Sea, was their traveling through the Wilderness.
IN which we may take notice of these things:

First, Their cross motion up and down, sometimes this way, and sometimes that
ways, sometimes toward their good land, and sometimes the quite contray way
back again.

Just so are the dealings of God with and in the spirits of the people; that
although they are fully justified from all their sins, by passing through the
Red sea of Christ's blood; yet the after-dealings of God (many times) are very
various with his people in point of comfort, what up and down leading (of God)
many times do poor souls find within themselves: Sometimes they are well-nigh
Canaan as they hope within them, and they can rejoice under the shinings of
Gods love upon their hearts, and they come to conclude pretty well of their
spiritual conditions, when they find their desires to run forth after God, and
their affections and love to move out after Jesus Christ; then the soul takes
to himself the wings of joy, and begins to mount upwards in the air of comfort.

But at another time the soul is wholly at a loss, and knows not what to
conclude of himself, or his condition, he sees nothing but confusion within,
all things out of order; the soul can feel little affection or love working
toward Jesus Christ, little heart to duty, all the souls zeal is gone from
him, his courage gone, his faith gone, his taste and spiritual savor gone, and
all seems to fail the soul, which makes his hope to die within him, and to cry
out with the Psalmist, Psalm. 73. 26. My flesh and my heart fails me. Insomuch
that the soul cannot believe for one days comfort, and then the soul concludes
that he goes quite back again even to the borders of Egypt.

Thus it was with David, sometimes he could say the Lord was his shepherd he
should not want; that he was made to lie down in green pastures, and led
besides the still waters, Psalm. 23. 1, 2. But at another time he is all off his
hope and comfort again, and cries out his life is spent in grief, and his years
with sighing, his strength fallen because of his iniquity; his bones were
consumed, Psalm. 31. 10.

Again, take him at another time, and then you shall up upon the hill of
comfort again, Psalm. 23. Lasts crying out, surely mercy and goodness shall
follow me all the days of my life.

Look you into the 25. Psalm 17. 18. And there you shall see him down on all
four again, crying out, The troubles of my heart are enlarged, O bring thou me
out of my distresses, so in the 27. Ps. 3. v. You have him up in the Mount with
God again, crying out, Though an host should encamp against me, my heart shall
not fear, though war arise on every side against me, yeti^n this will I be
confident: Look you again into Psalm. 73. 26. And you shall see him tumbling at
the hills foot in despair, crying out, My flesh and my heart fails me. Anon
you have him ready to sing, My heart is fixed, O Lord my heart is fixed, Psalm.
58. 7. But at another time, far from that condition, but gone quite back again
many miles from his Canaan rest, Psalm. 55 4, 5, 6. My heart is sore pained
within me, and the terrors of death are fallen upon me, fearfulness and
trembling are come upon me, horror has overwhelmed me; so was it with the
Spouse, sometimes she seems she was in the bosom of her beloved, Cant. 2 4, 5,
6. He has brought me into his Banqueting House, whose banner over it is love,
stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love, his left
hand is under my head, and with his right hand he does embrace me: Do but look
into the 5th. Chapter ver. 8. And you shall hear other words uttered, saying, I
have opened to my beloved, and my beloved had withdrawn himself and was gone,
my soul failed when he spoke, I sought him but I could not find him, I called,
but he gave me no answer. Thus it is with the gracious soul, led hither and
thither, up and down, back and forth, like Israel in the Wilderness over hills
and valleys, mountains and bottoms, sometimes a soul meets with a great deal of
courage and comfort in his way to his spiritual Canaan, and some other times
the soul meets with but a little comfort, and sometimes none at all: But is apt
to cry out oftentimes as the Psalmist did, Psalm. 77. 8, 9. God has cast me
off, and has forgotten to be gracious, and will be favorable no more, and
that he is as a dead man cast out of mind, Psalm. 31. 12. And it may be by and
by up again so high that he comes to conclude, His mountain is so strong that
he shall never be moved, Psalm. 306.

CHAP. 8. Now the next thing I shall speak of in Isreal's condition while in
their Wilderness state, is the Food they there lived upon and were feed with.
HEre note, that although the place was barren and would not afford any thing,
yet they wanted nothing, for God fed them with Angels food from heaven, which
food they called Manna, Exodus 16. 14 15. And their water came to them as
strangely, for it was what came out of the hard Rock, Exodus 17. 5, 6, 7.

Now their Manna was a Type of the woed of God contained in the Scriptures or
writings of the Prophets and Apostles, by which, as with Manna, God feeds his
people with all along in their way through their spiritual wilderness to their
Canaan of eternal rest and comfort.

This spiritual Manna being opened, preached, and applied rightly, by the
Ministers of Christ in the ordinances of the Gospel, this feeds Believers, and
enables them, and strengthens to walk from strength to strength, every one in
Zion appearing before his God, Psalm 84. 6, 7.

How often do sound Christians find this to be true, as that when they have
traveled out all their strength by striving against corruption, and wrestling
against sin, temptations, doubts, and fears.

How wonderfully have they been strengthened again by the word of God in the
several ordinances of it, as preaching, prayer, receiving of the Supper, and
the like. O what renewed strength to duty (and to renew their encounters
against sin and temptation) have the Saints gotten from the Word, and
ordinances of God, what power over corruption and the world, what fresh seals
of the love and favor of God have the Saints met with this way, which has
often refreshed them as with new wine: therefore do the Scriptures call these
ordinances of the Gospel (which issue forth from the Word of God) a feast of
marrow, and fat things of wine well refined upon the Lees, Isaiah 25. 6. Hence
it is, that the word of God is a word in men, John 15. 7. and a quickening word,
Heb. 4. 12. Psalm. 119. 145. and a word of life, Phil. 2. 16. and a word of
strength, Psalm 119. 81. and a word of comfort, Psalm 119. 82. All this is to
show that the word and ordinances of the Gospel is a Believers appointed food,
or his Manna to live upon in his journeying through the Wilderness of this
world, to his eternal Canaan of rest and peace: therefore says the Lord in
Micha 2. 7. Do not my words do good to him that walks uprightly. The meaning
is, as food does nourish and strengthen the body, so does the word of God the
soul, it being attended with the Spirit of God.

Secondly, By the water which came out of a Rock to them of which they drank:
we are to consider these two things.

First, The Rock out of which the water came.

Secondly, the water which came out of the Rock.

First, By the Rock we are to understand Jesus Christ, for that Rock was a Type
of Christ; for so the Apostle expounds it, 1 Cor. 10. 4. For we all drank of
the spiritual Rock, which Rock was Christ. Here Paul alludes to the Rock in the
Wilderness, showing Christians in that Type, that Jesus Christ is that Rock,
out of which all that refreshing water of life and comfort which comes home to
a poor thirsty soul in his painful way to his eternal Canaan of rest and peace:
therefore says David, When my heart is overwhelmed lead me to the Rock which
is higher then I, Psalm. 61. 2. For as the water which refreshed the Jews came
out of the Clifts of the Rock in the Wilderness: so the ground of all true
refreshment, comfort, or satisfaction which spiritually or temporaly comes home
to the Saints, arises from the blood of satisfaction which came out of the
wounded sides of Jesus Christ: it is from the sides, or clifts of the Rock
Christ, does that water come which quenches the wrath of God against an
offending sinner. It is from this Rock those waters flow forth, which cools the
scorching heat of an inflamed Conscience. From this Rock flows forth those
waters of life which revives the poor doubting soul which is ready to faint
under his fears and temptations: Out of this Rock it is whence those waters
comes which washes and cleanses the soul from all his spots and pollutions,
Zach 23. 1. which presents the soul pure, and without spot or wrinckle,
Ephesians. 5. 2. This was the Rock David had recourse unto in a sinning time when
he cried out, O wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my
si^. And David did not only fly to this Rock in sinning times to be washed,
but in fainting times to be refreshed, Psalm 28. 1, Unto thee will I cry, O
Lord, my Rock, be not silent to me, lest if thou be silent I become l^ke them
that go down into the pit.

Secondly, By the water out of the Rock in the Wilderness, together with the
Manna which fell from heaven, may be meant the flesh and blood of Christ which
was given for the life of the world, John 6. 51. And so our Savior expounds
the Type of the Wilderness food: read ver. 58. with John 4. 14 For as a man
cannot live where either of these be lacking, so neither can a man live
spiritually if either his Manna or water be lacking: therefore it is that
Christ preaches, and in it presses both these as necessary to salvation, John
6. 57. And Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, that unless ye
eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you.
For by the Flesh of Christ (which answers to the Type of the Manna) was
everlasting righteousness wrought out for the elect in the room of that which
they lost in their first Adam, 1 Cor. 1. 30.

And the Blood of Christ (which answers to the water which came out of the
Rock in the Wilderness) that was shed to take away the guilt of that sin which
the soul lay under in the sight of the Justice of God; this John the Divine
tells you, 1 John 2. 1, 2. He is a propitiation in his blood for our sins: so 1
John 1, 7. And the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin: Both of
which ( viz the Manna and water) must be applied by the soul in a way of sound
believing, or the soul cannot live, either the life of grace here, or the life
of glory hereafter.

Now this is it which is a Believers principle food, which made David cry out
when he was under the thoughts of it; what an excellent people the Saints were,
Psalm. 16. 3. he gives you the reason of it in Psalm. 36. 8, 9. They shall be
abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and thou shall make them to
drink of the rivers of thy pleasures; for with thee is the fountain of life, in
thy light shall we see light.

There is one thing very remarkable about the Rock in the Wilderness, which is
this, That the water came not out of the Rock until it was stricken by the rod
in the hand of Moses, which shows us thus much, That as all the spiritual
benefit, light, comfort, and refreshment (which comes home to a Believer) comes
home to them through this spiritual Rock Jesus Christ: so the original cause of
it was from Gods striking of him with the stroke of his wrath for sin, Isa. 53.
10 It pleased the Lord to bruise him, and to put him to grief, and to make his
soul an offering for sin, Gal. 3. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of
the law, being made a curse for us.

Use I.
O then what a rate should Believers put upon their spiritual and temporal
comforts; were Believers under the real sense of those dreadful strokes and
lashing blows which our dear Savior passed under, that the door of grace and
comfort might be set open to the Saints, surely it would both occasion more
love to Christ then there is, and more highly to value their enjoyments then
they do.

O soul, do thou receive any spiritual or temporal mercy or comfort at Gods
hands, do thou meet with any inward light or refreshment in thy soul.

O then look up to thy rock Jesus Christ, and consider with thy self how much
he endured and suffered for it e're it could come home to thy soul or body,
what strokes of the Fathers wrath he endured and passed under before these
waters of outward or inward comfort and refreshment could come either to thy
soul or body.

O how wonderfully would the knowledge of this both season and savor the
incomes of the Father to your souls.

CHAP. 9. I come now to speak of the Israelites drinking of the waters of
Bitterness, called Marah. Exodus 16. 22, 23. Though I should (according to
order) have placed this back before the stricking of the Rock; but because I
would not omit it, I have placed it here.
YOu may observe, that as soon as the Children of Israel were delivered from
the Red Sea, and brought into the Wilderness, the first waters that they drank
of (that we read of) were waters of Bitterness, or bitter waters, Exodus 16.
22, 23.

But this was done by the appointment of God: Moses was to take a Tree (which
God showed him) Mark that (not every Tree would do it) only a tree of Gods
choosing; and Moses was to cast the Tree into the Waters: which done, the waters
which were bitter before, became sweet and pleasant to the taste as before,
Exodus 16. 5.

This leads us to the Ante-type, and as in a glass it shows us these things.

First, What portion the soul (which has eaten the Lamb Christ) may expect to
meet with as soon as ever he enters the wilderness journey in this world: he
must presently expect to drink of the waters of Marah, or bitter waters; which
waters of Marah they will hold out the state of affliction which accompany
godliness in this life: how soon do poor souls experience (after they have
eaten Christ the Lamb of God) the drinking of these bitter waters of
affliction: what opposition does the soul presently meet with, both at home and
abroad.

First, at home, what cruel threatenings does the wife meet with from the
husband; and the husband from the wife; the child from the parent, and the
parent from the child, and so the servant from the master, the brother from
the sister, and the sister from the brother; how reproachfully will they speak
of the poor soul which has eaten the Lamb Christ Jesus, what taunts, jeers,
flouts, scoffs, and mocks does the soul pass under (for Christ) in the family
where he lives, reproaching the soul with the name of the holy Brother, or holy
Sister, and that they are of the order of the Brotherhood; (though these terms
are not matter of reproach, but rather of honor, yet the wicked use them as
words of reproach, to reproach the godly withal) and if the poor soul be at his
devotion to God at any time, then he must be termed a house Priest, or a Tub
Preacher. Thus the soul daily drinks of the waters of Marah, or waters of
bitterness, Psalm. 123. 4.

And if the soul goes abroad at any time, the same he meets with amongst his
Neighbors; its he that can sport himself with the poor soul, as the
Philistines did with Sampson, Judges 16. 25. What mischief does the wicked plot
against such a poor heart as the Psalmist speaks of, Psalm 37. 12. 14. The
wicked have drawn out the sword, and have bent the bow, to cast down the poor
and needy, and to slay such as be of upright conversation.

Besides, our Savior tells you what his people must expect while in the
wilderness, Mat. 10. 34. 35, 36. says Christ, Think not that I am come to send
peace on the earth, I am not come to send peace on the earth, but a sword, I am
come to set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter against the
mother, and the daughter in law against the mother in law, and a man's foes
shall be they of his own house, therefore says Paul to Timothy, He that will
live godly in Christ Jesus must first suffer persecution.

Besides, here is not only persecution of the tongue which the soul does pass
under for the Lambs sake; but persecution of the hand also; imprisonment, loss
of goods, banishment, yea, loss of life it self; therefore says our Savior,
You shall be hated of all men for my names sake, and they shall say all manner
of evil against you falsely for my names sake: yea (says Christ) the time shall
come that he which kills you shall thing he does God service, John 16. 2.
therefore says Peter, 1 Pet. 4. 12. Think it not strange concerning the fiery
trial, as if some strange thing had happened unto you. No indeed, we should not
account it a strange thing to suffer for Jesus Christ, and to be brought under
trails and temptations for the Lamb Jesus: it is but a drinking of the waters
of Marah which runs at the mouth or entrance into our wilderness condition;
which wilderness is our way to Canaan, through which all our Fathers went, and
of which waters all our Fathers have drank of before us: for he that will not
drink of the waters of bitterness for Christ, is never like to drink of the
rivers of living pleasures, which are at the right hand of Christ, Psalm. 16.
11. Matthew. 26. 29.

Secondly, Moses was to take a tree and cast it into the waters, which done,
the waters became very sweet and pleasant. This Tree cast into the waters of
Marah types out to us Jesus Christ, who is oftentimes compared to a tree, Zach.
4 2, 3. Rev. 2. 7. Jer. 23 5. Its this tree of life cast into the waters of
affliction which makes the Marah waters so sweet to the souls of Gods people.
The Lord Jesus Christ has himself dived into the bottoms of this pool of
affliction: therefore in Isa. 53. 3 he is called a man of sorrows and
acquainted with griefs; and says the Apostle, speaking of the Lord Jesus, that
he was in all points tempted as we are, sin only excepted, Heb. 4. 15. That is
to say, there is no condition of affliction in which a Christian can be found,
but Christ the tree of life has gone before him in the same condition of
affliction to sweeten and sanctify that very condition of affliction to that
soul.

Are you troubled with inward fears, violent assaults from the Devil so as to
be hurried and driven by the violen winds of his temptation,

Truly in this very condition was Christ himself, Mat. 4. 5. with 8.

Is it to be tempted to make use of any unlawful means to escape the trouble
which the soul may be in, Christ himself was in this very condition, Mat. 4 3.
Are the people of God tempted to blaspheme the name of God, his Word, or
Worship,

Christ was in this condition before you, Mat. 4 9. Where he was tempted to
fall down before the Devil and adore him as God, what higher blasphemy can
there be then this. Are Gods people tempted to distrust and despair of the
mercy, goodness grace and bounty of God;

Christ was likewise in this very condition himself before you were, read Mat.
4. 3. Does the Devil tempt Gods people to destroy life, and does Satan put a
man upon the laying violent hands upon himself, and to become his own Butcher
and the Author of his own murder? You may see Christ himself as in this
condition before you, read Mat. 4. 5, 6. Besides, does the Devil put a soul
upon the questioning the love and favor of God to his soul, and to call in
questi^n the truth of his grace and his right to Adoption, in the same
condition ^as Jesus Christ, Math. 4. 3. with ver. 6. Twice Satan comes to our
Savior with an (If) in his mouth, saying to Christ, I thou be the Son of God.

Secondly, So for outward Afflictions, Christ has gone through them all, and
had led the Van of all his traveling Army this way.

Is it to be derided and scorned for fearing God and keeping his Commandments,
in this condition was Christ himself, Mat. 13 45, 46, 47.

Do we loose a good name amongst men, so did Christ, he was called a Devil, and
Beelzebub the Prince of Devils; Is it Poverty, Hunger, Nakedness, and Cold, is
it to be turned out of doors by friends and acquaintance, is it to be hunted up
and down the Country from place to place for our Lives, is it Imprisonment,
Condemnation, is it to be made to stand to the Bar of Justice amongst the
Malefactors, is it death it self?

In all and every of these conditions was Christ himself, as the Tree cast into
these Marah waters of Affliction that he might sanctify them to us, and
sweeten them for our spiritual tastes, relish, and comfort.

Use 1.
Then what need had the soul in all his Wilderness Trials and Temptations, to
fix a believing eye upon Christ, and to have great dependency on this Tree of
Life, that can take out every Thorn out of his burden of Afflictions, that
only can sweeten his bitter Cup to him, and can sanctify every condition to
his soul.

Its reported of the Beasts in some Countries (where the waters are subject to
more Venom then ours are) that when they come to the water to drink, they all
wait for the Unicorn, that so he might first put in his Horn, the virtue of
which expels the venomous corruption which was in the water before, and then
they all drink of the same.

O so should the Lords people wait in the waters of Affliction upon Christ
their spiritual Unicorn, who puts down his long Horn of grace and
refreshment, to sweeten these conditions of Affliction and Trouble to the soul,
says the Apostle to the Hebrews 12. Chap. ver. 2. 3. Set Christ before you as
an example of suffering, and consider him who endures such contradictions of
sinners, least you faint and wax weary in your minds.

O how sweet and comfortable to the soul (in all his Trials) must it be when
the soul considers that Jesus Christ went all along in all these things before
him, to sanctify and sweeten them all to the soul.

Besides, when the soul considers that Christ did not only travel through these
conditions of Temptation and Affliction, to sweeten them to the souls taste,

But he is the Tree that still lies in these Marah waters as a Companion with
the soul in all his Trials, Isa. 43. 2.

1. Christ is there with his power to support them, Isa. 41. 10.

2. Christ is there with his spirit to comfort the soul while in the
affliction, 2 Cor. 1. 4, 5. John 14. and 16. Chap.

To which truth I my self can set to my Seal who am at this time a Prisoner for
the word of God and the testimony of Jesus Christ.

I can say Christ is such a Tree in the bitter waters of Marah, as that he
comforts those that are in tribulation for his work and service.

Thus you have had a sight of the bitter waters of Marah, together with the
Tree of Life cast into these waters; for the sanctifying and sweetning of them
to the Wilderness traveling soul, who has set forward to his Canaan of Rest
and Peace.

CHAP. 10. I come next to consider the nature of the Wilderness.
WHich was a place of Rocks and Mountains, Hills and Valleys a place which
afforded few Springs of water, a land of droughts, a place where no Corn would
grow, a land of doubts and fears, a place which produced great enemies, who
would in a warlike posture oftentimes fight the poor Israelites witness Og King
of Basham, and the ^malekites; besides their cursing- Baalam, which came up
with his mouth full of Curses, with an intent to overturn the poor Israelites
if it were possi^le.

Likewise this Wilderness might be called a place of Wonders and Miracles,
because of the wondrous appearances which God did give out of himself in
delivering of them from the hands of the enemies, and in bringing of them safe
to their promised land of Canaan, as in Psalm. 78. where you may see at large.

Now do not our spiritual Wilderness condition mightily simbolize with this
description of the Wilderness of old.

O what Rocks of danger do the soul sometimes meet with in his Pilgrimage here
in this world, what dismal providence does the soul pass under while on this
side Heaven, what trials and temptations does God exercise his people under
sometime in this world, which like mighty Rocks and Mountains stand up before
the soul to his great discouragement

How much poverty does God exercise some Godly souls under, what straits and
hardships do such hearts pass under because of it, sometimes what sicknesses
and weaknesses do others pass under for many years together; what lasting
Imprisonment do others of his people many times pass under in some parts of the
world. Thus God leads his people up and down amongst the Rocks and Mountains of
difficulty, and sometime from thence into the Valleys of despair and horror,
insomuch that the soul is made to cry out often times, My flesh and my heart
fails me, Psalm. 37. 26.

Thus it was with David, a man who was led a great part of his pilgrimage over
Rocks and Mountains of distresses, how did God suffer the hand of King Saul to
go out against him, how did Saul pursue the life of poor David from place to
place, which made him to cry out, I am pursued as a Partridge upon the
Mountains, and that he should one day perish by the hand of Saul, 1 Samuel 27. 1.
Then the men of Keilah ready to betray him at another time, 1 Samuel 23. 7. Then
Saul comes out against him with no less then three thousand men pursuing of
him, 1 Samuel 24. 2. At another time his Ziglag burned, and his Wives taken
captive, his goods taken from him, and his own servants ready to stone him, 1 Samuel 30. 6. And at another time his own Child raises up in Arms against him, 2 Samuel 15. 14. You may take a farther view of the man's condition, Ps. 73. 2. As
for me my feet had well nigh slept, and my steps were almost gone, Psalm. 31, 4.
with Psalm 30. 3. Pull my feet out of the not which they have privily laid for
me, thou have brought my soul out of the grave, and thou have kept me alive; so
Jonah 2. 2, 3, 4. I said and cried by reason of my affliction unto the Lord,
and he heard me out of the belly of hell; for thou have cast me down into the
deep, into the midst of the sea, and the floods compassed me about, all thy
billows and waves passed over me, then I said I am cast out of thy sight, yet
will I look toward thy holy Temple.

Thus you see what Mountains and Rocks, Hills and Valleys the Children of God
are led through in this world.

Use 1.
Then this should quiet the hearts of Gods people, if his dealing be sharp and
hard with them, alas Christians you must know you are in the Wilderness while
in this life a place of Rocks and Mountains; if you are exercised underhand
trials, its but with you as it has been with the dearest servants of God, the
people of God of old had their Wilderness; the Church in the primitive times
had their Wilderness, and thou must expect to meet with thy Wilderness if ever
thou intendest to sit down in Canaan, St. Prul tells you that this is common to
Saints, to be led up and down by the Lord in the Wilderness, 1 Cor. 13. 10.
There is no temptation but what is common to Saints, so says the Church, Psalm.
60 3. Thou have showed thy people hard things, thou have made us to drink of
the wine of astonishment.

Secondly, Have a care of murmuring and repining against the hand of God when
upon you, or of calling God to an account for his leading of you in the
wilderness. Remember what it cost the Jews for giving way to a repining,
murmuring spirit in the Wilderness, Psalm. 106. 24, 25, 26. Yea they despised
the pleasant land, they believed not his word, but murmured in the tents, and
hearkened not to the voice of the Lord; therefore he lifted up his hand against
them and overthrew them in the Wilderness.

O labor for a cheerful spirit which will help you on in your Wilderness
condition with the more comfort. O labor to sing the high praises of God in
the Wilderness, that is the way to sing his Hallelujahs in the good land.

Lastly, Have a care of grieving the spirit in thy Wilderness condition, in
concluding thy self out of Gods favor because of his hard dealings with and
this his leadings of thee, when ever such a temptation shall come upon thee,
read that good word often, Heb. 12. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

CHAP. 11. Few Springs of water in the Wilderness.
The Wilderness afforded few springs of water.
THis shows us the barrenness of all beneath, things as to true comfort and
refreshment, for so the word Water does sometime signify, ( viz.) comfort and
refreshment, Psalm. 42. 1. Now there is little of this to be had in the
Wilderness of this world, fix your eyes on what you will here below, here is
nothing can afford you the least comfort in spiritual trouble, it may be you
have riches, honor, many friends, alas, what comfort can these yield the soul
under spiritual trouble. This serves many times to help on trouble upon the
soul, when the soul thinks upon the abuse of the outward comforts which God
gave him; but as to the allaying of trouble upon the soul, they are not to be
accounted of; the Wilderness of this world is but an empty Well as to that
water, which can refresh the soul in a time of spiritual trouble; therefore
says David all my Springs are in thee O Lord, and says Christ, it is I that
can send you the Comforter. John. 16. 7.

Use 1.
Therefore soul if ever thou would have comfort in thy troubled seasons, look
not for it in any thing below Jesus Christ, read that of Isa. 50. 11. Behold
all ye which kindle a fire, that compass your selves about with sparks, walk in
the light of your fire and in the sparks that you have kindled, but this shall
ye have at my hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow. As Isreal's water springs lay
altogether in their Canaan, so the believers springs lies altogether above in
his heavenly Canaan, Rev. 22 2. Therefore if thy springs of comfort and
refreshment are but few, O consider thou art in thy Wilderness while here, a
place which affords great droughts but little water; but it is enough that thou
art traveling to a land of Rivers and Springs of water, and fountains of
living pleasures which are at the Fathers right hand that runs for evermore.

CHAP. 12. The Wilderness attended with doubts and fears.
Again the Wilderness afforded many doubts and fears which arose: First, From
the barrenness of it. And secondly on the other hand, because of the several
attempts which the Inhabitants of the Country daily made, in order to their
utter Ruin and Destruction.
THis leads us still to behold the condition of the soul while on this side his
Heavenly Canaan of Rest and Peace; where do that Christian live, that cannot
speak more or less of this kind of condition here in this life.

O the doubts and fears that do arise in the heart of a poor soul about his
eternal condition, when the soul is under the withdrawings of these sensible
enjoyments of the love and favor of God to his spirit, when the soul feels not
these inward stirrings of the spirit of God as formerly the soul had and could
once experience; O what doubts and fears do this many a times create upon the
heart of the Christian, which makes the soul to cry out, Now I shall perish,
now God has forsaken me and is angry with me, and intends to cast me off for
ever. O I shall never have his love more, I thought once that I should never
have inherited eternal life, O how have my soul been comforted heretofore
concerning the truth of this: But now all my hope and comfort is gone my grace
is gone from within me, my God is gone, my heart and my flesh fails me,
because the favor of God is departed from me, and I left a miserable poor
wretched soul, destitute of all help, hope, and comfort; so that like as the
Israelites hearts would fail them for want of bread and water in their
Wilderness, so does the poor soul in his spiritual Wilderness condition, when
his bread of life and water of life fails him, when grace seems weak, and
comforts fail, and the inward springs of supply grows low, then the soul dies
(as it were) within himself. Thus it was with David Lord (says he) ^hou did
hide thy face, and I was troubled, Psalm. 30. 7. And thus it was with the Spouse
in Cant. 5. 6. I opened to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself and
was gone, my soul failed when he spoke, I sought him but I could not find him.
I called but he gave me no answer.

Look how it was with the Jews in their temporal and litteral wilderness, no
longer then they could see their bread and water could they have peace within,
but were always complaining, and murmuring, and doubting what would become of
their conditions, and the condition of their generations to come: insomuch that
they displeased God oftentimes against them, and made him to slay the fattest
of them, Psalm. 78. 31, 32, For they could not believe for a day, but still
doubted of Gods faithfulness every moment.

Thus it is with the soul in the spiritual wilderness, no longer then the soul
is feeding upon the sensible enjoyments of Gods Holy Spirit, the soul is ready
to conclude destruction to its self. Now the duty of the soul is to believe,
and to trust God, that although we never feel, or taste, or discern any thing
within us, yet still to rely upon this promise, that God will ever be mindeful
of his Covenant: so did David, 2 Samuel 23. 5.

O what a blessed frame of spirit was the Prophet Habakkuk in, c. 3. 17. 18,
19. When he uttered these words, Although the fig tree should not blossom,
neither should fruit be in the vine, the labor of the olive should cease, and
the field should yield no meat, and the flock should be cut off from the fold,
and there should be no herd in the stall, yet will I rejoice in the Lord, and
joy in the God of my salvation: the Lord is my strength, he will make my feet
like hindes feet, and he will make me to walk upon high places.

Truly my friends, the best life is a life of believing, O this brings you in
the most solid comfort and peace: therefore says Habakkuck, cap. 2 4. The just
man shall live by his faith, and says the Apostle, We walk by faith and not by
sight, 2 Cor. 5. 7.

O souls, my exhortation to you is what was the Apostles to the Hebrews, Heb.
3. 12. Take heed of suffering in you an evil heart of unbelief in departing
from the living God.

O labor to live more and more by believing, and less by sense because its a
life that best suits the state you are in, remember you are in the Wilderness,
a place which affords great grounds of fears and many doubtings, and therefore
you had need of a great deal of faith in the promises of God and the
faithfulness of God, or you may faint by the way, and at last die in the
Wilderness, and so never see the good land, Heb. 4. 1. Let us therefore fear
lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of us should seem to
come short of it.

Now what is it that so much endangers a souls falling short of the good land,
the Canaan of rest, (look you into the 3. chap. of this Epistle and the 18.
ver.) You shall see it was want of a believing spirit.

Again, the Israelites fears did arise from those enemies which assaulted them
in the Wilderness, as Og King of Bashan and the Amal^kites.

Thus it is with the soul in his spiritual Wilderness, O what outcries does
the soul oftentimes make, with respect to these horrid assaults, the souls
enemies oftentimes makes against him in his inward man.

How does sin, and lust, and temptation assault the poor soul; with what
violence and strength does worldly mindedness break in upon the soul; what sad
assaults does Pride, Revenge, Concupiscence, and Unbelief oftentimes visit the
soul withal, which makes the soul cry out (with David) many times, I shall one
day perish by the hands of these Saul's which pursue my soul night and day like
a Partridge upon the Mountains; I say, what sad fears do the risings of these
corruptions oftentimes occasion in the souls of Gods people, which makes the
soul to question his condition many times saying, surely if I did belong to
God, why is it thus with me; O if I had true grace, my corruptions could never
be so strong in me as they are.

O soul remember thou art in thy Wilderness condition, and that affords great
enemies, and tall Anakins, and cursing Balaams, which will very often afright
thee with their raging blasphemy.

How often does the soul find within him (not only an opposing, warring,
fighting Og within him) but also a cursing, dreadful, blasphemous Balaam, as it
were daily cursing the holy seed of God within the soul, which often times
makes the soul to despair of ever getting home to his ^anaan of rest and peace.
Thus it was with David, Psalm. 39. 4. All my iniquities are gone over my head as
an heavy burden, they are too heavy for me, Psalm. 65 3. Iniquities prevail
against me.

Thus it was with St. Paul, how sensible was he of the wildernesse-assaulting
Og, and the Amalekites like corruption, which very often rose up against him in
his traveling through his spiritual wilderness, which made him to cry out in
Romans 7. 24. O wretchedman that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death. Which leads me to the next particular of the souls condition while on
this side his Canaan of everlasting rest and true peace: which is this. The
Wilderness of old was a place of discouragements; for there the false spies
brought up that discouraging report about the good Land, and so weakened the
hope and confidence of the people, which put them upon choosing a captain to go
back again to Egypt.

How much of this kind of experience do poor souls meet in their way to their
spiritual and eternal Canaan; what sad discouraging reports does the Devil and
his agents bring up upon the good Land of Canaan to this very day and hour.

First, The Devil, how often does he tell the soul, that he were as good go
back again from the good ways of God as to go on any further in them: for all
the souls duties shall be as rewardless as they are worthless, and that God
takes no notice of him: and as for his sins they are too great for God to
pardon them; and therefore let the soul never think (says Satan) to get out of
my kingdom and power of darkness: for do thou believe (says the Devil) that
if God could pardon thy sins, that ever he would look on such a worthless,
vile, sinful, poluted wretch as thou art, who do all things in hopocrisie of
heart: no, no, do not deceive thy self, thou shall find it otherwise; and
therefore thou were as good go back again to thy old conversation, and live as
thou did before.

Besides, says Satan, do thou ever think to enter so strait a gate as
leads to heaven; do thou not know that the Anakims both great and tall are
in the way; do thou not know that if thou go this way any farther thou will lose the favor of all thy friends and relations; do not thou see what
a gazing stock thou will make thy self to all thy neighbors and acquaintance
round about thee; do not thou see the taunts, flouts, scoffs, and jeers which
they will fling daily after thee: besides, thou art now pretty well to live in
the world, and have things full and whole about thee: but by those fines and
sequestrations which the world will lay upon thee, this will quickly be gone
from thee, and thou and thine forced to perish in a miserable condition.
Moreover, do thou not see before thine eyes, how some are whipped, others
imprisoned, and at last hanged up by the neck: assure thy self this will be thy
portion if thou go any farther this way. Come, come, says the Devil, I will
show you a better way, be advised by me, come turn back again, save your self,
and what you have; you do but dream of building Tabernacles in the air, assure
your self by going the way you are a going you do but wade through
impossibilities, and all shall fail you in the end: therefore get thee back
again to the Land of Egypt, the old carnal condition from whence thou have been
traveling a while, and fed upon onyons, leeks, the garlic and cucumbers which
thou have been a planting for many years, and eat the fat of thy flesh pots,
and take thy pleasure here; for there is nothing better under the Sun, then
that a man should rejoice in his own works; for that is his portion: for who
shall bring him to see what shall be after him.

Thus the poor soul hangs in doubt, and is oftentimes put to a stand, not
knowing what to do, nor which hand to take; whether it be best to go back or
forth in the ways of God, because of his discouragements.

Secondly, Satan will not leave the soul thus, but labors to set before the
eyes of the soul the apostasy of backsliding professors, who have both their
principles and practices in the ways of God; from whose conversation he
labors to argue the soul into the same practice of leaving the good ways of
God, and tells the soul, that in so doing, or in going back to Egypt, he does
no more then others have done before his face; persons of greater parts and
gifts then ever he yet had: and surely such knew well enough what they did, and
in doing what they have done, they have testified themselves to be persons that
were acted by a wise prudent spirit; such who make provision for their families
according to Gods holy ordinance.

Thirdly, If Satan the old Serpent cannot prevail with these secret whisperings
upon the soul, then he will send in his agents to deal farther with the soul;
as Father, Mother, Husband, Wife, Children, and servants too; which cry out as
Peter did once to Christ, Good master save your self.

And if all these cannot discourage the soul, then will Satan add to all the
rest one or two apostatizing professors, who with the rest, hang all together
about the soul, crying out, Sir, what mean you to do, what have you a mind to
ruin your self and all your family; do not you see that the Law of the Nation
will not endure your Religion, nor those ways of Worship which you set up and
walk in.

Have not you had warning enough in others (who have lost all they had, and
themselves in prison) to desist your work, and retreat your ground and come
back again.

Then in comes the prudent apostate (not that he is such) but he, and such as
he is thinks themselves so; and he undertakes to give the soul arguments from
Scripture, to save himself, his Wife, and Children, and all his family, by
telling him that he ought to be subject to every ordinance of man for the Lords
sake; and that if he be commanded either to do, or not to do, which conscience
at any time cannot let down, yet however he may satisfy himself with this
consideration; that its the Magistrates sin in commanding the thing, or
forbidding the thing to be done by in the worship of God (if the thing
commanded or forbidden be in its self an evil) but not the subjects in obeying
the thing commanded or forbidden.

Thus you see how difficult the Devil labors to render the poor souls way to
the good Land, and how Satan fills the souls paths with discouragements; and
how much Satan is like to prevail, without the infinite power of God be put
forth to help and bear up the poor soul in his way to the good Land, which
leads me to the next particular, which is this.

The wilderness of old might well be called the place of wonders, because of
the great miracles which the Lord did work for the Jews in their travels, in
that notwithstanding all the seeming deaths and dangers the people past under
in the Wilderness; yet the Lord by a powerful hand brought them to their
promised Land in safety.

So soul, take this for thy comfort, that whatever the opposition be that thou
meetest with in the way to thy eternal Canaan, yet bear up, fear not, for God
will at last deliver thee out of the hands of all thy enemies, and carry thee
safely through to thy appointed rest of glory, that thou may serve him in
righteousness and true holiness in bliss to all eternity, Luke 1. 74, 75.

O soul, therefore hold up thy head, the work is the Lords, and although he
suffers thee to tug with fearful difficulties and great oppositions; yet know
this, that the battle is the Lords, and he will fight it in thee for thee: its
true, it may be (as with Gideon) thou art ready to cry out of thy own weakness,
thy family is the smallest in Israel, and thou the least in the family; but let
me speak to thee in the words of the Angel to Gideon, Judges 6 12. Up, for God
is with thee thou mighty man of valor.

O soul, the Lord is engaged to bring thee home to glory, God has sworn by his
holiness, that it shall be so: therefore it must be so, read Psalm 89. 33. 34,
35, 36, 37.

O therefore arise, go out against thy enemies, fear them not, but look them
boldly in the face. O look a corrupt, proud lustful, revengeful, unbelieving,
worldly, fearful, dead, backward heart in the face, and look all the Devils in
hell, and wicked men in the world boldly in the face; look all thy relations in
the face, look a wicked world in the face, look ^ubtle enticing Apostates in
the face: O fear none of these things, assure thy self there shall nothing of
these prevail against thee, for God will fight for thee, and will be with thee
in the battle, he will do all thy works in thee, and for thee, Phil, 2. 13. So
that the gates of hell shall not prevail against thee.

O hearken to the voice of the Spirit of God in thy soul, which will speak to
thee as once Joshua and ^aleb did to the Israelites, Numb. 14 6, 7, 8. Fear
not, the Land which we passed over to search is an exceeding good Land: if the
Lord delight in us, then he wi^^ bring us into this good Land, a Land which
flows with milk and honey; only rebel not against the Lord, neither fear ye
the people of the Land, for they are bread for us, their defense is departed
from them, and the Lord is with us, ear them not: therefore for a close to this
particular, take these two places of Scripture, and the God of heaven make them
of use to the fainting, doubting, dying soul, Deuteronomy. 31. 8. The Lord he is he
that does go before thee, he will be with thee, he will not fail thee, neither
forsake thee; fear not, neither be afraid. Deuteronomy. 33. 27. The eternal God is thy
refuge, underneath thee are the everlasting arms, and he shall thrust out
thine enemies before thee, and shall say, destroy thou them.

O therefore soul, let me advise thee not to yield to thy temptations, for
assure thy self in time thou shall reap, if thou faint not. Let the gates of
Hell do what they can, yet they shall go forth weeping, bearing precious seed,
shall doubtless come again, bringing their shears with them, Psalm. 126. 56. And
the ra^sommed of the Lord shall return to Zion with songs, and everlasting joy
shall be upon their heads, and they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow
and sighing shall fly away, Isa. 35. 10.

CHAP. 13. The next thing that we are to take notice of is their bunch of
Grapes, which was brought them from the good Land by the hands of their Spies;
yet notwithstanding they could not believe.
THis bunch of Grapes which were brought out of Canaan by the Spies might lead
us to the sheddings abroad of the Holy Spirit of God upon our hearts if we
truly believe: for the end why God sent the Grapes of Canaan to the Israelites
while they were in the Wilderness, it was to assure their hearts to the making
good those promises which God before made to their Fathers concerning their
certain arrival at the Land of promise; and so it was to be an earnest or
pledge to them which believed of their right to the Land of promise, that
assuredly as they did eat of that bunch of grapes which came from ^ana^n, so
assuredly if they would believe, the Lord would bring them safe home to the
full vintage. Now of the same use is the Holy Ghost, which God sends down into
the hearts of the faithful

You may call the breathings of the Spirit of God in the hearts of the godly,
the fore-running bunch of Grapes of the eternal Canaan, which does yield forth
his blessed, refreshing, comforting, chearing juice into the hearts of the
people of God.

God gives out the holy Spirit to assure the godly that the Land is a good Land
unto which they are a traveling. God gives his people the sweet sensible
tastes of glory to come beforehand.

O how has God drenched the souls of his people with draughts of this
salvation sometimes, when in an ordinance of God. This made David prize so much
the house of God, Psalm 27 4. It was the coming down of those heavenly Grapes,
or spiritual Dews from the Spirit of God, which did so much draw and atttact
his heart thither-ward so much, Psalm 36 8. For thou shall abundantly satisfy
them with the fatness of thy house, and make us to drink of the Rivers of thy
pleasures.

The work of which heavenly dews of the Spirit is to witness to, and in our
hearts about the great right we have by free Grace to the good Land of promise,
which is Heaven, Romans 8. 16 The spirit it self bears witness with our spirit,
that we are the people of God: so 1 John 4. 13. Hereby we know that we dwell,
in him, and he in us, by his Spirit which he has given us. That is, the Holy
Spirit is given us to assure us of the right we have to heaven; the Father
gives it to his as the imagining pledge that by it we might hold God to his
promise or bargain, that so heaven might be good to believers in law; for you
know in Law a penny given upon bargain or sale as an earnest of that bargain,
gives strength to the bargain, as that the party cannot start from it, but in
Law is tied by it to make good the same: therefore in 2 Co^. 1 22. the Holy
Spirit of God is called the earnest sent down into our hearts; yet
notwithstanding as Israel could not believe they should come to the good land,
although God sent them the grapes of the Country, as the assuring earnest of
it: so is it likewise with the Lords people in this life, notwithstanding they
receive from God those many secret witnessings of the Spirit, and many blessed
refreshings which have been sealed home upon the heart by the blessed Spirit of
God. Yet how hard a matter does the soul find it to bear up with God in a way
of believing: how does the Devil labor daily to make the soul to call in
question his greatest enjoyments of the Spirit of God: thus it was with the
good man in the Psalms, Psalm 73. 25. My flesh and my heart fails me: so
Paul, though he could say sometimes he was full of the blessings of the Gospel
of God, and that he had been caught up into the third heavens, where his
enjoyments of the Spirit were so large, as that he hardly knew whether he were
in the body or no, yet at another time under the sentence of death, in his own
esteem, even as deep as hell, 1 Cor. 2 9. Therefore soul, if it be so with
thee, remember that its the condition which is proper to the Wilderness state
in which thou art; and though thou can not always believe, Yet God abides
faithful, and cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2. 13. And that the foundation of God
stands sure, having this seal, The Lord knows who are his, ver. 19. And for
those men and women which do not experience these ebbings and flowings
(inwardly) of the Holy Spirit of Faith and Comfort upon their souls, but boast
of the constant, sound, abiding comfort, which they have of heaven, and of the
love of God in the fence of it upon their souls, as some have done in my
hearing; let them profess what they will, yet to me the soudness of their
conditions is highly to be questioned: I do except some strict, close walking,
humble souls.

CHAP. 14. I come now to speak of those Types which were handed out to the Jews
in the time of their being in the Wilderness.
THe first was the cloud, which always led them up and down in the Wilderness,
Exodus 40. 3, 4. with 36, 37, 38. verses. Now this Cloud was undoubtedly a Type
of Jesus Christ, in these two respects.

First, In that the cloud guided the people from place to place, up and down in
the Wilderness; so the Lord Jesus Christ, he it is that leads the Church up
and down in the present Wilderness of this World, 1 Cor. 10 2. And as the Jews
were not to move any way until the Cloud went before them; so it should teach
all Christians not to move any way (in what condition soever they be in) until
they can say, the Lord Jesus Christ their spiritual Cloud goes before them, and
leads their way for them: that soul loses the honey of the condition he is in,
that wanted patience to tarry for Christ's leadings, as in the case of King
Saul, 1 Samuel 13. 9, 10, 11. Therefore the advice and council of the Lord to all
his people is this, Isa. 52. 12. For ye shall not go out with haste, nor go by
flight, for the Lord will go before you, and the God of Isra^l will be your
reward: so Isa 28. 16. And he that believes shall not make haste.

Secondly, The Cloud was a Figure or Type of Christ, for its protecting and
sheltering use which it afforded the Church in the Wilderness of old, by which
means they were hid from danger: so is Jesus Christ such a cloud of protection
to his Church and people in their wilderness condition in this life, as that
though Satan, the world, and the flesh, set upon the Church with a purpose to
overthrow and devour them at once, yet they cannot overcome them. Hence it is
that David calls Christ a defense, and a refuge to his people: says David,
Psalm 58. 16. I will sing of thy power, yea I will sing aloud of thy mercy in
the morning, for thou have been my defense and refuge in time of trouble: so
Psalm 94. 22. But the Lord is my defense, my God is the rock of my refuge: so
says the Church in Isa. 12. 2 Behold, God is my salvation, I will trust and
not be afraid, for the Lord Jehovah is my strength and my song, he is also
become my salvation: Therefore does Paul make it to appear, that the Cloud in
the Wilderness was a Type of Christ's great care of, and protection over his
Church, 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4. For we were all Baptized unto Moses in the
cloud, and in the Sea, and did all eat the same spiritual meat, and did all
drink of the same spiritual rock that followed them, which Rock was ^hriist.

Thus you see not I only, but the Apostle also applies the Wilderness Cloud to
Jesus Christ, which must hold out, and intend the great safety which Christ
does daily administer to his Church, as the Savior of it.

Use 1.
Then this should teach thee soul, when ever thou art assaulted by temptation
arising either from the Devil, the World, or thine own corrupt heart, then to
get in under this Could, and there to shelter thy self; here will thou be
covered in the day of battle, and thou need not fear what men or Devils can
do against thee, Psalm 26. 3. 5. Though an host should encamp against me my
heart shall not fear though war should arise against me, yet in this will be
confident, for in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion, in the
secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me, he shall set me upon a rock.

Thus you see how confident David was, and thought himself to be under this
covering and cloud of defense. O soul, so will it be with thee if thou fliest
to the Lord Jesus Christ, and art careful to make him thy covering and
protecting hiding cloud: thou shall then be far from trouble, no evil shall
come nigh thy tabernacles. Job 11. 17. 18, 19. Thine age shall be clearer then
the noon day, thou shall shine forth, thou shall be as the morning, thou shall
be secure, because there is hope; yea, thou shall dig about thee, and thou
shall take thy rest in safety; also thou shall lie down, and none shall make
thee afraid, yea many shall make suit unto thee. But if on the other hand thou
shall neglect to get under the spiritual cloud and covering; what ever covering
else thou shall hide thy self under, it will certainly fail thee in the time of
trouble, for God will tear it to pieces, and thou will be found naked; then
woe, woe to thee in the day of Gods wrath, when he shall come forth to render
vengeance upon all that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ, as the Apostle speaks, 2 These. 1. 7. 8, 9.

O soul, who ever thou art that shall read these lines, I beg thee therefore to
hearken to that good advice given thee from the Lord in Isa. 55. 6. Seek the
Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is near.

CHAP 15. I come in the next place to speak of the Brazen Serpent, another Type
which was given out to the Children of Israel in the Wilderness: read Numb.
21. 6, 7, 8, 9.
THe occasion of which was this: because of those hot fiery stinging Serpents,
which in the Wilderness had destroyed so many of the Israelites up and down in
the Country; therefore did the Lord out of compassion to the Jews cause a
thing to be made called a Serpent; and it was to be set upon a pole for this
end ( viz.) that if at any time any of the people should be stung by any of the
Serpents in the Wilderness; if they at the same time should but look up at the
Brazen Serpent set upon a pole in the midst of the Camp for that purpose, this
would bring them home an immediate cure upon their persons at the same instant.

Now this Type had (as to its use) special reference to Jesus Christ; for such
a remedy is Jesus Christ to spiritual stinged souls. God in mercy to the elect
has sent his Son into the world, and advanced Christ his Son upon the pole of
the Gospel, that he might cure them of their spiritual stingings (occasioned by
Sin, and the Devil, the worst of Serpents.) If we look up to this Serpent
upon the pole of the Gospel with an eye of faith, John 3. 16. God so loved the
world, that he sent his only begotten Son into the world, tha^ whosoever
believes on him should not perish, but have everlasting l^fe: so John 1. 29.
Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world. Alluding to the
use of the brazen Serpent in the Wilderness, which was to be looked up unto, or
to be beheld, so says John of the Lamb Christ Jesus; behold the Lamb or look
up to him if you ever intend to be cured of your spiritual stingings: therefore
for this purpose Christ is called the healer of the nations, Rev. 22. 2.

Use 1.
O then soul, whoever thou art that at any time art bit with the guilt of sin,
or by the prevalent working of any corruption.

O soul, if thou will but look up to Jesus Christ the spiritual Serpent by an
eye of faith, thou may as certainly expect a cure to be wrought on thy soul,
as the Israelites who in looking up to their brazen Serpent in the Wilderness
might expect a cure to be done on their bodies: therefore is salvation tendered
upon this act of the soul in looking up to Christ by an eye of faith, Isa. 45
22. Look unto me all ye ends of the earth, and you shall be saved.

O therefore soul have a care thou do not lose looking up to Christ; there
is nothing else will, or can damn thy soul but this thy not looking up to
Christ as a Savior and Redeemer, and resting upon him alone for life and
salvation, as one that is able to save to the utmost, as the Apostle speaks in
Heb. 7. 25.

CHAP. 16 I now come to speak of the Tabernacle, another Type given out to the
Israelites in the Wilderness, the manner and form of it I have already
described to you before.
THis Tabernacle was typical two ways, or it typed out these two things to us.

First. Christ himself.

Secondly, The Church of Christ.

First, It typed out Christ himself, and that in these respects.

First, As to the glory and excellency of Jesus Christ, the Tabernacle was
exceeding excellent and glorious within, for all the inward parts of it were
over laid with pure Gold, Exodus 35. This was to show us the richness and worth
of the Son of God, that so the creature might see cause to desire him, love
him, and choose him to themselves, as their highest portion for ever: therefore
when the Holy Spirir does speak of Christ, it speaks of him under this
consideration as excellent, Prove. 3. 13, 14, 15, 16. Happy is the man that
finds wisdom, and the man that gets understanding, for the merchandise of
it is better then the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof then fine
gold; she is more precious then rubies, and all the things which thou caust
desire are not to be compared to her; length of days are in her right hand,
and in her left hand riches and honor. Heb. 13. (speaking of Christ, says) He
is the brightness of his Fathers glory, and the express image of his Fathers
person. Therefore says the Spouse, Cant. 5. 10. (speaking of Christ) He is the
chiefest to me of ten thousand. And to this agrees the words of Peter,
speaking of Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 7. To you which believe he is excellent.

Secondly, As the Tabernacle typed forth Christ in point of beauty or
excellency, so in point of acceptance; for in the Wilderness, if the people
would worship God acceptably, it must be at the door of the Tabernacle: see
Numb. 8. 15. chap. 18. 3, 4. 7, 8. and at the Tabernacle door were the people
to wait, until the Priest within had done the service of the Tabernacle for
them before the Lord: which shows us thus much, that if we intend in Gospel
days to worship the Father acceptably, we must come to the Father, at the
Tabernacle Christ, and by the hand of Faith lay down our offerings at the door
of his Worth and Merits: therefore says Christ himself, John 14. 6. I am the
way, the truth, and the life, no man can come to the Father but by me.

Use 1.
O therefore soul, when ever thou do any thing of the Worship of God, be
sure thou come to God always by the door of this Tabernacle Christ, if thou
meanest to be accepted in and about what thou do in the service of God,
offer all thou have to offer God withal, in Christ's name, in and by his worth
and merits, only for his sake, and upon his account, and be wholly nothing in
thy own esteem: Come to the door of the Tabernacle, under the sense of a mere
piece of nothing; bring with thee a self-loathing, and selfcondemning,
self-abhorring frame of spirit, and let Christ be all, and in all to thy soul,
and in thy esteem, when thou art before the Lord in point of acceptance, Phil.
2. 8, 9. I count all things but as dung in comparison of Christ, and I desire
to be found alone in him.

Thirdly, The Tabernacle was a Type of Christ in point of revelation, Exodus 40.
35. with Levit. 1. 11. Exodus 30, 6. For through it God appeared to the people,
and out of which God gave the knowledge of his will and mind, as the above
Scriptures show.

This answers to the usefulness of Jesus Christ to the Elect of God, or it
shows us very much of the prophetical Office of Christ; for it is Christ only
that can give out the knowledge of his Fathers will and pleasure to the Church
of God. All the manifestations of the love, grace, mercy, favor and council of
God comes home to the Church, through the humane nature of this blessed
Tabernacle Christ Jesus: therefore says Christ, John 14 24. The word which you
hear is not min^, but the Fathers which sent me. John 15. 15. I call you
friends for all the things which I have heard of my Father I have made known
unto you* John 12. 49, 50. For I have not spoken of my self, but the Father
which sent me gave me a commandment what I should say, and what I should speak;
and I know that his commandment is life everlasting; wha^soever I speak
therefore what the Father said unto me so I speak.

Hence is Christ called the wonderful counselor, Isa. 9. because of his
revealing office; by all which it appears, that Christ is the way through which
the Father reveals, or makes manifest himself to his people now, as he did to
the Israelites of old through the Tabernacle.

Use 3.
O therefore soul, if thou would have more fatherly grace let out upon thy
soul, if thou would have more of the knowledge of God, more of the love of
his Spirit of Light and assurance, if thou would know more of his will so as
to obey it and live to it, O then wait upon God at the door of this Tabernacle
Christ, for in him it is that the Father will speak with thee, and no where
else, Matthew. 3. 17. This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. O wait
upon him in the meanest of grace, break through all discouragements, and
opposition, and temptations to wait upon the ordinances of the Gospel if ever
thou intendest to acquaint thy self with the saving knowledge of Gods presence
of grace and favor to thy soul. O stir not from prayer, reading, hearing the
word, meditation, Christian conference, and communion with the Lords people;
for thou waitest upon Christ in all these things, and in waiting upon Christ
thou waitest upon the Tabernacle, through which God will discover himself to
the people; therefore be not discouraged to wait here: though thou meetest but
with little profit hitherto, yet the promise is in Isa. 30. 31. He that waits
upon the Lord he shall mount up as on eagles wings; they shall run and not be
weary, walk and not be faint.

But to be a little more particular about several things in the Taberuacle; as
they were many in number, yet not a thing there without its special use and
signification, as they related to Christ; and there is not one of these things
but had a wonderful deal of glory and excellency laid up in them; and were but
the ignorant more acquainted with it then they are, they would not slight the
Books of the old Testament as they do.

CHAP. 17. I now come to speak of the several things in the Tabernacle, and
first I begin with the Ark.
FIrst, there was in the Tabernacle a very glorious thing called an Ark, Exodus
37. 1, 2. The signification of which we find to be the Worship of God
accompanied with his presence; therefore in 1 Samuel 4. 21. when the Ark was
taken by the Philistines, its said that the g^ory of God was departed from
Israel, meaning the Worship of God, wherein God was in an especial manner
present with his people: so Ps. 132 8. For indeed the worship of God is the
glory of any Nation, and when that is gone their true glory is gone, although
it may be they do not see it.

Use 1.
Then how may we pity those Nations that are without the true worship of God,
alas they are without true glory, they have not excellency or beauty upon them,
they have not the worship of God; whatever they may account of themselves, yet
God and his word accounts them to be a base ignoble nation or people, a whole
nation of them not worth one single person of that people which have the
worship of God amongst them: read Isaiah, where God is a speaking of these
persons that had his worship kept up amongst them, and do but observe how God
values them in comparison of others which had not this true worship amongst
them, speaking to Israel, says thus, Isa. 43. 3, 4. For I am the Lord thy God,
the holy one of Israel thy Savior; I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and
Seba for thee: since thou have been precious in my sight thou have been
honorable, and I have loved thee: I will give men for thee, and people for thy
life. Now Israel had the true Worship of God amongst them, but Ethiopia* Seba,
and Egypt had not: and that is the reason that God prefers Israel above and
beyond the other nations: but when the God of this world has wholly blinded
the eyes of the nations of the earth, as the Apostle speaks in 2 Cor. 4. 4. As
that the light of the glorious Gospel cannot shine in upon their hearts: Its no
wonder if the nations of the earth finds not the want of this mercy.

Secondly, O then what a sad thing is it for a Nation that once had the Gospel
amongst them shining in its luster and brightness round about their Tents and
Tabernacles to be guilty of driving and forcing the Gospel away, and the pure
Worship of God away from them; what worthless creatures are such, and what a
worthless Nation is such a Nation (think you) in Gods sight, who shall in the
face of God cry down, and vote down, and thrust out from amongst them the Ark
of his Worship and Gospel, as a thing not worthy to live or abide amongst them.
Certainly if the Gadarens, Luke 8. 37. Did render themselves a vile people in
Gods sight in putting Christ from their Country (though done with a mild
entreaty) how much more vile has that Nation or people rendered themselves in
the sight of God, who have not patience with the Gadarens to intereat him
civilly to depart from them, but wicked Pharaoh-like, does violently force him
and drive him out of their Coasts; Certainly I know not a blacker Character can
hang over a people or Nation, then this Character which do more strongly
witness the Ruin of such a people then this does, read these places, Prove. 1.
25, 26, 27. 2 Chronicles. 36. 16, 17. These. 1 2, 15, 16. You likewise know what
became of Pharaoh and his whole Army, together with all the glory of his
Kingdom, suddenly after he had contracted this kind of guilt upon him and his
Nation; and certainly the Lord favors this kind of sin no more now then in
Pharaohs time, and his arm is not shortened, he is as well able to reach such a
Nation now as then: O where this kind of sin dwells, the good Lord give that
Nation sound Repentance for it before he comes to tear them in pieces.

A 2d thing about the Ark which we are to take notice of is this, you read in
Exodus 37. 2. That the Ark was overlaid with pure gold; which shows us both
the excellency and purity of the Worship of God, for as gold is both excellent
and pure, so is the Worship of God, it is both excellent and pure; therefore
when that holy Ghost speaks of the Worship of God, he compares it to a Sea of
Glass as clear as Crystal, Revelations 4. 6. Meaning for the worth and purity
of it.

A third thing about the Ark is this, there was a Crown of gold round about
above upon it, Exodus 37. 1, 2. This Crown upon the Ark denotes the Authority
which God has stamped upon his Worship, Gods Worship has his Authority set
upon it, for such is the Import or signification of the word Crown, or the
thing called Crown, it signifies Rule and chief Authority, which commands
obedience and subjection to its Law, Will, and pleasure.

Use 2.
The use we should make of this Mystery will teach us this Lesson. First, to
their peril who ever they be that shall dare to alter any part or Tittle of
this Worship of the Altar, or shall mix it with any of their own whorish,
hellish Inventions, or Romish fopperies, Deuteronomy. 12. 32. What thing soever I
command you, that observe to do it, thou shall not add thereunto, nor diminish
from it.

Hence it is that Moses in the giving out of the Worship of God to the people
was admonished, that he should not vary from the pattern showed him in the
mount, we are to take notice of the pattern laid down in the word of God, and
by that Rule to build Gods house, and only according to that to steer our
compass in and about the Worship of God, Isa. 8. 20. To the Law and the
Testimony, if any man speak not according to this Rule, its because there is no
light in him: Besides, the Crown upon the Altar shows us thus much, that none
are left to their wills as arbitrary in the performing of Worship to God, so as
to do it when we please, as none are left (in this case) so to their own wills
to do it how they pleased; so likewise none are so left to their wills to do it
or perform it when or at what time they please, neglects in this case are
dangerous, not to attend the Worship of God either in public or private, where
and when God requires, is to sin against the Crown upon the Altar, which is the
Authority of God, and to incur the displeasure of God, and indeed to be guilty
of any wilful rashness or neglect in this business, is the ready way for a man
to lay himself open to great punishments from the hand of the Lord, Jer. 11. 3.
Cursed be the man that obeys not the words of this Covenant, so Jer. 48. 10.
Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord deceitfully.

O therefore soul remember that the Altar-worship has its Crown above upon it,
which signifies the Authors Authority or Law, which requires thy submission
or subjecton to it, so as to be careful thou provest not a wilful corrupter or
neglector of the Worship of God.

Again, in the Tabernacle was the Mercy-seat placed, which had two Cherubims at
the two ends of it, whose faces looked toward the Mercy-seat, Exodus 37 67, 89.

First, By the Mercy-seat placed in the Tabernacle, I understand to be meant
the Lord Jesus Christ, whose blood and merits is the ground of Gods great
manifestations of love and grace to the Elect, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. Cor.
5. 19. God was in Christ Reconciling the world to himself. Mark, God was in
Christ, that is, in his humane nature, appearing through it to men as he did
through the Mercy-seat of old, Romans 5. 9, 10. We are saved from wrath through
Christ by being justified by his blood, for when we were enemies we were
Reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled we shall
be saved by his life; so that you see Christ the Mercy-seat is the ground of
all the grace, love, mercy and Reconciliation which from the Father comes home
to the Elect, I mean a procuring ground, not the efficient or first moving
ground. In a word, this Mercy-seat shows us what Christ is in all respects to
believers, could we pick it out of this Mystery; and it takes in all that
Christ is or was anointed to be or to do for his Church and people, it takes in
Christ's blood, Christ's sufferrings, Christ's righteousness, Christ's satisfaction
given to the Father, Christ's Life, Christ's Death, Christ's being in the Grave,
Christ's Ascension, Christ's Priesthood, Christ's present work of Intercession now
in Heaven, Christ's Offices, as King, Priest, and Prophet to and for his people,
for their good and comfort forever; all this and more do the Mercy-seat in
Exodus 37. Comprehend and shadow forth to us for our instruction, so that
believers should look on all the dispensations of God toward them, (be they
sweet or bitter) always flowing forth to them from the Mercy-seat or place of
Reconcilement, the seat where God always sits when he has to do with
believers, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 5. 19 God in Christ Reconc^ling the
world to himself, so Romans 8. 32. He that spares not his own Son, but delivered
him up for us all, how shall he not with him freely give us all things: Its all
mercy, love, and grace which comes from God to his people, because it comes
forth from God through the Mercy-seat Christ, though the providence may be
mixed with never so much sharpness or bitterness, yet it shall end in mercy,
for it comes in mercy, Romans 8. 28. We know that all things shall work together
for good to them that love God; to them who are called according to his purpose.

Again, whereas it is said that the faces of the Cherubims still looked toward
the Mercy-seat, it shows us how the whole Trinity does agree together and
accord in the good of Gods Elect, for I look on this Figure as an Emblem of the
belssed union of the three persons, of Father, Son, and holy Spirit, my looking
on this is by way of allusion, the Mercy-seat to be meant of Christ the second
Person, the two Cherubims to be meant of the Father and holy Spirit proceeding
both from Father and Son, so that as the faces of the two Cherubims were placed
with their eyes toward the Mercy-seat, it shows us thus much, that what good
God the Father did will the Elect before time, and what grace, and mercy, and
love the holy Ghost did manifest, make known, and reveal to the Elect in time
by spiritual application; all this arises from Christ's merits, blood, and
righteousness as the procuring cause of all; to this agrees the words of St.
Peter, Pet. 1. 1, 2. Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father
(mark there is the act of the first person) through the sanctification of the
spirit, (there is the act of the third person) unto obedience and sprinkling of
the blood of Jesus Christ (there is the act of the second person as the
procuring cause and ground of all) Or thus:

By the two Cherubims at the two ends of the Mercy-seat; we many understand
Christ's standing between God and the rigor of his Justice in our stead and for
our sakes, that God might look on the Law through Christ as fulfilled by him
for our sakes and in our behalf; yet take this Caution along with you, that
although the Mercy-seat with its two Cherubims may be alluded unto as a Figure
of the concurring agreement of the three persons (Father, Son, and holy Spirit)
in and about the Salvation of the Elect; yet this proves not a ground for any
to attempt the making of any Image or similitude of either persons in the
Trinity, so as to Woship them by, as the Papist blindly dream, for its said in
Deuteronomy. 4. 15 That there was no similitude seen in the Mount, so that what ever
have been said of the three persons through the above said similitudes, are not
to be understood as Representations of his Divine Essence, but of the works of
God, which are those several manifestations of grace, which through Christ he
applys to the Elect by his spirit. So much as to the blessed Mystery of the
Cherubims placed in the Tabernacle at the two ends of the Mercy-seat.

CHAP. 18. I now come to speak of the place where the Ark did lie in the
Tabernacle.
THe place appointed for the Ark to stand in while in the Tabernacle, it was
under the Mercy-seat, for we read in Exodus That when Moses had put the Tables
(wherein the ten Commandments were written) into the Ark, then did he take the
Ark and carry it into the Tabernacle, and placed it under the Mercy seat, Exodus
40. 20. Then took he a veil and spread over it for a covering that it might not
be seen, ver. 21.

Now the great Mystery of this Type or Figure, I conceive to be this.

First, By the ten Commandments written in the Tables of the Ark, I understand
for the matter of it to be meant the Covenant of works which God made with all
men (in their Representative Adam) in Paradise, which Covenant we have all
broken, and so lie under the penalties of the breach of this Covenant in our
selves for ever, John 3 36. Rom 5. 12. Which Covenant came Jesus Christ to
fulfill in the greatest exaction of it; for all that ever Christ did or suffered
in the flesh was to give this Covenant its full satisfaction in our behalf, if
we prove to be true believers, Romans 10. 4. Christ is the end of the Law for
Righteousness to every one that believes.

Now by Moses his putting the fiery Law in the Ark under the Mercy seat, I
understand these things.

First, That the moral Law as it is a Law or Rule of life to a Christian, is
not ceased as some would have it go, you see it was not thrown away but only
hid under the Mercy-seat, and the hiding of it was what had relation to God
more then to the people, the hiding of the Law was to put out of Gods sight,
that he might never see it more, it was not hid that believers should never see
it more.

Secondly, It was to show us that the condemning, accusing, and eternal
destroying power of the Law (as it was the Law of the old Covenant, and so a
Law not satisfied for) I say, it was to show that this Covenant or Law was
taken away by the satisfaction which was given by Christ, that as the Law made
the creature before to subject to its terrors, now Christ has made the Law to
subject to his merits, for you see the Law is forced to lie under the
Mercy-seat: And besides it shows us thus much for the great comfort of all
believers, that God cannot look upon any of believers any more as in or under
the old Covenant, because the Covenant lies hid under the Mercy-seat; now if
it did stand upon the Mercy-seat, then indeed when at any time God had cast his
eyes about upon the Mercy-seat it would have been the first thing that God
would have had in his eyes. But to prevent that it is a Law hid out of sigh, a
Law that must not appear before God, a Law that must lie under the Mercy-seat,
a Law veiled up in the Mantle of rich and free grace, that if God will at any
time cast his eyes about that way where the Covenant lies, God must look
through a whole heap of satisfaction before he can epsy this old Covenant,
therefore says St. Paul, Romans 8. 1. There is therefore now no condemnation to
those which are in Christ, who walk not after the flesh, so Jer. 50. 20. In
that time, says the Lord, shall the iniquity of Isarel be sought for, and
there shall be none, and the sins of Judah and they shall not be found, for I
will pardon them whom I reserve.

But the question will be, that if the moral Law was a Law hid out of sight and
veiled up so as you speak, then whether or no believers are to take any notice
of it at all,

I answer, Its true indeed, as the moral Law was for the matter of it the old
Covenant of works, so its a Covenant or Law hid from believers, and in this
sense a believer has nothing to do with the Law, nor the Law with a believer;
but when Jesus Christ on the believers part had fulfilled and satisfied the Law
as it was formally the old Covenant, he takes up the matter of the old Covenant
which is the ten Commandments, and makes it the Law of his Kingdom, and so
Imposes it on his people as a Rule to walk by for ever in their several
Generations; but with differing respects in comparison to what the Law was to
be subjected unto before, for when the ten Commandments (as it was for the
matter of it, the Covenant of works) called for obedience from the creature
before it was for life, saying, Do this and thou shall live, if not thou shall
die the death. But as its become (for the matter of it) the Law of a Mediator,
and a Law in Christ's hand, and so a Law which comes forth to us from under the
Mercy-seat, it speaks otherwise then it did before, not for life, but from
life, not that you might live, but because you do live, not that you might
get-heaven, but because heaven is freely given unto you and bestowed upon you.
The Law in Christ's hand does not say you must repent and mourn for sin and get
it mortified, and be humbled and holy, that God might love you and pardon sin
in you, and that he might give you an inheritance amongst them which are
sanctified, but because all this is freely procured by Jesus Christ for you
already, and is freely by the grace of God made over to the soul as his through
sound believing, Like 1. 74, 75, That we being delivered (mark that) not that
we might be delivered, might serve him without fear, in righteousness and
holiness all the days of our lives, so Hebrews 12. 28. Wherefore we
receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved (mark that) a Kingdom already
received, Let us have grace whereby we may serve God with reverence and godly
fear, so Titus 2. 11, 12. The grace of God which brings salvation has
appeared to all men, (mark that) which has already appeared, This teacketh
them that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, should live soberly,
righteously, and godlily, in this present world; So that a believer is so far
from being set free by Christ from the Law or ten Commandments, as that he is
the more obliged to the strict observation of it; Therefore says Saint Paul,
Romans 3. 31. Do we then make void the Law through faith, God forbid, yea we
establish the Law, Romans 7. 12. Wherefore the Law is holy, and the Commandment
holy, just, and good.

The form of the Old Covenant is taken away by Christ from a Believer, but the
matter still remains, itceaseth to be a Law commanding for life to a Believer,
but it still requires obedience in all manner of Coversation at a Believers
hands, because he does live; and so its a Rule to walk by as binding as ever.

Thus you may see if you will but consider the place where the Tables of the
Law were placed, they were placed in the Ark, which Ark typed out Christ as you
have heard before, so that by Moses his placing the Tables of the moral Law in
the Ark under the Mercy-seat, both which places being types of Christ, it is
very clear that the moral Law or ten Commandments are become the Law of Christ's
mediatory Kingdom.

CHAP 19. I now come to speak of the Table for the Show bread placed in the
Tabernacle.
THis Table called the Shewbread Table was placed by Moses in one side of the
tabernacle, Exodus 40. 22. The use of this Table was to hold the bread called
the Shewbread, this bread was made into little loaves or cakes, and set upon
the Table, and they were in number twelve, which was proportionable to the
number of their tribes. The bread was set in two Rows upon the Table, six on
one side and six on the other side of the Table. The bread was set new on the
Table every Sabbath day, and when the new was to be set on the Table, the
Priests were to eat the old, as you may see in Lev. 24. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

Now this bread was typical two ways, and both held out Christ to the people.

First. It figured forth Christ one who constantly abides under the eye of God
for the people, or in the behalf of beliervers; for as the Shewbread was
always to stand on the Table before the Lord, therefore called the Shewbread,
so Jesus Christ (who is called The bread of life, John 6. 35.) Is never off the
Fathers sight in the behalf of believers, in whose humane nature the Father was
fully satisfied, and in whom he professes himself to be well-pleased with us,
Mat. 3. 17. This is my beloved Son in whom I am well-pleased. Christ is always
in readiness to present his Father with the view of his Righteousness on the
Altar of his sufferings, presenting his Father with his nailed feet and hands,
with his pierced sides, with his hanging down head upon the Cross, with his
drops of blood in the Garden with the pourings forth of his soul unto death,
that so the sight of these things might endear believers to the heart of God.

Use 1.
It may be some soul may think that he is cast out of the sight of God, and out
of the favor and love of God. O but thy Christ is not, and so long it is well
enough. Remember and recover thy self with these thoughts; Christ thy
Shewbread abides in Gods eye for ever, Christ is always standing upon the
Table of acceptance before God for thee: so says the Apostle, Heb. 9. 24.
Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, but into heaven it
self, there to appear in the presence of God for us: And therefore soul, if
thou have union with Christ, thou need not doubt of thy condition; for if
the Father do accept the head, certainly he cannot reject the members.

Again, whereas the Shewbread was put into twelve loaves, according to the
Tribes of Israel, as that there was not a loaf more or less: This teaches us,
that though the number of those that shall lay hold on Christ (by real faith)
be many, yea, very many; yet they need not doubt, here is bread enough for them
all; here is a loaf for every Tribe, a piece for every Christian. O Christ is
an inexhaustible treasure, which will not be wasted; a fountain which cannot be
drawn dry, a loaf that can never be eaten; Although there has been many a
thousand that have been a feeding upon Christ's Flesh and Blood, throughout all
generations of the world; yet our Lord writes himself still, Heb. 13. 8. Jesus
Christ tke same yesterday, to day, and for ever.

Again, This Shewbread signified the great bounty and goodness of God to the
Israelites in their wilderness condition, in that he gave them to understand,
that he could and would provide for them a table in a barren Land, where no
corn was grown, that from thence they might be led the more to admire God in
his power, love, and grace, manifested to them in that condition, and that
their hearts might be raised up to a pitch of thankfulness: so likewise should
it teach Believers to make the same use of Gods bounty and goodness to them in
the gift of his Son Jesus Christ, that such provision should be made for them,
that the Table of his grace and love should be so decked with the flesh, blood,
merits, and righteousness of his own only Son, as you have it in the parable,
Luke 14. 16, 17. A certain man made a great supper, and bid many, and sent his
servant at supper time, to say to them that were bidden, Come, for all things
are ready. Thus you see a great supper is provided, much provision made, a
table furnished, no want at all on Gods part, all the want lies on our parts,
we are not ready. O how should this cause Christians to admire God in his
wonderful acts of grace to their souls, that as John speaks, John 3. 16. He
should so love the world, as to send into it his only begotten Son, that
whosoever sees him, and shall believe in him shall have everlasting life. And
with 1 John 3. 1. To break forth into a holy admiration, and cry out, O what
manner of love is this that we should be called the Sons of God.

CHAP. 19. I shall in the next place speak of the Candlestick which was placed
in the Tabernacle.
IN this Tabernacle there was placed a Candlestick which was made of pure Gold,
and the fashion of it was thus. It parted from a foot high in the stem into six
branches, three of the branches going one way, and three of the branches going
another way, there were three bowls made like unto three almonds, with their
knobs and their flowers to every branch; but in the stem of the Cnadlestick
below their parting were four bowls with their knobs and their flowers, Exodus
27. 17. Exodus 37. 18, 19, 20.

By the Candlestick in this place we are to understand to be meant the Church
of God; which Church is made up of true Believers, which truly and sincerely
profess and own Christ and his Worship, being redeemed by his Blood from all
the earth, Rev. 7. 14. This is the signification of the Candlestick; the truth
of which you may read, Rev. 1. 20. where the seven Churches are compared to
seven golden Candlesticks, which answers to the Candlestick in the
Tabernacle, for that was made of pure beaten Gold, Ex. 27. 17. Now the Church
of God may be compared to a Candlestick several manner of ways.

First, As a Candlestick is made to mount or hold up the light, that all in a
time of darkness may see, so does the Church and people of God, they hold up
the light of truth, and the bright shinings of the word and Gospel, that all
that are in the dark world, who sit in the Region and shadow of death, might
behold the face of God in Jesus Christ shining through the Saints gifts,
graces, and holy conversations in upon their souls, Isaiah 2. 3. The Law shall
go forth out of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem: by which means,
Isa. 9. 2. The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light, and they
that dwelled in the land of the shadow of death upon them has the light shined.

Though this latter prophecy does principally belong to Christ, yet it is to
be applied to his Church also; for its through them Christ shines upon the
dark world: therefore says our Savior to his Dissciples, Matthew. 5. 14. Ye are
the light of the world, meaning, they were the Candlestick prepared of God to
hold up and hold out the light of truth to the dark, blind, miserable world.

Use. 1.
This informs then what a deal of duty lies upon the Church, both Ministers as
well as others.

First, For Ministers, what care should they take, and what pains should they
expose themselves unto, in order to the keeping up, and holding forth the light
and word of the Gospel to the dark nations of the earth: what care did Paul
take to fulfill his ministry, and to discharge his duty this way, Acts 20. 24.
He counted not his life dear unto himself, so that he could fulfill his ministry
with you, which ministration he had received from the Lord Jesus; and that he
might be useful this way, you may take notice of Paul's practice, Acts 20. 20. I
have kept back nothing which was profitable to you, but have showed you and
taught you openly, and throughout every house.

But O good God, how few such house preaching lights does the eart afford us in
this our age; but contrariwise, instead of men that should make it their
business with Paul and the rest of the Apostles, to go from house to house to
enlighten the dark fami^ies of the earth in the knowledge of God and his Son
Jesus Christ: they rather bend their forces, parts, wits, and purses, to darken
and put out the light of truth, and the knowledge of God in all the families
they meet withal where they go, like unto those teachers of old spoken of in
Ezekiel. 34. 18, 19. Seems it a small thing unto you, to have eaten up the good
pasture, but ye must tread down with your feet the residue of your pastures;
and to have drunk of the deep waters, but you must foul the residue with your
feet; and as for my flock they eat that which ye have trodden with your feet,
and they drink that which ye have fouled with your feet. How far these, or such
as these are from being of the true Candlestick appointed to hold up and hold
out the light of truth in the world, let the reader judge.

But again, this should teach all the Saints (for they are a part of the
Candlestick also) to endeavor in their several places and callings to promote
the glory of God in their generations, to study godliness, and which way they
may be useful with their gifts and graces, amongst their relations and
neighbors, and in their families, in order to the bringing in of their souls
to Jesus Christ: therefore says our Savior, Mat. 5, 16. Let pour light so
shine before men, that they seeing your good works might glorify your Father
which is in heaven: To this agrees the words of Paul. Phil. 2 16. with chapter 15.
ver. 15. He exhorts all true Christians, that they would labor to hold forth
the word of life, and that they would labor to live unblameable in their
lives, and spotless in their conversations, and that they would keep themselves
without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, amongst whom
they were to shine as lights: so verse 16. The reason of the former exhortation
is given you, viz. because they are to hold forth the word of life, even as a
Candlestick they are to hold up or hold forth the light of truth.

Secondly, A candlestick is appointed to hold fast as well as to hold up the
light, that it fall not down, because the fall of which many times puts out the
light; so is the Church of God prepared and fitted to succor and keep up the
light of Gods holy truth in the earth, that it might not be thrown down by the
malice of the devil and wicked men, who labor night and day to put it out in
the world.

There be two ways by which God fitteth the Church as a Candlestick to keep up
the light of truth in the world.

The first is by pouring forth upon them the gifts of the Spirit, by virtue of
which they are enabled to discover; detect, and find out all error, and
whatsoever may be contrary to sound doctrine, as in Rev. 2. 2. Thou have tried
them which say they are Apostles, and are not, and have found them liars. Hence
it is that the adversaries of truth are said not to be able to resist the
wisdom and spirit, by which St. Stephen spoke, Acts 6. 10. The reason you may
perceive lay in this, the Church of which Stephen was a member, had a very
great measure of the gifts of the Spirit, which came upon them but a little
before, read Acts 2. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Secondly. God fits his Church as a Candlestick to maintain and hold up the
light of his holy truth in the world, is by pouring forth upon their hearts the
grace of his Spirit, that so they might be enabled to suffer for it.

The Saints suffering for truth does wonderfully tend to the confirming of
truth in the earth, and to the making of it acceptable amongst men in this
world; insomuch, that in the first three hundred years after Christ, the
Churches sufferings for the truth occasioned this proverb, That the blood of
Martyrs was the seed of the Church.

Hence it is that the suffering Saints are called Gods witnesses; therefore St.
Paul tells you that the truth got great ground by his sufferings, Phil. 1. 14.

Use 1.
O then how should this teach the Lords people to bestir themselves in the way
of their duty. O remember, ye are God Candlestick, and appointed by God for
this purpose, to keep up truth in the world: O then how should this encourage
the Lords people to appear in the defense of that glorious light of truth,
which God has put into your hands, and not to suffer it to be trodden down
with so much ease as it is now in the world. I do not mean, nor say, that the
Lords people should betake themselves to any weapon besides faith, tears,
prayers, and sound arguments, together with a bold standing up in the visible
practice of the ways and truths of God against all that is contrary to this
truth: These be the weapons that I mean, and this is the contending that I
plead for: and as to this way of contending for the Faith, what cause has God
to complain of his people, as once he did of Israel of old, No man is valiant
for the truth. O what little contending is there (amongst Saints) for the faith
that was once delivered to them: O what silly heartless dove-like spirits are
the Lords people surprised withal, who can sit and hear the truths of the
Gospel rended in pieces before their eyes, and in their hearing, and not a word
spoken for it, or in the defense of it; but instead thereof, they out of a
slavish fear do but too much comply with the wicked in it.

O brethren, the precious truths of Sion are more worth then so, more worth
then not to have one word spoken for them. O remember, the Church is to contend
for the faith, and know that God will deeply charge home the neglect of this
duty one day close upon your souls.

O therefore as you would avoid that judgment spoken of in the third of the
Revelations, ver. 16. I beseech you brethren to labor to give up your selves
to a holy contending for the faith. O earnestly contend for the faith, there is
great reason so to do; for the name of God is upon the Faith, the Blood of
Christ was shed for this faith, the blood of all the Martyrs in all ages in the
world has been shed for this faith: O the faith that was once delivered to the
Saints is worth the contending for. O that God would stir up your hearts to an
earnest contending for the faith. O set a work a praying spirit, and a
believing spirit. O set on work your parts, your pens, your purses, every way
as you are able, (if the way be warrantable) do you contend for the faith which
was once delivered to the Saints, Jude 3.

Thirdly, This Candlestick was made of pure gold, this was to teach the Saints
what they should and ought to be; namely pure gold, that is very sincere to God
ward, void of a heart full of guile and hypocrisy, therefore says our
Savior, Mat. 5. 48. ^e ye therefore perfect as your heavenly father is perfect.

Fourthly, This Candlestick was made of beaten gold, which was to show or set
forth the glory and the excellency of the Church, for as gold exceeds for glory
and excellency Iron, Lead, Tin, or Brass, so do the Saints all other men and
women in the world; Therefore says the Psalmist, Psalm. 16. 3. The Saints are
the excellent of the Earth.

Though the blind world see no worth or excellency in the Saints in this life,
yet they shall know (as Solomon once said) that the Righteous is more excellent
then his Neighbor, Prove. 12. 26.

First, The righteous is more excellent then his Neighbor for grace.

Secondly, For their attendance, for not gilded creatures, but glorious Angels
are the Saints servants, Heb. 1. 14.

Thirdly, For the Saints food on which they live, in respect of which all the
dainties in the world, or which the world lives upon, are but husks and swines
meat, for the Saints live upon the Blood, and Flesh, Word, Spirit, and promises
of Christ, John 6. 55.

Fourthly, The Saints are more excellent then others in point of inheritance,
for its not an earthly Dunghill, but an inheritance which is pure and undefiled,
which fades not away is the Saints birthright, Pet. 1. 1, 4.

Fisthly, The Saints are more excellent then others, because they only can
prevail upon the heart of God in prayer, Prove. 15. 29.

Sixthly, Its so because its only amongst the Saints God delights to dwell, 2
Cor. 6. 16. Psalm. 132 13, 14.

Use 1.
O then what excellent Conversation should the Saints lead in this world, what
an engagement should this put upon the Saints to a strict holy walking, that
they should (through grace) be made of Gods pure golden Candlestick.

O therefore soul, think with thy self, when the Devil would at any time entice
thee to sin against God, or would draw away thy heart at any time from the
Lord, O say this to thy temptation. O Satan I am one that belongs to Gods pure
Candlesticks, how should I dare to bespot my self with the least of impurities,
as Joseph answered his Mistress, Genesis 39. 9. So do thou thy temptation, How
shall I do such a wickedness and sin against God.

Again, As the Candlestick had three Bouls and Knops with their flowers upon
it. This was for Ornament to adorn the Candlestick that so it might the more
appear in its glory and beauty to the beholder; all which was to set forth the
glory and beauty of the Church of God, which by the righteousness of Christ
and the Divine Graces of his Spirit, is made more glorious then the gold of
Ophir, read Psalm. 45. 13, 14. Isa 54. 11, 12. Rev. 12. 1. The Churches glory is
only discerned by an eye of believing, a carnal understanding knows very little
of this, says John 1. 3, 1. The world knows us not, certainly were not the
glory of the Saints a hidden veiled up glory from the world; its impossible but
the Saints would be better entreated at the worlds hands then they are, but
however thou farest at the worlds hands, let me advise thee to these two things.

First, If the world show thee and the rest of the Saints no favor, yet pity
them, because they are held so much in a condition of darkness, as the Apostle
speaks in 2 Cor. 4. 4. The God of this world has blinded their minds, least
the light of the glorious Gospel should shine in upon them.

Secondly, Labor to comfort thy self from this good consideration, under all
the ignomy and reproach which the world will or can cast upon thee, that the
time is coming which (will not stay long) wherein the Lord will make thine with
the rest of his peoples glory, to shine forth with more brightness and Majesty
then the Sun in its full strength; that although thou with the rest of the
Saints have lain (for a while) amongst the pots, yet the time will not be long,
But thy wings shall be as a D^ve covered over with silver, and all thy feathers
of yellow gold, Psalm. 68. 13.

Again, in this Candlestick we may observe these things.

First, The parting of the Candlestick, which was in this manner, it parted a
foot high or thereabouts in the stem.

Secondly, Out of which parting came six Branches, which shows us thus much,
the great Candlestick out of which the little Candlesticks branched forth,
signifies the Jewish national Church, this holds as entire from the foot of the
Candlestick to the parting above in the stem, out of which stem came the six
Branches; and the Branches signify the Gentile Churches which succeeded or
sprung forth from the Jewish Church, Isa. 60. 3. The Gentiles shall come to thy
light, and Kings to the brightness of thy rising. Pray observe the thing well,
there were not six little Candlesticks branched besides and apart from the
great Candlestick, but six little Candlesticks branched themselves forth of the
great Candlestick, but still maintained union with the great Candlestick, which
shows us these two things.

First, That both Jews and Gentiles are but one people to God, (consider the
Jews as they were befre they were broken off by unbelief) and all interested in
one Christ alike, all that did believe, either Jew or Gentile shall all sit
down in one Kingdom of God together, Romans 10. 12. For there is no difference,
but the same Lord over all, is rich unto all that call upon him.

Secondly, It shows us thus much, that the difference between Jew and Church
was not essential, but circumstantial, not so much in the state as in the
Ordinances. Pray observe, the Candlesticks all hold union in the stem, although
they differed above in the Branches: Its true, the Lord held the Jews and
Gentiles under differing administrations, but not under a diverse state, they
and we differed in our Ordinances, but not in essence or substance as to a
Church state, so much as this clearly offers it self to me from the union
between the stem and the Branches in the Candlestick, if it will be granted
that the Candlestick in the Tabernacle be a figure of the Church of God, as
then it was, together with these other Gentile Churches which should succeed
that; now considering the Scriputres elsewhere do so apply the word
Candlestick, I know not but this should pass for a fair notion, Rev. 1. 20.
Where its said that the Mystery of the seven golden Candlesticks are the seven
Churches. You see the Candlestick in the Tabernacle for Essence and Substance
was one and the same, though they differed above in the Branches; so then if
this be a figure of the Church of God under both Old and New Testament, then
both the Jews then, and we Gentles now, must stand upon one and the selfsame
stock or root, or else how does this hold good in the similitude, for after the
same manner reasons the Apostle about the Jewish and Gentile Churches, Romans 11.
24. For if thou were cut out of the Olive tree which is wild by nature, and
were grafted contrary to nature into the good Olive tree, how much more shall
these which be the natural Branches be grafted into their own Olive tree.

Methinks then how clearly do this warrant the practice of the Congregational
Churches in giving to their Infants Membership in their Church, and
consequently Baptism.

I know there are many of our dear Christian friends (in England) of a
differing opinion to me in this matter, but how ever read my notion without
offense, and then give thy thoughts about it.

Now mark, there is nothing more clear to me from the union that the Branches
hold to and with the Candlestick, but that the Jews and we Gentiles were taken
into a Church state alike, so says St. Paul, Romans 11. 16. with ver. 24. For if
the first fruit be holy, the lump is also holy, if the root be holy so are the
branches, and if thou were cut out of the Olive Tree which is wild by nature,
and were grafted contrary to nature into the good Olive Tree, how much more
shall these which be the natural branches be grafted into their own olive tree.
From hence I shall take leave to ask a question or two.

First, What may we understand by the root and the branches laid down here by
St. Paul.

Secondly, What may we understand by this holiness with which the branches were
made holy, ver. 16. and what these branches were.

First of all, by the root and branches must be meant either Christ, together
with all those sound Believers which are ingrafted into him by true Faith; or
else by the root and branches must be meant a Church state, and all those
visible branches which stand there by membership: Now if we should understand
it in the first sense, then this will follow, that those that are truly
ingrafted into Christ by faith, may be wholly broken off; and so we must run
our selves upon Arminianisme do what we can: But if we must not take it in the
former sense, then we must take it in the latter sense: ( viz.) by the root and
branches, a Church state, and those which are taken in the visible membership
of it, for such may be broken off, or may fall away (consider them merely as
Church Members) and no truth, or part of the truth of election impared: Now
what were the branches of the root (which root was the Jewish Church state)
were they not the parents and the children, ^en. 17. Well then, if these were
the branches of the old root, viz. the believing parents and their children,
and that the Gentiles are ingrafted into, or upon the same root, and are
partakers of the fatness of the old olive tree, meaning the privileges of the
Church.

And if the candlestick of the Jews holds union with the Candlestick of the
Gentiles (under the Gospel) in the same stem, how then can our Church state
under the Gospel be like the Jews under the Old Testament, if only we should
stand as Members in a Church state without our little ones: but again, mark
what the Apostle says, Romans 11. 16. For if the first fruits be holy, the lump
is also holy: if the root be holy so are the branches; so that the second
question will be this what may we understand by holiness here, or in what sense
shall we take it; either it must be a holiness consisting of the divine graces
of the Spirit, or else it must be a holiness arising from a Church state; and
in this sense were the Jews called a holy nation, and a peculiar people, which
arose from their being set apart by God to holy uses and purposes to God
himself; or if you will take it in St. Paul's terms, 1 Cor. 7. 14. A holiness in
opposition to uncleanness, which uncleanness is elsewhere proved to consist of
not being of a professed Church state to God; read Isa. 52. 1. with Acts 10.
14. For it could not be a holiness with which the whole body of Israel were
made holy; that consists of the divine qualifications of the Spirit of grace: I
think but few are of that opinion, that the whole body of Israel were in such a
sense holy: then it must be a holiness arising from a Church State; as if he
had said, If the first fruit be holy, that is, if Abraham with his Isaac and
Ishmael, together with the rest of his family, who were first (with all their
succeeding little ones) taken into a Church state, and so became the first
fruits of such a work to God, The lump is holy, that is, then the whole body of
that people is holy with reference to a Church state, they need not call it in
question. But if they keep close to God, certainly God accounts the issue of
Abraham, for many generations after, as much in a holy state (as to a Church
state) and as much a Church to himself, both they and their little ones, as
ever he accounted it in the first fruits of it, meaning in Abraham's time, The
lump, says Paul, is also h^ly. Then he comes to conclude, that if the first
fruits were holy, which were the parent and the child, And if the lump be
holy, that is, if God to this day have accounted the whole body of the Jews
ever since in the same Church state, which admitted of the parent and the
child, then are the branches holy, viz. The Gentile Churches which were
ingrafted in upon the same stock; then the child as well as the parent being
set on upon this stock as formerly, are likewise hily still: so that from what
has been spoken does (to me) clearly warrant the congregational people the
giving of their Children membership amongst them, and consequently baptism. Let
not any mistake me, I did not this to revive any part of the old contention, or
to beget any new quarrel between us and those Christians which dissent from us
in this thing; but as I conceived things lay so in my way, that I must have
leapt quite over a clear truth if I had left it and so passed by.

Object. But some may say, upon the same account, will a national Church be
proved to be lawful, even the same way that the membership of Infants will come
in?

I answer first, I know no absolute necessity lying upon the thing, so as that
we must not dispute for or practice the one but the other must come in, you see
in the practice of the Congregational Churches, both here and in New England,
that the connection is not forcible, but that we may give our Children
Membership and Baptism amongst us, and yet be far enough from building our
Churches upon a National bottom.

But secondly, And that which will lead me to the other consideration in the
Candlestick, which is this: The candlestick you know had one stem, out of which
came six branches. The stem of the Candlestick signifies the Jewish Church, and
the little Candlesticks which came out of that, signifies the Gentile Churches
under the Gospel: the stem of the Candlestick was but one individual, showing
that the Church of the Jews was to be national: But the branches above in the
Candlestick were several in number, signifying that the Churches under the
Gospel day, should be no more national but congregational, To this agrees the
two Prophesies of Zechariah and John, who writing both about one and the
self-same thing, viz. about the two Witnesses, Zach. 3. 3. with Rev. 11. 3, 4.
Only Zachariah says, That at that time when he writ about the two Witnesses
belonging to the Jewish Church, he saw but one Candlestick, Zach. 3. 2 Because
then the Church was national: but when John writ of the Witnesses in the
Gentile or Gospel Church, he saw two Candlesticks, or several Candlesticks,
Rev. 11. 4. Because now the Churches of Christ were no more to be national, but
congregational, or many Churches in one nation.

There is one thing more to be spoken to, about the Candlestick, and I have
done with it. You may observe in reading, Exodus 37. 18, 19, 20, 21. This plain
difference about the Candlesticks, which is, that the main Candlestick had four
bowls, with his knobs and his flowers belonging to it; but the lesser
Candlesticks which branched themselves forth of the great Candlestick had but
three Bowls, with their knobs and their flowers. Now you must observe (as has
been already said) that the bowls, knobs, and flowers added to the Candlestick,
it was to set sorth the glory of it: then where the most of the bowls, knobs,
and flowers were, there was the greatest glory: but now the most of these
things were about the great Candlestick, which shows us thus much, that
although the Jewish Church did at first fall short of the Gentile Churches in
glory and brightness; yet the time shall come that the glory of the Jewish
Church shall far excel all the Gentile Churches in the world, Isa. 54. 11, 12.
O thou afflicted and tossed with tempest and not comforted, behold, I will lay
thy stones with fair colors, and lay thy foundation with saphires, I will make
thy windows of agats, thy gates of carbuncles, and all ^hy borders of pleasant
stones. This is a Prophephesie which relates to the latter, day glory of the
Church of the Jews, when they shall be brought into Jesus Christ.

CHAP. 21. I now come to speak of the seven Lamps (which with the Candlestick)
were placed in the Tabernacle.
THere were likewise seven lamps made of pure gold, Ex. 37. 23. which Lamps
were to be lighted, and always to be kept burning before the Lord, Exodus 40.
25. In which, there are these things to be considered, or it may put us in
mind of these things.

First, The vessel it self.

Secondly the oil in the Vessel, or Lamp.

Thirdly, The light it gave out to the beholders.

First, By the Lamp or Vessel it self, it may put us in mind of this great
mercy, which by Grace Believers has received at Gods hands, and that is a
sanctified heart, into which God pours forth the holy oil of his Spirit in the
several graces of it; by which means the heart is changed, purged, renewed, and
made fit for God: Now in this sense every Believers heart may be said to be a
Lamp, therefore says the Lord in the Prophecy of Jer. 31. 33. I will put my
Law in their hearts, and write it in their inward parts: so Ezekiel. 36. 26. A new
heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I will take
awaythe stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh.

O how excellent is that heart which is dedicated to the use and service of
God, that Lamp which was set apart for the service of the Tabernacle was worth
a hundred Lamps elsewhere, because the use and service unto which it was
dedicated was both holy and honorable; O so is a heart set apart for the Lord,
its both holy and honorable, its worth a hundred of other hearts in Gods
account, Prove. 10. 20. The heart of a wicked man is little w^rth. Let men be
never so noble, great, learned, or wise in the worlds eyes, yet if their hearts
are not Vessels or Lamps dedicated to God for the use of Altar worship, you may
assure your selves that God values them no more then you value so many heaps of
Dung, the best service which comes from such unsanctified Vessels or hearts is
abominable to God, Prove. 15. 8, 9. Its a sanctified heart which God calls for
in Worship, P^ov. 23. 26. My Son (says God) give me thy heart. By Son here
we are to understand a soul, whose heart is renewed by the graces of the holy
Ghost John 1. 12. These are the Lamps which God loves should be always flaming
and burning before the eyes of his glory, as its spoken of the Lamps in the
Tabernacle burning and flaming with love and affection to God, with zeal for
him, with the flame of fervent prayer before him; therefore is it sad Prove. 15.
8. The prayers of the upright are his delight.

Use 1.
O therefore how should this teach the Lords people to look to their hearts,
that nothing but the true Oil of the spirit of grace be found in it, you know
the exhortation in Jer. 4. 14. O Jerusalem wash thine heart from wickedness,
how long shall vain thoughts lodge within thee, for its the pure in heart shall
see God, Mat. 5. 8 Therefore when Temptation, Sin, or Lust offers it self to
thy soul for entertainment; O banish it upon this very account, O say to sin,
my heart is become a dedicated Vessel or Lamp to God, set apart for
Altar-worship and work, prepared for better matter then sin is; O therefore sin
and corruption depart and get you hence, here is no entertainment for you, or
for such filthy matter as you are, says David Psalm. 45. 1. My heart is
inditing a good matter. O so say to thy temptations, My heart is inditing a
good matter, or better matter then sin, lust, or the world does amount unto;
its about heaven and heavenly things that my heart is now upon, its about God,
and Christ, and glory to come, which my heart is taken withal. O therefore
Sin, and Satan, the World, and Temptation, depart, depart, here is no
entertainment for you for ever, I have found better food to live upon, and
better objects to look unto then you are; therefore farwell for ever, farwell for
ever.

Secondly, By the Lamps or Vessels in the Tabernacle, which did hold the Oil
which was to give out the light in the Tabernacle; I understand by them the
Ministers or gifted men in the Church, who are principally employed to hold out
the light of Gods holy will to the Church for the benefit and comfort of it;
this you may see more plainly set out unto you in Zachaiahs prophecy, Zach. 4.
2. 3. I looked, and behold a Candlestick of pure gold with a boul^ upon the top
of it, and his seven Lamps thereon, and his seven Pipes to the seven Lamps,
which were upon the top thereof, and olive trees by it, one on the right hand,
and the other on the left side of the boul.

Here you see the Prophet puts a clear difference between the Candlestick and
the seven Lamps, the Candlestick and the Lamps are not one and the same thing:
Now by the Candlestick (as have been showed already) is meant the Church of
God, and by the seven Lamps on the Candlestick must be meant the Ministers and
gifted men in the Church, which are gifted by the spirit of God for the
accomplishing of the Worship and Service of the Gospel-tabernacle, both as to
Doctrine and Discipline, for as the two Olive Trees, ( Zach 4. 11, 12) Standing
on each side of the Lamps, did convey their Oil through the seven Pipes into
the seven Lamps, to continue their burning always in the Candlestick, so do
Jesus Christ by his spirit (for Christ is called the tree of life, nd the apple
tree, and the tree in the midst of the Paradise of God) constantly conveying
the sap and oil of light and truth into his Lamps (the Ministers) through the
Pipes of the Scriptures, or the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, for the
information of the Candlesticks his Churches, therefore says St. Paul to
Timothy, 1. Tim. 4. 13. with 15. Until I come give a tendance to Reading,
Exhortation, and Doctrine, meditate on these things, give thy self wholly to
them that thy profitting may appear to all.

Now if you compare Zach. 4. 2. with Rev. 1. 20. It will the more appear that
the seven Lamps do intend the Ministers of the Church, and such as are gifted
for Church work, they are called there the seven Stars of the seven golden
Candlesticks, that as Stars are fixed in the Firmament for the help of mankind
(in the absence of the Sun) against temporal darkness, so are the Ministers set
in the Firmament of the Church to help men in the absence of christ the Son of
Righteousness against spiritual darkness, therefore says the Apostle 2 Cor. 5.
20. We are Ambassadors in Christ stead, that is, we as the lesser Lights are
left with you in stead of Christ the great Light, who is the Son of
Righteousness, so Ephesians. 4. 10, 11, 12, 13. He gave some Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting
of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of
Christ, until we all come to the unity of the Faith and of the knowledge of
the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ.

Lastly, They are said to be seven Lamps, this number seven was given them, or
the reason why the Lamps were seven in number, its with respect to the
plentifulness of the gifts of the spirit, which the Lord Jesus does pour out
into his Church through these Lamps; for the word or number seven was a note of
perfectness amongst the Hebrews, which they called a perfect number, so that by
the seven Lamps we understand such a plentiful measure of the spirit, and
through supply of gifts as that there shall not be any wanwant of it in the
Church upon any occasion whatsoever, either to enlighten, guide comfort, and
strengthen it unto its journeys end; therefore you have it Isa. 27. 2, 3. A
vineyard of red wine, I the Lord do keep it, and water it every moment.

Use 2.
O then how do this call upon the Ministers of Christ to be vigilant, taking
all opportunities to hold forth their Lamp lights of truth to the Candlestick
the Church, Ministers are Lamps, and they were set apart by God for the benefit
of his people, to enlighten and comfort them in needful times, you know the
charge which is given Ministers in Isa. 40. 1. Comfort ye, comfort ye my
people, says the Lord, speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem; how careful was St.
Paul of his duty herein, what opportunities did he take on all hands to guide
the Church, and enlighten the Church with his Lamp light of knowledge, Acts 20.
24. Who accounted not his life dear to himself, so that he could but finish his
Ministry with joy.

O what a dreadful thing is it for one of these Lamps to wax out, or withdraw
its shinings when the Church of God lies ready to perish for his not
discharging his duty to them, for men to prove faint, careless, and negligent
in the discharge of duty in and to the Church, which God calls his Candlestick;
St. Paul calls this a being guilty of the blood of fouls, Acts 20. 26 You may
likewise see what God does account of this thing, read Ezekiel. 3 20.

Use 3.
How should this humble Ministers of the Gospel, what a blow would this
consideration give the old Adam within them, and pluck down the pride and
confidence of all proud Ministers, who may swell high with the conceit of their
gifts and parts, and so come to think high of themselves, beyond what they
should or ought to think, forgetting that at best they are but bare empty Lamps
in themselves, who can do nothing, nor can say any thing, or be of any use to
the Church of God without Divine assistance; you know a Lamp without Oil in it
is of little use in a house or family, the house may be full of darkness for
all that, if the Lamp be without Oil in it; O so are Ministers of as little use
without the Oil of Gods assisting presence goes along with their labors, they
can do little good to any soul in point of conversion or comfort, gifts, and
parts, and flourished notions, will do little in order to the raising of a dead
soul to life, or to the comforting a of dejected soul in the hour of temptation.

It was once the saying of Melancthon about a Sermon once preached by him to a
Country people, who pomised himself (upon the well preaching of it) a great
harvest of Converts, but upon his next coming that way and finding the little
effect of it, cries out, old Adam was too hard for young Melancthon.

Alas Brethren, the greatest Aristotle or Learned Philosopher in the world can
do nothing here without Gods quickening, comforting, spirit be with him, says
St. Paul our sufficiency is not of our selves but of God, yet St. Paul had
great parts and abilities, but he looks not upon these things but upon God for
success.

If God did not pour oil into him and thereby fitted him for his work as a
Minister of the Gospel, he knew he should remain but a dark Lamp without the
least use to any man or woman; therefore how should this make such men think
low and mean thoughts of themselves, and be humble both before God and man.

Use. 3.
This serves to inform Christians about their duty in this case.

First, To keep close to their Ministers and Pastors for spiritual light and
knowledge, and not to slight them so and to turn the back upon them as some
have done. I do not intend those who under the notion of Ministers of the
Gospel can cunningly undermine the Gospel, neither do I mean such as can mind
and turn with every turn of state; but I mean those Ministers who have given
evidence of the uprightness of their hearts and sincerity of soul to God (as
Jo^h^a and Caleb did in backsliding times) to be men of other spirits then to
run back again with the stream of the times or the cry of the multitude, to the
old Egyptian darkness from whence they were delivered; I say, to slight these
Ministers is to slight those burning Lamps of light and truth, which God in
mercy has left amongst his people for direction through their wilderness to
their spiritual Canaan.

We have had sufficient experience of this great evil of late years, into how
many evils, and mischiefs, and fearful Apostasies have thousands of professors
run themselves upon, leaving their sound Ministers and Pastors; O what horrid
darkness has their overspread the minds of some professors that would dare
to profess an open separation from their Pastors and sound teaching Ministers,
which were the Lamps of light and comfort which God in mercy held out to them.

O therefore Christians have a care you do not slight and despise these
heavenly Lamps, says St. Paul to Timothy, Let no man despise thee, you know
the exhortation in Mal. 2 7. Thou shall seek the Law at his mouth (the reason
is given you in these words) for the Priests lips shall preserve knowledge.

Secondly, Let this teach Christians to love the Ministers of Jesus Christ; O
keep this upon your heart daily, that the Ministers of Christ are the Lamp
lights to enlighten your souls in the time of darkness, our Savior calls them
the lights of the world, Mat. 5. 14. Ye are the light of the world, that is,
such as are appointed to guide the feet of the Saints into the way of peace;
the Apostle says that the Ministers of Christ are such as watch for your souls,
and must give an account for them to God in the last day, read Hebrews 13. 17.

O my Brethren, your Ministers they are more to you and can do more for you
then the eyes of your bodies; and how choice are you of that member, your eyes
you account your Jewels, when that's gone you account the Mercy next to life is
gone: But truly, great Mercies and greater Jewels are Ministers (if good and
sound) to the people of God, whether they know it or not, the Gallatians Church
were well acquainted with the worth of their Teachers and Ministers of Christ,
there was once a time when they valued them beyond their bodily eyes, Gal. 4.
15. For I bear you record (says Saint Paul) that if it had been possible, you
would have plucked out your own eyes, and have given them to me: Certainly if
you loose them, you will loose the best of your eyes; O therefore bless God
heartily, who has yet continued his Lamp lights amongst you, which yet
maintain their burning and shining lights in the midst of you, though it be
wholly dark over Egypt, yet you have your Lamps burning in Gosher. O pray hard
for them, O let Heaven ring with your cries about your Ministers, O put on for
them as you would for your treasure, your all, that God may yet stay them in
the midst of you.

CHAP. 22. A second thing that I take notice of about the Lamp, is the Oil
which was in it.
I Shall speak the less of this, because I have been handling the matter (in
some measure) before, but for order sake I shall give you a touch here.

You know as has been already observed, that a bare Lamp without Oil will not
produce any light at all to any family or house in the world, therefore here is
oil poured forth into the Lamp, and so it becomes a burning light before the
Lord always.

Now you may easily conceive what this oil did signify, if you will but
consider from whence it comes, read Zachariahs prophecy, chap 4. 2, 3. with
ver. 12. There you have the two Olive Trees standing on the two sides of the
Pipes (which Pipes reached forth close to the Lamps) emptying themselves
through the seven Pipes into the Lamps.

Now by the two Olive Trees (though some may conjecture or think by them is
meant the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament) I understand to be meant
Jesus Christ.

Now that it cannot be the two Testaments of the Scripture which we must take
for the two Olive Trees which poured their oil into the Lamps.

First, Because the Scriptures of themselves are not capable of giving out the
least drop of moisture to any, therefore S. Paul calls them A dead Letter,
meaning without the spirit.

Secondly, It cannot be so, because when Zachariah wrote this Mystery, there
was but one Testament written, for the new was not then given out; therefore I
say, it must be applied to Christ, Christ was both these Olive trees, both to
the Jewish Church then, and to the Gentile Churches ever since; I mean such of
them as are Christ's Churches indeed.

Now let Jesus Christ be considered in his twofold nature, as God-Man, and so
he will agree for number to the Olive Trees.

Now its upon this account that Christ is such a dropping fullness to the
Church: Christ being thus considered in his two natures make him up to be the
dropping Olive Tree to the Lamps of the Church.

For first, He must be God equal to the Father, that he might be capable to
receive these communications from God, which are necessary for the Candlestick
his Church.

Secondly, He must be man as well as God, that he might be capable to apply
these (received communications from God) to the Church, or these that shall be
the Lamps: therefore is Christ called the Emmanuel, or the God with us, Isa. 7.
14. and in 1 Timothy 2. 5. He is said to be the middle person between God and us,
therefore is Christ reported in Scripture to be the treasury, and storehouse
of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2. 3. And one in whom the fullness of the Godhead
dwelt bodily, Col. 2. 9. And that it pleased the Father that in him should all
fullness dwell; but that of John is full to this purpose, John 1. 14. with 16.
The word was made flesh, and it dwelt amongst us, and we beheld his glory, as
of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth: so ver. 16. And
of his fullness have we all received, and grace for grace.

Thus you see Christ is the Olive Tree that first does receive from the Father,
and then drops his spiritual fatness down again to his Lamps, the Ministers of
the Gospel, for the good of all the Church, which is called the Candlestick; so
that by the oil is meant the rich gifts of the Spirit, which Christ gives out
to his Lamps the Ministers, whereby they are enabled to counsel and instruct
the ignorant, to comfort the doubting, and strengthen the feeble minded, to
support the weak, to feed the hungry, and correct the obstinate, and warn the
unruly, as the Apostle speaks in the first of the Thessalonians 5. 14.

Use 1.
Then this should teach Christians to admire the Lord, who has not withheld
the best of supplies from his poor people. O what greater love can there be
thought on then this, who cannot but be swallowed up in the meditations of what
God has done for his Church, touching the daily benefits he drops down upon
his people. O when we do consider the rich droppings of the Spirit of God
through Christ, which do daily come down on the Churches Lamps, for the common
good of the whole body; how can we choose but cry out with the Psalmist, Psalm
8. 4. Lord, what is man that thou act mindeful of him, and the Son of man
that thou visit^st him.

O how largely has God abounded this way of late years toward his people,
what a wonderful deal of oil has he poured into his Churches Lamps, in this
our day; whatever age could say the like as we can say, setting aside the
Apostles age O how has the fountain of light and truth been broken up of late
in the midst of us, how have the little ones in Sion, been made to understand
doctrine; what a high way has there been set open in the things of God in our
day, as that the wayfaring men, though fools, have been kept from erring
therein O that the Lords people would admire the love and grace of God herein,
and that they would cry out with the Apostle, O the height, the depth, the
length, and the breadth of the love of God which passes knowledge, how
unsearchable are his judgment, and his ways past finding out.

Use 2.
It informs us what rich food the people of God has given them to live upon,
which is better then all the rare dainties in the world beside; when I think
upon the pourings out of the Spirit of God, in the gifts and graces of it to
the Churches of Christ: I do not so much wonder at the saying of the wise man,
who tells us, that that little which the righteous has is better then the
large revenues of the wicked, Psalm, 36. 16. Not only because the wicked have
not their portion upon a divine account, or with such a blessing as the godly
have, but because all that the wicked do enjoy of this world, were it ten times
more then it is, yet it is nothing compared with the least dram of the grace of
the Spirit in the heart of a believer. O the honey sweet mansions which
believers feed upon. O the rare comforts they experience both by day and night,
says Paul 1 Cor. 2. 9. 10. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor can it enter
into the heart of man to conceive the things which God has prepared for those
that love him, which things God revealed to his by his spirit.

Well, one word of the Lamps more and I have done speaking about them; and that
is, It is said that these Lamps were always burning before the Lord, in which
we may take notice of these two things.

1. They were always burning 2. That they were to burn before the Lord.
As to the first consideration, I understand it to be meant of the assured
continuance of the gifts and graces of the Spirit, for the benefit of the Elect
of God in several ages of the world, that as the Lamps were never to go out in
the Tabernacle, so the Lord will never be wanting with the gifts of his Spirit
upon his Ministers throughout all ages, that he might by and through them keep
up the light and truth of his holy will in the world in despite of all
opposition whatsoever: read Psalm 132. 15, 16, 17. I will abuudantly bless
their provision, I will satisfy their poor with bread, I will cloth her
Priests with salvation, and their Saints shall shout for joy: there will I make
the horn of David to bud, I have ordained a lamp for mine anointed. This is the
promise of God to the Candlestick, is Church, throughout all ages in the world,
giving them to understand, that let men and devils do what they can, yet
certainly God will always keep up the lamp light of truth to the end of the
world. You see the lamp was always to burn in the Tabernacle, so as certainly
the light of truth shall and must always burn in the world. Hence you have it
in the Psalms, Psalm 132. 14. where God is speaking of the Candlestick his
Church, says in these words, This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for
I have desired it for my habitation.

Use 1.
This informs us then of the great folly and madness of the children of this
world, who labor night and day to extinguish and put out these lamp lights of
Gospel truth, which God has set up in his Church. Alas men do but strive
against the stream in the thing: you see how successess men have been in their
attempts this way, even from the beginning: How did Pharaoh King of ^^y^t
strive to root out the Lamp lights in his day; so how did King ^^^^b^am lay out
himself this way in his day, by setting up the Calves, by throwing out the good
Ministers of the Lord and in putting into their rooms Priests made of the
lowest and basest of the People, 1 Kings 12. 31. so in Christ's time, what ado
did King Herod make to find out the Lamp of lamps, viz. our Lord Jesus Christ,
that he might quite rid the world of his light, Mat. 2. so in the Apostles
days, how did the Jews labor to fill the world with uproars against them,
that their lamp light of truth might be wholly put out of the earth: so the
heathen Emperors, in the first three hundred years after the Apostles, what
bloody attempts did they in their times make against the lamps, and so all
along ever since their time, for this fifteen hundred years, what horrid cruel
desperate attempts have the Antechristian party in the world made against these
lamp lights of Gospel truth, which Christ by his Apostles has left for the
good of his Church, witness the slaughtering of the Waldenses, Albingenses,
beside those many murders which have been done upon the Christians in Germany,
whose case (without doubt) God is now a pleading by the Turks. You may call to
mind the many cruel murders done in France and Ireland, as also the many
cruelties which have past upon the Lords people in England ever since Queen
^^ar^^ time: what endeavors, what plots, what secret treacheries have there
been afoot to get down these divine lights, which God in mercy has caused to
shine in the midst of us. But alas, alas, let me tell such men, that all their
labor is but lost labor: men do but kick against the p^icks, and throw back
their heels against sharp stakes, that persist in a work of this nature.

O you persecutors of truth, and such as think to extinguish the lamps of Gods
truth, to you I speak, even to you of every nation in the world. O Sirs, lay
down your weapons of contention, push at the pikes no longer, for you will
certainly perish in the end; know you that do what you can, God will keep alive
his lamp lights of truth in the world in despite of you all: certainly you do
but set the briars and thorns in battle array, against the everlasting burnings,
in rising up to resist the work of God in the earth: God will have his work to
go on; O therefore stand not in his way, God will make way for it, though it be
through your heart blood: read Psalm 45. 4, 5, 6. Psalm. 36. 9. O therefore be
wise ye judges of the earth, and be ye instructed ye great ones, serve the Lord
with fear, and come before him with trembling: kiss the Son lest he be angry,
and ye perish in the mi^ way, when his wrath is kindled but a little; therefore
if you love your selves, hearken to the advice of that learned Doctor, Acts 5.
34. with 38, 39. Then stood there up one in the council a Pharisee named
Gamaliel, a doctor of, the Law (who said) And now I say unto you, Refrain your
selves from these men, and let them alone; for if this counsel, or this work be
of men, it will come to naught; but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it,
lest happily ye be found even to fight against God.

Lastly, and I have done this Type, It is to be noted, that this Type, viz. the
Lamps, was to burn before the Lord, or in his sight, which signifies Gods
watchful eye over the lamps, that so nothing might hinder or obstruct the
burning of them: you may fully see the care of God set out to you in this
thing, Isa. 27 2, 3. In that day (says God, speaking of his Church) sing ye
unto her a vineyard of red Wine, I the Lord do keep it, I will water it every
moment, lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and day.

Use 4.
This should inform us then, what a dangerous thing it is for men to endeavor
to corrupt the pure Worship of God, by mixing any thing of their humane
inventions, with Gods divine Institutions: certainly there cannot be any thing
added to the Doctrine or Worship of God, but God will readily espy it; for the
lamps were to burn before the Lord where the eyes of his glory should be fixed
upon them, let it be in the most secret Chambers men can devise, yet God will
find it out, Ezekiel. 8. 12. You may see how dearly the two sons of Aaron paid
for so bold an adventure, Levit. 10. 1, 2. Truly men cannot easily provoke God
in any thing more then by endeavoring to eclipse the shining of his lamp
lights of Gospel truth in the world, for truth may be as much eclipsed by
corrupting of it as any other way. But good Lord, what little conscience do men
make of this crying sin at this day. Alas how do the learned of the earth
labor by their wits and parts to adulterate the worship of God and the pure
oil of truth in this our age; so that the great evil is come upon the earth now
which fell upon Israel of old, Ezekiel. 34. 18. They eat the good pasture, and
tread, wn the residue with their feet, they drink up the best water and foul
the residue with their feet. But truly, though men may join hand in hand in
this thing, yet they shall not go unpunished.

Use 5.
What an engagement should the thoughts of this doctrine of the lamps burning
always before the Lord, put upon the hearts of all Ministers of the Gospel to
look to it, that there doctrine be sound, and that which will hold weight
before the Lord; if Ministers doctrine do at any time carry more of their own
water in it then Gods Wine certainly God will discover it: the Ministers are
Gods Lamps appointed for the Tabernacle, and they are to burn before the Lord;
that is, they never act but Gods eye is upon what they do and preach in his
Worship, to observe what comes from them, his eye is upon them in the studying
of their matter, while in the composing of it, and his eye is upon them in the
Pulpit, while they are preaching of it: if there be iron and tin mixed with
Gods gold and silver, surely the pure eyes of Gods glory will try it, of what
sort it is: therefore says Paul in 1 Cor. 3. 12, 13, 14, 15. If any man build
on this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones, hay, wood, or stubble, every
man's work shall be made manifest, for the day shall declare it, because it
shall be revealed or fire, and the fire shall try every man's work of what sort
it is, if any man's work abide which he has built thereon, he shall receive a
reward; but if any man's work shall be burnt, he shall receive loss, yet he
himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire.

O if men were well acquainted with the strict eye that God exercises always
over his burning lamps the Ministers, with respect to their doctrine, surely
men would be more careful then they are, both in their studying and preaching
of them, and would tremble to bring forth such sad stuff for doctrine as some
do amongst us: Paul ^ells you of a doctrine of devils, 1 Timothy 4, 1. And says,
that some men which give heed to seducing spirits may be given unto: therefore
if men would be protected from being delivered up to the doctrine of seducing
spirits, let men labor faithfully to bring forth the doctrine of God. Hence it
is that Paul has it in 1 Timothy 4. 16. Take heed unto thy self, and to the
doctrine, continue in them, for in so doing thou shall both save thy self, and
them which hear thee.

CHAP. 22. I now come to speak of the Snuffers which did belong to the Lamps in
the Tabernacle.
ANd there were Snuffers likewise made of pure gold, which belonged to the
Tabernacle, as well as the Lamps and Candlestick, Exodus 37. 23.

Now the use of that instrument; you know it is to correct, or to remove out of
the way any thing that shall offend the burning of the light, that so the light
might shine with the more brightness, and clearness: Now if you observe the
thing, the snuffers are put together with the lamps, Exodus 37. 23. And he made
seven lamps, and his snuffers, with his dishes of pure gold; which gives us to
understand, that the snuffers were appointed for the use of the Lamps; which
Lamps, as I have said, signifies the light of truth (which through the pourings
out of the gifts of the Spirit, into the hearts of the gifted men of the
Candlestick, the Church) God intends by them to keep up in all ages of the
world. Now by the adding the snuffers to the seven Lamps, we the better come to
understand their property, which is as I have said, to correct all those
superfluities, which in cleaving to the lights of the Lamps are apt to hinder
its shining.

This shows us the great care which God does and will take to the keeping up of
the purity of truth, in its glory and luster in the Church, do what men and
devils will to the contrary: it shows us likewise the great provision which God
has prepared to his peoples hands, for the removing out of the way any thing
that might tend to the darkening or hindering the light from burning in his
Churches, and that is it which we are to understand by the Snuffers which were
added to the Lamps.

Now here two things are to be noted.

First, What it is which hinders the light of truth from shining in the
Churches of Christ.

Seeondly, What that provision is (which as the Snuffers) is given forth by God
on purpose to correct it, and remove it out of the way.

For the first, what it is which offends the light of truth in the Churches of
Jesus Christ,

First, Its all that corrupt doctrine, and unsound opinions which false
teachers labor to usher into the Church of God and of Christ, by the cunning
craftiness of men, which handle the word of God deceitfully: of such the
Apostle speaks of in his time, who labored to bring in damnable errors into
the Church of God, Jude 4. For there are certain men crept in unawares, who
were before of old ordained unto condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace
of God into wantonness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus
Christ. Hence it is that Paul gives such a charge to the Elders of Ephesus,
Acts 20. 28, 29, 30. Take ^e^d brethren unto your selves, and unto the flock
over which the Holy Ghost has made you over seers, to feed the Church of God,
which he has purchased with his own blood, for I know that after my departure,
shall grievous wolves enter in amongst you not staring the flock, also of your
own selves shall men arise speaking perverse things, to draw away Disciples,
after them; so likewise do the Apostle show us that it will be the portion of
the latter ages of the world to be pestered in the Churches of Christ by men of
very base and corrupt principles, to the eclipsing and darkning of the Lamp
lights of truth in the midst of them, these are S. Paul, words unto Timothy, 2 Timothy 3. 1. with ver. 8. This know, that in the last days perilous times shall
come, for there shall arise men, such as Jannes and Jambres, who withstood
Moses, so shall these resist the truth, Men of corrupt minds, reprobate
concerning the faith, so Rev. 9. 1, 2, 3, 4. And the fifth Angel sounded, and I
saw a star fall from heaven unto the earth, and to him was given the key of the
bottomless pit, and he opened the bottomless pit, and there arose as make out
of the bottomless pit like the smoke of a furnace, and the Sun and the Air was
darkened by reason of the smoke of the pit. By the Sun and the Air here spoken
of, I understand the Lamp light of truth, which did once burn in the Romish
Church before its falling away, for it is the condition of the Church of Rome
which the holy spirit intends in this Chapter, who intimates to you that as
smoke darkens the Air, as that you cannot see the Sun in the Heavens, so this
smoke of Error and Antichristianism which arose from Hell, did wholly put out
the Lamp lights of truth amongst them, every where through out the Romish
Church, so that this is one way of offending the light in the Churches of
Christ, which hinders it from shining forth for the profit of others.

Secondly, A thing that hinders the light in shining, is the corruptness of the
Teachers hearts, men that are ambitious of honor, or are covetous of gain
being greedy after much of this world; these are such as prove offensive to the
light of truth and very much hinder the shinings of it in the Church, such were
the Sons of old Eli the Priest, whose filthy, greedy, covetous conversation
made the sacrifices of the Lord to be abhorred in Israel, 1 Samuel 2. 12, 13, 14,
15, 16, 17. so Ezekiel. 34. 2. 3. with 18. 19. Likewise Jude tells you of a sort
of greedy Teachers, who run greedily after the way of Balaam for reward, and
perished in the gainsaying of Corah, you see the Apostle makes the covetousness
of Balaam and the gainsaying of Corah to link together, and well he may,
because the one is such a notable Introduction into the other sin; for a man to
grow greedy of gain with Balaam, is the ready way for him to become the truths
gainsayer with Corah, D^than, and Abiram. Now by such things as these is the
light of Gods pure work oftentimes darkened in the Church.

But secondly, what these snuffers are, or what that provision is which God
has provided to correct these corruptions in order to the keeping pure the
light of truth in the Churches of Christ, and this consists of three things.

First, Sound Arguments preached and pressed upon the Consciences of men from the
word of God, convincing men of the error of their notions, who shall endeavor
to vent any thing of an unsound or hurtful concernment in the Church of Christ,
by holding forth to them the judgments of God, as they are laid down in his
word against such as shall persist and go on in their obstinacy: hence you have
these words from S. Paul to Titus, Tit. 1. 9. Holding fast the faithful word as
have been taught, that he may be able by sound Doctrine both to exhort and to
convince the gainsaver. You may add unto this of Titus, the whole Epistle of
Jude, which may very well be compared for its usefulness this way, which (to
me) does wonderfully agree with the end of the snuffers of gold in the
Tabernacle, which was made to preserve the Lamp light while shining in the
Churches of Christ.

Secondly, That means which in a second place is to be added to the former, in
order to the making up the snuffers in the Tabernacle of Gods Church, is a
faithful admonishing of the erroneous person for his errors and mistakes, not
favoring of him either for his place or greatness, you are to know truth is
the greatest of all, he is not worthy to be a professor of truth, much less a
Preacher of truth, who regards not truth above the person of any man in the
world, this is the rule, 2 These. 3. 14, 15 If any man obey not our word by this
Epistle, note that man and have no company with him that he may be ashamed;
that is, be not so intimate with him as you are, and ought to be with those
that are sound Christians, that he may understand by your carriage that he is
not right in the faith of our Lord Jesus, Yet count him not as an enemy, but
admonish him as a friend.

Thirdly, The third and last thing to be added to the making up the snuffers in
the Gospel tabernacle is this, that if nothing of the above said means will
prevail to the correcting of error in the maintainers thereof, then cast him
out for a Heretic, that he may do no more mischief in the Church of Christ,
giving notice to all the Churches what has been done to such a one, that the
Churches may avoid and shun him where ever they meet with him; therefore is
this rule given the Saints, Ti^us 3. 10. A man that is a heretic after the
first and second admonition reject. Were this rule carefully observed in the
Churches of Christ, how wonderfully would it conduce to the keeping truth free
from those mixtures of error, which otherwise will cleave to it, do men what
they can.

Use 1.
O Brethren, how infinitely should we admire the wisdom of God in these things,
O how much of the Divine policy of heaven is there which lies wrapped up in
these golden Mysteries; O who can read these secrets, and not have a heart
deeply affected with them.

My dear Friends, let not Gods ancient contrivements from eternity go void of
its great observations amongst us; O peep a little into these great Mysteries
of the Tabernacleworship, and ask your selves what infinite reason you have to
admire God in all, surely if some of the heathen Philosophers could so gaze (in
a way of admiration) on that Divine wisdom of God, which so gloriously
compacted the frame of the whole world.

O what cause have Christians to adore the wisdom of God, in framing together
so glorious a piece as the Tabernacle, with the several vessels of it, as that
there was not a vessel in the whole Tabernacle without its special
signification, as the Apostle speaks in Heb. 10. 1. There were all shadows of
good things to come, so likewise how much is the love and goodness of God seen
to his poor people in this world, that he should provide them with such
spiritual necessaries to help them out in all exigencies, and to relieve
themselves by upon all occasions, if they want light and comfort, they know
where to have it, he has fixed his burning Lamps amongst them if they should
find their oil to grow slack, their oil of comfort, their oil of peace and
refreshment, they know where the Olive Tree (Christ, stands, they have him with
them, Thy name is in the midst of us, says the Prophet, its but to call upon
him and he has promised to hear, Psalm. 50. 15. And if their Lamp light at any
time prove dim through any corruptions cleaving to it, they have their
snuffers made up of sound Scriptural Arguments, together with these two
Ordinances of admonition and excommunication, to correct the evil at pleasure,
that the lights may keep their shining in the midst of them still.

Use 2.
Lastly, The Use of lamentation, O how little of this means have the Lords
people made use of, for the protecting of the light of truth in the midst of
us; how have the snuffers been laid by as wholly useless of late years, by
which means error has gotten the ground of truth in an abundant measure,
insomuch by the neglect of Christians herein (though truth was sent into the
world to get ground of error) the truth is, error has almost weeded out
truth, truly (for redress in this case) God has not been so much wanting to
his people in the means, as Christians have been to themselves about the
faithful use of means; if error have prevailed above truth, the fault has
been ours not Gods: We have wanted hearts to deal plainly with our offending
Brethren in this case, besides the great liberty which has been given to some
of our green, raw, rash members of Churches to vent their undigested notions in
public, and that before themselves well skilled in the knowledge of the
Scripture, and the form of sound words; I am not pleading against a Christians
exercising his gifts to the building up his fellowmembers in the faith,
provided they keep their bounds, and act within their compass, until their
growth be such (in the judgment of the wise) as that they may be adventured
upon public work; for want of using the golden snuffers, sure I am, that many
a poor ignorant soul has been carried away with gross opinions, to their utter
undoing without the infinite mercy of God prevent it; Therefore if we would
have our Lamps burn clearly in the midst of us, let us more use the golden
snuffers (which were appointed to remove that which should hinder the light in
its shining) with more diligence then yet we have done.

I shall conclude this type of the snuffers, with that good word of the Lord in
Prove. 36. 6. Add thou not unto his word lest he reprove thee and thou be found
a liar, for every word of God is pure.

CHAP 23. I now come to speak of the two Altars which were made and placed in
the Tabernacle, both of which having special reference to Jesus Christ.
THese Altars were two in number, their difference in form and fashion was not
great, only the one was overlaid with pure gold and had his Crown upon it, and
the other was overlaid with brass, but we find not any Crown upon that, and the
Altar which was overlaid with brass had a Grate of Net-wort made for it, which
was to let out the ashes of the slain sacrifices which were to be offered as a
burnt-offering upon it, Exodus 27. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Both of the Altars had horns
alike, which were in number four, and placed at the four corners of the Altars,
Exodus 27. 2. with Exodus 37. 25, 26.

Now these two Altars differed mostly in use or office, for the Altar which was
overlaid with pure gold and had the Crown upon it, was only to offer the burnt
Incense upon, Exodus 40. 26, 27. And the Altar which was overlaid with brass,
that only was to offer the burnt sacrifice upon, which sacrifices consisted of
the bodies of the slain beasts, which were to be offered before the Lord, Exodus
40 29.

These two Altars did signify both to them and all else, the Lord Jesus Christ
as then to come, with respect to the twofold work which he was to do and suffer
for believers; in the handling of which I shall do these two things

First, I shall show you that these Altars did signify Christ our Lord who was
then to come.

Secondly, That according to the differing uses of these Altars, are the
differing works of Christ for and in the behalf of all true believers.

First, That these Altars did signify Christ to come, to this you have St.
Paul's words agreeing, read 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14. In which place you have the
Apostle speaking how much a duty it is that Preachers of the Gospel should be
well provided for by the Saints, and that because they wait on the things of
the Gospel, and that was to preach and make known Jesus Christ to their souls;
now to prove that such Ministers are of right to be provided for, the Apostle
does instance the right which the Moseical Law did give those men (which did
wait on the Altar) to eat of the things of the Altar, as if the Apostle should
have said, certainly Gospel Ministers have no less a right to a maintenance,
then the legal Ministers had under the Law, seeing our work is one and the
same, the difference only lay in mode and circumstance, not in substance, they
and we all taught one and the self same Christ; they waited on the Altar
typical, and we wait upon the Altar substantial; they upon the Altar of the
legal tabernacle and we upon the Altar Christ of the heavenly tabernacle, as
that their Altar was but the type or forerunner of Christ our Evangelical
Altar, which we wait on and preach to you; my end in this Commentary was not so
much to handle a Ministers maintenance, as to give you by what has been spoken
a sight of the great congruity the Apostle makes to be between the Altars in
the tabernacle and Christ Jesus, so Heb. 13. 10. We have an Altar whereof none
have right to eat which serve the tabernacle, you may easily perceive in
reading through this Epistle to the Hebrews, that the drift and purpose of the
Apostle was to bring off the Jews from their resting in these shadows, to live
more upon Christ the true substance, which the legal Figures were only the
types of; And labors to convince them that the tabernacle with all the
glorious Vessels in it, together with what else was of any Ceremonial use
amongst them, all was but to shadow out Christ to come, read, Heb. 9. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. And amongst which things the Altars in the
Tabernacle were of special use (in point of signification as they related to
Christ) as any other type which was in use amongst them; And therefore does the
Apostle so apply the matter in hand, if you compare the 10. verse of Heb. 13.
with the 5th ver. of the same Chapter, for when in the 10. ver. he had spoken
of the Jewish Altar, saying, in these words, We have an Altar which none have
right to eat, which serve at the tabernacle, he presently (in ver. 12.) brings
in Christ as the Antytipe of that type in these words, Wherefore Jesus that he
might sanctify the people with his own blood suffered without the gate. Mark,
he suffered without the gate as a sacrifice which was proper to the Altar in
the Tabernacle; thus you see how the Apostle makes Christ and the Altar in the
Tabernacle to agree here also, so Rev. 6. 9. I saw under the Altar the souls of
them which were beheaded for the word of God and for the testimony of Jesus
which they hold: Which Altar we must understand to be meant of Jesus Christ,
which was slain for the sins of the world, under which sacrifice lies
murdered, of the slain Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs of Jesus Christ, that
have died for the word of God in all Ages of the world, for as Christ was
sacrificed for their sins, so are the Saints willingly sacrificed for his
truths; and so Christ and the Saints are by John represented to our view in one
suffering heap or body together, only Christ has the preeminence, he first,
and they after, or Christ above and his people under the Altar Christ; so that
by all has been spoken it appears that the Altars in the Tabernacle did intend
Christ which was then to come in the flesh.

Secondly, I shall show you in the next place, how the two Altars (being of two
differing uses) did signify the two great works which Christ was to perform to
God for believers.

I shall begin with the Altar that was overlaid with Brass. This Altar
signified Christ in the work of making or giving satisfaction to the justice of
God for sin, for upon this Altar in the Tabernacle were the bodies of those
beasts offered which were slain for sin, and they were offered to God in hot
flaming fire, therefore called the burnt offering; so was Jesus Christ an Altar
to bear the indignation of God for the Elect upon Christ's back (as upon the
Altar) did stand both the sins and the burning hot wrath of Gods justice
together, which like mighty flashes of lightning came upon the soul of our dear
and precious Savior, which made the bloody sweats upon him in the Garden, Luke
22. 44. Therefore in Isa. 53. The Holy Ghost shows you the Elects sins and Gods
wrath both together, standing at one and the self same time upon the back of
Christ, Isa. 53. 6, 7. We all like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every
one to his own way, and the Lord has laid the iniquities of us all upon him,
he was oppressed, he was afflicted, so ver, 10. It pleased the Lord to bruise
him and to put him to grief, when thou shall make his soul an offering for sin,
so ver. 12. Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall
divide the spoil with the strong, because he has poured out his soul unto
death, and was numbered with the transgressour, and did bear the sins of many,
so 1 Pet. 1 18, 19. with chap. 2. 24. For ye know that ye were not redeemed
with Silver or Gold, but by the precious blood of Jesus Christ, as a Lamb
without blemish and without spot, who in his own body bear our sins upon the
Tree. But notable is that place of the Apostle in Heb. 13. 11, 12. For the
bodiess of those beasts, whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by the High
Priest for sin, are burnt without the Camp, wherefore Jesus also that he might
sanctify the people with his own blood suffered without the gate, so Ephesians. 5.
2. says S. Paul speaking of Christ, He gave himself for us an offering, and a
sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor; Thus you see how Christ in his
sufferings makes good what the Altar of Brass (with the sacrifice upon it) did
signify and hold out to the beholders, where indeed our Savior was both the
Altar and the Sacrifice too: By which offering up of himself (as the Altar and
Sacrifice to God) he has purchased eternal Redemption for us, and has for
ever perfected those which are sanctified, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 10. 10,
12, 14. verses.

Use 1.
O then this should teach all true Believers to rejoice, and sing aloud for joy
of soul. O Saints, lift up your heads, and with your voice bless the Lord; take
with you these words and sing with the Psalmist, Psalm. 118. 20, 21. 22, 23. I
will praise the Lord, for thou have heard me, and art become my salvation, for
the stone which the builders refused is become the head of the corner; this is
the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes: this is the day which the
Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it. That the soul that was once
so far from God, as hell is from heaven, should have an Altar of satisfaction
provided for him, yea, and a sacrifice to, in order to his full justification
before the everlasting burnings. O says David, Psalm, 66. 16. Come hither and I
will tell you what God has done for my soul.

Why, what is the matter David, what is it that God has done for you? O, I that
was a poor sinful wretch, and accursed, miserable creature, a condemned
Malefactor before God, for the breach of his royal law, and could never
possibly have redeemed my self by all that ever I could do of my self, or in my
own strength O I was one who was under the guilt of sin, and a slave to Satan,
an heir of Hell, a child of darkness, a firebrand of the bottomless pit, a
son of perdition, a lost perishing soul in my self for ever. Oh I that was
alien to the promise, a stranger to the Covenants and Commonwealth of Israel,
and without hope of God in the world, am now again made nigh by the Blood of
Christ, and thereby taken again into the reconciled love and favor of God,
through this altar of grace and satisfaction, (which the Father in mercy) has
set up for my soul, upon which all my sins are laid, past, present, and to
come, Is^. 53. 6. So that through the rich mercy of God I can say I am
delivered from the law wherein I was held, through the satisfaction and full
payment the Father received from my Altar Christ, Romans 7. 6. And although
(before I had any interest in this Altar Christ) I feared death and hell every
day before; yet now I can say, there is therefore now no condemnation to me,
who am resolved not to walk after the flesh, but after the spirit, Romans 8. 1.
Now can I come with boldness to the throne of grace, to ask grace and mercy to
help in time of need, Heb. 4. 16. O this Altar Christ by his sufferings has
opened a new and living way to the Father for me, a way consecrated through the
vail of his flesh, Heb. 10. 18, 19, 20. By which means (although I durst not
look up to the Father before) I can come into his blessed presence as a child,
and call him Father, and I can come to him upon the account of purchase, and
demand my adopted rights, and purchased privileges at my Fathers hands, and
that upon the account of altar atonement, which was made and done by my Altar
Christ, when he offered up himself a sacrifice to God, without spot and blemish
for me, Ephesians. 5. 2. And although I was as black as hell, and as full of spots as
the Leopard in Gods sight, yet now shall I be found of God complete in Jesus
Christ, not having spot or wrincle, Col. 2. 10 Ephesians. 5. 27. O thus may every
true Believer say, and sing with David, for the weakest and least of the
Children of God has as large, and as full, and as ample a satisfaction laid
down for him to God as David, and his privileges by this Altar, and his right
unto this Altar Christ, is as large and altogether as full as David's was; so
says Paul, Romans 10. 12. The same Lord over all is rich unto of that call upon
him, for he is no respecter of persons.

Use 2.
Let this teach Christians to have great recourse to the Altar of atonement
and satisfaction. There be three seasons when a Christian should have special
regard to the Altar of satisfaction.

First, In guilt seasons.

Secondly, In doubting seasons.

Thirdly, In corruption-prevailing seasons.

First, In guilty seasons, when the heart and conscience comes to be stained
with the guilt of sin, then is it the souls time to run to the Altar of
satisfaction; when ever the Jews had any guilt broke out upon them; they were
to take some offering or other in their hands, and a way to the Priest with it,
that he might hasten to the altar of satisfaction, and there make an atonement
for them by offering up their offering before the Lord. O so should believers
do when guilt breaks forth upon them, they should fly by faith to their Gospel
Altar of satisfaction and atonement: says John 1. 2. 1. 2. My little
children, if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, for he is a propitiation in his blood for our sins, and not only
for ours, but for the sins of the whole world. Certainly, many a poor soul many
times lies longer under trouble of spirit then they need to do, were they but
well acquainted with this truth, that the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us
from all sin, 1 John 1. 7. A through acquaintance with, and a close application
made of this Scripture in doubting times, it would wonderfully ease the heart
in trouble; therefore, O troubled soul, would thou have thy guilts removed
from thy conscience, and would thou get thy self into the favor of God
again; would thou have within in thy soul, would thou have the anger of God
pacified again, whom thou have offended. O then, run to the altar of
satisfaction, take an offering in thy hand, go and call upon the Priest, and
pray him to go into the Tabernacle for thee, and there offer upon the Altar of
satisfaction thy offering before the Lord; I mean take with thee in thy hand of
faith, the blood, merits, and righteousness of Jesus Christ, and beg him to lay
up this upon the Altar of his satisfaction for thee. O stand at the Tabernacle
door of the throne of grace, there call upon thy high Priest Jesus, give him no
rest day or night, until he has gone in to the Father, and made an atonement
for thee: which done, thon may assure thy self of that peace of God which
passes all understanding, as the Jews in offering what they had to present
their High Priest withal, might expect a full peace between God and their
souls, which was obtained by the high Priest for them: And you know the
obtaining of their peace at Gods hands upon their observing of this rule, was
very unquestionable) so soul in the observation of this rule between thy soul
and Christ, thou need doubt of the love and favor of God to thy soul no
more then the Jews.

Secondly, A second season when a Christian should have regard to the Altar of
satisfaction, is in doubting seasons, when the Devil shall so far prevail, as
to discourage the soul from coming to partake of his right to the altar of
satisfaction: and this the Devil does oftentimes, by telling the soul that the
Altar was never set up, or prepared for such a vile rebellious wretch as the
sinning soul has been. And thus the soul being filled with discouragements, is
oftentimes almost swallowed up with exceeding grief and despair. But let me
answer the devil in that soul: O Satan, thou have by thy cunning, subtle,
crafty devices deceived many poor souls this way already, by which hellish
craft thou have held back many a thousand poor souls from partaking of the
privileges of their Altar Christ, bearing them in hand, that the Father looks
for greater preparations of soul, and higher qualifications of heart and life
(to fit the soul for such a mercy as the Altar Christ is) then the soul is yet
able to bring with him, which design is but to put the soul upon delays, on
purpose for his everlasting undoing, (for he well knows, if the soul should
stay from Christ until he be fit for Christ, the soul never gets Christ to
eternity:) But Satan, that thou may prevail no more this way upon poor
souls, I tell thee by the word of the Lord, and in the name of my God, first of
all, that the Altar of satisfaction is erected and set up for every comer to
it; as that, let the soul be never so vile, unworthy, unclean, or impure in
himself, yet he shall be accepted as heartily as ever was Saint in the world,
if he will but come to the Altar; for Satan, thou know very well, (though
thou thus blindest the eyes of poor souls) that the Commission which Christ
has given to all his Ministers, is to preach another doctrine in the world,
then what thoa preachest to men and women, which is as follows, Isaiah 55. 1,
2. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and ye that have no
money come ye buy wine and milk without money, and without price: wherefore do
you spend your money for that which is not bread, and your labor for that
which satisfies not, hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is
good, and let your soul delight its self in fatness: Incline your ear and come
unto me, hear and your soul shall live; come unto me and I will make an
everlasting covenant with you, even ths sure mercies of David: so John 7. 37.
And Jesus stood and cried, it any man thirst, let him come to me and drink.
Matthew 11. 28, 29. Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and ye
shall find rest to your souls; take my yoke upon you; for my yoke is easy,
and my burden is light: So Revelations 22. 17. The Spirit says come, and the
Bride says, come, and let him that hears say, come, and let him that is a
thirst come, and whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely; so
that the souls coming in a way of believing gives him a real right to the Altar
of satisfaction; for the altar of satisfaction or atonement was erected for
the guilty, not for the righteous: says Christ, I come not to call the
righteous but sinners to repentance. Therefore the Apostle tells you, that the
Altar was set up to make reconciliation for sins, Hebrews 9. 13. But to
persuade a soul that he must not come to the Altar, until he is so and so
qualified, and humbled, and mortified to sin, is to make void the great
excellency of the Altar, and to render it of no effect.

Thus Satan, thou labourest by thy subtleties, not only to destroy the soul
for ever, by keeping it from Christ, but also thy next design is wholly to
overthrow the glory of Christ's sufferings in the whole world.

Secondly, This Altar is so far from expecting such qualifications in the
comers to it, as that it stands there on purpose to give out these things to
the comers: read Jeremiah 3. 33, 34. with Ezekiel 26. 27. Read Proverbs 1. 22.
23. How long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity, and scorners delight in
scorning, and fools have knowledge; turn ye at my reproofs: behold, I will pour
out my spirit upon you, and I will make known my words unto you. Therefore
soul, let not the father of lies keep thee any longer from Jesus Christ thy
Gospel Altar, but come with the greatest freedom, and do not dispute so much
thy unworthiness, as the Lord Chtists sufficiency in point of righteousness;
for whatever thy life has been, though never so notoriously wicked, yet in the
name of God, and by special commission from Christ, we are to tell thee, that
neither the number of thy sins, nor yet the greatness of thy sins can hurt
thee, but thy coming ^o the Altar of satisfaction. where atonement is to be
made for sin: this is it that will prove thy soul-destroying sin for ever,
if thou take not heed of it: Hence it is that David made the greatness of sin
the only ground of coming to the Altar, Psalm. 25. 11. Lord pardon my Iniquity,
for my sin is wondrous great.

Thirdly, A third season when a Christian should have regard to the Altar of
satisfaction is in corruption-prevailing seasons, when the heart is overcome
with the strength of corruption, then is it a fit time for the soul to have
much recourse to ths Altar, corruption can never live if thou bring it to this
place, that altar upon which Christ died for sin will of all places in the
world yield thee the greatest death to, sin this is the sword of Goliath which
has none like it, Romans 6. 6. Knowing this that our old man is Crucified, that
the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin.
But worthy of note is that place of the Apostle in the 1 John 3. 8. For this
purpose was the Son of God manifest, that he might destroy the work of the
Devil. As if the Apostle should say, for this purpose was the Son of God
manifested, or for this purpose was the Altar of satisfaction erected and set
up, that poor souls might as well get sin and corruption mortified and subdued
in them, as to have the guilt of sin removed out of their souls; O this is the
tree of Life which stands in the Paradise of God, the leaves whereof will
heal the Nations.

O therefore soul would get down the power of sin in thy soul, as well as to
get out the guilt of sin from thy soul; O then when ever corruption gets head,
be sure to bring thy soul to the Altar of satisfaction and atonement, and there
lay thy soul down at the feet of the Altar, and beg of Jesus Christ that he
would yield forth the blessed effects of his death upon thy soul, that as he
died upon the Cross to remove out of the way the guilt of thy sins, so likewise
he would be pleased (out of his infinite mercy and love) to drop something of
his sufferings, some virtue of his death into thy soul, which might kill sin in
thy mortal body: Now this being done, adding faith to the work, thou needst not
doubt but a blessed issue in time will proceed to the great joy and comfort of
thy soul, only labor for a waiting frame of spirit, give God his own time to
effect this work in thy soul, for in time thou shall Reap if thou faint not.

Objection, But does not the Apostle say in Hebrews 13. 10. That we have an
Altar whereof they have no right to eat which serve the Tabernacle, then it
seems all may not come with that boldness to the Altar of satisfaction as you
say?

Answer, The Apostle is not to be understood so much in treating about the
guilt of sin as above the use of Ceremonies. Now the dangerous condition of the
Hebrews was twofold, not only was their Case sad with respect to their
distance from God upou the account of sins guilt,

But their danger did farther appear in this, they having their Ceremonies for
a Christ to rest upon, this kept them from Christ indeed, by which means they
were deprived of the benefit of Christ's Merits, Blood, and Righteousness,
which only takes away the guilt of sin, as the Apostle elsewhere says,
Galatians 5 4. For Christ is become of none effect unto you, whosoever of you
are justified by the Law you are fallen from grace: As if the Apostle should say,
certainly so long as you stick to your Ceremonies and Jewish Rights, you are at
a great distance with Christ, Christ can profit you nothing, for you have
Converted the Tabernacle Service into a Christ, and you rest here, and you live
upon the Shadow in the neglect of the true Substance Christ, unto which these
Types and Legal Shadows should lead you.

Therefore while you serve the Tabernacle (in this sense) you have no right to
eat of the Altar Christ, but otherwise, let the souls condition be never so
desperate by reason of sin, yet here is an open door for him to step into the
Tabernacle, and fall upon this Altar Christ with boldness, according to that
word of the Apostle in Hebrews 9, 13, 14, 14.

So that there is no sin how great soever makes the soul incapable of
partaking of the Altar Christ, (who has a desire to make out after Christ) but
only the souls resting upon some thing else on this side Christ, and shall make
that and not Christ his bottom for Salvation.

CHAP. 24 Of the Grate of Network made to this Altar.
I Now come to speak about the Grate of Network, which was made to the Altar,
and placed under the compass of the Altar; which was about the midst of the
Altar, underneath, Exodus 27. 4, 5.

The use of which was to let forth the Ashes through the small holes of the
Grate, when the Sacrifice or Burnt Offering should be offered before the Lord
upon it.

Now the Ashes of any thing which is burnt, we look on it as the Dross or
Excrements of the thing burned; so it is in this case: therefore was the Grate
prepared to convey the Ashes of the sacrifice under the Altar, which was to be
carried forth without the Camp. This shows us this much: First of all the
exceeding rich usefulness of Jesus Christ every way for Believers. First, In
point of Justification:

From hence Believers may assure themselves, that when Christ became a
Sacrifice to God for them (in order to their Justification) that God was well
pleased with it, which was for the great comfort of Believers, publicly
witnessed from Heaven, Mat. 3. 17. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased. To this agrees the words of S. Paul, Ephesians. 5. 2. Christ gave himself
for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling savor.

So much as this you may read in this blessed Type, for there was nothing which
was offered upon this Altar to God, but was pure; I mean that of the Sacrifice
which ascended up to God, that was very pure; for the Ashes which was the Dross
and Impurity of the Sacrifice, that was conveyed away through the Grate of
Network, which was made and placed under the Altar for that purpose: I say
this should exceedingly comfort Believers, with reference to the foundation of
their Justification; their Altar-Sacrifice was a Sacrifice full of purity,
without the least spot or stain in it; an offering without blemish to God, yea
a sweet smelling savor.

Use.
This informs us then of the sad condition of two sorts of persons amongst us.
First, those that dare offer God with any other offering then Christ for their
Justification, or shall offer any thing to God in any other name, then in
Christ's name: know you that the best Sacrifices which you can offer God of your
own, or in your own names, or in the names of any Saint or Angel, has too much
of their Ashes and Dross in them, then to have any acceptance with God, you
have no Grate made of Network to sever the Ashes from your Sacrifices: What
ever a soul shall offer God in sacrifice, if it does carry the least impurity
or dross in it, it will be so far from justifying of you before God, as that it
will but sink you deeper and deeper into hell, Gal 3. 10. O therefore be not
deceived any longer ye self-righteous persons, in thinking that your duties,
and works of Righteousness will bear you out before God! no, no, there is no
man is justified in the sight of God by the deeds of the Law, says Paul, Gal.
3. 11. the reason is given you by the Church, in Isaiah 64. 6. For we are all
as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags.

Secondly, It informs us of the sad condition of those which were once
enlightened into the excellency of this Altar-Sacrifice, as that they wholly
lived upon him for life, and would only fetch in their peace and comfort and
refreshment this way; and in this light they rejoiced for a season, but are now
gone back again, and have left their Altar-Sacrifice, and will only offer God
their own duties and works of righteousness, mixed with the Ashes of impurity.
Oh! the condition of these men and women is worse then the former; because
these are fallen from Grace it self: And therefore although they may talk much
of Christ within them, yet Christ shall profit them nothing, Gal. 5. 4. But I
shall refer these backsliding souls to read that dreadful place in Heb. 6. 4,
5, 6. For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted
of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have
tasted of the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, if they
shall fall away to renew them again to repentance; seeing they have crucified
to themselves the Son of God afresh, and have put him to open shame.

Thirdly, And more principally, the Grate of Network in the Altar, through
which the Ashes of the Sacrifice was conveyed, it may allude to the Priestly
Office of Christ, which is to present for us our Sacrifice to God as a sweet
smelling savor, for that is the proper work of Jesus Christ as a High Priest,
to and for his people, who stands at the Altar on purpose to sever the Ashes
from the imperfect duties, which his people do offer up to God: for as the
Grate of Network in the Altar did convey the Ashes from the Sacrifice which
was offered upon it, so does Jesus Christ convey away out of sight all the
weaknesses and infirmities of the Saints duties which ascend up to God;
therefore in Mal. 3. 3. it is said of Christ, That he shall sit as a refiner
and purifier of silver, and he shall purify the Sons of Levi, and purge them
as gold and silver that they might offer to God an offering in righteousness.
So that you see it is Christ's work to sever the dross from the pure metal, both
as to the persons of his people and their performances; that so their duties
might smell pleasant in the nostrills of God. Christ is the Altar, with the
Grate of Network in it, that casts away (through himself) all the pollutions
of our duties: therefore the Apostle in Heb. 13. having spoken of the Altar
Christ under the Levitical type, ver. 10. tells you in the 12. ver. Wherefore
Jesus, also that he might sanctify they people suffered without the Gate. That
is, Christ as the Altar did both sanctify the persons and the duties of his
people, that their sacrifices as well as their persons might be a sweet
smelling sacrifice to God.

Use. This should teach believers where to bring their duties in the worship
and service of God, that they might be accepted with God. O soul! would thou
have thy prayers, thy praises, thy duties, thy services, all accepted with God
in Heaven? O then direct them all to this spiritual Altar Christ. There is the
Grate of Network in Christ, that will carry away, and convey out of sight all
thy defilements, impurities, weaknesses, and infirmities of thy duties, which
would have displeased God greatly, for God is a God of purer eyes then to
behold the least sin: therefore when ever thou have any thing to do with God in
the duties of his Worship, be sure to eye Jesus Christ: O beg of him that he
would perform the office of the Altar (with the Grate of Network in it) for
the welfare of thy soul. Desire him to sever the ashes of thy duties from thy,
duties, and that he would shake out the ignorance of thy duties from thy
duties, together with the unbelief, Hypocrisy, Pride, Deadness, Drowsiness,
and backwardness of Spirit; besides that formality, spiritual Pride, and
wandering Thoughts, which cleaves so fast to duty, as the flesh cleaves to the
bones: but possibly many a poor soul may not be acquainted with their danger in
miscarrying in duty as it were to be wished they were. Take a Scripture or two,
Malachy 1. 13, 14. Ye brought that which was torn, and the lame, and the sick;
thus ye brought an offering, should I accept this at your hands, says the
Lord; but cursed be the deceiver which has in his flock a male, and voweth and
sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing; for I am a great King, says the
Lord of Host, and my name is great amongst the Heathen: So Jer. 48. 10. Cursed
be the man that does the work of the Lord deceitfully. By which we may
understand these two things.

First, that its very possible that men and women may deeply miscarry in their
duties toward God.

Secondly, That so to do is a very dangerous thing. O then if corrupt things
may be offered to God in Worship, and so to do is so dangerous, as appears by
these Scriptures before alleged; O then what infinite reason is there, that
all Believers should make constant use of Jesus Christ, who is the Saints
Gospel Altar, as not daring to offer up any thing to God in his Worship, but
upon this Altar, where the Grate of Network is, where they may be sure there
shall nothing pass up to God, but what is pure and acceptable.

CHAP. 23. I come now to speak of the Horns of this Altar.
THis Altar had four Horns, and they were placed upon the four corners of it.

The use and purpose of the horns upon the Altar I find to be twofold. First,
they were appointed and set up to bind the sacrifice to them, that so the
sacrifice (being kept equally strait by the cords which came from the four
corners of the Altar) might not start aside, as otherwise it might have done:
there is so much as this to be gathered out of the words of David, Psalm 118.
27. God is the Lord who has showed us light, bind the sacrifice with cords,
even to the Horns of the Altar.

Secondly, It is very likely that these Horns of the Altar might be a kind of
refuge to the Hebrews, as their cities of refuge were, performing something of
the same use to malefactors, as the Cities of refuge did which we read of in
Numb. 35. with Joshua 20. 2.

This seems to be the use of the Horns of the Altar, if we consider that place
in 1 King: 2. 28. with verse 30. when Joab had fled to the Horns of the Altar,
about his rebelling against King Solomon; the King sends forth his Executioner
to fall upon him; but when the Executioner came and found him hanging about the
Horns of the Altar, he went back again to the King to report the matter, and to
know his farther pleasure therein; which strongly intimates to us, that these
Altar Horns did afford men, in that kind of distress, some succor and relief
against present Execution. Both of which uses of the Horns of the Altar leads
us to the Lord Jesus Christ for something (as our great treasury) which may be
fetched out of him, both for our instruction and comfort.

First of all for our instruction it shows us thus much, That as the Jewish
Sacrifices were tied with cords to the Horns of the Altar, so should Believers
(if they would not have their Sacrifices and Duties miscarry) bind them fast
with spiritual cords to the Horns of their Altar Christ. There be five cords
which I shall present you with, as very necessary to the binding of all our
duties to the Horns of our spiritual Altar Christ.

First, the cord of believing; this is so necessary a cord, that if our duties
be not bound fast to the Horns of the Altar Christ with it, all our labor will
be lost labor, do what we can, Heb. 11. 6. For without Faith it is impossible
to please God; for he that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he
is a rewarder of them which diligently seek him. So verse 4. its said, By faith
Abel offered a more acceptable sacrifice then Cain.

Here let me admonish two sorts of persons: First, such as yet have no Faith at
all. O Sirs, what do you mean, that you can content your selves to live all
this while in the world without Faith? Oh! how do you mean to have your duties
accepted with God in Heaven, when you want Faith? Unbelievers are so far from
pleasing God, as that he hates all they do as an abominable filthy thing, and
all for want of Faith, which is the Cord that should bind your Sacrifices to
Christ; for whose sake any thing is valued that is offered up to God: You see
Cain offered his Sacrifice to God as well as Abel, yet God regarded only
Abels. O friends, you may see what respects God has for your Services while
you remain in a state of unbelief: Read Isa. 66. 3. He that kills an Ox, is
as if he slew a man; he that sacrifices a Sheep is as if he cut off a Dogs
neck; he that offers an oblation, as if he offered swines blood, he that
offers incense as if he had bl^ssed an Idol: yea they have chosen their own
ways, and their souls delight in their abominations.

O poor souls, how are you deluded by Satan, who spurs you on in the ways of
wickedness and unbelief, keeping you all the while in darkness and ignorance as
to the grace of believing, which is the main necessary Cord that should bind
your service to the Horns of the Altar Christ; as that if it be wanting, all
that you do is but as the howling of dogs in the ears of the Lord, as the
Prophet speaks: O therefore you that are Unbelievers, leave off your sins, and
turn to God: Oh go and beg of God for true saving justifying faith in Christ
Jesus; that so you may be accepted in your persons, and then God will accept of
your performances: for God must first like your persons, before he can have any
regard to your performances; and your persons cannot be accepted, until you are
found in Christ: and you cannot be found in Christ until you have faith to put
you into him; and then when God (through believing in Christ) accepts of your
persons: then will he like of your duties, and not before then.

Secondly, This serves for instruction, touching those which have Faith, but
are not so careful in the use and exercise of it, as they should be in their
duties of Worship toward God. O be admonished, in and about all you do in the
Worship of God, to set Faith on work. O remember, that under the Law, the
Sacrifice was to be tied fast to the Horns of the Altar: O labor in the
discharge of duty, to get up the cord of Faith in your hands, and bind your
duties fast to Jesus Christ: O look up by an eye of believing to Christ, when
you pray, read, hear the word, ot break bread, or what ever you do else, hang
up all upon this Altar, and bind it fast to the Horns of it by this Cord of
believing, by concluding (when you come off from the work) that God will hear
your Prayers for his Sons sake; and upon this account he will accept your
duties, though weak and poor, and that he will in his time feed you and
satisfy you, and give you the thing you have asked at his hands for his own
name sake; because you have builded upon the Lord Jesus his worthiness, and
have tied your duties fast about him; for Faith is the uniting grace between
Christ and Believers; it first ties our souls to Christ, and next our duties;
therefore says Habakuck, 2. 4. The just man shall live by his faith.

Secondly, The Cord with which Believers should and ought to bind fast their
sacrifices to the Horns of this Altar Christ, is a sound understanding; in and
about the things they offer to God in sacrifice; for want of which, Believers
do lose very much of the reward of their work with God. Under the Law, if those
sacrifices which the Jews did offer to God had wanted but an eye, it was
rejected, Levit. 22. 22. The eye you know is the discerning part of a Beast;
and surely God has no more regard for an eye-less sacrifice under the Gospel,
then he had under the Law; for if knowledge (which is the eye of the sacrifice)
be wanting, it is an imperfect sacrifice, and much blemished in Gods account:
therefore says S. Paul in ^ Cor. 14. 15. What is it then, when I pray, I will
pray with the spirit and with understanding; and when I sing, I will sing with
the spirit, and with the understanding: so that you see, S. Paul was very
careful to bind (what sacrifice he had to offer God withal) very fast to the
Horns of the Altar Christ, with this cord of understanding; and indeed so
should all Believers else labor for such a measure of knowledge, and spiritual
understanding of, and discerning into the things of God, so as to acquaint
themselves with the nature, use, end, virtue, and excellency of the work and
worship of God, in which they are employed, as that they may be able to give
God a reason of what they do: as that when God shall ask them this question (in
their consciences) as once he did the Jews in Isa. 1. 12. Who has required
this at your hands. They may be able to answer again with the Church, in Isa
26. 13. O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee have had dominion over us, but
by thee only will we make men ion of thy name. You know how God disregarded
the Corinthians duties, and sacrifices, for want of a true discerning of the
things in Worship which they adventured upon, 1 Cor. 11. 29, 30. Therefore my
Brethren, take S. Peter's advice, 2 Pet. 2 18. But grow in grace and knowledge,
that through the exercise of which grace, you may so bind your duties to the
horns of your Altar Christ, as that through the not starting aside of your
sacrifices, you may be sure not to miss of the reward of your work.

3. A third cord with which believers should bind their duties to the horns of
their Gospel-Altar Christ, is the cord of love and affection.

Love is and ought to be the spring of action, it is not what services we do
for God, as the principle from whence they flow forth to God, is the thing God
looks at; for did we offer God (in one sacrifice) the cattle upon a thousand
hills, yet if this comes not freely to God from a principle of love and
affection, God hates all when done: notable is that place in the Psalms, Psalm.
40. 6, 7, 8 sacrifice and offerings thou did not desire, mine ear have thou
opened, burnt offerings and sin offerings thou did not require, then I said,
lo I come as its written of me in the Volume of the Book, I delight to do thy
will O God, yea thy Law is in my heart.

Though this Prophecy do principally concern Christ, whose blood was preferred
before all the Sacrifices in the world with respect to the taking away of sin,
yet this Scripture may not be unfitly applied to the Saints with respect to
their right performing of duty, which teaches us thus much; that unless that
principle of delight or Law of love (here spoken of) be in the heart as a
bottom to all our duties, all our Sacrifices are of little value with God:
therefore in Levit. 1. 3. who ever they were that would offer any thing to God
in Sacrifice, he was to offer it with a willing mind; the reason of it is given
you by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 9. 7. For God loves a cheerful giver.

Use.
O then my friends labor after this grace of the holy Spirit, O make it much
of your business at the throne of grace, that God would shed abroad much of his
Spirit and Grace of love upon your hearts, that so you might not miscarry in
your work and service; and for want of this blessed cord to tie your services
fast at the horns of the Altar Jesus Christ: O this is a blessed grace of the
Spirit of God, he that has much of this in his heart is a rich man.

The world accounts those rich that have much of the wealth of this world in
their houses, but the word accounts them rich which have much of this grace
shed abroad in their hearts by the holy Ghost.

This makes duty acceptable, this grace of love to God, (if in the heart) will
make a little Goats hair that is offered to God, pleasing and acceptable in
Gods sight. Read Exodus 35. 23. and this will make thy weakest of groans very
sweet to God, O therefore forget not to labor after this precious grace and
Jewel of the spirit of God, for the more you have of this to love God withal,
the more God will love you, and the more will God delight in your duties; love
(as we use to say) is the loadstone of love, it draws the heart of the object
beloved to love again.

The Fourth Cord with which Believers should tie their duties to the Horns of
the Altar Christ, is sincerity and uprightness of heart in the things of God;
sincerity of heart to God is varnish to all our other gifts of the Spirit,
therefore does Saint Paul prefer this beyond the highest gifts and parts and
learning, which men may be endowed with in this world, 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2. Though
I had the Tongues of men and Angels to speak with all, yet if I had not
Charity, I am become a ^ounding Brass and a tinkling Symbal; and though I have
the gift of Prophecy and all Knowledge, and understand all Mysteries, and have
faith so as to remove mountains, and have not Charity, I am nothing. Alas
Brethren, for men to get a headful of notions, and to covet after gifts and
parts, to be able to talk and discourse much amongst the people of God, or to
be able to pray and preach much, or to be able to speak well from a Text of
Scripture; If this be all that God sees in a man, truly that man is but in an
ill Case; its true, he may be of use to the benefit of others, but all in vain
as to himself, therefore says S. Paul, I desire so to preach Christ, that I my
self be not a castaway; As if Paul had said, true, I my self may be very
useful with my gifts and parts to tie on the Sacrifices (of others) to the
Horns of this Altar Christ, yet all this while I may want the cord of sincerity
to tie on my own Sacrifice; therefore it is that God requires (so often in his
word) the heart, My Son give me thy heart, this God calls for often in his
word, as in Prove. 23. 26. By the heart is meant the uprightness and sincerity
of the Soul, concerning those things which the Soul shall set about for God;
hence you have it in 1 Samuel 16. 7. The Lord sees not as man sees, man
looks at the outward appearance, but God looks at the heart.

Use.
O labor for this cord of sincerity, that you may find favor in the eyes of
God, touching what you do in his Worship: O this is as the Gold about the
Temple, which made it so glorious to the beholders, so does this grace
wonderfully adorn the Temple of our Souls to God, in which God delights to
dwell, therefore are the prayers of the upright so delightful to God; Prove. 15.
8. Never think your duties fast bound to the Altar Christ, unless they are tied
to the Horns of it with this cord; O consider well that place in the 1 Chronicles.
28. 9. David's words to Solomon, and thou Solomon my Son, know thou the God of
thy Fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart and a willing mind, for the
Lord searches all hearts, and understands all imaginations of the thoughts;
if thou seek him he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him, he will
cast thee off for ever.

A Fifth cord with which Believers should bind their duties to the Horns of the
Altar Christ, is a zealous fervent Spirit in the work and Worship of God, as
the Apostle speaks, Romans 12. 11. Not slothful in business, but fervent in
spirit, serving the Lord.

A Soul that acts carlesly in the Worship of the Lord, is like a Cord let loose
or slackt, it gives liberty to the thing tied to role or start at pleasure: A
careless heat in Worship destroys all in hand, and brings a Curse upon the
person found under so filthy a frame of Spirit.

Many Christians insensibly perish and die to their growth in Sanctification,
and yet ignorant of the Reason of it; alas it lies here ( viz.) in their
giving way too much to a careless frame of Spirit in the work of God, who can
think or imagine that God will bless the means appointed for our growth in
Sanctification, when we come to the means and Ordinances of the Gospel, void of
hearts and serious spirits, which should fit them for the blessing of it, Luke
1153. The hungry are filled with good things, but the rich are sent empty away.

We use to say that Gold is better worth then to give to Children to play
withal, so does God account the precious things of the Spirit better worth
then to give out to careless Children, who rather play with holy things then
truly prize them; as it too too often appears by these two great evils. First,
what respect to persons carelessness in coming to the Worship of God, who can
take their own times in coming, as if it lay in their power to make it subject
to their carnal interests in the world. The second Evil is in persons slight
behaving themselves when before the Lord in his Worship, so that as men do
behave themselves in this case, accordingly are the dealings of God with them.
As to those spiritual things which God gives out to men in their waiting upon
him in his Ordinances, according to that word in Jer. 5. 25. Your iniquiti^s
have turned away these things, etc.

Use.
O then labor for this Cord of a fervent Spirit, that you may fasten your
sacrifices with Zeal to the Horns of the Altar Christ.

Friends, beg of God for it, O give not over asking, and crying, and praying,
until you have got it; let there be no neglect on your part in the getting of
this mercy into your souls, assure your selves that God will not be wanting to
you, if you will not be wanting to your selves: I mean, God will not be wanting
in the giving out this Gospel-frame of a fervent Spirit to you, if you be not
wanting to your selves in the asking and seeking of it at Gods hands.

God has pawned his Word for it, and he cannot deny his word, nor cease to
make it good to the souls of those which shall plead his word with him for any
spiritual mercy: Read often that place in James 1. 5. If any man lack wisdom
let him ask it of God, who gives liberally and upbraideth not.

My friends, its worth your while to consider that place in the 3. of Revel.
16. where you may see how the want of this Cord of a zealous fervent Spirit,
did render the Laodiceans services altogether loathsome to God, as that when
their work was done, God tells them he could spue both it and them out of his
mouth; the Reason is given you, because what they did in the Worship of God was
done from a lukewarm spirit. O be afraid of this ye careless heedless, souls,
which can pray, and read, and hear themselves fast asleep in the Worship and
Ordinances of God; and others that can suffer their eyes and hearts to wander
after every vain object, while in the Worship of God; of such a sort of people
did God complain of long ago; in Ezekiel. 33. 31. God says, This people draws
near me with their lips, and with their mouths they seem to honor me; but
their hearts run after their covetousness.

Secondly, I come now to speak of the second particular of the Horns on the
Altar as they lead to Christ, and that is what affords the soul as much
comfort, as the other did Instruction.

If we consider the Protection Believers have by Christ (while in his Service
and Worship) if they with Joab do fly to Christ the great Altar for it; It
cannot be denied but that these souls (whose hearts God has awakend, to behold
their danger while in the Worship and Service of Christ) have great cause to
dread and fear what may befall them, or become of them before they come off the
duty; now that danger which attends the people of God while they are engaged in
the work of God, may be three ways considered.

First, With respect to the Justice of God.

Secondly, With respect to the Malice of the Devil.

Thirdly, With respect to the Malice and Hatred of wicked men here below.

First, With respect to the Justice of God, which cannot bear with the least
sin committed any where, much less in his Worship and service: As to that, did
not the blood and merits of Christ interpose between the justice of God and the
soul, (in the performance of his duties) it were impossible that ever the soul
should come off alive again, because of these stains, weaknesses, impurities,
and defilements; our best of duties are accompanied with an instance, you may
take for this in the two Sons of Aaron, Levit. 10. 1, 2.

Secondly, It is so if we consider the Malice of the Devil, who like a Roaring
Lion is going up and down the earth seeking whom he may devour; whose devouring
Rage and Malice is mostly bent against the soul, when the soul is engaged for
God in the performance of some spiritual duty; a figure of which you may see in
Zach. 3. 1. where no sooner was Joshua the High Priest engaged in the
performance of the work of the Priesthood, but presently you have Satan at his
right hand to resist him; whose work was to hinder him in, and to unfit Joshua
for the work of God what he could, therefore says S. Peter, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Be
sober, be vigilant, for your adversary the Devil like a roaring Lion goes
about seeking whom he may devour.

Thirdly, Its so with respect to the Rage and Malice of wicked men, who out of
an implacable hatred against the work of God, labor to take all occasions that
might be, to endeavor the utter ruin and destruction of the people of God;
what tumults and commotion have the Children of this world (in all ages) raised
up against the godly, for their zealous attending upon the pure Worship and
ways of God? How many thousands of Innocent souls have the seed of Cain brought
down to the dust, for their keeping close to the ways and Worship of God? And
to this day how do the wicked plot against the just, seeking all occasions
against them, to bring them down to the dust both as to Life and Estate? How
often (in our days) have the wicked run together in whole heaps upon the godly
to disturb them, and to divide and confound them in and about the Worship of
God? How have some with drawn Swords and cockt Pistols violently broken into
the Assembles of the Lords people on purpose to destroy them in the place? How
have the ungodly in our days halled out some of their Meetings, and dragged
forth others by the heels through the streets of our Cities and Towns to
Prison, not sparing any either for sex or age? How full have the Prisons been
at a time of the godly, merely for their being found in the Worship and Service
of God? How have some been Sequestered from their Estates, others condemned to
die in open Sessions, merely upon the account of their being found in the
Worship and Service of God, together for their refusing to comply with any
other Worship else? Put all this together, and have not the godly cause to fear
and dread when in the Worship of God? who are exposed to all these dangers, to
danger from Heaven, to danger from Hell, and the danger from this wicked world
below. O then what cause is there for the people of God (when in the Service
and Worship of God) to have great recourse to the Horns of the Altar Christ for
safety with respect to soul and body; And with Joab to take hold of them and
shelter there. O make much use of Christ for this end and purpose, for he is
the Horns of the Altar that thou should fly unto; for its Christ
administreth safety to the soul, when in his work and service, as well as
procures acceptance for thy work and service to God; therefore when ever thou
set about Altar-work be sure to take hold of the Altar Horns: Therefore
says David, Psalm 96. 6. Honor and Majesty are before him, Strength and
Beauty are in his Sanctuary.

Hence it was that David could so willingly Worship God, and desired (so much)
to be found in his service, he knew that the Horns of the Altar Christ could
afford him all manner of Protection, either against the Justice of God, the
Malice of the Devil, or the Rage of the wicked and ungodly in this life, Psalm.
84. 10, 11. I had rather be a Doorkeeper in the House of God, then to dwell in
the tents of wickedness, for the Lord is a sun and a shield. So says Solomon,
Prove. 18. 10. The name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the righteous run there
and are safe.

O you see what Protection the Horns of this Altar Christ did afford the
Israelites in the land of Egypt, and at the Red Sea, and in the Wilderness all
along to their Canaan; what a covering cloud was be to his people by day, and
what a Pillar of fire was he to them by night, for the safety of all these (in
the Wilderness) which by faith took hold of him as their Horn of strength and
safety, insomuch that the people never miscarryed until they let go their
hold-fast in him, as you may see in Psalm 106. from 34. to the 42. Verse.

O therefore soul, would thou be preserved from the storm and blast of the
terrible One, which beats against the wall, which affrights thee in the
Worship and Servive of God. O then when ever it be thou art about to Worship
God either in public or private, be sure as soon as thou drawest near to the
Altar of Worship to take fast hold of the Horns of it; I mean lay fast hold by
the hand of Faith of the promised strength and Protection of Christ, and be
sure to hang there: O lift up thy soul to him, and beg him that he would now
hide thee from the Justice of God; that for the stains and infirmities and
pollutions, thy duties are clothed with all, thou might escape the portion
that Nadab and Abihu was once in the like case overtaken withal, Levit. 10.
12. And beg of him that he would be a refuge for thee, against the Malice of
the Devil, who will be at thy right hand to resist thee, Zach. 3. 1. And that
he would hide thee from the malice and fury of the wicked of the Earth, who are
hunting up and down from place to place (like so many dogs) to find out such as
are attending the service of God, That if possible they may undo them, either
in or for their work; this made Paul so earnestly entreat the Saints in his
day, that they would pray that he might be delivered from unreasonable men, For
all men have not faith, 2 These. 3. 2. So Ephesians. 6. 12. For we wrestle not
against flesh and blood, bue against Principalities, against Powers, against
the Rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness got into
high places.

CHAP. 24. I come to speak of the Incense Altar overlaid with Gold, as it
differed from the former which was overlaid with Brass.
THe use of the Incense Altar, was to offer Incense upon for a sweet smelling
savor to the Lord, Exodus 40, 26. 27. which Incense offered upon the Altar
overlaid with Gold, did make the other offerings that were offered upon the
Altar overlaid with Brass so savory and sweet before the Lord.

This the Apostle applies to Jesus Christ in Ephesians. 5. 2. In which words he
takes in the use of both the Altars, and shows you that the Incense Altar
overlaid with Gold was set up to make the sacrifices of the slain beasts (which
were offered upon the Altar overlaid with Brass) very sweet and delightful to
God.

Pray observe well, the words consist of two parts.

First, Of what relates to the Altar overlaid with Brass.

Secondly, What relates to the Altar overlaid with Gold, which was called the
Incense Altar.

First, Of what related to the Altar overlaid with Brass, upon which was
offered the slain beasts, Exodus 40. 29. This is set forth to you in these words
of Ephesians. 5. 2. Walk in love as Christ also has loved us, and has given
himself for us an offering and sacrifice to God: This part of the Verse agrees
with the Altar which was overlaid with Brass, upon which the slain sacrifices
were offered up to God in sacrifice.

Secondly, That which in the Verse relates to the Incense Altar overlaid with
Gold, you have in the latter part of the Verse in these words, for a sweet
smelling savor. Both of which Uses of the Altars, the Apostle makes to agree
to and in our Lord Jesus Christ a Believers spiritual Altar.

But here a question may be asked me, why the Incense Altar should be overlaid
with Gold, and the Altar appointed for slain sacrifices only with Brass? To
which I answer, by this difference in the two Altars, we may observe this note
for our Instruction; That as Gold is more excellent then Brass, so was the work
of the Incense Altar more excellent in the sight of God, then that work of
slaying the sacrifices on the Altar which was overlaid with Brass: And as these
Altars were both Types of our Lord Jesus Christ, with reference to the twofold
work he was to administer for the Elect (which was first to offer himself a
sacrifice, and secondly to make continual Intercession to God for them.) I say
it plainly shows us thus much, that although the work which our Savior did in
dying the bitter death on the Cross, in order to the satisfying of the justice
of God (wherein he was a sacrifice to take away sin.) I say though this was a
very glorious and transcendent work, yet the work of Christ's Intercession is
much more glorious. This will appear if we consider these two things. First,
the Apostles words in Romans 8. 34. who puts the term (Rather) upon the
Intercession of Christ, (a work proper to the Incense Altar) which term is not
put upon the sufferings of Christ, Verse 34 Who is he that shall condemn, it is
Christ that died; yea rather is risen again, who is even at the right hand of
God to make Intercession for us, giving you to understand that the greater
excellency of the two lay in the work of Christ's Intercession, rather then in
the work of Christ's sufferings; farther, it will more appear in that the
Apostle (in this 34. Verse) tells you, that for this work sake of Christ's
Intercession, he sits at Gods right hand; as if the Apostle should say,
though the work of Christ's sufferings was a very glorious work, yet that of his
Intercession was, yea is much more glorious in Gods sight, because the act of
Christ's Intercession declares the former act of his sufferings to be wholly
done and completed; therefore must Christ sit down at his Fathers right hand:
This you may farther see held out to you in the Type it self, Exodus 37. 26.
where you may observe that the Incense Altar had his Crown of Gold placed upon
it, (which the other Altar had not) which shows us (as has been said) that
this work of Christ's Intercession Crowns all the former.

But secondly it will yet more appear, if we consider the estate and condition
our Savior was in when suffering upon the Cross, and that was a guilty state
and condition he was under, (at that time, when he was upon the Cross) the
highest guilt that ever was man in this world (not any of his own) for there
was never guile found in his mouth, but it was our guilt which he took upon
him, Isa. 53. 6. For it pleased the Lord to lay upon him the iniquity of us all.

But in the work of Intercession he is fully justified from all that sin and
guilt (which he took on him for us) by the offering up of himself to God as a
sacrifice, and the justice of God has nothing now to say against Christ; so
that Christ takes his place in Heaven (without control or objection) at the
right hand of God, who sits there making Intercession for us: And Christ taking
his place there at the Incense Altar, does cause a sweet smell to arise up to
God from every other act of Christ done before upon the sacrifice Altar
overlaid with Brass; because now he acts not as a nocent person but as an
innocent person, therefore says the Apostle, Phil. 2. 8, 9. speaking of Christ
says, And being found in fashion like a man, he humbled himself and became
obedient to death; even the death of the Cross, wherefore God has highly
exalted him, and given him a name above every name: Thus you see why the Altar
of Incense was overlaid with Gold, but the other only with Brass.

Use.
O then this should teach Believers where to run for sound solid comfort in
doubting seasons, let it be at the Altar of Incense where Christ sits at
Gods right hand to make Intercession for us. Its true, I have in my former
Discourse about the Altar of satisfaction (which was overlaid with Brass)
advised souls to make at that Altar in doubting seasons, and so I say still;
for Christ could not have sat down at the right hand of God to have made
Intercession for us, if he had not first suffered, Phil. 2. 8, 9.

But the sufferings of Christ on the Altar of Brass do not yield a soul such
full matter of triumph over Sin, the Law, and the Devil, as the interceeding
work of Christ does.

My Reason for it is this, because that although Christ in love to his people
did go so far as to die for them, even the bitter death of the Cross, that so
he might justify them before God; and although he went so far as to pour out
his soul unto death, that by it he might redeem them to God, yet he might have
miscarryed in the work, he might not have been able to have given justice its
full satisfaction, and so he might have been held under the power of sin and
the grave himself; and so all the Elect have as really perished in him their
second Adam, as they had done before in the first Adam; not that any thing of
this nature could have been, but the supposition may be made for the farther
clearing of our matter in hand: But now if the people of God will look to the
Incense Altar, there they shall see their surety Christ standing at Gods right
hand Ministering for them before the Lord, which clearly shows thus much for
our comfort, that as our Savior took all our sins upon him and became guilty
with them before the justice of God, so now its most certain he is got clear
off from them, and is pronounced a justified person, and we in him fully as
well, as freely justified also; otherwise Christ had never sat down at the
right hand of God

Now this is that which fills up the comfort of Believers, that Christ is
translated from the Altar overlaid with Brass, to the Altar of Incense overlaid
with Gold, which shows that he has done the work which he came to do for
Believers.

Hence it is that S. Paul triumphs so over Hell, Sin, Satan, the curse of the
Law and death it self; not so much from what Christ did at the Brazen Altar of
satisfaction, as from what Christ does at the Incense Altar, therefore it is
that the word (Rather) is put upon that, not that the one could be without the
other: I mean this, not that we could have been justified had not Christ died,
but S. Paul shows you where to go (in doubting seasons) for the greatest
confirmation of your Faith and Comfort, therefore says S. Paul, Rom 8. 34. Who
shall condemn, it is Christ that died; yea Rather is risen and sits at the
right hand of God, making Intercession for us: Therefore soul, with S. Paul,
lift up thy head and look up to the Incense Altar, and there shall thou see thy
blessed surety (that once took all thy sins upon him) yet now he sits at the
right hand of God on the Throne of the Majesty of Heaven, fully set free of all
thy sins, and discharged of all thy guilt; Thou may assure thy self they will
never come into mind more, God can never call them into remembrance more, Jer.
31. 34.

They can never trouble thee more to condemn or accuse thee before God. O soul,
before thy sins can accuse or trouble thee, they most trouble Christ in Heaven,
for they are not thine, but Christ's sins; I mean, they are so accounted to be
his, because he has taken them upon him for thee if thou art a Believer.

Therefore as its natural for every thing to make to their home or Center, so
if ever sin return again, it will first light upon Jesus Christ: You know the
Ant makes to his hill, the Fox when abroad will to his hole, the Be when
abroad will to his hive; and if ever sin swarm again it will to its hive which
is Christ, for he has made it his by imputation, and is become the hive of sin.

O doubting soul fear it not, if by faith thou did ever lay thy sins upon
Jesus Christ; O rest contented, trouble not thy self about it, for sin shall
never trouble either thee or thy surety more, Christ has made sure work with
sin, it stands him upon it so to do, For it was his sin, for it was Christ was
made sin for us that knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of
God in him, 2 Cor 5. 21.

And let all the Devils in Hell do what they can, yet Christ shall come the
second time without sin to salvation, Heb. 9. 28.

The work of the Incense Altar which was overlaid with Gold, it was to offer
upon it the Incense Oblation or Offering, Ex^d. 30 1, 2, 3. with Exodus 39. 38.

Which Incense was made of sweet Spices, as Gumm, Galbanum, and Frankincense,
Verse 34. This was (as I have already said) to pefume all the other Offerings
which were offered to God in Sacrifice. This shows us the second part of
Christ's work as he is a Believers High Priest, whose Work and Office as a High
Priest, as I have hinted already, was not only to offer himself up a Sacrifice
to God for Believers but also to make. Intercession to God for them, which
Intercession of Christ answers to the work of the Incense Altar: Insomuch that
both of these works of the two Altars meets in Christ the High Priest of
Believers.

Therefore in the High Priest under the Law (which was a Type of Christ our
great Gospel High Priest) you may see how both these works were proper to him.

First, To offer the Sacrifice for the people, Lev. 2 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

Secondly, To make Intercession for the people, Lev. 9. 22. And Aaron lifted up
his hands and blessed the people, and came down from Offering the Offering for
sin, and the burnt-offering, and the peace offering. So Lev. 16. 11, 12, 13.
which blessing of the people is as much as to say his praying for the people;
for so much the lifting up of hands does import, Exodus 17. 11. with 1 Timothy 2.
8. that God would pardon their sin, accept their sacrifices, and send them the
blessings of this life, and that which is to come. 1 Kings 8. 55, 56, 57 both
of which works in the High Priest under the Law, does the Apostle apply to
Christ, and shows (as I have already said) That Christ was the Antitype of the
Jews High Priest in these two works. 1. Of offering the sacrifices. 2. In
making Intercession for the people, says the Apostle in Heb. 8. 3. For every
High Priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices, wherefore it is
necessary that this man (meaning Christ) should have somewhat to offer. Now
what is it that this man Christ Jesus, the Believers High Priest was to offer
in sacrifice to God for the people; look into the 9th. Chap. 26. verse, and
there it is told you what it was, says the Apostle; But now in the end of the
world has he appeared (meaning Christ) to put away sin by the sacrifice of
himself.

Secondly, The same Apostle tells you that Christ has another work to do as
our High Priest, besides the offering up of himself as a sacrifice to God for
Believers, and that is the work of Intercession or praying to God continually
for all manne^ of blessings for his Saints, which relate to this life and that
which is to come, Heb. 7. 24, 25. But this man (meaning Christ) because he
continues, ever has an unchangeable Priesthood, What to do? Verse 25. for
ever to make Intercession for us.

Now about the Office or Work of Christ as an Intercessour, there are these
things considerable. First, The work it self. Secondly, The time of it how long
it shall last. Thirdly, The end or purpose of the work. All this you may see
held out to you in the Incense Altar, which was the Type of this work of
Christ's constant interceeding for his people, Exodus 30. 7, 8. 9, 10.

1. First there is the work it self, Verse 7. And Aaron shall burn thereon
sweet Incense every morning when he dresseth the Lamps he shall burn the
Incense upon it. So that there is a work of Intercession for the High Priest to
do, which High Priest now is Jesus Christ; therefore faith the Apostle Heb. 7.
21. with 25. The Lord swear and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever
(meaning Christ) after the order of Melchisedeck. Now what was the work of
Mechisedeck, was it not to offer up prayers to God on the behalf of the people,
that God would bless them with the blessings of his love and favor, Genesis 14.
18, 19. with Heb. 7. 1. Therefore the Apostle adds this passage after that he
has showed you that Christ was (in the work of his Intercession) the
similitude of Melchisedeck, Heb. 5. 6, 7. Where speaking of Christ says, Who
in the days of his flesh offered up prayers and supplications, with tears and
strong cries unto him that was able to save him from death. Now you must not
think that Christ in his cries, and tears, and supplications, only prayed for
himself at that time; No, no, but for all the Elect who at that time met in
Christ, as the Body united to the Head, and so he is to be understood as our
interceeding High Priest, praying to God for us against the evil of death. So
ver. 10. This was done as he was called of God according to the Order of
Melchisedeck: That is, as he is a High Priest, for so was Melchisedeck, Heb. 7.
1. whose work was to bless Abraham a Member of this Priesthood, grace and
mercy, Genesis 14. therefore says the Apostle, Heb. 7. 25. Wherefore he is able
to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives
to make Intercession for them, therefore says the Apostle, ver. 26. Such an
High Priest became us. And as Christ did pour out his cries and supplications
with tears here on earth, it was to give Believers a comfortable view and sight
of what he is ever doing for them in heaven, of which they may assure
themselves to the utmost. Therefore does S. Paul so much comfort Believers
against all fear of a total miscarriage; for it cannot be because Christ as our
great High Priest did not only interceed against it on earth, by pouring out
strong cries and supplications, with tears, Heb. 5. 7. but he is doing of the
same work now he is in heaven, with as much fervency of Spirit for us. Romans 8.
ver. 34. Who is he that condemns, it is Christ that died; yea rather is risen
again, and sits at the right hand of God, who also makes Intercession for
us: Now that the Intecession Christ makes is a work of prayer which he pours
forth for his people to God evermore, as that which the Golden Altar for
Incense was a Type of, will appear if we consider that place in Rev. 8. 2, 3,
4. 5. with chap. 1. 13. And I saw the seven Angels which stood before God, and
to them were given seven Trumpets; and another Angel came and stood at the
Altar (which Angel was Christ) having a golden Censer in his hand, and there
was given unto him much Incense that he should offer it with the prayers of all
Saints upon the Golden Altar which was before the Throne, and the smoke of the
Incense which came up with the prayers of the Saints ascending up before God
out of the Angels hand. Now look into Rev. 1. 13. and you may see who this
Angel was; And in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks one like unto the
Son of men, clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt about the paps
with a golden girdle.

Here you have the Son of man representing himself to John after he ascends up
into Glory, standing in the garb of the High Priest, for so the legal High
Priest was attired when he was to administer before the Lord.

That so we might understand for our great comfort, that he is doing the great
work of the Priesthood now in Heaven, for his people that are yet without the
Tabernacle, as to their being in this life, even for those that are not entered
within the veil of blessed glory and immortality: So that you see that Christ
is an interceeding High Priest now in heaven pouring out his prevailing prayers
to God for his. And this is the matter of the work of Intercession.

Use 1.
O then what cause have Believers to bless God for his mercy, that there is an
Intercessour provided for them, that can and will prevail on their behalf, if
loud cries and strong supplications attended with many tears will do it. O my
Brethren, this is an inestimable blessed privilege to Believers, that they have
such an interceeding High Priest as Jesus is, who is heard in all things and
denied in nothing that he shall request the Father for on the behalf of
Believers: We use to say that man is happy that has a Friend in Court to
speak, if need be, on his behalf

O but how much more happy are Believers that have a Christ, a High Priest in
heaven to agitate all their matters and concernments for them there. Hence it
is that the Psalmist does affirm that there can be no want to them which fear
God, Psalm. 34. 10. And S. Peter wonders who can harm such as be followers of
that which is good, Pet. 1. 3. 13. And says S. Paul, who can lay any thing to
the charge of such? and who can condemn such? or can separte such from the love
of God. Romans 8. 33, 34, 35. the Reason of all is given you in the 34. ver. For
we have a High Priest at Gods right hand making Intercession for us.

Use 2.
O then let this blessed Doctrine administer comfort to the people of God at
all times, in all conditions, that they have a High Priest in Heaven
interceding for them at Gods right hand.

O Brethren! of whom should Believers be afraid that have such an interceding
Priest as Christ is; what if all the Tyrants in the world, and Devils in hell
should set themselves together against the poor Lambs of Christ; O fear them
not, there cannot a hair of your heads fall to the ground. O you Saints, lift
up your heads and be not so fearful of your Adversaries, it is your High
Priests work in heaven to pray you down deliverance from the hands of Men and
Devils: Read that comfortable place, Exodus 17. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. When Amaleck
came out to fight against Israel, its said that all the while that Moses lifted
up his hands to God in a way of Prayer and Intercession for Israel, Israel
prevailed over Amaleck. O then shall the liftings up of the hands of a Moses so
much prevail for Gods Israel in a time of danger (and yet Moses was but a
servant, Heb. 3. 5) and shall we think that the lifting up of the interceding
hands of Christ, (who is the Son) shall not prevail over these Amalekites which
Believers stand in doubt of here: O Brethren, do not dishonor the interceding
Office of Jesus Christ your High Priest, in giving way so much to your fears;
Remember what our Savior spoke in his own case, the same he can and will do in
the case of his people, so far as it shall stand with his glory and a Believers
good, Matthew. 26. 53. Think you not, and I can pray to my Father, and he can
give me more then twelve Legions of Angels: What work did that Angel make which
Christ prayed down for the relief of his Church in the time of their distress.
Isa. 37. 36. How did the Angel scatter in one night that proud Blasphemous
Army; and shall we think that Christ's Prayers have lost their Efficacy through
length of time; No, no, he is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, Heb.
13. 8. And so in all other exigencies and straits, whether in Famine, Plague,
Pestilence, or what ever the providence be which may occasion fear. Here is a
sufficient Balm for the soul in these conditions; yea in a word, if thou were
brought so low with thy distress, as that thou could not put up one word in
prayer to God thy self in the greatest necessity, thou mighst comfort thy self
in this, thy High Priest is praying for thee; for says the Apostle, he ever
lives to make Intercession for us, Heb. 7. 25. This is the ground why thy
barrel of Meal wastes not, and thy Cruse of Oil spend not it self in time of
Famine, and why the Plague comes not nigh thy dwelling place in pestilentious
seasons, Job 5. 17, 18, to 23.

Secondly, The next thing we are to speak of is the time how long this is to
last, or how long this interceding work of Christ was to continue for
Believers; not only for the Saints under the Old Testament seasons, but for the
Saints under the New Testament seasons also, even for us says the Apostle,
Romans 8. 34. And such a High Priest became us, Heb. 7. 26. And this will further
appear if you consider this work in the Type of it, as its held out to you,
Exodus 30. 8. And when Aaron lighted the lamps at even, he shall burn Incense
upon it, a perpetual Incense before the Lord, throughout your Generations.

Now observe, it was perpetually to burn before the Lord throughout their
Generations; there was not a Generation but must have the benefit of this Altar
of Incense, so is Christ an Intercessour for the Elect in all Generations, and
not only for time either of the day or of the night, but Christ is pouring out
his interceding groans to the Father for his people. Therefore says the
Apostle, Heb. 7. 25. He ever lives to make Intercession for us.

Use 3.
O soul then doubt not, thy case goes on in Heaven well enough, there is
always prayer going up to God for thee, to keep thee night and day from
danger; so long as Moses his hands were kept up by Aaron and Hur, it went well
enough with Israel, Exodus 17. O but here are the hands of Christ lifted up for
thee night and day, to keep thee from the Arrow that flies by day, and the
shaft which flies by night; Read that place, Isa. 27. 2, 3. In that day sing
ye a Vineyard of Red Wine, I the Lord do keep it, I will water it every moment
least any hurt it, I will keep it night and day. O Christ is interceding night
and day for thee against all evils; It may be thou fear that sin and
corruption will undo thy soul, that the Devil and temptation will be thy ruin,
that wicked men will swallow thee up in the end: O soul look up to Jesus Christ
under all this, eye him at the Throne of grace wrestling by his strong cries for
thee; O soul live upon this in doubting seasons; O go on in the way of thy duty
with cheerfulness; O remember the Lord is with thee, his Spirit shall be with
thee, his Prayers with thee; O fear not: O says David, The Lord is on my side,
I will not fear what man can do unto me. O soul whatever thy danger be that
shall beset thee, whether it be from Hell or this World, it can never seize
thee while Christ is at prayer for thee, but Christ as thou have heard, ever
lives to intercede on thy behalf.

Object. But some may say then, why are men so strict to enjoin the people to
pray, is it not enough that Christ their High Priest prays for them in Heaven?

I answer, It is true, in point of prevailing with God for the Elect, so Christ
their High Priest prays enough for them; And in this sense there is no need
of Believers praying, I mean so as if their prayers did give any strength to
the Priestly work, or office of Jesus Christ, therefore that cursed Tenent of
the Papist is to be abhorred by all true Christians, which teaches that the
prayers of the Church meriteth or procures the grace of God by its own
strength or efficacy, blindly mistaking that place, James 5. 16. The effectual
fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much. Now in this sense there is no
need of Believers prayers, for this will be to destroy the Mediator-ship of
Christ, and to render his Priestly office of no effect; for in point of merit
o^ worth God only accepts of the prayers of Christ, and of the Elects for his
sake, according to that word in Matthew. 3. 17 This is my beloved Son in whom I
am well pleased.

But secondly, notwithstanding the Intercession of Jesus Christ, yet in point
of obedience to God it is a Christians duty to pray; So much as this is handed
out to you in the Priesthood of old: Read Luke 1. 8, 9, 10. Speaking of
Zecharias the Priest, While he was executing the Priests office before God in
the order of his course, according to the custom of the Priests office, his lot
was to burn Incense when he went into the Temple of the Lord, and the whole
multitude of the people were praying without at the time of the Incense. Now
Zecharias the Priest represents our Lord Jesus in the work of his Priestly
interceding office for the Elect, and you read that nowithstanding Zecharias
was interceding at the Incense Altar within the Temple, yet the people were to
pray at the same time without; strongly proving, that although Jesus Christ our
Gospel High Priest still intercedes in Heaven for the Elect; yet
notwithstanding it is highly the duty of all the Elect (while without the
Temple of glory, and remain yet in the body) to pray: This will farther appear
if you consider that place in Rev. 8. 3, 4. And another Angel came and stood at
the Altar having a golden Censer in his hand, and there was given unto him much
Incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all Saints upon the Golden
Altar which was before the Throne, and the smoke of the Incense which came up
with the prayers of the Saints ascended up before God out of the Angels hand.
If you would know who this Angel was; or is, you may read Rev. 1. 13. and there
you shall (as I have said already) find him to be Jesus Christ, in all his
Priestly Formalities as our High Priest; And in this Chapter he is set forth to
you in the performance of his work of Intercession for the Saints, by having a
Golden Censer in his hand; which was what the High Priest under the Law did
administer before the Lord withal, Numb. 16. 46, 47. And the Angel had Incense
given him to offer up to God in the Censer which was in his hand; which Incense
I understand to be meant the infinite worth of his blood and righteousness,
which is continually pleaded by Christ, as a ground of full satisfaction to God
for the Elect: Its said there was much Incense given to this Angel, that is, as
the Apostle elsewhere says, in Col. 1. 19. It pleased the Father that in him
should all fullness dwell, which shows the abundant worth and efficacy that
lay in the death and righteousness of Christ; therefore he is able to save to
the uttermost all those that come to God by him, Heb. 7. And to be a
propitiation in his blood for the sins of the whole world, John 1. 2, 2. That
is, there was so much Incense given this Angel by the Lord, or so much virtue
put into the death of Christ (that although it was never intended for all the
world) yet there is a virtue or a sufficiency in his death able to save all the
world at once. And its said the Angel offered Incense, that is, the Lord Jesus
Christ was interceding at the Throne of grace for the Saints.

Now pray observe, all this was done with the prayers of all Saints, so that
the Saints are set forth as a praying people as well as Christ is set forth as
an interceding High Priest, Christ's prayers and his peoples prayers going up
together before the Lord, make up the great cloud of Incense which went up from
the Altar.

Thus you see the point cleared, that Christ's interceding in Heaven at his
Fathers right hand for Believers, does not give any liberty to the least
neglect in prayer here on earth; therefore does our High Priest himself enjoin
prayer to be made by the Saints that live under his Priesthood, Matthew. 26 41.
And farther says, that men ought to pray always, Luke 18. 1. So likewise the
Apostles of Christ, they tell you that the subjects of this Gospel Priesthood
must pray, James 5. 13. and that they must pray every where, 1 Timothy 2. 8. and
that without ceasing, 1 These. 5. 17 and that men should continue instant in it,
Romans 12. 22. and that men should pray always night and day, Ephesians, 6. 18. These.
2. 3, 10. and for one another, James 5. 16. with this advice, that it must be
in the Holy Ghost, Jude 20. likewise this has been made the Character of a
good man, Acts 9. 11, and on the contrary, a prayerless heart is looked upon in
Scripture to be a wicked heart, Job 27. 10.

Thirdly and lastly, I come to speak of the end or main purpose of the work of
the Incense Altar, or of the work of Christ's Intercession, which he drives on
in Heaven for Believes: Now the purpose of this glorious work of Christ's
Intercession, it was to make Reconciliation for sin, or amongst many other
things, one main^ thing was this; ( viz.) the keeping up a constant peace
between God and the Soul, therefore it was called the office for atonement,
Exodus 30. 10. And Aaron shall make an atonement upon the horns of the Incense
Altar once a year with the blood of the sin offering of atonements, once in the
year shall he make atonement upon it throughout your Generations, its most holy
to the Lord.

This the Apostle applies to Jesus Christ, Heb. 2 17. where you have the
Apostle speaking of Jesus Christ as our Gospel High Priest, succeeding Aaron of
old, the Apostle has this saying about it in Verse 17. Wherefore in all things
it behoved him to be made like unto his Brethren, that he might be a merciful
High Priest in things pertaining to God, and that he might make Reconciliation
for the sins of the people: Note here, That he might make Reconciliation for
the sins of the people, or an atonement, which is all one; so that this was the
end or purpose of the High Priests atonement, it was to keep peace between God
and the people under the Law; this you may see, read Numb. 16. 46, 47, 48. And
Moses said to Aaron, take the Censer and put fire therein off the Altar, and
put on Incense, and go quickly unto the Congregation, and make an atonement for
them, for there is wrath gone out from the Lord, the Plague is begun: And Aaron
took as Moses commanded him, and ran into the midst of the Congregation, and
behold the Plague was begun among the people, and he put on Incense, and made
an atonement for the people; and he stood between the dead and the living and
the Plague was stayed.

Thus you see clearly what the purpose and end of the Priests interceding or
making atonement for the people amounts unto, it is to interpose between Gods
wrath and the people, or to keep God at peace with the people; which is the
proper work of Jesus Christ now in glory, to make peace for the Saints, and to
interpose by his Intercession between the anger of God and their sinning souls,
who labors by those strong cries, sighs, and groans, with many tears which
cannot be uttered, to prevail with God that he would be pleased for his own
death and righteousness sake, to pass by those many sins, failings, and
infirmities which his people are apt to commit; And as in the like case we read
of Moses, Exodus 32. 11, 12, 13. So does Christ (of whom in the work of
Intercession Moses was the Type) cast himself at the feet of God, praying,
begging, entreating, that he would be pleased to pass by the sins and daily
infirmities of his people, and not remember their iniquities against them, but
that he would, extend his Love, Favor, and Grace to their souls as afore-time,
and would lead them and conduct them by his special grace to the good land of
Canaan, the land of promise which was purchased for them by his own blood upon
the Cross at Jerusalem; and begs his Father that he would be pleased to look
more upon his blood and righteousness for them, and less upon their sins; And
does confess as Moses did, that the people are, and ever have been, a
stiff-necked and rebellious people ever since he knew them, but yet still cries,
good Father put up all the injuries done against thy glory by this people, and
let not thy wrath wax hot against the sheep of thy pasture; O remember the
promises which thou have made to me concerning this people: That a seed should
serve me, and a Generation of men should call me blessed, Psalm. 22. 30. and
Psalm. 72. 17. And that I should see of the travel of my soul and be satisfied,
Isa. 53. 11. and therefore prays that the Father would consider what loss it
would be to him (who was his Son) should the people miscarry, how all his
sufferings would be lost, the end of his coming in the flesh would be lost, the
fruit of all his Sermons, works of Miracles, and works of Righteousness, would
be lost, therefore in John 17. 24. Prays saying, Father I will that they whom
thou have given me may be with me where I am, that they may behold ^y glory
which thou have given me, for thou hase loved me before the Foundation of the
world.

Use 4.
O then soul thou see where to fly under the guilt of sin, O what comfort
wlll this afford a poor doubting soul that shall well digest this truth into
his soul, that Jesus Christ is interceding for him now in Heaven, how will the
knowledge of this feed the hearts of Gods people in times of doubts. O let not
the Wolves catch any comfort from hence, this is what belongs to the true sheep
of Christ, and to none else; This is not for him that will catch at any comfort
to protect himself in a trade of sin; but this truth chiefly belongs to those
that are indeed truly humbled under, and burdened with, the sense of the
weight of sin: To such only I speak; do your sins press you down as a Cart is
pressed with sheaves? Do your iniquities so weigh down your heads as that you
cannot look up? Dare not you come to God nor stand in his presence? Do you fear
that your sins have provoked God against you? Do you doubt the Plague is begun
against you? are you fearful the wrath of God is coming out upon you and that
it may prove such a storm as may sink you into the lowest Hell? Yet O look up
to your interceding High Priest who is now in Heaven for you, who labors to
prevail upon the heart of God for pardoning grace on your behalf, who likewise
makes it his business to observe his Fathers countenance toward Believers,
that if at any time his face of Justice begins to look grim, and he perceives
that wrath begins to come forth, he may as Aaron did, step quickly in between
God and the people, and so by his interposing presence of grac, eand powerful
Intercession, he may allay the anger of his Father again.

Hence it is that John comforts doubting, drooping souls in his day with this
truth, because indeed it is a truth proper to that end and purpose, and
farther, John the Divine does not only apply this truth as a Cordial to bear
them up under the sense of sin, but likewise as a notable preservative against
the act of sin, 1 John 2. 1, 2. My little children I write unto you that you
sin not; and if any man sin we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous; and he is a propitiation in his blood for our sins, and not
only for ours, but for the sins of the whole world. O Soul, live upon this
blessed truth, stay thy self here under all thy doubtings. O consider, sin may
vex and disquiet thee, but all cannot hurt thee, so long as Christ keeps up his
praying hands to God for thee it shall not do thy soul the least injury. Christ
does prevail, and he will prevail in heaven for thee against sin and wrath:
Christ lies in the way of his Fathers wrath, as it were, if any of it run forth
it must pass through Christ; he stands between the Father and thy Soul in a
time of the Fathers displeasure, and cries out, good Father stay thy wrath! O
hold thy hands, strike not this poor sinner; if thou strikest I am resolved the
blows shall alight all on my back; I will bear all, and suffer all, and take
all, both fault and punishment upon my self. This the Father tried once and it
proved true, when the Father went to strike the Elect, the blows fell all upon
Christ's own back, which bruised him very much, Isa. 52. 1. which leads me to a
fifth use of the Point.

Use 5.
Which is to exhort thee, O soul, from what has been said about the
intercession of Jesus Christ for thee: Oh! to love Jesus Christ with all thy
heart, and with all thy strength, and with all thy soul: O who can love such a
friend as Christ is too much: O therefore strive to love with the love of
service and obedience, with the love of delight, with the love of communion,
and with the love of desire, so as to part with Father, Mother, Wife, Husband,
Children, Honors, Lands, Livings; yea, all that is near and dear for Jesus
Christ. O account nothing too much you do for him in his Worship, in his
Ordinances, as in Prayer, Hearing, Reading, in Meditating, Mourning, Weeping,
Repenting: Oh account nothing too much you administer unto him in his People,
in his Ministers, in the mannaging of his Cause and Gospel in the world. O with
Mary think not your Alablaster Box and Ointment too good to bring forth in a
time of need for Jesus Christ. Oh account nothing too much you suffer for
Christ; account no prison to bad to go into for Christ, no dungeon too deep to
lie in for Christ, no death too disgraceful for Christ's sake; because he
thought nothing too much he suffered for you, nor any thing too much which he
now does for you.

CHAP. 25. Of the Brazen Laver.
I Now come to speak of the brazen Laver which was for this purpose, that the
Priests might wash themselves therein before they went into the Tabernacle to
perform the Worshp and Service thereof, Exodus 30. 18, 19, 20. Thou shall also
make a laver of Brass, and his foot also of Brass to wash withal, and thou
shall put it between the tabernacle of the congregation and the Altar; and thou
shall put water therein, for Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and
their feet thereat when they go into the Tabernacle of the Congregation: they
shall wash with water that they die not, or when they come near unto the Altar
to minister to burn offerings made by fire unto the Lord.

This brazen Laver was a Type of Jesus Christ, and the cleansing water which
was in it, typed out the Blood of Jesus Christ, which only can cleanse poor
souls, and wash them from their sinful guiltiness, and sinful filthiness: for
as the Priests under the Law were to wash themselves in the brazen Laver before
they were thought fit to have to do, either with the holy God of Worship, or
the holy things of the Worship of God; so are all the Elect, first by Faith to
wash themselves in the Blood of Christ, this spiritual brazen Laver, before
they are thought fit to have to do either with God or his Worship.

Hence is that cleansing attributed to the Blood of Christ so often in
Scripture, to show you it performs the same use to the Gospel Priests (for so
does the Gospel term every Believer now, Rev. 1. 6.) as the Laver water did to
the legal Priests, 1 John 1. 7. The blood of Jesus that cleanses us from all
sin: so Rev. 1. 5. To him that loved us and washed us from our sins in his own
Blood. Now in this chapter of Revelations you may see by the order of the words
in verse 5, 6. how the Holy Ghost makes the type and the antitipe to agree. In
Exodus 30. 19. you have the brazen Laver set up now: in the 5. verse of this
chapter you have Christ set out to you, performing the same use and office in
washing and cleansing. In Exodus 30. 19. you have the subjects spoken of who
they should be which should wash in the brazen Laver, and these were Aaron and
his sons: now you know these were Priests. Now look into Rev. 1. 6. there the
subjects spoken of which must wash in the Laver of Christ's Blood, they are
called Priests likewise, which intends all believers in and under the Gospel:
all those which have washed in the Blood of Christ our Gospel brazen Laver,
they are now all accounted priests as well as kings to God.

Use I.
Let it serve for information first concerning those which have not yet washed
themselves by believing in the Blood of this spiritual brazen Laver. O Sirs,
how do you think to be accepted with the Lord either in your persons or
performances. O you that contend so much about Religion, alas, to what purpose
is it, when you your selves were never washed from your uncleanness in the
Laver of Christ's Blood through believing. O my friends, that I could persuade
you to read and well consider that Scripture, Isa. 1. 11. 12, 13, 14. and so
on, To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices to me, says the Lord,
I am full of the burnt offerings of rams, and the fat of fed beasts, and I
delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he goats; when you
come to appear before me, who has required this at your hands, to tread in my
Courts, bring no more vain Oblations, Incense is an abomination to me, the
calling of Assembl^es, with your new Moons and Sabbaths, I cannot away with it,
it is iniquity; even your solemn meetings, your new Moons and your appointed
Feasts my soul hates; they are a trouble to me, I am weary to bear them, and
when you spread your hands forth I will hide mine eyes from you, yea when you
make many prayers I will not hear, your hands are full of blood; wash you, make
you clean, put away the evil of your doings, cease to do evil, learn to do
well, so Verse 18. Then come and let us reason together. Thus you see what you
must be, a people washed and cleansed from your Pollutions through faith in
Christ's blood, ere ever you can come near God in Worship; do not think that God
will draw near the Swearing Blasphemer, the Whoring Ranter, the Sabbath
Prophaner, the Unjust Oppressor, the Justice Wrester, the Christian
Persecutor; I tell thee no, no, do not deceive thy self, be thou never so great
or honourabe in this world, yet while thou remainest in this condition, God
regards thy service in his Worship no more, then he values the cutting off of a
dogs neck, Isa. 66. 3. So likewise your Worship is abominable in Gods sight,
you hear God accounts. it so, let it be put forth in never so glorious a dress,
or done in never so Princely a Chapel, or dished up upon never so good a
Velvet Carpet, you hear what God accounts of it, until you have washed your
soul in the blood of Jesus Christ by Faith. O Sirs, labor to draw near to
Christ and get your selves washed by his blood, Oh break off from your vile,
hellish, and profane lives, or God will never draw near your Worships while
you live; you may assure your selves of it, the pure God can never commune with
such impure souls as you are in his sight: you may make your selves as merry as
you can when you are in your Worships, but you may assure your selves while you
remain unwashed with the blould of Christ, the great God will be far enough
from coming amongst you to cast in any true mirth in the midst of you.

Use 2.
It shows you the danger that will necessarily follow our presumption in daring
to meddle with any thing of the holy Ordinances of the Gospel, without being
washed in the blood of Christ our spiritual brazen Laver; you see if the
Priests the Sons of Aaron should do it they should die for it. Certainly then
if God in his Justice should smite with death all these Priests in England
which never yet were washed in the Laver of Christ's blood, we should have more
Pulpits empty then we should find Priests to supply them in England.

And how God should make use of such unwashen, ignorant fellows, to wash the
unclean of the times, when so many sanctified cleansed Ministers of his own
must be thrust out of that work, and must stand by as useless the mean while,
to me it is a great mystery.

Use. 3.
If it be threatened with death for any to meddle with the holy things of God
without being washed in the blould of the Lord Jesus, Oh how should we tremble
then to think how many deaths men bring on their heads this day in the world;
Oh was there ever more meddling with the holy things of the Altar by
unsanctified men, and unwashen Priests, then in this day: Oh how do the holy
Ordinances groan under this intolerable burden that the Childrens bread must
become meat for every Swine.

Use 4.
Lastly, Oh you that are the Priests of the Lord indeed (I mean Believers,
Ministers and People) would you be accepted in what you do for God; would the
Minister of Christ be useful in his place to the people, what great need have
such ere ever they come into the plce of Worship: First, by the lifting up of
an eye of faith through prayer, to cast themselves into the brazen Laver of
Christ's blood, ere ever they cast theminto the Pulpit. And you the people,
would you have the Blessing, and miss the Curse, which does or may attend the
Ordinance; Oh then look up, yea get up to the brazen Laver every time you come
to the Ordinances of God, remember the Priests the Sons of Aaron were to wash
every time they were to meddle with such things. Now ye are the Sons of Aaron
and of the Royal Priesthood, Oh labor to come in dropping wet (to the
Ordinance) with the blood of Christ, and that is the way to go out dropping wet
with the blessings of God.

CHAP. 26. Of the anointing of the Tabernacle with with the Vessels therein.
THus having ended with the several particulars in the Tabernacle, I now come
to speak of the anointing of the Tabernacle:

For we find that when Moses had finished the Tabernacle with the several
Vessels thereof, all this was to be anointed all over with Oil, Exodus 40. 9,
10. Now the Vessels that were in the Tabernacle, as they had reference to
Christ (as has been showed you) so also do they refer to the Individuals of
the Church of God; this you may see in Zach. 14. 20, 21. In that day shall
there be upon the Bells of the Horses holiness to the Lord, and the Pots in the
Lords house shall be like the bouls before the Altar, for every Pot in
Jerusalem and in Judah shall be holiness to the Lord: That is, every true
servant of the Lord shall be under a great spirit of holiness in the latter
Ages of the world.

Use 1.
It serves to inform us of these two things: First that the least member in the
Church of God is appointed for some use, you know there were several Vessels
and Instruments in the Tabernacle, as the Pots, the Caldrons, the Flesh-hooks,
the Fire-pans, the Snuffers, and the like; now though these did differ in glory
the one from the other (for all had not alike measure of glory upon them,
neither were they all alike employed in the same kind of work) yet the least
Instrument or Vessel in the Tabernacle was employed, and was of use, even to
the Tongs and Fire-pan, both which were to right up the Coals on the Altar, and
to carry forth the Ashes of the Sacrifice. Oh so it is in the Church of God,
there is not one there in that Body or Tabernacle but was appointed for use in
the Church, though their work may differ and their gifts may differ, yet there
is work to employ all; so says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11. Where the Apostle tells you that there be given to the Church a diversity
of gifts and operations for every man to profit withal, in Verse 10. To one is
given the working of Miracles, to another diverse kinds of Prophecy, to another
discerning of Spirits, to another diverse kinds of Tongues, to another the
Interpretation of Tongues; but all these works that one and the self same
Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will: So that you see every one
in the Church of God is of some use or other, for every one has his proper
gift, every Christian in his place must do something in his Generation to help
forward the glory of God.

Object. But some will say their gifts are small, and their graces small, and
they can do but little?

Answ. Its true, where God gives but little he does not require much, but yet
requires the well-improvement of that little; the unjust Steward, though he
had but one tallent, yet he was cast into hell for the non-improvement of that;
what soul, though thou can not preach for Christ, yet can not pray to
Christ for the Church, and Gospel, and Ministers, and Ordinances of Christ:
what if thou want gifts to pray, can not shed some tears for a slain
Christ, a dying Gospel, a starving, perishing Ministry, and an imprisoned
company of Saints, and banished Saints; and what if thou have no tears, have
thou no sighs and inward groans for these things? what if thou have none of all
this for Christ in his people, what have not a good word for them; and what if
thou durst not afford them a good word what have thou not a piece of bread to
send them, or secretly ^o convey to them in their sufferings: and what if thou
want that to give them, have thou not a little dish to dip up a little water
as thou passest by a prison door for them, Matt. 25. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39. Oh let
not the weakest Christian set himself aside to say I can do no work for God, I
want these gifts and parts which some have, and therefore I can do little. O
soul, though thou art but the fire-pan in the Church, yet here is work to be
done for thee, though it be but to rid out the dung of the Sanctuary. I mean by
thy crying, and sighing, and praying to God, that he would cast out that filth
and dung out of his Church and Sanctuary that is of late crept into it.

Secondly, It may inform us what the Children of God are and ought to be, the
holy sanctified ones of the times: You read what God commanded Moses to do to
the vessels in the Tabernacle; when they were framed and fi^ted, he was to
anoint them all with holy oil. Oh so has the Father anointed every true
Believer with the oil of Grace which came down from Christ: so says John 1.
16. And of his fullness have we all received, and grace for grace. Hence is that
of Peter speaking of the Saints, 1 Pet. 1. 2. Elect according to the
foreknowledge of God through sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience., and
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. There is not one in the body of Christ
but is sanctified and fitted by grace for the work God appoints him to do, 1
Pet 2. 5. You are built up a spiritual sacrifice to God, and set apart for holy
uses to God as the things of the tabernacle were: Psalm 4. 3. The Lord sets
apart the man that is godly for himself. O therefore Sirs, ye that are the
Tabernacle vessels, O labor to answer the end for which you were dedicated to
God at the time of your Conversion and Calling, remember the reason why you
were caught out of the power of darkness, it was for this purpose, that you
might be a holy people to God, and might bring him home the fruits of
righteousness in your lives for ever, Titus 2. 14.

CHAP. 27. Of the Tabernacle coverings.
I Come now to speak of the outside coverings of the Tanacle which
comprehended all the rest.

Now the coverings were of two sorts, which we may call the inward or the
outward coverings.

First, the inward covering, and that was very glorious.

Secondly, the outward covering, and that was as mean and uncomely.

As for the inward covering you may read what is said of that, Exodus 36. 8. And
every wise-hearted man amongst them that wrought the work of the Tabernacle,
made ten curtains of fine twined linen, and blue purple, and scarlet, with
Cherubims of cunning work made he them: you may likewise see the outward
coverings of the Tabernacle which seems to be as uncomely as the other are
comely and glorious, Ver. 14. with 19. And he made curtains of Goats hair for
the tent over the Tabernacle, ver. 19 And he made a covering for the tent of
Rams skins dyed red, and a covering of Badgers skins above that. Suitable to
which coverings is the state and condition of the Church of God, is it relates
either to God or this world.

First as it relates to God, so the covering that is upon the Church is very
beautiful and glorious, which answers to the coverings about the Tabernacle
made of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, with Cherubims of
cunning work, Exodus 36. 8. Which holds out to us the Righteousness of Jesus
Christ with which the Church is clothed withal; which covering makes the
Church truly beautiful and glorious in the eyes of God, when this blessed
covering of Christ's Righteousness is put upon and hanged about the Church, then
does the Church look fair in Gods account, so says the Apostle, Col. 2. 10.
And yea are complete in him who is the head of all Principalities and Powers:
That is, when the Church is clothed upon with this covering of Christ's
Righteousness, then are you complete (who are of that Church) in Gods sight,
not else.

2. Besides the Tabernacle covering agrees to the Righteousness of Christ (I
mean the Inner of the two coverings) if we consider the obscurity of the
Tabernacle covering, it was not what was to be seen by every beholder, for this
covering was hid from the beholder by reason of another covering which was made
of Rams skins, and cast over it: Read Exodus, 36. 14. with ver. 19. So it is in
the case of the Churches greatest glory in this life, the Churches greatest
glory and beauty does consist of a being clothed with the Garments of Christ's
Righteousness. But its a glory veiled up from the eyes of the most of men,
there is a covering of Rams skins drawn over it, which keeps the sight of this
glory from men; there is nothing but an eye of Faith can discern this,
therefore is the glory of the Church said to be a hidden glory from the world;
men as men, see little into it or know little of it, Psalm 45. 13. The Kings
Daughter is all glorious within, all her clothing is of wrought Gold. But
however, though in the account of men the Church of Christ seems to be poor,
and mean, and worthless, yet because of the Righteousness of Christ with which
she is clothed, she is very beautiful, and glorious, and lovely in Gods eyes,
Cant. 1. 9, 10. I have compared thee, Oh my love, to a company of Horses in
Pharoahs Chariots, thy cheeks are comely with rows of Ienels, thy neck with
chains of Gold; So ver. 15. Behold thou art fair my love, behold thou art fair,
thou have doves eyes; So Isa. 43, 34. For I am the Lord thy God, the holy one
of Israel thy Savior, I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Sheba for
thee, since thou wast precious in my sight thou have been honorable and I have
loved thee, therefore will I give men for thee, and people for thy life. And
hence it is the Saints are Gods Jewels, Mal. 3. 17. by all which you may
perceive what great respects God has for the Church, because of that glorious
Tabernacle covering of the Righteonsness of Christ which is put upon them.

Use 1.
O then how should the thoughts of this wonderfully raise and comfort the
hearts of the people of God, especially in two seasons.

First in doubting seasons, when a poor Soul lies burdened under the sense of
his personal vileness and pollutedness before God, which oftentimes weakens the
souls confidence in God, and keeps the soul at a distance with God, who thinks
that as he seems in his own eyes, so he does in the eyes of God; Oh soul
remember the Tabernacle covering, that glorious wrought piece which had the
Cherubims wrought in it, which Cherubims were the Emblems and Signs of mercy;
in which covering God looks upon all Believers, not as they are in themselves
but as they are and do appear before him in the righteousness of his Son, which
covering hides all thy filth, and iniquity, and infirmities.

Psalm. 32. 1. Blessed is the man whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is
covered; So that you see there is that which does cover transgression, and hide
iniquity, that it cannot appear before God to condemn the soul, Romans 8. 1.
There is therefore now no condemnation to a soul in Christ Jesus.

The Robe of Christ's Righteousness is such a covering for, and to the Church,
as that it does not only hide sin, pollution, and a thousand times ten thousand
infirmities, but also it presents the soul to God in its own dress, and so
draws forth the love of God and the delight of God to the creature, as if the
creature had never sinned, Ephesians. 5. 26. 27. Husbands love your wives as Christ
has loved the Church and given himself for it, that he might sanctify and
cleanse it by the washing of water and the word, that he might present it to
himself a glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinckle, or any such thing, but
that it should be holy and without blemish.

Therefore the Spouse in Cant. does notably distinguish her condition in this
case, as she saw her self in her self, and as by faith she saw her self in the
Righteousness of Christ.

First as she saw her self in her self, so she cries out, she was black as the
tents of Kedar, which tents were made of black hair-cloth, so black, and worse
was she in her own eyes by reason of sin and corruption which dwelt within her,
Cant 1. 5.

Secondly but as she looked upon her self in Christ covered over with his
Righteousness, so she cries out she was as comely as the curtains of Solomon,
there she knew she was without spot or wrinkle in Gods sight, and in the worst
of times could go with boldness to the Throne of grace to ask grace and mercy
to help in time of need, as the Apostle speaks in Heb. 4. 16. here it was in
his covering that Paul desired to be found in above any place or state in the
world for justification: Phil. 3. 9. To be found in him not having mine own
righteousness which is of the La^, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith.

Oh soul, study this Tabernacle covering more and more, and labor by faith to
see thy self in it, then thy the doubts and fears will begin to leave thee, but
not before.

Secondly, this will administer great comfort to the soul in times of
Persecution, when the Church shall be buffeted, and slandered, and slighted and
scorned, and cast out as evil, and accounted the dung of the times, then may
the people of God comfort themselves in this truth, though men slight them, yet
God does not, though they see no beauty in us yet God does, and he says in all
the reproaches we meet with we are honorable and precious in his sight, Isa.
45, 3, 4. What if Councils and Parliaments, Kings and Princes and Nations shall
vomit us up out of the midst of them, yet the Lord has other thoughts of his
people, and so long its well enough; the world thinks we are not worthy to live
with their dogs, but God accounts one of his Saints worth a whole Nation of the
wicked ones.

Use 2.
Oh then how should this truth press upon men and women to get into this
Tabernacle covering: Oh Sirs! whatever thoughts you may have of your selves, it
may be you are rich and honorable in this life, you may have great names
amongst your Neighbors for your Wealth, Parts, Wisdom, or Valor, but let me
tell you, if you be not within this Tabernacle covering of the Lord Jesus his
Righteousness, God accounts you more worthless then the dung of the streets,
Prove. 10. 20. The heart of a wicked man is little worth; They are the scorn of
Heaven, Psalm. 2. 4. They are the burden of the Earth, Romans 8. 22. and to say
no more, they are the delight and joy of hell.

This is thy condition soul, while thou art out of Christ, thou have no
Tabernacle covering about thee to present thee faultless to God but art under
the Law and Curse, a poor, naked wretched soul; Oh therefore my advice to thee
is to endeavor to get into this Righteousness, O fly to Christ, give him no
rest until he has put this glory upon thy soul, that so thou might not be
found naked when the great and notable day of the Lord shall come.

I come now to speak unto the outward coverings, which covered or comprehended
all the rest of coverings or things in the Tabernacle, and this covering had
very little or no beauty in it, there was nothing in it to delight the eye of
the beholder at all, the materials of it are so mean and contemptible, for they
did consist of Goats hair, and Rams skins dyed red, Exodus 36. 14. with 19.
which was so fastened together by loops and tacks being coupled round about,
that when the Tabernacle was carried from place to place there was nothing of
the inside beauty or glory to be seen at all: That which of the Tabernacle was
discernable to the eyes of the beholders was matter of offense and scorn,
rather then any way taking, to men. Just so it is with the Church of God which
is Gods Tabernacle, for so in the New Testament is the Church of God styled,
Rev. 11. 1. Measure the Temple of God and them that worship therein, so Rev.
21. 3. A Temple or Tabernacle, for the use of both was alike, and therefore it
had been all one if the Spirit had said, Measure the Tabernacle and the Altar,
and them that Worship therein: I say, look how it was with the Tabernacle in
the wilderness, so it is with the Church of God, for the one was a Figure or
Type of the other.

With what little outside glory does God cloth his Church in this world, the
Church comes with little of observation, she is not clothed with the Pomp,
Glory, Excellency, and worldly Felicities of this life; the great pomp of this
world belongs to the Church of Antichrist, not to Christ's Church; the great
Titles of Honor, great Places, and also to be called of men Rabbi, Rabbi,
dwells in the Cup of Fornication, which Mystery Babylon has, who is termed the
Mother of Harlots, Rev. 17. 4. This is the reason that there be so many of the
Learned Clergy of the Nations run into her so often as they have done all
along, and have left the Tabernacle and Altar ( viz.) the Church of Christ and
worship of Christ, who in the very face of their Convictions to the contrary,
have struck in with the vanities of the Earth: Alas the reason is clear, the
Tabernacle coverings are poor comtemptible things made of nothing but Goats
hair and Rams skins dyed red, here is nothing that will take with the Learned
wiseman; I confess were the outward covering of the Tabernacle, the Church,
decked with Gold, precious Stones, Velvet Hangings dyed in Scarled, carried up
and down in a Chariot, and could it accommodate its Priests with Coaches, and
settle each of them in four hundred a year, and set them far from oppression,
and make them the Lords and Rulers of the Earth, here might be something done:
But in stead of that, nothing but affliction, contempt, and persecution attends
the Tabernacle, loss of Goods, Blood, and Fire, Rams skins dyed red, a color
which does very well fit the Church of God in this life, which is always in a
persecuted condition, dyed red with showers of Martyrian blood, hurryed up and
down from place to place, banished from Country to Country, as the Apostle
speaks, we have no continuing City here, but we seek one to come; from hence
men and women take offense at the Tabernacle, and think it a sad uncomely
thing, the very troubler of the Nations of the Earth; the Devil has blinded
the eyes of men as that they cannot see into the inside glory of the Church of
God, for if the Devil lets them see any part of the Church of God, it shall be
but to stumble them, and set them at a further distance from it then before,
they shall only see the outside of the Church of God in her Goats hair
covering, shows them the meanness of the Saints, and the mechanickness or
servileness of the Ministers and Servants of the Church of Christ, many of them
not Learned but illiterate men, many hardly ever saw Oxford or Cambridge in
their lives, not a Doctor to be found one amongst twenty, silly Fellows, can
hardly speak sense, many of them nothing but a little Goats hair, and the
coverings of the Tabernacle are of Rams skins dyed red, who can delight in it,
flesh and blood can never embrace the Tabernacle or the Church of Christ,
because they are always in blood, nothing but ruin atends it from age to age.
Thus the Devil shows his Kingdom what an uncomely thing the Church is, what a
sad covering it is covered withal, and tells souls that they judge of the
inside by the outside of it: when alas all the beauty and glory of the Church
of Christ lies within; The Kings Daughter is all glorious within, says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 45. 13. And if ever God comes to open the Tabernacle glory to
the soul, and gives the soul spiritual discerning to see into it, O then the
soul will quickly utter the words of David, Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I
desired of the Lord, and that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house
of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to
enquire in his Temple.

Use 3.
O then let this consideration abundantly quiet the minds of Gods people under
the undervaluings you meet with from the world; does the world slight you, does
the world despise you; alas trouble not your selves about it, the world does
not see your glory, remember the Tabernacle was very uncomely in the outside
of it, nothing of any beauty in the Church, this is the reason the world cries,
raze her down, raze her down to the ground; Alas they do not think the Church
worth the standing: Alas say they, what is there to be seen to take a wise-mans
heart, nothing but a little Goats hair and Rams skins dyed red, not worth the
looking upon it, much less the standing of such a deformed piece in the world,
therefore let our eye look upon Sion, and let her be defiled; but let not this
discourage the godly, but rather bless God that you see farther into things
then they do, for Godliness is a Mystery says Paul; and all the things of God
as to his Church and Worship, are Mysteries and Riddles to the world, is what
is veiled up and hi^den from the most of men, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
The carnal man receives not the things of God, for they are foolishness unto
him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned: God must
first give the man a spiritual seeing eye before he can discern a glory in the
Church and people of God, so as to close with them, delight in them, earnestly
to desire after them, and heartily to resolve with purpose of heart to cleave
to them, to give up all and suffer with them, to live and die in the midst of
them; but blessed be the Lord that opened your eyes to behold the Tabernacle
glory which is hid from men: you have infinite cause to bless God that has
ravished you with those inside glorious sights of the Tabernacle. Oh how often
have you been refreshed in your souls in the opening of it in the Ordinances,
how have you been made to cry out with Peter, Matthew. 17. 4. Master it is good
to be here; what blessed heart-affecting discoveries does there come out of the
Tabernacle sometimes, therefore does David so much prize the Tabernacle or
House and Church of God.

Psalm 84. 1, 2, 4. Oh how amiable are thy Tabernables O Lord of hosts, my soul
longs, yea faints for the Courts of the Lord, my heart and my flesh cries
out for the living God, blessed are all they that dwell in thy house for they
will be still praising thee.

Why should those that live in the Tabernacle or house of God so much praise
God? Answer, amongst many reasons so to do, this is not a small one, because of
the exceeding glory God discovers to them in the Church, Oh what glorious gifts
are there, what glorious Ordinances, what glorious Ministers are there, what a
glorious Gospel, what glorious discoveries are there made of this Gospel in the
Church, what a glorious Spirit is there in the Tabernacle of the Church; Oh
what glorious graces do there live in the hearts of the Materials of this
Tabernacle, besides the glorious name of God lives there, and all this covered
over with Rams skins dyed red, and coverings made of Goats hair: But however
let Believers comfort themselves, God will have a time to remove the covering
made of Rams skins and Goats hair, and then the world shall see and know the
worth an^ glory of the Tabernacle or Church.

There are many precious promises in the word of God about the removing of the
Rams skin covering from the Church of God; take a few for all, one is in Psalm.
45. That where the Church of God (because of her deformity on the out side)
has been the scorn of the Earth, yet the time shall come (when God shall
remove her Rams skin and Goats hair covering) that the rich men of the Earth
shall entreat the Churches favor, as ver. 12. of that 45. Psalm. And the
Daughter of Tire shall be there with a gift, even the rich among the people
shall entreat thy favor, Isa. 60. 15. Whereas thou have been forsaken and
hated, so that no man went through thee, I will make thee an eternal
excellency, a joy of many Generations: So Verse 14. The Sons of them that
afflicted thee shall come bending to thee, and all they that despised thee
shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet, and they shall call thee
the City of the Lord, the Zion of the holy one of Israel; Verse 13. The glory
of Lebanon shall come unto thee, the Fir Tree, the Pine Tree, and the Box,
together to beautify the place of my Sanctuary, for I will make the place of
my feet glorious: So Verse 12. For the Nation and Kingdom that will not serve
thee shall perish, yea, those Nations shall be utterly wasted: So Verse 3. For
the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and Kings to the brightness of thy
rising: So Isa. 54. 11, 12. Oh thou afflicted and tossed with tempest and not
comforted, behold I will lay thy Stones with fair colors, and lay thy
Foundation with Saphires, I will make thy windows of Aggates, and thy gates of
Carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant Stones: So Verse 13. 14. All thy
Children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace of thy
Children, in righteousness shall thou be established, thou shall be far from
oppression, for thou shall not fear, and from terror, for it shall not come
near thee.

But the Question will be, when shall these Prophesies be made good?

I Answer, When Israel shall come to his good land, then it shall be, then
shall God take away the Tabernacle covering made of Rams skins and Goats hair,
which was upon the Tabernacle all the while of its being in the wilderness, and
then will God show the glory of the Tabernacle his Church to all the world:
Isa. 60. 3. The Gentiles shall come to thy light, and Kings to the brightness
of thy rising: Is a Metaphor taken from the rising Sun, as that when the Sun
rises upon the earth, all the earth is filled with the beams of its glorious
light, so shall the world with the glory of the Tabernacle.

You know this covering upon the Tabernacle lasted but during their abode in
the wilderness, for when they came into the land of promise and rest, the
covering was taken away in a great measure, and the glory of it suffered more
to appear then formerly, as you may perceive when Solomon turned the Tabernacle
into a most Magnificent Temple. Now this land of rest, or the end of the
wilderness journey, I find to be two ways held out in Scripture, either for the
ultimate glory above, or for that Kingdom of glory which Christ calls his
Kingdom, as he is the Son of man which he so often promises his people as the
reward of their sufferings for him, for our Savior makes a clear difference
between the Kingdom of ultimate glory above, and the Kingdom of glory which
Christ has promised to give his people for their Faith, Love, and Constancy to
him in suffering-times, pray read well and consider that passage of our
Savior, Rev. 3. 21. To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me on my
Throne, even as I have overcome, and am set down with my Father on his Throne.
Mark that there is the Fathers Throne of glory, and there is the Sons Throne of
glory, mine says Christ and my Fathers; now one of these Thrones or Kingdoms
of glory has Christ made the proper reward of the Saints sufferings, and that
is, what he calls his Kingdom, a Kingdom distinct from the Fathers, Rev. 3. 21.
I will grant him to sit with me upon my Throne; which is promised the Saints so
often in the word of truth, Math. 19. 28. Rev. 2. 26, 27. Rev. 20. 4. Rev. 21.
2, 3. Now all these Scriptures relate to the Kingdom of Christ, this none will
deny.

Secondly, That this Kingdom is held out to the Saints, and promised them as
the reward of their sufferings, it must also be granted.

Thirdly, That this Kingdom thus promised to the Saints as the reward of their
sufferings cannot be applied to the ultimate glory, will appear if we look into
each Scripture, neither can men read these Scriptures so, without being guilty
of putting mere Nonsense upon the face of Scipture; Pray let us look into these
places, Math. 19. 28. And Jesus said unto them, Verily, Verily, I say unto you,
that ye which have followed me in the Regeneration, when the Son of man shall
sit upon the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon 12. thrones judging
the twelve tribes of Israel. Now this very promise is again handed out by our
Savior (after his Ascension) to John the Divine in the Isle of Patmos, Rev. 3.
2. To him that overcomes I will grant to sit with me on my throne; Look into
Rev. 20 4. There you have the same promise applied to his proper subjects,
which were suffering Saints: and I saw thrones, and they that sat upon them,
and Judgment was given unto them, and I saw the Souls of them that were
beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not
worshipped the beast, neither his Image, neither had received his mark upon
their foreheads, nor in their hands, and they lived and reigned with Christ a
thousand years. Now the Question will be, whether this Text do neither relate
to the Kingdom of ultimate glory, taking its rise from the general Judgment day
mentioned Math. 2. 5. 31, 32. Or whether it relates to the setting up of
Christ's Kingdom here on Earth which is mentioned, Dan. 2. 44. And in the days
of these Kings shall the God of heaven set up a Kingdom which shall never be
destroyed, and the Kingdom shall not be left to another people, but it shall
break in pieces and consume all these Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.
Now certainly it cannot relate to that Kingdom which takes its rise from the
general Judgment day, because we find the general Judgment day pointed at by
the Holy Ghost to be a thousand years after this Kingdom begins, Rev. 20. Where
you read after a thousand years time spent in the management and ordering of
the Son of man's Kingdom, then the general Judgment day takes its place, as
appears from Verse 11. 12, 13, 14, 15.

Secondly, Because this Kingdom is to have an end before the other begins, Rev.
20. 7, 8, 9.

Thirdly, The great glory resolves this into it self, 1 Cor. 15. 24. Then
comes the end (meaning the end of the Son of man's Kingdom, which answers to
that in Rev 20. 7, 8, 9) When he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God the
Father, when he shall have put down all Rule, and all Authority, and Power.

Fourthly, Because this glorious Kingdom of the Son of man promised to the
Saints, as the reward of their faithfulness in holding out and suffering for
him, is so far from being any part of the ultimate glory above (I mean so as to
be enjoyed above that its what is expressly said to come down from that which is
above, Rev. 21. 2, 3. And I John saw the holy City, the new Jerusalem coming
down from God out of heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband, and I
heard a great voice saying, the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will
dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with
them, and be their God. Another Text of Scripture which speaks of the Son of
man's Kingdom of glory here on Earth is in Rev. 2. 26, 27, And he that
overcomes and keeps my works unto the end, to him will I give power over the
Nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of Iron, as the vessels of a Potter
shall they be broken to shivers, even as I have received of my Father.

Now Reader pray read well and consider these words, then give thy thoughts
whether any thing in them can be applied to the ultimate glory, not but that I
believe the Saints shall enter there at last, but whether there be not a
glorious Kingdom on this side that, for the Saints to enjoy as the reward of
their sufferings, which has its foundation in the Scriptures Now observe in
the abovesaid words of John, its said in ths Kingdom the Saints shall have
power over the Nations so as to rule some, and to break others in pieces with
rods of Iron: Now if this must relate to the glory of the Saints after the last
and great general Judgment day, behold as I said before, what Nonsense we put
upon the Scriptures; for according to the Description given of the great and
general Judgment day, the wicked must immediately after sentence given depart
into hell, and the godly shall be taken up into heaven, where each party shall
be to eternity, and shall never see the face of each other more, Math. 25. 33.
with 41. Well then, according to that of Math. 25. The wicked and the godly
shall be so totally separated, as that they shall never see the face of one
another more; then where be the Nations, and who are they that the Saints must
rule over with Iron rods and break to pieces: Besides, over whom shall the
Saints rule in Heaven, for there only God shall be all in all, 1 Cor. 15. 28.
Again, Iron rods notes severity and bitterness; now what of this, do you
promise your selves in Heaven, Heaven knows nothing of that in the least, and
to say any shall rule with Iron rods there, is to say that which the word does
not say: Therefore be content Christian to travel to the end of thy appointed
wilderness-journey, and when the time comes that thou must enter into this
good land and much promised Kingdom, then expect thy Spiritual Solomon to turn
thy Tabernacle state of deformity into a famous Temple of glory.

CHAP. 28. I come now to speak of the High Priest under the Law, which was a
Type of Jesus Christ also.
IN the handling of which, I shall observe this method: First, Speak something
as to the place out of which the High Priest was to be chosen.

Secondly, I shall speak of the Qualifications which he was to be endued
withal.

Thirdly, I shall speak of the Consecrated Garments which he was to administer
in.

Fourthly, I shall speak of the manner of the Priests Consecration.

Fifthly, Of the Work he was to do for the people when chosen for them.

First, As to the place out of which the High Priest was to be chosen, (by
being chosen) I do not mean that there was such a Custom or Rule amongst the
Jews (before the Corruption crept into the Jewish Church) for the people to
choose their High Priests, but I intend the thing, as it respects the first
setting apart of a High Priest for the people.

Now the place from whence the High Priest was to be taken, it was from amongst
the Children of Israel, not from a strange people or Country, Exodus 28. 1. And
take thou unto thee Aaron thy Brother, and his Sons with him, from amongst the
Children of Israel, that he may Minister unto me in the Priests Office.

This Particular affords us these two Uses.

Use 1.
It serves to remove out of the way two great Objections, which may abide upon
the hearts of some tender Souls, who may be unwilling to adventure their case
in Christ's hands.

First, Because of their unacquaintance with him, he is too much a stranger to
them, therefore some make no use of him for their High Priest.

Secondly, Others call in Question his faithfulness, therefore others make no
use of him; that which they have to commit to the High Priests care is of an
infinite value, its the price of a Soul, which if it should miscarry through
want of faithfulness in the Priest, they lose their all, and more then the
whole world is worth: Now to prevent these Fears and Objections, the Priest was
to be taken from amongst his own Brethren, it shall be no stranger whom you
know not, or that knows not you, but of your own selves, from amongst his
Brethren, bone of your bone, and flesh of your flesh, this yields great relief
against Fears. Suppose the King should send an Army over Sea into some strange
Country, now if he shall make choice of some Alien or Outlandish man to be
General over them, how would this discourage the Army in their way and work,
for who knows but that a stranger may sell them into their Enemies hands; or
should he not do so, yet he being an Alien, they not known to him, what ever
their necessities (with respect to want of food, clothing, or any other
necessaries) may be, he cannot understand their complaints, and they perish
without remedy; but now if the General be one of their own Nation, they will
not so much fear the being betrayed into the hands of their enemies, because
their General and they are all alike, hateful to the enemy they engage against,
besides when ever they have any request to put up to him, or matter of moment
to inform him withal, they are sure he knows their language and understands
their tongue and they his, for he is born of the same Nation, a General made of
his Brethren. Now as the High Priest under the Law was a Type of Christ in all
respects, so in this very respect likewise, that so Believers might have great
encouragement to apply themselves to him at all times, hence it is that Moses
(alluding to Christ says) Deuteronomy. 18. 15. A Prophet shall ^he Lord your God
raise up unto you from amongst his Brethren like unto me, him shall you hear in
all things: So Heb. 2. 17. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made
like unto his Brethren. So that you see the Apostle as well as Moses speaking
about Christ, alludes to the High Priest under the Law, which was to be taken
forth from amongst his Brethren.

Use 2.
Oh then, what comfort and encouragement should this afford the soul against
the former Objections: First as to their non-acquaintance with him, Oh soul
thou needst not fear, for thy High Priest is no stranger to thee, he is not an
Alien which cannot understand thy speech, thou may freely lay open thy mind
to him in prayer, what ever distress or want thou art in come to him in prayer
and thou needst not fear he will well know what it is thou supplicatest him
about; this it was that encouraged David to come to him and freely pour out his
soul to him, he knew that Christ was no stranger, nor a man of an unknown
tongue to him, and he knew that Christ could as well understand what he had to
express on his part of Christ, Psalm. 139. 4. Lord there is not a word in my
tongue but thou know it altogether. Besides, Christ is so well skilled in
our tongue that he can thoroughly judge of our meaning, and broken sighs and
groans delivered up before him, if we want expressions he can help the soul out
in the thing, for he does not only know what we should speak, but what we would
speak before him, and so helps us out in the matter, Romans 8. 26, 27. Likewise
the Spirit helps our infirmities, for we know not what to pray for as we
ought, but the Spirit it self makes Intercession for us with groans which
cannot be uttered; and he that searches the hearts, knows what is the mind
of the Spirit, because he makes Intercession for the Saints according to the
will of God: For Christ is made a High Priest for this end, to spread the
complaints of his people before the Lord; therefore is it recorded in Rev. 8.
3. And another Angel stood at the Altar having a Golden Censer, and there was
given him much Incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all Saints:
So that you see Christ did offer up the complaints, sighs, and groans of his
people to God, therefore must he be taken from amongst his Brethren, a member
of the same Nation, born and trained up amongst the people, that so he might be
fully capable to do them that service for which he was ordained a Priest.

Use 3.
What encouragement should this Doctrine give a soul to adventure his all in
the hands of this Christ, in point of that faithfulness we may expect to find
in him merely upon this account, that he is a High Priest called forth to the
work from amongst his Brethren, and then this would remove the other Objection
which some poor soul may make against Christ; O! That which I have to entrust
the High Priest withal is of infinite value, and if it should miscarry through
the unfaithfulness of the Priest, I am for ever undone, and shall never recover
my self more: Now to prevent these fears, the High Priest was to be taken from
amongst his Brethren, a man interested with them in all the proyerties
together, whose happiness is bound up in the peoples; one who must stand and
fall with those, he is a Priest unto who promotes but his own in seeking the
peoples good for whom he undertakes, therefore must he be taken from amongst
his Brethren, to assure us of his faithfulness and diligence in the work he
has undertaken for Believers; you know that Christ our High Priest is called
an Advocate, that is, one that pleads a case in Law, 1 John 2. 1. Now what an
encouragement would this afford a person to make use of such a man in his case,
who is concerned in the same case himself, so as that if it goes ill with the
Client it must go ill with the Advocate. Oh soul, thus much may thou draw out
of this particular, of the High Priests being taken from amongst his Brethren,
it is to encourage thee to make use of Jesus Christ for a High Priest to God in
the behalf of thy soul, thou may assure thy self that he will be faithful to
thee: No bribes offered him can pervert or corrupt him, therefore is he called
a righteous Advocate, 1 John 2. 1. We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous; the Inheritance which Christ as a High Priest intercedes
for, and as an Advocate pleads for in Heaven its what Christ and thee are
coheirs and joynt-heirs of together, Romans 8. 17. If Children, then heirs,
heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ: So that thou stand and fallest
with Jesus Christ, Christ promotes his own Interest in promoting thine, if he
prove unfaithful its as well to himself as to thee; Oh therefore doubt of
nothing, put thy all into his hands, adventure whole soul and body upon his
Priesthood, thou can not do better, that which was Peter's Exhortation to the
Saints in his day, is mine to thee, Pet. 1. 4, 19. Wherefore let them that
suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping of their souls to him
in welldoing, as unto a faithful Creator. Soul, it would be very necessary for
thee to keep this truth always warm upon thy heart that it may give down its
daily comfort to thee, that the High Priest is thy Brother, for he was taken
from amongst his Brethren; it would be the choicest food thou can live upon
in thy wilderness condition, if thou were to take up thy quarters at any time
in a Dungeon, yet if thou have this pot of Manna with thee ( viz.) thy Brother
is a High Priest in Heaven, what more comfortable consideration in the world
then this? David was wonderfully raised in his hopes and expectations from
hence, Psalm. 23. 1. The Lord is my sheepherd I shall not want; that is, he is a
Priest, whose office it is to supply the wants of the soul in any condition,
for so much was expected from the High Priest under the Law, he was to procure
what blessings he could for the people, Numb. 6 23, 24 25, 26. And the Lord
spoke unto Moses saying, speak unto Aaron and to his Sons, saying on this wise,
ye shall bless the Children of Israel saying, the Lord bless thee and keep
thee, the Lord make his face to shine upon thee and be gracious unto thee, the
Lord lift up his countenance upon thee and give thee peace. Now that which
greatens this mercy is this, (That as its the Place and Office of Christ to
supply the wants of his people) there is no condition whatsoever that his
people are in at any time but Christ is privy to it, Psalm. 139 2, 3. Thou
know my down sitting and my uprising, thou understandest my thoughts afar
off, thou compass est my path and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my
ways. Herein lay David's great comfort, and the same may be thine, that this
want-supplying Priest that was so well acquainted with his peoples several
conditions, he could appropriate him to himself as his sheepherd, The Lord is
my sheepherd says David, that is as if he had said, I draw much of my comfort
from the place out of which the Priest was to be chosen, which is this, he was
to be called forth from amongst his Brethren, so that he is not a stranger to
me, a man whose voice or words I understand not, or he mine, but he is my
Brother which understands my thoughts afar off.

CHAP. 29. I now come to speak of the Qualifications which were required in the
Person which was to be the Peoples High Priest under the Law.
THe High Priest was to be one of the meekest, tenderest, mercifullest men,
exceeding others of his Brethren, a man brimful of bowels of tender love and
compassion toward those he was to be a Priest unto: And secondly, he was to be
as faithful as merciful. Both of which Qualifications in the High Priest under
the Law, you have the Apostle speaking of in the Epistle to the Hebrews.

First, That he was to be full of bowels and tender compassion toward those
for whom he was chosen a High Priest, Heb. 5. 1. For every High Priest taken
from among^st men is ordained for men in things pertaining to God, that he
might offer gifts and sacrifices for sins, so Ver. 2. Who can have compassion
of the ignorant, and them that go out of the way?

Secondly, The Priest was to be a faithful man, a man discharging his duty with
all faithfulness and sincerity toward his people, not seeking his own before
their good, using all diligence in his place and calling, withholding no due
right from the people; thus much you have from the Apostle in Heb 2. 17.
Speaking of Christ says, That in all things it behoved him to be made like
unto his Brethren, that he might be a faithful High Priest in things pertaining
to God, to make Reconciliation for the sins of the people: To be made like unto
his Brethren, who are these? Answer, not only all Believers (for they are
called Christ's Brethren too) but also, and most principally (with respect to
office) by Brethren is meant all those High Priests which were before his
Incarnation, who were likewise the fore-running Types of him in the work of the
Priesthood, and that it was the Priests of old that are mostly intended (in
this Text) as the Brethren which Christ was to be made like unto will appear,
if we consider the end why the Apostle says our Savior must be made like unto
his Brethren: It was that he might make Reconciliatien for the sins of the
people, Heb. 2. 17. A work proper to none (under the Law) but to the Priests.
But wherein was Christ to be made like unto his Brethren, you may see in the
Text, it was in point of faithfulness as well as in other respects; That he
might be a faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make
Reconciliation for the sins of the people: So that you see so much as this was
expected to be found in and from the High Priest under the Law, that he should
be faithful.

Now both of the Qualifications in an abundant measure, the Apostle shows you
are in Christ our Gospel High Priest, for so he applies the thing for our
comfort, as indeed all this was but to set forth the fullness of grace which
from the Spirit of anointing the Father caused to run into Christ to fit him
for this great work of the Priesthood, read Heb. 5^ 1, 2. and Chap. 2. 17. Isa.
11, 2, 3, 4. with Isa. 61. 1.

Use 1.
I shall first of all take up the first of the Qualifications, and labor to
improve it for the encouragement of two sorts of persons.

First, For those who as yet keep themselves off from this High Priest Christ
through a sinful fear.

Secondly, For those who have made choice of Christ for their High Priest, but
still live in continual doubt about their conditions.

As for the first fort of persons, who yet stand off from Christ, and are
afraid to close with him so as to make him their High Priest; Oh soul, how long
will thou doubt, and by doubting keep thy soul off from Jesus Christ, know
thou not that there is a necessity for thee to hasten to Jesus Christ, art thou
not convinced that thou art a sinner and under the Curse, does not the word
tell thee that God is angry with thee every day, Psalm 7. 11. Do thou not hear
the sound of wrath that is gone out against thee, are not the first fruits of
it upon thee already, which is but the forerunner of the full Winepress, which
like a dark storm is hastening after; and is there not great need that
Reconciliation for sin should be made to God for thy poor soul, why then do
thou delay thy hastening to Christ the High Priest that he might make atonement
for thee to the Lord, that so a stop may be put to that wrath which (from the
Lord) is gone out against thee; or do thou know a better way of
Reconciliation and Pacification then by Christ; do thou not read that the
Father is only well-pleased in Christ because he is his beloved Son, Math. 3.
17. Do thou not read that he is the way, the truth, and the life to the
Father, as that there is no coming to the Father but by him, John 14 6. And
that there is no other Name given amongst men whereby we can be saved, Act. 4.
12. And that if we believe not in him, we shall die in our sins, Ioh. 8. 24.
And the wrath of God shall abide upon us, John 3. ult.

Obj. But methinks I hear thee reply, Oh but thou art afraid to come to Christ:
I pray thee tell me where the stick lies, what it is which hinders and keeps
thee back from the greatest of mercies; what is it? Is it the greatness of thy
sins, Oh then come to Jesus Christ, for he is a merciful High Priest, filled
brimful of bowels and tender compassion for such an one as thou art, which have
gone out of the way of God, mark the phrase, Heb. 5. 2. Who can have compassion
on them that are out of the way; Oh the Spirit of the Lord God is upon me
(says Christ) and the Lord has anointed me to preach liberty to the captive,
and to open the Prison doors to them that are bound, Isa. 61. 1. Soul art not
thou one of these captives; art not thou a captive to sin, a slave to Satan, a
prisoner to thy own lustful wicked heart; as that if the Devil and Lust bid
thee to drink until thou art dead drunk in the place, thou must do it; if it
bid the commit Adultery, Lie, swear, and Blaspheme the worthy name of God; if
it bid thee Rob, Kill, thou must do it; if it bid thee fight against the Gospel
of thy Salvation, speak evil of good Ministers for their faithful dealing with
thy soul; if it bid thee abuse and persecute the Lords people merely for
waiting upon him in his Ordinances; if it bid thee seek and hunt out their
Meetings until thou have tired thy self with thy wicked journey, all this and
more thou must do, thou can not help it, thou art not thy own but Satan's and
Sins slave: Now for thee was Christ anointed, and with infinite bowels of grace
and tender compassion filled, that he might set thee at liberty from thy sin
and lust, and that he might preach the acceptable year of the Lord to thy soul;
O therefore come in, come into Christ, do not so much look upon what thou have
been in thy self, as upon what Christ is anointed to be, and to do for thee as
a High Priest if thou will come in to him, look not so much upon thy sins as
upon the infinite compassions of Christ as a High Priest, which was so made for
them that go out of the way, yea and for the ignorant likewise, that should not
discourage thee neither, for if thou come to Christ as a High Priest he will
teach thee the fear of the Lord, the knowledge of himself, and the exceeding
evil of sin, which thou did not know before, Isa. 29. 24. They also that
erred in Spirit shall come to understanding, and they that mu^mured shall learn
Doctrine: Oh soul, throw thy self upon him, he will not reject thee for thy
sins, but pardon thee of them, and pity thee under them; Oh remember he is the
High Priest which is full of compassion, look up to him and hasten thy soul
thither to the gate of his tender mercy, and thou shall find acceptance with
him, take his own word for it, live upon it as surer then Bill or Bond from the
tenderest, faithfullest man in the world, for it came from the lips of one who
never spoke an untruth in his life, John 6. 37. He that come^h unto me I will
in no wise cast out.

Secondly, As for those who have made their choice of Christ, but still doubts
of their condition; Oh soul, did thou know how much comfort and satisfaction
thou may draw out of the Priestly office of Christ, thou would never doubt
more: I do confess that Satan labors to fill the minds of the people of God
with great fears and doubtings, but would they view this Qualification (of
compassion) in their High Priest, it would abundantly fortify them against all
Objections whatsoever Satan could make against them; there be these five things
which do ordinarily cause doubtings in the hearts of the Lords people,

First, The guilt of sin.

Secondly, The strength of corruption.

Thirdly, The violence of Temptation.

Fourthly, The weakness of Grace.

Fifthly, Their backwardness in duty.

First, If it be the guilt of sin which comes in upon thee under all this look
up to Christ, let it not drive thee from but to Christ; for he, full of bowels
and tender compassion on purpose to deal with thee under this distemper, take
his own words for it, Art thou laden with thy sin as that thou can not hold
up thy head, says Christ, then come to me and I will freely pardon it for my
name sake, though your sin be as red as Crimson and as Scarlet, yet I will make
them as white as snow and as wool; Isa. 1. 18. Is it the power of sin troubles
thee, Oh then look up to Christ thy High Priest, who is full of compassion
filled up with it to outvie thy corruption, the Father was resolved to bring
his elected ones to glory through the Priesthood of Christ, therefore filled
Christ with infinite affection toward his people, that so he might pity them
and have compassion on them in all their distempers, the people were in an ill
case in the wilderness for want of greater measures of this in Moses who had
undertaken the conduct of them. Numb. 11. 11, 12 13, 14, 15. Moses cries out, I
am not able to bear all this people alone because it is too heavy for me; Oh
but its otherwise with Christ, for the Father was resolved to fill Christ with
so much compassion as that he should never complain of his burden in having to
do with such corrupted ones as thou art, Heb. 2. 17 18. For he was made a
merciful High Priest in things pertaining to God, that he might be able to
succor those that are tempted, (mark that) to succor the tempted or
burdened, not to reject them under it: Oh then come to Christ, bring thy
corruption with thee, lie down with it at the feet of Christ and he will unlade
thy burden for thee, Math. 11. 28, 29. Come unto me all ye that are weary and
heavy laden and I will give you rest. Oh burdened soul! here is thy call, what
can expect more at Christ's hands then to be bid under this weight of
corruption to come away to him.

But it may be thou will say, but I am afraid, should I come my corruption
would stir up fury in my Lord? Soul, Christ gives answer to it (what will thou
have more) and bids thee put him upon the trial, for says Christ, I am meek
and towly in heart, therefore come unto me, Math. 11. 29. And also tells thee
that fury is not in him, Isa. 27. 4. He means toward such as are burdened
with corruption, there is no fury in him against such, but rather wounderful
love, and tender pity and compassion, yea so much that Christ could and will
bear the burden himself rather then it should sink his poor people, therefore
if there be no other help or remedy to be had against the burden of
corruption, we are by Christ's word exhorted to cast the burden upon his
shoulders, Psalm. 55. 23. Cast thy burden upon the Lord and he shall sustain
thee, he shall never suffer the righteous to be moved. Is it the violence of
temptation makes thee to doubt, come to Christ, look up to him, he is merciful
and full of compassion, its not thy temptations shall alienate Christ's heart
from thee, but rather work his heart to compassionate thy condition, Christ is
so merciful as to distinguish between thy temptation and thy allowing of it and
delighting in it, as a tenderhearted Husband would do in the like case about
his wife; suppose a woman should be violently set upon by some wicked person
and he should be too strong for her and get her under him, and should abuse her
body, her Husband coming in the mean time and finds her in the act, yet when he
beholds her struggling and striving with the man to get from him, and when he
sees the tears which dropped from her eyes about it, do you think that this
Husband will put her away from him; no, no, but rather embrace her in his arms
with all tenderness and affection imaginable: Take one comfortable instance for
this in our Saviors carriage of old in the like case, and assure thy self what
he was in his carriage then he is the same ever since, and ever will be to his
people under their temptations; For he is the same yesterday, to day, and for
ever, Heb. 13. 8.

The instance you have in Zach. 3. 1, 2. Where you have Joshua the High Priest
(who personates the whole Church of Christ) violently set upon by the tempter,
who was said to resist Joshua, that is, tempted him and strugled and strived
with Joshua to have his pleasure of him to make him, sin and transgress against
Christ; but did Christ reject Joshua for this and cast him off, no sure, but it
rather wrought forth his heart toward him with the greatest pity and
tenderness, the bowels of Christ wrought toward Joshua all the while of the
temptation, and pray observe where and upon whom did our Savior charge the
guilt of the temptation, was it not upon Satan the tempter, or Joshua the
tempted, not a word spoken against Joshua, but all the blows fell upon Satan,
ver. 2. And the Lord said unto Satan, the Lord rebuke thee Satan, even the Lord
which has chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee, is not this a brand plucked out of the
fire.

But it may be you will say, when Christ stood up so much for Joshua, it was at
a time when Christ had nothing to accuse him withal, he had kept his garments
pure and unspotted, but this is not my case, I have my filth publicly upon me,
my temptations have made me very black and uncomely in his presence? I answer,
its true, Christ did not accuse him wi^h any thing that was the effect of his
compassion as a High Priest, but that he had nothing to accuse Joshua withal,
you may read the contrary Verse 2 3. For first our Savior was forced to
confess that his temptations had made him as black as a brand plucked out of the
fire, and you know when a brand is newly plucked out of the fire its then a sad
thing to look upon, its then full of smoke and filth, apt to stain any thing it
touches. Secondly, he had then at the same time very filthy garments upon him,
a great deal of pollution, enough to render him as bad in Christ's sight as bad
may be, yet all this was buried up in the bowels of his Priesthood, and then
why should thou not expect the same grace upon coming for it, for all this
was to show the carriage of Christ to his Church, for Joshua was but a Figure
of the Church then as it was newly come out of Babylon, which came up to
Jerusalem with abundance of pollution cleaving to her; yet Christ undertakes
with the Father, that in time he will present it a more glorious Church, For he
would cause her iniquity to pass from her, and give change of garment to her,
and he would put a fair M^ter on her head, ver. 5.

Again, is it the weakness of thy grace makes thee to doubt, Oh look up to thy
High Priest Jesus, there is infinite compassion for thee under all this: Was
Dav^ds Faith weak, which sometime made him to cry out, Psalm. 73. 26. My flesh
and my heart fails me, and at another time, I shall one day perish by the hand
of Saul; and again when it drove him to feign himself mad to escape the danger
which he feared might come upon him amongst the Philistians, yet Christ had
bowels for these weaknesses, and this David could set to his seal, that nothing
of this nature had made a separation between him and Christ, for Christ
continued the same in bowels toward him as aforetime: Ps. 103. 2, 3, 4. Bless
the Lord oh my soul, and forget not all his benefits, who forgiveth all thine
iniquities, and heals all thy diseases, who redeemeth thy life from
destruction, and crowns thee with loving kindness and tender mercies, who
satisfies thy soul with good things, so that thy youth is renewed like the
Eagles: Was St. Peter's grace of faith weak when he began to sink down in the
water, and had it not a compassionating hand held out to succor and help it,
Math 14 29, 30, 31. Was it weak when he denied his Master, but was his Masters
bowels so close shut up against him for it as to renounce him; Oh the care that
our Savior takes to remove out of the way all the discouragements which Satan
might throw in St. Peter's way, to the making any farther use of Christ as High
Priest. First, before ever he came amongst his Disciples, when after his
Resurrection he sent them word of his rising, he sends not the least hint to
Saint Peter of his Apostasy, or as if ever such a thing had been, John 20. 17.
Again, when he appeared in person amongst the Disciples, what care did our
Savior take to prevent Saint Peter's fears, not one ill word could St. Peter
hear from him, or ill look could St. Peter discern in him, but all his
weaknesses forgotten because all forgiven, infinite compassion at work for a
weak Peter, I have prayed that thy faith fail not, Luke 22. 32. No, no, Christ
cannot part with his people upon slight terms, its not weakness in grace will
out a soul of Christ's favor, he is called a shepherd, Psalm. 23. 1. Now you
know a shepherd does not throw away his weak Lambs, but rather takes up such as
are weak and cannot go and carry them in his arms, and lodges them in his
bosom; Oh so does Christ make much of weak Lambs, such as cannot go of
themselves Christ will carry, Isa. 40. 11. He shall feed his flock like a
shepherd, he shall gather the Lambs with his arms and carry them in his bosom,
and shall gently lead those which are with young.

Oh see with what heart burnings Christ parts with any of his weak ones,
Ephraim was a weak lamb and Ephraim would be gone from Christ, but observe how
Christ parts with Ephraim, Hosea 11. 8. How shall I give thee up Ephraim, how
shall I deliver thee Israel, how shall I make thee as Admah, how shall I se^
thee as Zebaim, my heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled
together: And Christ is the same to thee that ever he was to Ephraim, his arm
of mercy is not shortened, Oh therefore come to him with joy and comfort, for he
will never leave thee nor forsake thee.

Lastly, Art thou weak in duty, O look up to him as thy High Priest, full of
compassion, and love, and pity toward weak souls; Oh do not despair, Christ
cannot cast thee off because of thy infirmities in duty, for then he would have
carried but very few home to heaven, for the best that ever were have been very
infirm in duty, and have had cause to cry out with the Church, All our
Righteousnesses are but as m^nstruous cloths, and as filthy rags in thy
presence, O Lord, Isa. 64. 6. But Christ is called a Father, yea an everlasting
Father, Isa. 9. 6. Does a Father in the flesh reject or despise the work a weak
child does, because it is not done with so much strength as he expects, or
rather does he not pity him under his weakness, and favor him in his work, and
considering he sees the child does what he can, the Father likes it as well as
if it were a great deal more. O^ so it is with this High Priest, oh he is so
full of compassion that he will not reject thee for thy weakness in performance
of duty, though the duty be done with little strength or a weak hand, yet if it
be right for sincerity and truth Christ will accept it kindly, hear what he
says about it, Zach. 4. 10. For the whole has despised the day of small
things: Therefore labor for sincerity of heart that those things thou do for
Christ may be done in truth and fear not, Christ has great compassions, he
will rather help thee in the work then reject thee for it, read Romans 8. 26.
Thus you see what that Qualification in the Priest, if well improved, will
afford us in a doubting season, I now come to the second Qualification, in the
High Priest, and that is his Faithfulness.

This will afford us comfort three manner of ways.

First, In point of supply as to grace.

Secondly, Against falling off from grace.

Thirdly, Against the evil of affliction and persecution.

First, In point of supply with grace, I know the Lords people do find the want
of that many a time, Cant. 2 5. Supporting grace under affliction, strengthening
grace against wearisomness in duty; mortifying grace to sin and corruption, and
comforting grace in the hour of temptation: now here is a fullness of this laid
into Christ, (...). 1. 19. chap. 2. 9. And he made the steward of it; Oh go to
Christ for it.

Obj. But some may say if we should he may deny it to us and keep it to
himself, as many Stewards have done who have been entrusted with a treasure in
the behalf of others, yet they have been defrauded of it through the
unfaithfulness of the Steward: Oh soul, be not discouraged as to that, but put
him upon the trial there is not one jot of grace that the Father has given
Christ for thee which he can keep from thee; I must confess, all the supplies
of grace which the Father has given forth for the use and benefit of his
Elect, he has entrusted Christ with it, and has made him the disposer of it,
John 1. 14. with 16. But to be sure of it, he will not, yea he cannot diminish
one jot or mite of it, and that for these two reasons.

First, Because in his own nature he is faithful, its abundantly more easy for
the Sun to cease shining then it is for Christ to cease being faithful,
therefore in the Revelations the holy Ghost gives him this name, Rev. 3. 14.
The faithful and true witness: Therefore soul, what ever supply of the grace of
the Spirit thou want, assure thy self thou shall have it if thou make use
of Christ for it, he will not withhold one drop of it from thy soul, Oh
therefore come with boldness to the Throne of grace to ask grace and mercy to
help in time of need, plead with Christ for it, tell him that thou have heard
that the Father has laid in a stock of justifying, pardoning, and sanctifying
grace into his hands for poor, naked, sinful, unclean, miserable sinners, and
has made him the Lord Treasurer of it, and tell him that thou art come to him
as a miserable poor sinner for a portion of it, for a portion of pardoning
grace and sanctifying grace, then see whether Christ will deny it thee; Oh he
is so far from withholding from a sinner what is his due by gift from the
Father, that he has taken great care and pains to possess the soul of it upon
every occasion read that place in Proverbs which relates to Christ as a Steward
entrusted in this great work of giving out grace to the Lords people, Prove. 9.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Wisdom has bu^l^ed her house, she has hewn out her seven
pillars, she has killed her beasts, she has mingled her wine, she has
furnished her table, she has sent forth her maidens, she cries upon the
highest places of the City, who so is simple let him turn in hither, as for him
that wants understanding, she says to him, Come eat of my bread and drink of
my wine which I have mingled, for sake the foolsh, and live and go in the way
of understanding: Farther, you may see how intent Jesus Christ was in this work
of distributing (freely and faithfully to men) the portion given them (as
sinners) by and from the Father, John 7 37. In the last day of the Feast which
was their great day, Jesus stood and cried, If any man thirst let him come to
me and drink. Mark, he chose the great day of the Feast when the company were
greatest, he did not take a time to proclaim what treasure he had received from
the Father for poor sinners, when there were but few in place to hear him, but
when the most of the people were met together, besides he did not whisper the
matter but cried aloud that all men might hear him touching what he had
received from the Father for them if they would come to him for it.

2. Reason, why Christ cannot withheld any supply of grace from the Lords
people, is because of these relations he stands in to the Saints.

1. He is their friend, John 15. 15. Now a friend is so far from withholding
what is due, that he will rather add something of his own to what was given.

2. He is their Husband, J^r 3. 14. Now is it usual for the Husband not to seek
the good of his Wife.

3. He is their head and they his body Ephesians. 5. 23. Can the head withhold any
thing from any one of the members of the body, does he not give down his
supplies to every part of the body freely, truly no more can Christ withhold
any supply of grace and mercy from his members which as their head he has
received for them.

Secondly, How should this Qualification of faithfulness in Christ secure our
hope and comfort against falling away totally from grace; Oh how many poor
souls are there in the world which are under tremblings about this thing, Oh
but I fear I may be cast totally out of the grace and favor of God, Oh soul,
look up to Christ under this doubt, if there be any Interest in heaven to be
made against thy falling away from a state of grace, thou may be sure not to
want it: Soul remember, will a poor mortal man (when his Wife stands upon the
trial of her life strive, and tug, and labor, by Purse and Petition, to make
an Interest for his Wife, both with Judge and Jury to save her life, and do
thou think that Christ will fall short in this to thee, who have given up thy
self to him as his Wife, behold his interceding and advocating work in heaven
for thee at this hour, on purpose to preserve thee from this evil, thou so much
fear, and does not the Apostle tell thee that he is heard in all he prayed
for, read these two places of Scripture, Zach. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. 5. with Heb. 5.
7. And does not our Savior say that he is always heard in heaven, John 11.
42. Therefore says the Apostle Heb. 13. 5, 6. So that we may boldly say that
the Lord is our helper, and I will not fear what man can do unto me, for he
has said I will never leave thee nor for sake thee: Fear it not, it can never
be, if ever he took thee into Covenant, all the Devils in hell can never out
thee more, for he takes none into Covenant but such whom he loves, and those
whom he begins to love he loves to the end, John 13. 1. And its with an
everlasting love, Jer. 31. 3. Its true, a Christian may lose the sense and
sight of the love of God, many days if not years, But he can never lose the
being of the love of Christ to his soul; and as much as some talk of falling
away from grace, thou needst not trouble thy self much about that point, but
leave it to others that can better judge of the thing then thou can; besides,
if the notion were rightly understood by weak Christians, ( viz.) about falling
from grace, I think there would not be so many vain Disputations, Doubts, and
Fears amongst them about it as there is.

Grace in Scripture is taken four manner of ways.

First, For the state of grace into which a soul is placed (through his
believing in Christ) by an indissolvable Covenant which is never to be
violated, or broken, or altered more, Psalm 89. 34. This is the thing the
Apostle is speaking of, Romans 3. 24. When he says, We are justified by his
grace, that is, Believers are put into a justified state by the blood of Jesus
Christ, which we call a state of grace, Romans 5. 2.

Secondly, There is the means of grace, that is all that provision which God
has provided in his word for the calling home of poor lost creatures to
himself, of this the Apostle speaks likewise, 2 Cor. 6 1.

Thirdly, There are the habits of grace, which are those divine dispositions or
qualities of sanctifying grace, placed in the heart at the time of our
Conversion, of which James speaks, Iam. 4. 6

Fourthly, There is the exercise or actings of this habitual grace, which St.
Peter speaks of, 2 Pet. 3. Lastly, now if by falling from grace men do intend
by it grace in the second sense, ( viz.) from the means of grace, so I say too,
and am so far an Arminian, for our Savior was of this Judgment, Math. 13. 19,
20, 21, 22. with Luke 14. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Of this judgment
was St. Paul, 2 Cor. 6. 1. with Heb. 2. 3. That men and women may enjoy the
means of grace in common with others, and yet have no benefit by it. Again,
they may go farther with that in Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. To have great enlightnings
and great tastes of it, and by the powerful convictions of it, made (with Herod)
to do many good things, but our Savior tells you that they were such as were
never truly rooted, hence it is that the word was never truly rooted in their
hearts, Math. 13. 21. Now to be truly rooted, is elsewhere expounded a rooting
in Christ by Election, Math. 24. 24. Luke 18. 7. Romans 9. 11. Romans 11. 5. Peter
1. 1, 2.

Again, There are the actings, or there is the exercise of grace; now in this
sense a Child of God may fall from grace, that is, he may go downd the win for
a time, he may abate in the degree of his love to, and zele for; and faith in
Jesus Christ; Thus it was with David, and St. Peter, and the Spouse, Cant. 5.
2, 3. And with Ephesus, Rev 2 4. 5.

Again, Take grace in the habits of it, now in this sense an Elected, called
soul can never fall from grace, that is, he can never lose the roots of his
grace more; they may be buried up with corruption as the fire is with its ashes
sometimes, but it can never be extinguished or put out in the soul more, but it
will now and then appear, as roots may lie many months in the Earth unseen in
a Winter season, but when the heat of the Sun draws near the Earth they will
Spring again, so though grace in the heart may have its Winter season, and so
lie hid under the clods of corruption for a time, when Christ the Sun of
Righteousness shall draw near the heart with his heating beams, grace will then
spring again, Cant. 1. 12. When the King sits at his Table my spicknard
sends forth the smell thereof.

I will give you one reason why grace in the heart can never be wholly
extinguished, because its a branch of the Covenant of grace which God has made
with the Elect in Christ, Ier. 31. 33. But this shall be the Covenant that I
will make with the house of Israel, after those days, says the Lord, I will
put my Law in their inward parts, and write it upon their hearts, and will be
their God, and they shall be my people. Now by that Law in the heart, what can
it be but the conveying of the sanctifying grace of the Covenant into the Souls
of the Lords people at the hour and time of their Conversion.

Lastly, There is grace in the state, or that which we call a state of grace,
which is a souls being planted into Jesus Christ by faith, from this men and
women can never possibly fall away; And for these three grounds.

First, Because those that have been really planted into Jesus Christ, they all
receive from him eternal life, and Christ says, that those which have received
from him eternal life, they shall never perish, John 10. 28. Now if some will
assert such shall perish or may perish, and Christ says they shall not, soul I
leave thee to believe which of these two thou please.

Secondly, It cannot be they can fall from grace, because they have Christ's
hand to defend them; now Christ is God as well as man, and all power in Heaven
and Earth is given into his hand, Math. 28. 18, John 10 28.

Thirdly, It cannot be so because they are in the Fathers hand, John 10 29.
They are in the Fathers hand by Electon, and in the Sons by Redemption and
Intercession, and none can pluck them out of these infinite Divine hands; how
is it then that such a Doctrine can be true, which says that true believers may
fall from grace totally and finally.

But lastly, this Qualification of faithfulness in Christ may afford a great
deal of comfort in afflicting and persecuting seasons, let the soul meet with
never so great distress, he may be sure to comfort himself in the faithfulness
of Christ, though friends may leave him, and an estate may leave him, says
Christ, Isa. 43 2. When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee, and
through the Rivers they shall not overflow thee, when thou walk through the
fire thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee: This
the Prophet David could experience to be true at sundry times, who says that
Christ had been with him in six, yea in seven troubles, who does instance in
some of his troubles, how he had found Christ with him in these troubles one
was this, when his Father and Mother left hm, then the Lord took him up, Psalm.
27. 10. Another was this, when his friends and acquaintance had withdrawn from
him and did look strange upon him, the Lord stood by him, Psalm. 31. 11. So St.
Paul could say likewise, when all men forsook him, yet the Lord stood by him, 2 Timothy 4. 16, 17. And therefore would comfort the distressed Corinthians, 1 Cor.
10 13. That though no temptation had happened to them, but what was common to
Saints, yet Christ was faithful, who would not suffer them to be tempted above
what they were able to bear, and would with the temptation make away for their
escape.

Now St. Paul could speak this by experience, for he had found it so; Oh
therefore live upon the faithfulness of Christ in a Gaol, in a Dungeon, any
where, for he has said he will never leave thee nor forsake thee; if thou art
sick he will make thy bed in thy sickness, Psalm. 41. 3. If thou art poor he
will stick closer to thee then a Brother, Prove. 18 24. If thou art tempted, it
shall be in his arms, Heb. 2. 18. For in that he himself has suffered being
tempted, he is able to succor those which are tempted: In a word, he is so
faithful as to bear a part with thee in all thy afflictions let them be what
they will, Isa. 63. 9. In all their afflictions he is afflicted, and the Angel
of his presence saved them: Oh therefore make him thy High Priest, live upon
him for thee and thine in all conditions whatsoever, entrust him with thy soul,
with thy body, with thy relations, with thy estate, with thy all, for he is the
faithful and true witness, Rev. 3. 14.

CHAP 30. The Consecrated Garments of the High Priest, in which he was to
Minister for the people.
THe High Priests garments were twofold, there was what was proper to his body,
from the neck downward to the feet; and secondly there was what was proper to
the head of the High Priest from the neck upwards.

Now in the garments which were proper to the body of the High Priest, from the
neck downward, there were these things considerable.

First, The long Robe it self, which covered the whole body of the High Priest
from the neck down to the feet, we find it to be a very glorious thing as it
will appear if we consider the matter of which it was made, which was of Gold,
blue Purple, and Scarlet, and fine Linen, Exodus 27 4, 5. This shows us, or sets
forth to us, the glorious Robe of Christ's Righteousness in which Believers only
stand justified before God. The body of the High Priest when clothed with his
Priestly garments, held out two things to an eye of faith.

First, The head with its Crown and Miter upon it, that held out Christ as the
head of his Church, therefore that had the Miter and the Crown upon it.

Secondly, The whole body of the Priest below the head, that signified the
whole Church of Christ, over whom Christ is head: Now as the body of the Priest
was wholly covered over (in all the parts of it) with this glorious long Robe,
so it shows us how the whole body of the Elect stand covered over with Christ's
Righteousness before God, in which alone they are in person and performance
presented complete before God: Therefore when the Apostle is speaking of the
Elects meeting in Christ, and covered over with this glorious Robe of
Righteousness, says in Col. 2. 10. And ye are complete in him which is the
head of all Principalities and Powers: That is, when Believers have by faith
put on the Righteousness of Christ about them (as the High Priest did put on
his garments) then are they complete in Gods sight, and not till then. Hence it
is when the Apostle speaks of the work of making Christ ours, he delivered
himself in such phrases as hold analogy with the High Priests putting on his
long Robe, that you may know the one was a Type of the other: As in Romans 13.
14. But ye put on the Lord Jesus Christ, so Ephesians. 4. 24. And that ye put on the
new man, which after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness: so
Phil. 3. 9. And be found in him not having mine own Righteousness, which is of
the Law: That is, to put him on as a Robe, or to be found in him or his
righteousness, wholly covered over with it by faith as with a garment.

Thus you see how the Scriptures make the High Priests garments, and the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ, to agree and harmonize together.

Use 1.
Then this shows us the usefulness of the Righteousness of Faith, or Christ's
Righteousness; soul know this, that there is no covering will either protect
thee from the wrath of God, or present thee or thy duties acceptable with God,
but this covering; should thou make up a covering of the finest duties or
works of Righteousness that ever was spun by the finest Pharisee in the world,
it would prove but rottenness before the Lord; alas my friends, if God had not
provided Adam better coverings then his Fig-leave Righteousness, what had there
become of Adam, and all us in him. There is nothing will or can cover thy
nakedness but this Righteousness, your spots will still appear and show
themselves, do what you can; you were as good go about to build a ship of Paper
to sail through the Ocean withal, as to think to sail to heaven in a vessel of
your own Righteousness. If you will accept of this Righteousness, well, if not,
God will accept of no other from you; this is of Gods providing for you if you
like it, 1 Cor. 1. 30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made
unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption.

God will like nothing but what is of his own making, bring him what you will
for Righteousness except this of Christ's, certainly the everlasting burnings
will quickly consume it into ashes, and pierce through all: Therefore labor to
get into this righteousness, beg hard for it, that thou may be presented to
God without spot or blemish; its for the sake of this that the Church is so
glorious in Gods eye, Cant. 4 9. Thou have ravished my heart, my Sister my
Spouse, thou have ravished my heart with one of thy eyes, with one chain of thy
neck: So Cant 1. 15. Behold thou art fair my love, behold thou art fair, thou
have doves eyes, and Cant. 4. 7. Behold thon art all fair my love, there is no
spot in thee. All this is spoken with respect to the righteousness of Christ,
which is upon the Church of Christ; this was the Churches great ground of joy
and rejoicing, not that she was clothed with the glory of the world, but with
the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, Isa. 61. 10. I will greatly rejoice in the
Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God, for he has clothed me with the
garments of Salvation, and has covered me with the Robe of his righteousness,
as a Bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a Bride adorneth her
self with Jewels: Certainly sad is the condition of these men and women which
have left this blessed righteous covering, upon what specious pretense soever;
it may be they think they have found out a better way for their justification
before God; they think they can provide God a better Robe, a Garment made up of
their just dealing with their Neighbors, adding to it their outward
abstination from some meats, and drink, and superfluity in apparel, together
with some endeavors to act up to a light within them; Oh this they hug, and
embrace, and cry up as the only glorious righteousness, crying out, lo here is
Christ, he dwells in this light we cry up, he lives in this Robe of
righteousness which we have spun, come turn to it and hear, incline your ears
and your souls shall live; thus poor blinded (yet very confident) souls, they
are just as the Jews were, carried out by the Devil (being ignorant of Gods
righteousness) to establish a righteousness of their own in opposition to the
righteousness of faith as the Apostle speaks in Romans 10. 3.

Dear friends, have a care of parting with that righteousness which is only
justifying before God, and I do affirm that there is nothing within a man that
will justify him before God, there is no light in any man on earth can or will
do it, take it either for a natural or divine light, and that soul that shall
make any thing within him a ground for justification in opposition to this Robe
of righteousness, I say, according to the voice of Scripture, cannot be saved
if he lives and dies in that error; St. Paul and these persons who are for a
righteousness within them (for justification) were of a vast differing
judgment; these (which are fallen from the righteousness of faith) say, for their
parts they will have a righteousness found in themselves which shall justify
them; but S. Paul says, that he desires that himself may be found in that
righteousness which shall justify him before God, Phil. 3 9. Oh soul, keep
close to the righteousness of faith, contend earnestly for it, let it not go
from thee, because nothing can present thee faultless before God if this be
wanting.

CHAP. 31. I next come to speak of these Mysterious things which belonged to
the Robe or Garment which the High Priest did wear about him when he was to
administer (for the people) before the Lord,
FIrst there was a breast plate made for the Robe, made of a plate of Gold
apiece, in breadth and length about a span every way, Exodus 39. 9.

In this breast plate of Gold there was engraved the names of the twelve tribes
of Israel, in Letters set in rows, with precious stones, Exodus 39. 10, 11, 12,
13. 14. There was likewise set in this brest-place the Urim and Thummim, Exodus
28 30.

This plate was tied about the High Priests long Robe with chains of Gold, that
so the plate (which had the names of the twelve tribes written in it) might set
strait upon the High Priests heart, Exodus 39 19, 20, 21. with Exodus 28 29, 30.

The use and purpose of this breast plate, was to show all believers (for their
great Consolation) these things.

First, Concerning the deep sense that Christ has of the several conditions,
that his people are liable unto in this world; for you see that the names of
the twelve tribes were written upon this breast plate, which was placed upon the
High Priests heart.

Now by the names of the twelve tribes in Exodus 28. 29. We are not to
understand precisely of the Israelites, but more generally of the whole body of
the Elect, both of Jews and Gentiles, as elsewhere it is so understood, Rev. 7.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

Now all the names of the body of the Elect, was the High Priest to carry upon
his heart, Exodus 28. 29. And Aaron shall bear the names of the Children of
Israel in the breast plate of judgment upon his heart, when he goes into the
holy place for a memorial before the Lord continually.

I say it shows us how deeply the several conditions of the Elect are stamped
upon the heart of Christ, he bears them all upon his heart, he keeps to this
day (though in glory) a naked place in his heart to affect himself with his
peoples conditions, says David, Psalm. 40. 5. Many O Lord are thy wondrous
works which thou have done, and thy thoughts which are to usward, they cannot
be reckoned up in order unto thee, I would declare and speak of them, they are
more then can be numbered, so Jer. 29 11. For I know the thoughts that I think
toward you, says the Lord, thoughts of peace and not of evil, to give you an
expected end, so that you may perceive how the Scripture does make the High
Priests carrying the names of the Children of Israel upon his breast plate, and
Christ our great High Priest carrying the whole of the conditions of his Church
upon his heart now in heaven, to agree and simbolize.

Use. 1.
Then comfort thy self O poor dejected soul, remember what ever thy condition
be in this life, it hangs upon the heart of Christ in heaven, what is it soul
that troubles thee, is it spiritual troubles, is it the weight of thy sins,
look up, this hangs upon the heart of Christ in heaven, art thou violently
tempted to blaspheme God and Christ, or to make away with thy own life, look up
to Christ thy High Priest, he bears this upon his heart in heaven; art tempted
to deny the faith and quit thy profession, this is upon Christ's heart too; does
lust and corrupion press thee low, and oftentimes carry thee away from God,
look up, this is upon the heart of Christ too; art thou complaining for the
want of the comfortable shinings forth of the presence of God, do thou with
David, feel the want of the spirit of God, the strength of it, the light of it,
the life and comfort of it, Psalm. 51. 10, 11, 12. Look up, this condition
likewise is upon the heart of Christ.

Does duty seem burdensome, and Ordinances seem dry, and barren, and sapless
to thee, O look up, this is upon Christ's heart too.

Is thy condition a condition of outward trouble or distress, all hangs on
Christ's heart, art thou weark and sickly, much under pain, this hangs on the
heart of Christ likewise; Is thy family smitten, is thy Husband, or Wife, or
Children, or Parents, or Servants smitten under the hand of God, this hangs on
the heart of Christ; art thou afflicted under the loss of Relations, art thou
Wifeless, Childless, Friendless, is thy Husband taken from thee by Death or
Banishment, and thou left with five or six small Children to the wide world,
and hardly bread to put into their mouths, all these conditions Christ bears
upon his heart: art thou a Prisoner or banished from thy All, dear Wife,
Husband, Children, Estate, and all for thy Conscience sake. Assure thy self all
this lives upon the heart of Christ now in glory, that he might be deeply
affected with these conditions which this world affords his people, O read that
blessed place in Heb. 2. 17. Wherefore it behoved him to be made like unto his
Brethren, that he might be a merciful High Priest in things pertaining to God,
to make Reconciliation for the sins of the people, for in that himself has
suffered being tempted, he is able to succor those that are tem^^ed.

This leads me to a second thing about the brest-place upon the High Priests
heart, which was this, The Priest was to carry the names of the Children of
Israel (written upon the breast plate) before the Lord; which shows us that
Christ does not (as he is our High Priest) only carry the sense of Believers
conditions upon his heart, but it seems it is to good purpose, for he carries
them in before the Lord, Exodus 28. 29. And Aaron shall bear the names of the
Children of Israel in the breast plate of judgment upon his heart when he goes
into the holy place, for a memorial before the Lord continually.

But some may ask me, what comfort will that afford a Believer that Christ was
to carry their conditions before the Lord?

Answer, O there is much in this Mystery, and that in point of prevalency with
God, who is the great Lord of all the blessings that Believers do enjoy, for
there is not any special favor which comes from Christ to a Believer, but
Christ first draws it forth from the Father, James 1. 17. Every good gift, and
every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the father of lights.

Now all this in the Type is to assure the Believer, that without doubt (if he
has hung up his condition upon the heart of Christ) it must go well with it in
heaven, for God the Father is merciful enough in himself (for he is called the
Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort and consolation, and one in whom
the fatherless finds mercy, so that there is an aptness and readiness in God
himself upon the knowledge of his peoples conditions, to give out relief and
supply to them; O but when the wants, necessities, miseries and afflctions,
trials and temptationss, shall be brought in before God by a High Priest, one
who was constituted and appointed by the Father for this very end, this must
needs be effectual, otherwise God will render his work in the High Priest of no
effect, but God never made or set up any thing in vain, but the sitting of the
High Priest was Gods own act and ancient contrivance, Exodus 28. 1.

And the Priest was appointed on purpose by the Lord for this piece of work
(amongst the rest) to produce the several conditions of his people before him
in order to a supply; surely this must amount to something on which Believers
may depend for comfort; but besides, if we do but mind what the High Priest was
to do when he was to carry the several conditions of the people before the
Lord, it will still add to our comfort; and that was this, he was in the same
place to pour out strong cries to God, that he would both look upon and take
into deep consideration the Estates of the people, now brought into his
presence, and that by a High Priest, a man in office, chosen by himself for the
purpose to bear the names of the whole Israel of God before the Lord in order
to supply.

Surely this must prevail in heaven, for if the Lord was so ready to be moved
with compassion at the cries of an Ishmael, Genesis 21. 17. Surely much more will
God hear the cries of a High Priest, who has the anointings upon him, to make
him every way prevailing upon the heart of God, Exodus 29. 7.

Surely methinks this should very much encourage Believers to wait upon God in
dark times for supplies; besides, when this High Priest shall be the Son of
God, yea his only Son, brought up with him from eternity, Prove. 8 23.

And when the Father shall see that Jesus Christ his Son brings in the wants,
distresses, temptations, afflictions of his people upon his heart, giving
assurance thereby that he has made their conditions, all of them his own, for
they live upon and in, the heart of Jesus Christ, as that their wants are his
wants, their pains are his pains, and temptations his temptations, for he
sympathyzeth with them in all respects, Isa. 63 9. In all their afflictions he
is afflicted.

And when he shall add to it, his strong cries and tears poured forth with deep
sighs and groans, crying out, O Father these are all of my body for whom I
intercede, if thou love me, have regard to their conditions, they are my own
flesh and bones, in helping them and relieving them, and easing them out of
pain, thou relievest me, and helpest me, and easest me out of pain, for in all
their afflictions I am afflicted; Therefore I pray thee let the Angel of thy
presence save them; Lord look upon my heart, and here thou shall see the names
of the twelve tribes (even all my Israel) engraven in the Letters of my own
blood, thou shall never see thy Son but with their conditions engraven upon his
heart: And what think you souls, will not this prevail, may not Believers
safely adventure their all upon the work of this Priesthood; Oh study this
more, and your comfort will be infinite.

Obj. But some may say, it may be thought the High Priest under the Law did do
so for the people, I mean, carry their names upon his heart before the Lord,
yet its a question whether Christ does do this always now he is in heaven; Is
always, for so much as this lies in the Type, Exodus 28 29. The Priest was to
bear the names of the people upon his heart for a Memorial before the Lord
continually, which shows that this Priesthood piece of service, of bearing
the names of the people before the Lord, was to continue for ever; for it was
to be a Memorial before the Lord continually; not only was this work of the
High Priest in the Type to remain for a for ever, so long as there will be any
need of Christ's Intercession, but always for ever, for so the word continually)
does likewise import, therefore says the Apostle, Heb. 7. 24. But this man,
because he continues ever, has a^ unchangeable Priesthood, ver. 24. He ever
livet^ to make Intercession for them; so that we may safely say that Christ our
High Priest is always in heaven lifting up holy hands (as it were) to God for
Believers, in a way of presenting their conditions before him; whether thou
sleep or wakeest, whether thou art able to pray or not, yet Christ is at
prayer for thee, he intercedes night at day for thy welfare, He ever lives to
make Intercession for thee.

Hence it is that David could so comfortably lie down in his bed and take his
rest so securely by night, he knew that Christ had his condition upon his
heart, Psalm 4. 8. I will both lay me down to sleep, for the Lord only makes
me rest in safety.

Lastly, We may learn this from it, that the High Priests going into the
presence of the Lord with the names of the twelve tribes upon his heart, it
shows u^ that Christ enters he presence of the Father in the names of all true
Believers Christ does it for them, and intercedes for them in their name, as
well as for their sake; As the High Priest under the Law was chosen for the
people, so Christ was sent forth to agitate for Believers, and tells the
Father* as it were that he is come to him in the form of a servant, to
discharge his duty to God for Believers. If I pray, Petition, intercede, for
any spiritual mercy for them, it is but to fulfill thy will (in this case) from
eternity, for this was the great design that thou had before the world was,
that I should come down from glory, and take upon me the form of a servant, and
die the bitter death of the Cross, that the Elect might be saved, and then to
go up to glory again on purpose to make Intercession for them; and therefore if
I ask any spiritual favor for them, its no more then I was appointed to do by
thee from everlasting.

Oh what a deal of comfort may a poor soul draw from this consideration, of the
brest-plates being upon the High Priests heart, wherein the names of the Elect
of God are engraven.

Oh methinks if a soul were assured he were upon no bodies heart in the world,
either Husbands heart, Wives heart, Fathers heart, Mothers heart, Brothers
heart, Sisters heart, Friends or Neighbors heart, yet to be in so eminent a
manner upon Christ's heart, this is enough to bear up the soul in the worst of
times.

There was likewise placed in the breast plate the Urim and Thummim, Exodus 28.
30. This of the Urim and Thummim was to be understood two ways.

First, As it had relation to the Type it self.

2. As it related to the Antitype, which was Christ.

First, As it related to the Type it self, which was the High Priest called to
office, a principal part of whose office it was to teach and instruct the
people in the Doctrine of God, as to the Worship and Service of him; its true,
there were others of the inferior Priests did this work of expounding to, and
teaching the people also, but the High Priest was not exempted from this great
duty, Mal. 2. 7. The Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek
the Law at his mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts.

Now the Urim and Thummim did signify those two qualifications to be in the
Priest, was which the soundness of his Doctrine which he was to deliver to the
people, and the holiness of his life as a pattern and example amongst them; the
Priest was to preach to or press upon the Consciences of the people, nothing
else but the sound substantial truths of God, not his own novels or brainish
fancies or dreams, but the wholesome Doctrine of God, Ezekiel. 3. 17. (says God)
Son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel, therefore
hear the word of my mouth, and give them warning from me.

Oh what care should the Ministers of the Lord take in this matter, that they
feed the flock of God with sound and wholesome food, therefore is the
exhortation from St. Peter to all the Ministers of the word in the world, 1
Pet. 4. 11. If any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God.

Its true, there are many men passing under the name of Ministers of Christ now
a days in the world, but how few of them make it their faithful and painful
labors in their studies to bring forth pure truth; but on the contrary, wrest
it and stretch it, and puts it upon a rack to make it bend every way to serve
their ungodly wicked ends and purposes; And so instead of feeding the flock of
God (which was purchased with his own blood) with sound wholesome food, they
feed them with Gall and Wormwood, who rather pervert then convert any they have
to do withal.

Take the most sober sort of them, I mean, the most Idle and Laze sort, such
who love neither to feed the fold of Christ either with Gall, or Honey, that
is, as the Prophet speaks, they are dumb dogs, such as will not bark, lying
down, loving to slumber, yet they can feed themselves with the fat and the
sweet, and cloth themselves with the wool: But for the fatness of sound
Doctrine and the sweetness of truth, the Church of God may perish, and rot, and
die, for any thing they ear or are thoughtful about, surely the Urim and
Thummim was never upon the breasts of these sacred Priests, as they would be
owned.

Secondly, As for the other qualification which is holiness of life and
conversation, this ought to be in and upon the Ministers of the Lord; They
ought to be exemplary in their lives and conversations for others to imitate
them, that so they might not build for God with one hand, and throw it down
again with the other hand, this is our Saviors exhortation to all Ministers of
the Gospel, Math. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men, that they seeing
your good works, might glorify your Father which is in heaven, therefore says
St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 5, 3. Neither as being Lords over Gods heritage, but being
ensamples to the flock.

Use 2.
O Then how unhappy are the people of some Countries in the World, with respect
to the want of this great qualification in their Ministers, or pretended such
how; hard a thing is it to find the Urim and Thummim upon their Priests,
methinks to see men and meet men with their loins girt so seemingly devout, and
yet to see these casks so empty either of sound Doctrine or a holy
Conversation, it is to me a piece of unparalled hypocrisy.

Its known to all that know any thing, that the generallity of the world, are
apter to walk by examples then by precept; the Authority of precepts depends
very much upon the good lives of those which preach them; alas Brethren, what
is it if a man go into a Pulpit and preach a very good Learned Sermon, and as
soon as he is come forth of the place to spend the rest of the Sabbath with his
Parishioners in an Alchouse, it may be until they are all drunk in the place,
or to some ungodly sport or other, to the very shame of nature it self, if
their be any Bull-baiting or Bear-baiting, any Hurling, Wrestling, or
Cudgel-playing, any Crowding, Dancing, May Pole, or Church Ale-gaming, who more
fritcher and forwarder in the work then the Parson of the Parish.

Thus the poor people are made Sermon proof, and shut up against all
convictions of truth, through the scandalous conversations of their idle
profane Priests, which they have amongst them; how far are such from being the
Priests of the Lord, bearing the Urim and Thummim upon their breasts, let the
world Judge.

Lastly, Where as its said that the Urim and Thummim was written in the
breast plate, and placed upon his heart; it shows us how much the work should be
upon his spirit that the Priest does for God, and how near he should set it to
his heart, so should it be with all the Ministers of the Gospel, they ought to
set those truths which they preach very near their hearts, yea, such as are
true Ministers of Jesus Christ, they do set those truths which they preach to
others nearest their hearts of any thing in the world, God has ordered it that
it shall be so, he gives them (that he sends forth as Ministers) the little
Book of truth to eat into their bowels, that it might live in their hearts,
Rev. 10. 9

Hence it is that Jeremiah tells you that the word of God lived in his heart,
Jer. 20 9.

And David a Prophet of the Lord, also could tell you that the word of God and
the truths he was to deliver, were dearer to him then thousands of Gold or
Silver, Psalm. 119 72. The Lord makes it so to them, that they may take delight
in the preaching of it.

2. That they may be careful of corrupting of it, you know things that are dear
and near our hearts we are very apt to keep pure, but such things as we regard
not we throw into any hole, so that it easily corrupts and rusts.

3. That if need be they may lay down their lives in defense of it; this it was
made St. Paul cry out he was not only ready to be bound, but to die in the
defense of truth, Acts 21. 13. It was the nearness of truth to his heart, but
how few of them are there in the world that call themselves Ministers, that in
any sense wears the Urim and Thummim upon their hearts.

2. As this qualification did relate to the Type which was the High Priest, and
so in him all the succeeding Ministers of the Gospel, so it relates to Christ
who was the Antitype of it: And so the Urim and Thummim shows us these two
great things (for our comfort) which are infinitely to be considered in Jesus
Christ.

First, The infinite perfection of holiness and sanctification which is in
Christ, John 1. 14. He was full of grace and truth, Col. 1. 19. For it pleased
the Father that in him should all fullness dwell; This teaches us these two
things.

1. What believers are in the sight of God through Christ, a people full of
holiness, for Christ is the Vine, and believers the Branches; now by virtue of
this union God looks upon all alike, God in the wise dispensations of his grace
has so ordered it, that believers and his Son shall make up but one body, that
so God might account for the Heads sake all the members holy, not that they are
so in themselves, but I say God is pleased to account it so, that believers are
as holy as his Son, they being of him and in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21. For he was made
sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him.

And God would have us to reckon so too for our comfort, mark that place in
Romans 6. 11. Likewise reckon your selves to be also dead indeed unto sin, but
alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord: There is not any man in the world
dead to sin or perfectly alive toward God; its true, the Saints are a dying to
sin daily, and a laboring out after life toward God, says St. Paul, I press
hard after the mark, Phil 3. 14. But for any to say he is perfectly dead to
sin, and perfectly alive to God, in himself, he says not the truth, I speak of
perfection in the degree; yet you see God would have believers look upon
themselves so, reckon it to be so says God, that is, as they are in Christ and
by the Father there apprehended, for Christ was so in himself fully, yet not
for himself but for believers, read 1 Cor. 1. 30. He was made of God Wisdom,
Righteousness, and Sanctification for us.

2. It informs the Saints from whom they do derive their holiness and
sanctification, and to whom they should go for it.

O friends, you drive it all from Jesus Christ, he is the fountain of all your
grace of holiness and sanctification, John 1. 14, 16, 17. The word was made
flesh, and it dwelt amongst us, and we beheld his glory, as of the only
begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth, and of his fullness have we
all received, and grace for grace, ver. 17. For the Law was given by Moses, but
grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.

Christ is called the head of the body, Ephesians 5 Whose Office it is to give down
his supplies to the several members of the same, for the mutual benefit of the
whole body.

There was a stock of grace and holiness laid into Christ for this very
purpose, therefore is Christ called the Saints treasury or storehouse, Col. 2.
3. So says our Savior himself, John 17. 19. For their sakes I sanctify my
self, that they all might be sanctified through the truth.

O therefore souls! make to Christ for grace and holiness, remember the Urim
and Thimmim of all; perfection both of Doctrine and holiness of life, lies in
Jesus Christ, on purpose to be given out to those that come for it.

Here it was David fled for sanctification under the decays of grace, Psalm. 51.
7, 10. Purge me with hysop and I shall be clean, wash me and I shall be whiter
then snow, Psalm. 36. 9. For with thee is the Fonntain of life, and in thy light
shall we see light.

Soul, do thou want grace, purging grace, sanctifying grace, would thou be
more holy in thy life and conversation, then thou hear where the fountain
is, make out to him, its his desire to have thee come, thou can not please
him in any thing better, then to sue to him for grace and holiness; therefore
says Christ, If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink, John 7. 37.
Therefore come with boldness to the throne of grace to ask grace and mercy to
help in time of need, Heb. 4. 16.

Lastly, We may draw out this (from the Urim and Thummim upon the Priests
heart) for our comfort to help us in dark erroneous times.

When the Doctrines of the Scripture are by men corrupted, as that we cannot
drink them any where, should we travel from Sea to Sea, there is not a Priest
or Minister that stands up in the defense of truth, but every one perverts and
corrupts it; I say, should we fall into such a season, that we cannot find a
Minister with the Urim or Thummim upon his breast; yet we may comfort our
selves in this, that our High Priest in heaven is not corrupted, he has the
Urim and Thummim still as much upon his heart as ever, who takes care to feed
his people with sound Doctrine and with wholesome food; however it goes amongst
the Priests here below, yet this Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, if you
will seek the Law at his mouth, Mal. 2. 7. In the greatest darkness that
overspread Egypt, yet he provided a light for his people in Goshen, Exodus 10.
23. So when the Antichristian darkness spread the Roman Empire all over, yet
Christ took care that his people should have a place of nourishment provided
for them, Rev. 12. 14. So in the times of Isreal's Apostasy, when all the
shepherds were corrupted in Israel, when they had trodden down the good pasture
of truth and justice both in Church and State, and had fould the remainders of
it with their feet, Ezekiel. 34. 18, 19. Yet then see the care of this Gospel High
Priest in those times, that although others did perish for want of sound
wholesome soul-food, yet his people should be fed from himself with the finest
of Wheat and Oil, read Ezekiel. 34. 11, 12, 13, 14

O therefore make use of Christ upon this account, let him be your stay, let
error fill all the public places in the world, yet thy High Priest will
provide for the sincere though in holes and corners, I will send you the
Comforter (says Christ) and he shall teach you all things, John 14. 26.

Men may shut up all thy sound Ministers from thy soul, such who have fed thee
with knowledge and understanding, but be of good comfort, they can never shut
up from thee this Gospel teaching Spirit, this will give thy heart a visit in
the most secret places of the earth, this was with the Spouse in the secret
places of the stairs, and in the clefts of the Rocks, Cant. 2. 14. This soul
teaching Agent is not straightened, says our Savior its like the wind it blows
where it lists, men may hear the sonnd of it, but cannot tell from whence it
comes, John 3. 8.

There was likewise at the hem of this glorious Robe tied several Bells and
Pomgranates, a Bell and a Pomgranate, a Bell and a Pomgranate, round about the
hem of the Robe, Exodus 39. 25, 26, with Exodus 28. 35.

The Use of this may be several ways considered.

First, It was for noise or sound, when the Priest was to enter before the
Lord, for this purpose was the Bells, for it would have cost the Priest his
life, if he should have gone in to the presence of the Lord without these Bells
ringing at the hem of his Robe, Exodus 28. 35.

Here we see what little regard God has to these silent Meetings in Worship,
as the Quakers and others dream of; God loves a laudable sound in his Worship,
Aarons Bells were to make a sound in the Woship of God: But some may say is God
taken with Words and Voices?

I answer, would not the same Objection have quarrelled with Aarons Bells;
would one think God should be taken with the ringing of a company of Bells in
his Worship; friends, have a care you be not such as would be wiser then God,
let us keep close to the known rule of Worship, if we cannot give a reason why
we should do this, or that, or the other thing in the Worship of God; let us
remember God can.

And for the Saints meeting together, in Scripture I find it was to speak often
one to another, Mal. 3. 16. And another private Meeting, John 20. 19. But our
Savior comes and speaks or preaches a word of peace to them, and in ver. 26.
Another private Meeting, but our Savior by his speaking keeps it from being a
silent one; Another private meeting held in Acts 1. 13, 14. Where they
continued in breaking of bread and in prayer, but never read of any such silent
meetings as the Quakers keep, so likewise if we consider the exhortations which
the Scripture gives to the Saints about their meeting together, we find it was
to provoke one another to love and good works, Heb. 10 24 25.

And that should spend the time away in their building up of one another in
their most holy faith, and praying together in the holy Ghost, Jude 20.

Now can this be done where there is nothing but silence, will sitting an hour
or two together, only looking in the ground in our meetings, fulfill these
exhortations.

Alas Brethren, God will be served with whole man, soul and body, the body as
well as the soul, for God made both for his glory, and Christ Redeemed both for
the Worship of God; And upon this account we are bid to glorify God with our
bodies as well as with our souls, 1 Cor. 6. 20. And we are exhorted to present
God with our whole bodies as well as our souls in the Worship of God, as living
sacrifices, which is but our reasonable service, Romans 12. 1.

Therefore says David, My tongue shall be as the Pen of a ready Writer, Ps.
45. 1. He would make use of his tongue in the Worship of God to praise him
withal: So Psalm. 71. 24. My tongue shall talk of thy righteousness all the day
long, Psalm. 27. 7. Ps 28 2.

Obj. But some will say, the Scripture says that bodily exercise profits
little.

I answer, not bodily exercise used in the worship of God excluded; but bodily
exercise when the soul is excluded out of the worship of God, this signisies
but little in Gods account, else why did the Apostle exhort the Romans to give
up the body as well as the soul to God in his service, Romans 12. 1.

But secondly, the gingling of Aarons Bells did signify the laudable sound
that the Priests Doctrine was to make in the ears of the people, he was not to
be a dumb silent Minister, but to make his Doctrine to ring (for God) in the
ears of the people, you may see the Charge which is given in this case to
Ministers, Isa 58. 1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet,
and show my people their transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins.

Use 3.
O how few Aaronites can we see or hear now in the world, how seldom can the
poor people hear the ringing of the Bells of sound Doctrine in their ears, in
some Parishes not above once a month, in so much, that the poor people have
almost forgot that kind of Music; and as for others when they do ring the
Aaronite Bells of Doctrine to the people, its so much confounded with the sound
of other mixed Bells which they have added to them, that when the Minister rings
them, the people can hardly tell whether they be rung in England or in Rome.

Lastly, The Bells of Aarons garment did signify the readiness, forwardness,
and aptness which there should be in the Priest to the work which God called
him unto, he was not to be hauld and dragged to his work, he was to act readily
from a principle of willingness, you may conceive the Bells at the end of the
long Robe, would gingle with every little motion of the body, so should
Ministers readily, freely, and willingly give out the mind of God to the dark
blind world; this is so in a great measure found upon the Ministers of Christ,
that have the Aaronite Bells upon their garments, read that noble passage of
the Apostle in Acts 3. 6. Silver and Gold have I none, but such as I have give
I thee, in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth rise up and walk.

Therefore says our Savior to his Disciples when he sent them forth to preach
the Gospel to the world, Math. 10. 8. Freely have you received, therefore
freely give.

God abhors a lazy idle Preacher, they are the worst plants that stands in his
Vineyard; an idle Minister will quickly grow an ignorant Minister, for so the
Lord puts them together, Isa 56. 10. His watchmen are blind, they are all
ignorant, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark sleeping, lying down, loving
to slumber.

Therefore when the Apostle would give a true Character of an Aaronite indeed,
one that carries the Aaronite Bells to the hem of his garment, he tells you in
2 Timothy 2 24. He should be apt to teach, that is, ready, willing, or forward in
his work, one that need not be pulled to it with Cart-ropes, that acts from a
principle of love to, and delight in his work, says St. Paul, A Dispensation
is committed to me, and wo^am I if I preach not the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9 16.

Our Savior tells you, that the Gospel shall flow so freely from them that are
his Ministers, as water from a fountain, John 7 38.

Use 4.
Of Lamentation, O how few of such Ministers do the Earth abound with at this
time, that are apt to teach the Gospel to the poor world, yea they are so far
from being apt to this work themselves, that they labor to stop up the way
against others, who out of Conscience to their duty (though at a low rate)
would do the work themselves, but must stand by as useless and can do nothing:
The good Lord Judge between party and party in this matter, if it be thy
blessed will; how many poor souls lies now a perishing through this dreadful
evil, is notorious known to many Countries, though not so much laid to heart,
and bewailed before the Lord as the matter requires.

Again, There were Pomgranates likewise mixed with the Bells at the hem of the
long Robe. Now the Pomgranates with the Bells, did set forth the glory of the
doctrine of the Gospel; for the color of the Pomgranates was very glorious, as
you may see, if you read their complexion in Exo. 28. 33. for they were to be
made of sky color Purple, and of Scarlet: but the Pomgranate alone did set
forth to us the fatness and nourishment which the Gospel does afford the souls
of Believers that live upon the Gospel; for so is the Pomgranate set forth in
the Scripture to be a very pleasant feeding fruit, Canticles 4 13. O so is the
Gospel, its fatness it self is called a feast of marrow, and fat things, of
Wine well refined upon the Lees, as you have it in Isa 25. 6.

O this is the refreshing, satisfying, fatning, good in the world. O the
Gospel, what a choice thing is it to the souls of the Lords people, which makes
them cry out, bread and the Gospel is good fare. A gracious soul knows no such
feasting as preaching; no such fatness as the word of God brings forth to them:
the love of which have made some to throw up all their Estates and good things
in this life to purchase it.

This made the Apostle kick up their fishing Trade, and this made Matthew to
leave his great place in the Custom-Office, and Zacheus to throw up the half of
his Estate to the poor; O they saw by an eye of faith a better glory in the
color of the Pomgranate, truth of the Tabernacle, they had heard better Music
in the Bells of the Priesthood, and had tasted more fatness in the juice of the
Pomgranate Doctrine of grace and Reconciliation with the Father by the blood of
Christ, then in all the pleasant Musicks, glories, or rarest feeding dainties
which this world could afford them, could it give me ten thousand times as much
again as its able.

O says David (whose Court abounded with all worldly pleasures and delights)
the greatest fatness lies in the house of God, Psalm 36. 8. They shall be
abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and thou shall make them
drink of the Rivers of thy pleasures.

And for all his Kingdom-glory here below in all the plenty and fatness of it,
yet upon the account of these tastes which he had had of the far exceeding
fatness, and richness, and sweetness he found in the Pomgranate truths of the
house of God, he does protest in the Psalm. 84. 10. That one day in the Courts
of the Lord were better then a thousand, and that he had rather be a
Doorkeeper in the house of God, then to dwell in the tents of wickedness.

There was likewise a glorious girdle made for the Priest, which was wrought
with Purple Blue and Scarlet, fine twined Linen, this the Priest was to wear
about his loins, Exodus 39. 5. with Exodus 29. 5. This girdle of the High Priest
does hold forth these things to our consideration; the girding up of the loins
does import these things to us.

1. It denotes the resolution of the will to action, Jer. 1. 17. Thou therefore
gird up thy loins and arise, and speak unto them all that I command thee, be
not dismayed at their faces, least I confound thee before them.

2. Sometimes it denotes the strength which God gives to his servants, by which
means they are enabled to perform that work he imploys them about, Psalm. 18.
39. For thou girdest me with strength unto the battle, thou subduest under me
those that rose up against me.

3. Sometimes its put down in Scripture to denote the sincerity and
faithfulness of the mind in the work a man sets about, Ephesians. 6. 14. Stand
therefore, having your loins girt about with truth.

Now all these considerations (about the girding of the loins) do all agree
unto and meet together in the Golden girdle of our Gospel High Priest.

But first, let me show you that Jesus Christ, our Gospel High Priest, is set
forth to you as the Anti type of the legal High Priest, with respect to the
garments which the High Priest was to wear, and amongst which this of the
Golden girdle is not omitted, in Dan. 10. 5. 6. Then I lifted up mine eyes and
looked, and behold a certain man clothed in linen, whose loins were girded
about with a Golden girdle, his body also was like the Beryl, and his face as
the appearance of lightning, his eyes as lamps of fire, and his arms and his
feet like in color to polished Brass, and the voice of his words like unto the
voice of a multude: So Rev 1. 13. And in the midst of the seven Golden
Candlesticks one like unto the Son of man, clothed with a garment down to the
foot, and girt about the paps with a Golden girdle.

Now both Daniel and John had their Revelation from Jesus Christ, and they both
speak of him, as the person who with his own hands gave it out to them; And
that it was he appears by the garb and dress in which they set him forth to
you, he was clothed in linen says Daniel, and clothed with a garment down to
the foot says John, which was as the High Priest did use to wear, of which
Christ was the Antitype: Now it can be none but Christ can be intended here by
these two Prophets, and that it was Christ it farther appears by John, who
gives him the Title of the Son of man, which Title was proper to Jesus Christ.

Besides, both Daniel and John tells you that the same person which gave out the
prophecy to them (which was clothed in linen, and a garment down to the foot)
he was girt about the loins with a golden girdle. Thus you see that Christ is
set forth to you as a High Priest, with respect to the garments which the High
Priest did wear, of which the girdle (as you see) was a part.

2. I am to show you that all the former considerations about the girding about
of the Priests loins, did all meet together in the Golden girdle of our Gospel
High Priest.

First of all it denotes the resolution which was in Christ to the work of man's
Salvation and Redemption, Oh nothing could hinder the Lord Jesus from
undertaking the thing, although sin, Satan, the Curse of the Law, the wrath of
God, Grave, Death and Hell, stood in the way; yet he goes through all, and
makes his way through the highest difficulties, that he might accomplish the
thing, he adventures soul and body, glory, happiness, and all that was near and
dear to him, in order to the effecting it, Luke 12. 50. I have a Baptism to be
baptized with, and oh how am I straightened until it be accomplished; which
Baptism was not the Baptism with Water, for in that sense he was baptized
before, Math. 3. 16. But it was the Baptism of his sufferings, which he had so
much a desire to finish, and a resolution to go through.

Secondly, He has as great a resolution to bring forth sanctifying grace in
the Saints by his Spirit, as he had to bring forth justifying grace by his
Death, Zack. 3. 4. And he answered and said unto those that stood before him,
take away the filthy garments from him; and unto him he said, behold I have
caused thine iniquity to pass away from thee, and I will cloth thee with change
of garments; This was spoken by Christ concerning his Church, ver. 1, 2. But
mark the resolution of Christ to the procuring of sanctifying garments (which
is that inward grace and holiness he fills them with) which he sees his people
stands in need of, says Christ, I will do it.

It must and shall be so, I am resolved, as I have procured justifying grace
for them, so they shall be made holy, I will give them sanctifying grace,
nothing shall cross my will in this matter, Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26, 27. Then will I
sprinkle you with clean water, and ye shall be clean from all your filthiness,
and from all your idols will I cleanse you; a new heart will I give you, and a
new spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of
your flesh, and I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them.

Mark the resolution of Christ to the sanctifying of his people, he will do it,
take notice of the many Repetitions of his will, there are in this place.

Thirdly, So for the saying of his Church out of danger, when begirt about with
trouble, Christ is resolved upon the business (though sometimes the Devil and
wicked men may think to make their Market upon the Saints) that the gates of
Hell shall never prevail against his Church and people, says Christ, Psalm. 12.
5. For the oppression of the poor, and for the sighing of the needy, now will I
arise, says Christ, and I will set him in safety from him that puffs at him.

Mark how much the will and resolution of Christ lies in this work of saving
and delivering his Church out of the hands of men and Devils.

Use 5.
O then how should this comfort and encourage the people of God; O Sirs study
the girdle of your High Priest Jesus Christ, do you doubt of Justification, do
you doubt of Sanctification, do you doubt of deliverance from Sin, Satan, the
wrath of God, the malice of Devils and wicked men; O look up to the girdle of
resolution about the High Priests loins, and wait patiently upon him, for he is
resolved to get all this for you in a time of need

Secondly, As the girding of the loins do imply the strength which God does
afford his servants in the work he imploys them in or about, so is this
abundantly made good in Christ our great High Priest; our Savior had a very
great work to do, and a weighty burden to bear, therefore it was necessary he
should be filled with infinite strength.

First, The work he was to do would have discouraged all the men in the world
and Angels in heaven, had they been put together to have engaged in it, for he
was to conflict with four enemies, the least of which has driven the whole
world before it.

These are Satan, Sin, the World, with all its temptations, and the justice of
God for the breach of his royal Law; what power, force, or strength, was there
ever in the world that could bear up against one of these enemies; besides,
Christ was to deal with death it self; what strong Samson, or valiant
Alexander, in the world could grable with this one enemy, yet did our Savior
bring this enemy at his feet with case, therefore says the Apostle speaking of
Christ, Acts 2. 24. He has loosed the bands of death, because it was not
possible he should be holden by it.

Secondly, There must needs be infinite strength in Christ, if we consider the
weight of that burden he was to bear upon his shoulders; And that was all the
sins of all the Elect in the world, a weight which makes the whole earth to
groan under the burden of it, as the Apostle speaks in Rom 8. 22. For all our
sins were laid upon and charged on Jesus Christ, Isa. 53. 6. The Lord has laid
the iniquities of us all upon him, so St. Peter speaking of Christ, says 1
Pet. 2 24. Who his ow^ self bear our sins in his own body on the tree.

Samson did never carry away the gates of the City with more ease, then Christ
did our sins upon his shoulders; Therefore is Christ called a Rock, Deuteronomy. 32.
31. And the Rock of strength and refuge, Psalm. 62 7.

Now all this was Christ, as he was and is our High Priest, for this lies in
the girdle of Christ, which girdle he weared as our High Priest; therefore you
are to look upon all this as yours upon believing, Christ needed not this
himself, but this strength was put into him for believers.

1. To do the great work of saving of them out of the hands of their enemies.

2. That as their Head he might give it down to them to help them out in all
their duties, whether they be Active or Passive.

Use 6.
This should inform us then where our strength lies, its not in our selves but
in our High Priest, he is our Treasury and Storehouse of it, and to him we
must come for it, and in coming we shall have it says David, Psalm. 18. 2. The
Lord is my Rock, and my Fortness, and my Deliverer, my God, my S^rength, in
whom I will trust, my buckler, and the horn of my salvation, and my high tower.

In this Use I would commend two things to thee for thy peace and comfort,
would thou see all thy spiritual enemies conquered and brought down at thy
feet, then look to Christ and he has done it for thee and in thy room, and the
glory of the conquest he imputes to thee, as Joshua in the wilderness did, who
was a Type of Christ in this thing; he fought Isreal's battles for them, and
conquered all their enemies for them, and when done gives the glory of the
conquest to the Israelites, for he causes the chief of the enemies to be
brought before him, and makes them lie down, and bids the Jews to set their
feet upon their necks, Joshua 10. 24. So has Christ done for believers.

2. If thou would get the mastery over the remainders of corruption within
thee, and the Devil and World without thee, then look up to Christ thy High
Priest, and draw out strength from him, for he is girded about with strength on
purpose to give it out to thee; says S. Paul, I can do all things through
Christ which strengthens me, Phil. 4. 13.

3. Lastly, the girdle in the High Priest denotes his faithfulness and
sincerity in the work he undertakes to do, for so we showed you did the girding
of the loins employed so much as this is applied to Jesus Christ who is our
Gospel High Priest, Isa. 11. 5. And righteousness shall be the girdle of his
loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins, so says the Apostle speaking
of the faithfulness of Christ, says, Heb. 3. 5, 6. And Moses was faithful in
all his house as a servant, for a testimony of those things which were to be
spoken afterward, but Christ as a Son in his own house, whose house we are if
we hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope firm to the end.

Observe these two things in the words.

First, Moses his faithfulness was a testimony of those things which should be
spoken hereafter.

Now what were these things which should be spoken after Moses his time, it is
what all the Prophets and Apostles have written about, the faithfulness of
Christ to his Church and people, as he is their High Priest.

1. That he would certainly become bond to the justice of God as their surety,
to give full satisfaction for all the wrong they have done the justice of God,
so says David, Psalm. 40 6, 7, 8.

2. That he would stand in the room of his people, and take upon him every part
and parcel of their guilt, this wrote Isa. of him, Isa. 53. 6.

3. That he would as certainly bear every part of that punishment (which
justice would have else poured forth upon the Elect) I say he would bear this
himself as really as he did their guilts, so writes Isa. also, ver. 5.

4. That he would certainly call home to himself, by the means of the Ministry
of the word and spirit, every elected soul to the embracement of him, this
writes Luke of him, Luke 14. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 So John writes,
John 10. 16.

5. And that there shall never be wanting to the ages of man, a sufficiency of
means in order to the bringing in the Elect of God in every age, Mat. 28. 19,
20.

6. That as by his blood and righteousness he has taken care to get them
justified before God, so as certainly will he give out with his sanctifying
grace, the testimony of this (in his time) into their consciences, so writes
St. Paul of him, Romans 5. 1. Isa. 26. 3.

7. And that if he has begun any thing of the work of grace upon the heart of
any poor soul (they should not doubt of the success) for he will as certainly
finish and complete it, Phil. 1. 6.

8. And that in the mean while, what corruptions shall remain in the soul
(although he will not promise wholly to out them of the soul here in this life)
yet the soul may assure himself of this, they shall not Rule and Reign over the
soul as before, so writes St. Paul of him, Romans 6. 14.

9. And as for the power of temptation which may so violently seize the soul,
as that the soul may think it will at last for ever undo him; Christ will
certainly bear up the soul under them as that they shall not totally sink the
soul, and will as undoubtedly deliver the soul at last out of the hands of them
all, so writes St. Paul, 1 Cor. 10. 13.

10. And for what duty he shall require and expect at his peoples hands, he
will look for no more, nor require of them any farther service, then he shall
give them strength to perform it, so says St. Paul of him, Romans 8. 26. 27. So
2 Cor. 8. 12.

11. And that what infirmities and weaknesses your duties shall be clothed
withal, Christ will certainly overlook them upon the souls hearty and humble
acknowledgment of them to him, so writes the Apostle, Heb. 8, 12. with Chapter
9. 14.

12. And what ever the sin be which may be acted and committed by any of his
people (they should not despair at the matter) for upon their hearty
acknowledgment of it and endeavor to amend about it, he would certainly pardon
it and it shall be no breach about it, so writes ^oel and Micha of him, Joel 2.
13, 14. Mich. 7. 18, 19.

13. You may assure your selves if ever you have carefully endeavored to get
into a covenanted condition with him, he will take that care that nothing in
heaven, earth, or hell shall ever work you out again, so writes St. Paul, Romans
34. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39. Ier. 31. 35, 36.

14. And at any time if any of his people be called by him to adventure upon
hard and difficult service, they shall certainly have his company with them (to
assist, comfort, and refresh them) foot by foot all along their work, Matthew
28. 20

15. And if they shall be put upon sufferings at any time for him, he will
certainly be with them to help them and relieve them in that condition, if it
be with the three Children to march through the fire, they shall not go one
foot in the flames beyond or without Christ in their hand, Isa 43 2.

16. And what charge they shall leave behind them in the storm to be cared for,
as Husband, Wife, Children, Parents, we need not doubt, Christ will certainly
take care for them in our room, and better then we could, had we staid amongst
them, so says David, Psalm. 37. ^5.

The other consideration in the words to be observed, is this, Moses was
faithful as a servant, but Christ as son in his own house, I shall say but
little as to this, you know what obligations (with respect to interest) do lay
upon a Son beyond a servant to be faithful in his place. Now if Moses a servant
were faithful to the house, and in the house, then much more may this be
expected from Christ.

I have only this to start about, the High Priest girdle, and I have done with
it.

The last Use of the girdle, it was to gird the Robes so securely about him, as
that they might not fall off his body, no nor so much as hang loose to the body.

Thus do our Gospel High Priest deal by and with his Church, he girds them all
fast to himself by a girdle of Covenant that will never admit of their falling
from him, nor long hanging loose to Christ, the people of God are very apt to
hang loose to him, and when they are awakened to it, then they in the next
place fear of falling wholly away from him, for the one does make way for the
other; if Satan can but get a soul a little loose from Christ, he will quickly
make the soul to call in question the whole of his condition, and to think that
now he is falling quite off from Jesus Christ; but soul, against such doubts
look up to Christ thy High Priest, and there thou shall see thy self so fast
bound to his loins by the girdle of an indisolvable covenant, that thou can
never drop from him more, thou may be loose to him, but fear not, thou can
never fall finally unless Christ fall, for thou art girded about his loins,
read these Scriptures for thy comfort, Isa. 11. 5. Ezekiel. 16. 8. Jer. 31. 3, 4.
John 13. 1. Isa. 54. 89, 10. Romans 8. 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39 Romans 11. 29. John
10. 28, 29. And assure thy self if thou do hang loose to Christ, he will
quickly be sensible of it, and will tuck thee up and gird thee close to himself
again as he did David and Peter.

But beware of that, it may be such a gird as you may feel it in your bones
many days after, as David did in the like case, read Psalm. 51. 8.

I now come to speak of the Miter and the plate of Gold which was to be fastened
on it before, near upon the forehead.

As for the Miter it was to be put upon the Priests head when the holy garments
were to be put on, Exodus 39. 28 with Exodus 29. 6.

Now this part of the Priests atire is what respected Christ as the Head of the
body; we have showed you already how that the Robe it self, with the things
belonging to them were what did respect the Church, the body of Christ.

And this atire ( viz.) the Miter and Crown, did more properly belong to Christ
as the Head of the Church.

I shall begin with the Miter, which was the Crown and glory (if I may so
express it) of all the other attributes of Christ; for if you look into the two
first Chapters of the Revelations, you shall find what ever comfort did run
down upon the Saints through any Title given to God, yet it did all Center in
the Priestly office of Christ, to which the Miter belonged, in Rev. 2, 1. You
have this Title given of Christ, He h^ldeth the seven stars in his right hand,
ver. 8. These things says the first and last, ver. 12. The sword with two
edges, so Chap. 1. 5. The faithful and true witness, the first begotten of the
dead, the Prince of the Kings of the earth, ver. 8. The Alpka and Omega.

Now do you but look into the 13. ver you may see the fountain of all these
streams in the midst of the seven Golden Candlesticks. I saw one like unto the
Son of man, clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt about the paps
with a Golden girdle; so that here it is from whence the Titles (which are
given to Christ) do arise, they all flow from the Priestly office of Christ,
who wears the Priestly Miter; the truth is, its from the Miter upon Christ's
Head that we draw all our comfort. Alas Brethren, what comfort could we take in
God himself but through Christ, and what comfort could we take in Christ, but
as he wears the Miter upon his Head as our High Priest, whatsoever comfort we
have in any other office of Christ, namely, as a King or Prophet, it all
originated in the Priestly office of Christ, the truth is, the Priestly office
of Christ is an office of mere love and tender compassion, set up on purpose
for the succor and relief of poor sinners, there is no mixture of terror in
this office of Christ, there is a mixture of terror in the other offices of
Christ, the Lord Christ is King, and has a Kingly office, and by it Rules over
his Church, and Rules over all the world, but all do not obtain mercy that he
Rules over; As for those mine enemies that would not that I should Rule over
them, bring them forth and slay them before me, Luke 19 27.

But there is not the least mixture of terror in this of his Priestly office,
the Miter shows nothing but grace, and love, and wonderful compassion, infinite
bowels of tender love to the sinner, a God reconciled in Christ by the
sacrifice of himself, which was slain for sinners; the blood of which speaks to
you better things then the blood of Abel, for the blood of Abel bespoke sin
committed, and a guilty soul, and an angry God, but Christ's blood bespeaks sin
remitted and pardoned, and a God recorcied again, the blood of Abel spakes for
vengeance from under the ground, but the blood of Christ speaks for grace,
mercy, pardon and reconciliation again from under the Altar; Abels blood
bespake the sinner under the Curse, but Christ's blood speaks him into the
blessing again, Acts 3. 26. Abels blood spoke the soul at a great distance with
God, but the blood of Christ speaks him very nigh God again, Ephesians. 2. 13. But
now in Christ Jesus ye that were sometimes afar off, are made nigh by the blood
of Christ.

Use 7.
Then soul when ever thou have to do with Christ view him in his Priestly
atire, having his Miter upon his Head; O thou can not look upon Christ under
a more blessed consideration then this, that can afford thee like succor as
this will do, for this will yield the soul blessed relief against all thy fears
and temptations whatsoever; the Miter was put upon the Head of Christ on
purpose to be looked unto for relief and succor in a time of doubt and danger,
what was the great relief amongst the Jews against their sins, the Jews you may
observe they had many reliefs when they were in the wilderness, if at any time
they were stung with the fiery Serpents, then they had their brazen Serpent to
look unto as a relief against that distress, when they wanted water they had
their Rock to make at as a relief against that distress; when they wanted bread
they had their Manna from heaven as a relief against that distress, and if they
sinned whether they did go, then they took a sacrifice and went unto the Priest
and he was to offer for them, so that the Priestly office then was the only
relief they had against sin

So now the Priestly office of Christ is the only relief and succor the people
of God have against all temptations, doubts, and fears under heaven; O make
much use of the Miter in times of fear, look unto it as the Jews were to look
to their brazen Serpent upon the pole when stung with Serpents, so when ever
thou art stung with the Serpent of temptation, and guilt, and horour, and
terror about guilt, look up with an eye of faith to this Miter, the Crown (as
I may call it) of his Priestly office and thou shall be healed and cured of all
thy stingings, so says Christ himself, Isa. 45. 22. Look unto me and be ye
saved all ye ends of the earth, for I am God and there is none else.

Mark, look unto me, he does not bid you to look to that unhollowed Bear the
Pope, who to deceive the poor miserable world of their Estates and Wealth, has
feigned a Miter and puts him upon his Head, and Bug-bears the world with it, as
if he were some great one, which by the pretended power of his conjuring State
and Cross-keys of hell afrights the poor ignorant world into an opinion of some
more then ordinary Authority must reside in this Beast for his Cap sake; when
alas he nothing but Cheats the world by it, both of their souls and treasure,
he is a Limb of the Devil to Cheat men of their souls, because he keeps them in
ignorance about the Priesthood of Christ, and arrogates and assumes that
Authority as proper to himself, he says he has the Miter upon his Head, and
he is in the Priestly Chair, and he can procure pardon with God for sins, and
he has the keys of Hell and Death (which the holy Ghost only attributes to
Christ, Rev. 1. 18.) And he can open Purgatory and let out of torment, and he
has the key of David (which the holy Ghost gives only to Christ, Rev. 3 7.)
And he can open heaven and let into glory: O horrid Blasphemy! What a beast is
this, and how much to be abandoned by all those that love Christ and their
souls, how does he dis-throne and shut out Christ of his great office as a
Priest and Savior.

2. He Cheats poor souls of their Estates here, because he takes their money of
them to save them from sin, and to discharge them of some torment, and to let
them into heaven when he himself shall not escape the vengeance of Christ, but
shall be for his juggling and deceit tormented in fire and brimstone for ever
and ever, Rev. 19. 20, 21 Where the whole Rabble of that gang shall eternally
dwell together.

And as for others ( viz.) the lesser sort of Popes, that imitates the High
Priest in his garments with respect to his Cap and Linen Ephod, its a clear
denying of Christ to be come in the flesh, and John says these are
Antichrist, 1 John 4. 3. For if these garments were Types of Christ, then they
were only to continue until the coming of Christ, so reasons the Apostle, Heb.
10. 1. Who says that these things were shadows of good things to come, but not
the very Image; and therefore when these good things were come which was the
substance, then the shadow must give place as no longer of use, so says St.
Paul, to the Colossians, chap. 2. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22 23. Well then if
these Ceremonies were only the signs of Christ to come and to give place to him
when he did come, then what does their present use signify, but that he is not
yet come, and so as John speaks, denied to be come in the flesh, who is the
Antichrist then think you.

The next thing we are to take notice of, is the plate of Gold which was placed
upon the forehead of the High Priest fastened to the Mitre, wherein was
engraven in Letters these words, Holiness to the Lord, Exodus 28. 36, 37.

The purpose of this very plate with the Letters written in it, was for the
High Priest to take upon him all the failings, imperfections, and weaknesses of
the peoples duties in the Worship of God.

The Plate was to bear upon it the peoples sins which they would contract in
the Worship of God, and the Letters engraven upon the Plate was to bear out the
Priest before the Lord that he died not, Exodus 28. 36. 37, 38. And thou shall
make a plate of pure Gold, and grave upon it the engravenings of a signet,
Holiness to the Lord; and thou shall put it on a blue lace, that it may be upon
the Mitre, upon the forefront of the Mitre it shall be, and it shall be upon
Aarons forehead, that Aaron may bear the iniquity of the holy things, which the
children of Israel shall hollow in all their holy gifts: and it shall always
be upon his forehead, that they may be accepted before the Lord. This still
looks to Jesus Christ our Gospel High Priest, and tells us what he is to do,
and does do for Believers, he takes upon him all the failings and infirmities
of his peoples duties. O what a blessed ground of comfort is this to a doubting
soul: I know some poor souls have had their backs bowed down with this kind of
guilt, who when they have been in the Worship of God, as in Prayer, hearing of
the Word, or breaking of Bread: when they have considered with what sad frames
they have been in the Worship: how has that troubled them, when they have
minded the hypocrisy that appeared in their hearts while in the work; those
vain wandering thoughts, that deadness and dull, drowsy, tiredness of spirit,
with which their work was mixed withal: besides when they have considered with
how much ignorance, and little says, and want of love to God, and his work in
hand, they were attended with, O how has this perplexed some poor souls, and
how deeply has this sunk others into the pit of despair, putting them upon
resolving never more to hear the Word, or Pray, or receive the Sacrament: O
they never Worship God, but they sin against him, and make their case worse
then it was before.

All this has been for want of knowledge in this blessed mystery of the plate
fastened upon the forefront of the High Priests Mitre. The Devil keeps them in
suspense about this thing, shows the soul his guilt, but will not suffer him to
see the plate upon the forefront of the Priests Mytre, which was appointed on
purpose for them to lay up their gilt upon. O therefore for thy comfort poor
soul, when ever thou come into the Worship of God, thou may come boldly
without fear as to that: what guilts thou either have, or shall contract upon
thy soul in the Worship of God, (provided they are not wilful guilts) there is
a plate of Gold prepared to bear all, thou shall bear none of them thy self. O
bless God for this great mercy to thy soul, and rejoice in it as thy great
favor; make much use of it as thy best of privileges: study it as the highest
of comforts, and live up to the God of this mercy, with the greatest of
faithfulness, and to the highest pitch of holiness.

Secondly, This was to be a standing privilege at all times, for all Believers
to such a continual sweetness and comfort from in point of acceptance with
God; for Aaron the Priest was to wear it always upon the forefront of the
Mitre, that they might be accepted before the Lord.

This was not to be worn once or twice, but always, before the Lord; so that
until Christ puts off his Mitre, and lays aside his priestly work, thou may
assure thy self until then, those sins of infirmity which will cleave to thy
duties, shall not render them or thee disacceptable before God, if thou reliest
faithfully upon this High Priest in this case.

We now come to speak of the Crown which this High Priest was to wear, as well
as this Mitre, and the Crown was to be set upon the Mitre on the Priests head,
Exodus 29 6. And thou shall put the Mitre upon his head, and put the holy crown
upon the Mitre.

The Crown upon the Priests head set forth to you the Kingly Office of Jesus
Christ, which springs from the Priestly office of Christ; he is a King to rule
in and over his Church, because he is a High Priest to the Church; therefore
the Crown must stand upon the Mitre; the Mitre does keep up the Crown, not the
Crown the Mitre. The Mitre being under the Crown, shows you that the Kingly
Office of Christ has its foundation in the Priestly Office of Christ, as was
showed you before from the first of the Revelations.

This shows first, that Christ has power to give out what Laws, Rules,
Customs, and Ordinances he please for his Church and people to walk by; for he
has a Crown upon his head as well as a Mitre.

Secondly, That all duty, and subjection, and obedience ought to be given to
him both in soul and body, for he is a King, Psalm 2. 6. I have set my king
upon my holy hill Sion.

We do not read that any of the Priests besides the High Priest did wear a
Crown: we read that they did wear Bonnets, but not a Crown, Exodus 28. 40. The
Crown was only for the High Priest, showing us, as the Priest was a Type of
Christ, that all Rule and chief Authority belongs to Christ: its Christ only
can make or impose any Laws upon the consciences of his people: so says the
Spirit, Rev. 4. 11. Thou art worthy O Lord to receive glory and honor, and
power, for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were
created.

And yet how common is it to see the inferior sort of Priests, that should
content themselves with wearing the Bonnet, to catch the High Priests Crown
from off his head, and to leave the High Priest nothing to wear but their
Bonnets; and given him to understand, if he will not wear them he must sit bare
headed before them. I mean how do men who pretend to be the Ministers and
Vicars of Christ, pull his priestly Diadem from off his head, and so rob him of
his principle glory, in arrogating a power to themselves of making and imposing
spiritual Laws upon the consciences of his poor people, as rules for them to
walk by, which customs and traditions the word of Christ never knew or spoke of
in the least. O what greater indignity can there be offered to the Crown of
Christ then this: not only so, but if the poor Lambs of Christ (who are as
dear to him as his own blood) will not comply with their Canons; they violently
run upon them with ruin and destruction both to them and theirs, without the
least dram of mercy showed them: Should a Subject deal thus with his Prince,
who would advocate such a ones case at the Bar; but how much Christ thinks
himself bound to these men for this piece of service both to himself and his
people, let the world judge.

Again, whereas it is said that the Crown was set upon the Mitre, it is to show
Believers how sweet the Kingly Office, Power, and Authority of Christ is
sweetened to them by the Priestly Office of Christ: Its the Priestly Mitre makes
the Kingly Crown so sweet and lovely to men. The grace which flows from Christ
as Priest, makes the Law which flows from Christ as King so delightful and
precious.

What strange prejudicated opinions have men of the Law, of the Crown of
Christ, when they look on it apart from the Mitre of Christ's Priesthood: how
formidable and cruel does the Law look to them; how do men shun it and avoid it
as death it self: its an unreasonable Law, it requires impossibilities, such
things as can never be obtained or performed by me: it affords me no
assistance, no strength, let me do what I can it damns me at last. This the
soul instead of subjecting to it, fights with it as his worst of enemies: so
says Paul, Romans 8 7. The carnal minded man is not subject to the Law of God,
neither inde^d can be.

But when the soul is brought in to close with Jesus Christ, as his High
Priest, and has tasted of the grace of the Priesthood, and is made to see the
Mitre under the Crown, which it did not see before, and understands, that all
the terror of the Crowns Law is sucked in by the Mitres grace. O then the soul
comes to have other thoughts of the Law of God then ever it had before. O says
the soul; how miserably was my understanding darkened, that I should so
wickedly conclude of it, as an unreasonable Law, and a cruel Law; a Law which
required brick to be made without straw. O but now I see it was my mistake and
great ignorance. O it requires no more then it will help in the doing: its a
Law which has the spirit of life in it, Romans 8. 2. That will quicken to its
own performances; a Law flowing from the Crown, but its a Crown upon the Mitre,
which is so far from killing of me, that it gives me spiritual life, and frees
me from the Law of sin and death, Romans 8. 2. Therefore says Paul, Romans 7. 22.
I delight in the Law of God after the inner man: so says David, Psalm 119. 72.
The Law of thy mouth is better then ten thousands of gold or silver. So Psalm
19. 10. More to be desired is thy law then gold, yea then much fine gold,
sweeter also then the honey, and the honey comb.

O every part of the work and worship of Christ is sweet now, when the soul
sees its the Law of a reconciler; the work of an advocate, the worship of a
blessed High Priest, which he is employed in and about. O its the Law of one
who has shed his dearest blood for me, to satisfy Justice, its the work of a
High Priest which presents me in himself without spot to God, and has clothed
me with the Robe of his Righteousness, and made me an heir of Glory, a child
of God; a citizen of the new Jerusalem. O this makes the work of Christ's
Kingdom delightful work to the soul now.

CHAP. 32. I now come to speak of the fourth general, which is the manner of
the Consecrating of the Priest, which is as follows.
THe High Priest being thus attired, then was Moses to take a young Bullock,
and two Rams without blemish, and unleavened bread, and unleavened cakes,
tempered with oil, and offer this with the two Bullocks, and two Rams unto God
for the Priest, Exodus 29. 1, 2. with 19. 20. Then was Moses to take a vessel
of oil, and pour it on the Priests head and anoint him, ver. 7.

In which consecration we may note two things.

1. Something which related to the Type it self.

2. What related to the Ante-type Jesus Christ.

First, What of this consecration related to the Type, or High Priest himself,
and what was this: the materials made use of about his Consecration, did highly
testify, that he himself was but a poor, weak, frail man; and that although he
were called to so great an Office, as to interpose between God and the people,
to make reconciliation for them; yet he was no farther efficacious then as he
was the Type of him that only could take away sin, which was Jesus Christ
held forth in him. Thus much both himself and the people likewise might inform
themselves in the manner of his conseeration; for there were two Rams and a
young Bullock must be slain and offered to God in sacrifice for him before be
could stand in Gods presence to administer for the people. Some sacrifices of
pacification and atonement must be offered to God for the Priest himself, as
well as for the people; which taught both the Priest and People, that there
was no reconciliation with God to be had by the High Priests means any
further then both Priest and people had an eye of Faith upon Jesus Christ held
out by him: so reasons the Apostle in Heb. 7. 26, 27. For such an High Priest
became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made
higher the^ the heavens, who needs not daily as those High Priests to offer
up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the people.

So that you see the legal Priest stood in need of a sacrifice for himself, and
he was to offer a sacrifice for himself as well as for the people: there
salvation and reconciliation could not be wrought out by the Priest, but by
another, which was only Christ.

2. As the thing related to Jesus Christ, it shows us thus much, that whatever
our Lord Jesus Christ has done, does do, or yet shall do in heaven, as our
great High Priest, it takes its rise from the Death and Passion of himself: You
see the High Priest under the Law could not be a High Priest, without he were
consecrated so in the death of something which must be slain as a sacrifice to
God.

So did Christ lay down his life as a sacrifice to God here upon the Cross,
before he could act as our great High Priest in Heaven before ever he could
perform the work of Intercession within the Tabernacle, he must first offer
himself up a slain sacrifice to God (for pacification) without the camp, Heb.
13. 12. Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people with his own
blood, suffered without the gate.

Quest. But why was Moses to take a young Bullock to make a sacrifice for the
Priests consecration.

Answ. Because any thing when its young and lively, is better then that which
is old and feeble. It was first to show the High Priest under the Law that God
expected he should be lively and strong for the Lord in all he did for him; he
was to consecrate the best of his years, and the best of his time, strength,
and abilities for the Lord, that the worship of God called for the best of our
all for its service: therefore was he to be consecrated with a young Bullock,
not an old or feeble one.

2. It shows us that time or age never enfeebles our great High Priest in
heaven; the Priest was to be consecrated with a young Bullock, showing you that
the Priest. Believers have in heaven, grows never old, he is not subject to
tire or faint in his employment; he is as lively and active in his work for his
people now, as at the first day he entered heaven as their Priest: and so is it
looked upon by the Father, that makes our High Priest still so prevallent upon
the Heart of God: he is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever.

Lastly, We might make this use of it to persuade all young persons to dedicate
themselves to God betime, in the prime of their days, when the marrow is warm
in the bones. A young Bullock, not an old, must be offered to God in sacrifice.
O so should it be with you my friends, would you offer up your selves as an
acceptable sacrifice to God. O then let it be in your youth: mind that
exhortation of Solomon, Eccles. 12. 1. Remember thy creator in the days of thy
youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall
sa^, I have no pleasure in them. It was Timo^hies honor, and it is spoken to
his great praise, that that he had consecrated his soul and body to God in the
time of his youth, at a time when he was mostly capable to act for God, 1 Timothy
4. 12. 2 Timothy 3. 15.

Alas Sirs, when we live so long in sin, as to spend the marrow of our bodies
in the service of the Devil. How do we think God should be pleased with the
offering up of our old dry bones for a sacrifice upon his Altar. There is
nothing does more engage God to take care for a soul in old age, then when a
soul is careful to consecrate himself to God in his youthful days. Then was
Moses to take a vessel of oil and pour it on the Priests head, which was called
the anointing of him, Exodus 29. 7.

The oil of anointing poured forth upon the High Priest signified these three
things.

First, It signifies the great endowments of the Priest with respect to the
gifts of the Spirit, which should be upon him, as necessary to the work he was
to do for the people, for so is the anointing understood sometimes, 1 Samuel 10.
1. 6. And Samuel took a vial of oil and poured it upon the head of Saul, and
kissed him, and said, Is it not because the Lord has anointed thee to be
captain over his inheritance. Now look into the 6. verse, and there you shall
see the gifts of the Spirit spoken of, that should fit him for government, an
office unto which he was anointed, And the Spirit of the Lord will come upon
thee, and thou shall prophecy with them, and be turned into another man. And
look you into the 10th. verse, and there you shall see the gifts of the Spirit
upon him.

This shows us what infinite gifts of all manner of perfections fell upon
Christ to fit him for the great work of the Priesthood: says Christ, Isa. 61.
1. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me. A Spirit of
counsel, that he might be able to give sound advice at all times to his Church,
Isa. 9. 6 A Spirit of courage and strength, that he might go through all
oppositions for his people; therefore is he called, the mighty God, Isa. 9. 6.
A Spirit of wisdom, that he might be able to out-wit his subtle adversaries in
hell, or on the earth, 1 Cor. 1. 24. A Spirit of love and tenderness, that he
might not reject for, but pity his people under their temptations, weaknesses,
and infirmities, Heb. 2. 17, 18. A Spirit of pardon, that he might be able to
pass by his peoples sins, iniquities, and transgressions, Nehemiah 9. 17. A
Spirit of faithfulness as not to neglect his people in any condition, nor
wanting in the giving out to them any supply to his people, which the Father
has both given the Saints by promise, and laid into Christ, as their
storehouse of grace and wisdom for that purpose, Psalm 36. 5.

All this was in Christ the Head, for the use of the Body mystical, as the
streams are in the fountain, not only to be employed for them, but to be given
down to them into their souls according as they shall draw it out of this Well
by the vessel of believing, so says the Church, who made use of Christ upon
this account, Isa. 12 2, 3. Behold God is my salvation, I will trust and not be
afraid, for the Lord Jehovah is my strength and song, and is become my
salvation, therefore (says Christ) with joy shall ye draw water out of the
wells of salvation.

Secondly, It denotes the perfection of grace and holiness which was to dwell in
Christ, for so much may we understand by the pouring forth of the anointing,
says the Apostle, It pleased the father that in him. should all fullness dwell,
Col. 1. 19. A fullness of grace and holiness, that from him we might derive it
for our use and benefit in this life.

Thirdly, The anointing of the High Priest, did signify that legal right he
had to administer in the Priests office above another man, hence is that of the
Apostle, Heb. 5. 4. And no man takes this honor upon him but he that was
called of God, as was Aaron.

Now this would afford great comfort to a soul if well considered, that the
Lord Jesus Christ was not only a Priest or an Advocate, but he was an anointed
Priest and Advocate, one who had a legal right to the place, he came not in the
wrong way, therefore no Thief or Robber, we need not doubt, no one can invalue
Christ's work when its done for believers, merely for want of right to
officiate; you know if a Counselor at Law undertake to plead a man's case for
him and should dispute it never so ably, and should carry it in Law, yet if
this can be objected against the Counselor that he is not lawfully inducted
to the place as a Counselor, all will be invalued that has been done and
said, and looked upon as of no force.

O therefore soul, if Christ intercedes as a High Priest, and pleads as an
Advocate at the Throne of grace for thee, thou needst not fear of thy Case,
there is not any enemy thou have can hurt thee in this Case, should the Law
object, the Justice of God object, should Satan object against thy Christ its
nothing, he had the legal anointings of the father upon him to in right him to
his work, says Christ, Isa 61. 1. The spirit of the Lord is upon me, and he
has anointed me to preach the Gospel; That is, the sense of what he means by
preaching.

Lastly, That which was appointed to consecrate the Priest withal, the Priest
was to eat it, Exodus 29. 32, 33. Which shows us that the work of the Priesthood
lives in the heart of Christ, it should be of that infinite delight to him, as
food is to the hungry stomach, the Priest should eat in his office and work, he
should as it were live upon it, and feed and feast himself with it as a man
does on his daily food so says Christ himself speaking of this great work of
the Priesthood, it is my meat and drink to be employed in and about it, John 4.
34. It is my meat and drink to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish
his work.

All this is to encourage doubting souls to make use of Christ, to bring their
sins and sores, and sorrows, temptations and corruptions to him; and their
leporisiecal souls to him, and the ignorant, hard, unbelieving, dead, carnal,
proud, lustful, revengeful hearts to him as their High Priest, and lay them
down at the door of his Priestly office. O this is meat and drink to Christ the
High Priest. O for Christ to see his door crowded up full with halted, mained,
blind, leporous souls, all waiting for a cure. O this makes the heart of Christ
leap in heaven, says Psalm. 40. 8. I delight to do thy will O God.

Now what was the great will of God, it was that the desperate and damned
should be saved by the Priesthood of Christ, and that he should preach good
tidings to the meek, and that he should bind up the brokenhearted, and preach
liberty to the captive, and let loose the prisoners, and proclaim the
acceptable year of the Lord, Isa. 61. 1, 2. And that he should comfort all that
mourn of the Elect, Isa. 40. 1, 2. O says Christ this is my delight, its my
meat, and drink, to do my fathers will, remember the Priest has eaten in that
with which he was consecrated.

Secondly, So should it be with all the Ministers of the Gospel, with what
delght should they go about their work; O says St. Paul, the goodness of God
constrains us, or the love of God constrains us, 2 Cor. 5, 14. This work
was as meat and drink to him, St. Paul had eaten in his Consecrating matter,
which was bitter in his belly, but as sweet as Honey to his taste, as its said
of the little book John was to eat, Rev. 8. 9.

CHAP 33. The work which the High Priest was to do for the people when chosen
for them.
UNder which general, there are these things to be considered:

First, The place where the High Priest was to perform the work of the
Priesthood.

Secondly, The work he was to do when in the place for administration.

Thirdly, What the Priest was to do for the people upon all occasions of need,
besides his solemn work in the Tabernacle.

First, The place where the Priest was to perform the work of the Priesthood,
and that was in the Tabernacle within the veil, a place where none but the
Priest was to enter, Lev. 16. 16, 17. This was a Type of Christ's interceding
work now he is in Heaven, Heb. 9. 24. For Christ is not entered into the holy
place made with hands, but into heaven it self, there to appear in the presence
of God for us: He is there to intercede forth blessings for us, and to Advocate
our Case he takes up all our accusations laid in against us. There he answers
all objections which may be made in Heaven by the Law against us, he is there
to gather up all our Inditements which may be laid into our charge, and he is
always there for this work, Christ is never absent when there is need for his
presence on our behalf, says the Apostle, he ever lives to make Intercession
for us, its likewise said that the people were not to go into the Tabernacle,
but were to stand without at the door of the Tabernacle, Lev. 16. ^6. 17.

This shows us two things.

First, The dark state which God held them under in comparison to us
Gospellers, it was little of the glory or of the mystery of the grace of the
Gospel which that people knew; its true, they knew they had a High Priest
within, in the Tabernacle, within the veil of it, but what he did or acted they
were not to look into, what manifestations he had of God, or glorious
discoveries from God, they were not to see or have any knowledge of, therefore
if the ministration of the Law were glorious, much more will the ministration
of the Gospel exceed in glory, so reasons St. Paul, 2 Cor. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12. And he tells you wherein the Gospel is rather glorious, in that the veil is
taken away, and we can now with open face behold as in a glass the glory of the
Lord, ver. 16. 18.

Secondly, It shows us that at best while we are in this Tabernacle of our
body, we are absent from our greatest Vision of glory, we are but in the outer
Court, we behold only the backside of the Tabernacle in comparison to what we
shall see when we come to pass within the veil where our High Priest is, he
says, Paul at best, We walk by faith and not by sight, 2 Cor. 5. 7.

We have here but a few drops of our true Tabernacleglory brought whom to us by
the eye of faith through Ordinances; O but when we are out of the body we shall
swim in the Rivers of all glorious perfection, says David, Psalm 16. 11.
(Where we shall be brought) into the presence of God, where shall be the
fullness of joy, at whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore: therefore
says Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 8. We are confident I say, and willing rather to be
absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord. Who would desire to live
in this dark dungeon Tabernacle state apart from those celestial glories; but
rather who would covet, as Paul did, to be at whom to this blessed Canaan of
rest, where all true blessedness dwells.

Again, Its observed that the people were to bring their offerings, and lay
them down at the door of the Tabernacle, and the Priest was to take it and
offer it for them before the Lord, Levit. 1. 3. 4, 5. This teaches what
believers should do now in Gospel days, bring all their offerings to the Lord
Christ, all the duties in worship, and offer it to him that he may present it
in his own name to God. O how does this reprove that vain opinion of the
Papists, who dream of I know not how many High Priests in Heaven, whom they
adore with that respect, which is only due to Christ, as the Virgin Mary the
Mother of God, as they can term her, and Saint Peter, Paul, and John, besides
many other late canonized Saints, whom they attribute the honor of the
Priesthood unto, unto whom they dedicate the Services: Pray what Saint or Angel
were the Jews to create to themselves in this great work, besides their High
Priest which was of the Lords own institution by Moses.

2. As to the work the High Priest was to do when in the Tabernacle within the
rail.

First, he was to take the blood of the sacrifice, and to sprinkle the
mercy-seat therewith, Levit. 16. 14, 15. which shows the prevalency and force
of Christ's intercession now in heaven for us: Christ enters heaven with the
worth of his Merits, and in the virtue of his Blood, and shows the Father a
sufficient ground for what he intercedes about. Lord here is my Blood for this
request, and for the other petition which I put up to thee in the behalf of my
people below; if I ask grace or pardon, Lord, here is my blood upon the
mercy-seat: if I ask deliverance for them from their enemies, Lord, here is my
blood for it upon the mercy-seat.

Secondly, The Priest was to add to this strong cries and prayers, by the
burning incense Altar for the people, praying to God for pardon for them, and
that he would accept their persons, and their sacrifices, and would be their
God, and would bless their souls, and would send them help from his holy
Sanctuary, Levit. 16. 12, 13. This is the very work of Christ now in Heaven,
the blessing of his people, with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things, is
from him, its attributed to Christ; Acts 3. 26. Unto you first God having
raised up Jesus Christ sent him to bless you, in turning every one of you from
his iniquities: therefore soul, what ever thou want of this nature, apply
thy self to the Priest of Blessings, and thou shall not fail.

Again, then was the Priest to take of the Incense and cast it into the fire,
which was upon the Incense Altar, that so a cloud of Incense might arise before
the Lord, Lev. 9. 22, 23. This was to show us for our comfort, what abundance
of acceptable matter goes up to God in the intercession of Christ, a whole
cloud of Incense: and certainly this must prevail with God in the behalf of his
people; for that is the purpose of Christ's offering up incense; it was not for
himself, but his people: it is the Incense of his own blessed worth and
excellency, which is in a way of powerful Intercession, of fered up to God with
his peoples duties, to make them and their services a sweet smelling savor to
God: and after this manner, and to this purpose you have our Savior
represented again by the Spirit to John after his Ascension, ^e^. 8. 3, 4.
Where the purpose of the going up of this cloud of Incense is laid open to you;
it is as I have said, to perfume all the rest of the Saints prayers, duties,
and services, as that they may be a sweet smelling savor to God: this makes
the weakest services of the weakest Believer acceptable to God: therefore soul,
when ever thou art about to perform any duty to God, and find that thou
can not do it but with weakness, yea, much weakness; then take that weak duty
and cast it into the Incense fire of intercession, which stands upon the
Altar Christ, in the vessel of the hot burning coals of his zeal, and love to
thee, and for thy good, and then it will ascend up, with the rest (of Christ's
and his peoples) to God, in that great cloud where it will be acceptable indeed.

CHAP. 34. What the Priest was to do for the people upon all occasions besides
his solemn Work in the Tabernacle.
FIrst, the High Priest was to take notice of every uncleanness that should be
found amongst the people, either in their persons, garments, or in their
houses, Levit. 14. from the 3. to the 40. verse. as that if any plague, or
leprosy, sore or ulcer, should break forth upon the person of any of the
people, then were they to go to the High Priest and show it him, and he was to
look upon it and endeavor their cleansing. All this is to be set upon a door
of access for a poor doubting soul to come to Christ in the worst of times:
for, look what work the High Priest under the Law was to do for the seed of
Abraham, according to the flesh, the same is Christ, a Believers Gospel High
Priest, to do for Abraham according to Faith: and this action of the High
Priest to the Israelites, in a case of bodily mallodies, leads you to Christ in
a case of spiritual malladies. I believe the want of knowledge into this
mystery has occasioned many doubts and fears in many poor souls, who has not
had Satan a little wanting to make the most of their ignorance in this matter
in a way of heaping on their trouble, who stir, up corruption in the soul what
he can, and labors to create guilt upon the conscience; and when he has
filled the soul with all manner of sores, and spiritual plagues, and running
griefs, then does Satan labor to plaster them abroad upon the conscience, to
the affrighting of the soul off of Christ, and tells the soul, that certainly
the holiness of Christ will never endure to have fellowship with such a
soul; his nature is too pure to cast an eye upon such an impure piece as the
soul is; therefore the soul were better sit still where he is, then to think
of going out to Christ; for it will be but lost labor: Thus he labors to
over-shoot the Priestly office of Christ, and shows the soul much of Christ,
according to his divine Nature, not suffering the soul to have the least view
of, considered as a High Priest, who was appointed to be such, on purpose to
have to do with ^linde, lame, sick, sore, corrupted, deformed, desperate, and
damned sinners, that he might heal them, Isa. 6. 1. 2. and for a demonstration
to the point in hand, you may observe through the whole Life of Christ, in the
days of his flesh, these were the most, (which he for the most part of his
time) conversed vvithal. It was for this the Pharisees upbraided Christ, as a
friend to Publicans and Sinners, because he eat and drank mostly with such:
besides, our Savior himself tells you That he came not to call the righteous,
but sinners to repentance.

Use 1.
O therefore soul be not discouraged for the future, let not Satan hinder thee
for time to come of making use of Christ, in times when thou find thy
sores, and plagues, and corrupted issues upon thy soul. O then above all times
come to Christ; if thou at such a time as this is stand off from Christ,
thou art guilty of robbing Christ of one great part of the glory of his High
Priesthood: thou shut'st out Christ of doing that work (which as a Priest) he
was sent into the world to do. O where will thou go to have thy case bettered,
or who shall cure these wounds, sicknesses, sores, leprosies, and guilts, which
Sin and Satan has created upon thee if thou come not to Jesus Christ. O this
is the good Samaritan that takes up the soul wounded by the spiritual thieves,
and bounds up his wounds, and pours oil into his griefs, and heals all his
diseases, Luke 10. 36.

O therefore come to Christ, make use of him as thy High Priest, bring thy soul
with all its corruptions, sores, and plagues, and running griefs upon thee to
him, lay it down at his door, tell him that thou have brought a soul full of
the plague and leprosy, full of unbelief, full of the sores of pride, hardness
of heart, impenitency, revenge, hypocrisy, lust, worldly mindedness, a soul
full of the issues of vain thoughts, and plead with Christ for a cure: tell him
that he is the High Priest appointed by the Father for this very end and
purpose, not to reject thee for thy misery, but to pity thee under it, and to
show mercy to thee about it, and to help thee out of it, Heb. 2. 17. Wherefore
it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren in all things, that he might
be a merciful high priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation
for the sins of the people, in that himself has suffered, being ten^ted he is
able to succor them that are tempted, Heb. 5. 2. Who can have compassion on
the ignorant, and on them that are out of the war, for that he himself also is
compassed with infirmities. Here it was David run in the like case, when his
sores and griefs of corruption run upon him: He did not do as a great many
troubled souls have done, namely, then to run from Christ, Ps. 38 3 4. 5, 6, 7,
8. There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thy anger, neither is there
any rest in my bones, because of my sin, for mine iniquities are gone over my
head as a heavy burden, they are too heavy for me: My wounds ^stinck and are
corrupt, because of my foolishness, I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I
go mourning all the day long, for my loins are filled with a loathsome disease,
and there is no soundness in my flesh.

But did this drive David from Jesus Christ, no surely, but rather put a
necessity upon him to make the more haste toward him in order to cure,
therefore in the 9. Verse and 15. Verse, Lord all my desire is before thee, and
my groaning is not hid from thee, for in thee Lord do I hope, thou will hear O
Lord my God.

Secondly, As the Priest was to take notice of their personal uncleanness, so
also of the uncleanness in their houses, Lev, 14 35, 36. And he that owes the
house, shall come and tell the Priest, saying, it seems to me that there is
as it were the Plague in the house, then the Priest shall command that they
empty the house before the Priest goes into it to see the Plague that all that
is in the house be not made unclean, and afterward the Priest shall go into see
the house.

Now the end for which the Priest was to view the house, you may see in the
same Chapter, it was that he might endeavor the cleansing of it if the plague
were in it; of the same use is Christ to his Gospel-house, which is his Church,
if the plague enter into it, the plague of discention and discord, the plague
or leprosy of formality, or the plague of a lukewarm spirit, or the plague of
error and unsound Doctrine; its proper to Jesus Christ to take notice of this
in his Churches, and he does so, read Rev. 2. 1, 2, 3. 4, 5. with Rev. 3. 16,
17, 18.

Therefore in all such Cases, its the duty of the Churches of Christ to apply
themselves to him for redress, if Christians in the use of fasting and fervent
prayer would more press upon Christ for help in this case, I doubt not, but we
should have more purer and unstained Churches by far then we have amongst us.

Was there ever more need for Churches to make use of Christ upon this account
then now, had ever the Israelite more cause to go to the Priest and say, it
seems to me the plague is in the house, then Christians have to go to Christ
and say, it seems to me the plague is in the house; is not the plague of a
formal, cursed, lukewarm spirit in the Churches of Christ, are not the walls of
it overspread with the hollow, greenish, and reddish strakes to be seen there,
Levit. 14. 37.

Are they not overspread with the plague of Contention and Discord, was there
ever more of this plague reigning over the Churches of Christ then at this day;
O how deeply have this plague rooted it self in the hearts of the Lords people,
that four years affliction will not yet fetch it out, but God will fetch it out
of their hearts, or else he will fetch their bodies out of their warm houses;
besides what a fearful spirit and plague of Apostasy have their overspread
the minds of the Churches of Christ, I will not say this has leavened every
one, but sure I am too many of them.

Then what cause have the Church and house of Christ to make to Christ with all
haste for cure, and were it the will of God, how could it be wished that Christ
our High Priest were more visited upon this account by his people.

Fifthly, If any man had sinned either ignorantly or wilfully, the Priest upon
his coming to him was to offer sacrifice for him, and it was pardoned, Levit.
5. 17, 18. The same work is Christ to do for believers, for he is their High
Priest for this very purpose says the Apostle speaking of Christ, he is to
make Reconciliation for the sins of the people, Heb. 2. 17. Its as much the
mark and office of Jesus Christ to do so for believers, as ever it was the work
of the legal High Priests to do it for the Israelites, therefore soul, when
ever thou have been over taken in a fault, do not fly from Christ, but away to
him, for he is thy High Priest in Heaven on purpose to make an atonement for
that sin, and Reconciliation to God for that sin; only when thou have been with
Christ, believe that for his sake it shall be pardoned, and the father will be
pacified, and doubt not of it, it will be so, soul thou may apply as really
as the Jews that very word in Levit. 5. 18. And the Priest shall make an
atonement for him concerning his ignorance, wherein he erred and wist not, and
it shall be forgiven him; to this agrees the words of the Apostle in 1 John 2.
1, 2. If any man sin we have an Advoca^e with the father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins in his own blood, and not
only for ours, but for the sins of the whole world.

Sixthly, The Priest was to interpose between Gods wrath, and the people in a
time of sin, and by his intercession to endeavor to pacify God again, read
Numb. 16 46, 47, 48. This is proper to Christ also, and it did but Type out
Jesus Christ in the great work of reconciling God to the creature, together
with his present interceding work, whereby he stands to this hour between the
Father and the Church, this says St. Paul of our Savior to Timothy, 1 Timothy 2.
5. There is but one God and one mediator between God and man, the man Christ
Jesus.

Therefore when ever sin and satan presents the with an angry God for sin,
labor to affect thy heart with the thoughts of it; repent and be humbled
about, but be not out of hope, look up to thy High Priest and there thou may
see him interposing between Gods anger and thy soul in order to pacification.

CHAP. 35. About the standing Sacrifice of the Lamb.
THere was likewise an Ordinance of God instituted amongst the Jews, which was
this, a standing sacrifice of two Lambs which were to be offered to the Lord
Morning and Evening, the one in the Morning, and the other at Evening, every
day throughout the year, Exodus 29. 38, 39. This was to be done whether the
people could be there at the sacrifice yea or no, which teaches these two
things.

First, The continual ground which God still has in his eye, for the
continuing his reconciling love to the Church, and that is the death of his
Son, which is called the Lamb of God, John 1 29. Christ is called a Lamb as he
was a sacrifice to God for him.

This sacrifice which did at first fully give the Father satisfaction for sin
is always in the eye of God, Christ presents himself to the Father under that
consideration always; Therefore is it said the mercy-seat was sprinkled wi^h
the blood of the sacrifice, Levit. 16. 14, 15. That when ever the Father had
any thing to do with the mercy-seat, there should he always see the blood of
the Lamb Christ, which speaks better things then that of Abel, Heb 12. 24.

Secondly, It teaches us this much, family-duty is to be kept up and
maintained as an ordinance of God by all professing Souls.

This standing sacrifice had a double respect.

First, As it respected our Lord Jesus, so it Typed out the constant voice of
the blood of Christ in the ears of God for everlasting Reconciliation with the
Elect, that as they were always sinning, so here are two Lambs always
sacrificing before God for them: But secondly, as it respected the people, so
it was as the performance of family-duty by them, for they were (as it were)
but one family, and they had one head to it which was Moses, but at morning and
at evening this practice of the sacrificing of the Lambs must be kept up and
performed throughout the year.

O so much is it a duty for families to offer God the Evening and Morning
sacrifice at this day as it was then. O methinks to consider how little God is
honored in this respect by the families of the earth, it is a matter most
lamentable, Certainly men's not performing family-duty is a shutting out of God
from being King in that family; for God is known amongst the families of the
Earth by prayer, for God upon himself as having a special part of his
Prerogative denied him in that family which denies him family prayer, therefore
is God styled a God of prayer, and the God hearing prayer, and one unto whom
all flesh shall come; and indeed the contrary is threatened with a dreadful
stroke (I mean the omission of the duty) read Ier. 10. 25 Pour out thy wrath
upon the heathen, and the families which call not upon thy name: Men little
know what secret mischiefs they heap upon themselves and their families, who
live in the open neglect of this duty, says God in Deuteronomy. 32. 23. I will heap
up mischiefs upon their heads, I will spend mine arrows upon them. And who so
likely to be the persons upon whom God will heap mischief, as prayerless
persons, if you compare this of Deuteronomy. 32. 23. with Ier. 10. 22. Into what
flames have God turned some men's houses in one night over their heads, turning
them and theirs into ashes before the morning, which judgment might have been
prevented had they performed this duty the night before; O think upon this you
prayerless souls, for fear least God rush out upon you and tear you in pieces,
and there be found none to deliver you out of his hands.

CHAP. 36. Of the good land of Canaan which the people were to enter into after
their forty years travels in the Wilderness.
THis land was by St. Paul called their rest, Heb. 3. 11. This land was the end
of all their sore travels and weary journyings, and great temptations; a land
of delights, a land full of fatness, abounding with all manner of ease and
plenty, a land flowing with milk and honey, where there was not any want of any
good thing, Deuteronomy. 8. 7, 8, 9. This does St. Paul in Heb. 3 11. express as a
type of that Gospel Kingdom of rest and peace, which all the true Israelites
shall certainly rest and Center in at last, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 58.
11. So that men shall say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous; so my
Brethren, there is a Canaan (more glorious then Isreal's was) for believers to
enter into, of which Canaan of old was the type, and as all things typical
under the Law, did fall short in glory of the substance of that thing which it
typed forth, so also will it be in this case. The Canaan in the Antitype will
infinitely excel (for glory and brightness) the Canaan in the type. These two
Canaans typed out one another for these things, or in these respects.

First, For place.

Secondly, For condition upon which the Subjects were to enter each place.

Thirdly, For the privileges of it.

First, For the place it self, where this Canaan shall be into which all the
faithful shall enter, which St. Paul calls the people of Gods rest, or a rest
for the people of God; and that is, in this world upon this earth, for so was
Canaan of old, it was in this world, upon this earth, I do not say that there
is no other Canaan of glory for the Saints to enter, but do believe there is,
and my hope is toward it; but I say that rest spoken by St. Paul in Heb. 3.
11. which he makes to agree to Canaan of old as the Antitype of it, must be a
rest in this world upon this earth, and not any where else: And this will
appear if we consider the conditions upon which each Canaan is promised or
tendered, that of old, and this by the Apostle in Heb. 3. And that was upon a
faithful following of the Lord believingly, in our Wilderness-condition, this
was made the condition between God and the people for Canaan of old, so reasons
the Apostle, Heb. 3. 11. So I swear in my wrath they should not enter into my
rest, so ver 18. And to whom swear he that they should not enter into his rest,
but to them which believed not; so that the condition between God and the
people made Canaan of old their reward for sticking close to God in a way of
dependency, during the time of all their Trials, Temptations, and Afflictions
in the Wilderness; so likewise does the Apostle make the same qualifications, a
condition between God and his people touching this latter Canaan, and applies
the matter so, Heb. 4. 1. Let us fear lest a promise being left us any of us
should come short through unbelief.

Now by coming short of a Gospel Canaan through a spirit of unbelief, the
Apostle must mean (I say by Canaan) either the ultimate glory, or else a
Canaan, or Kingdom of glory here below; that it cannot be the ultimate glory,
for if we will maintain Election before time, then none of those that were ever
Elected to that Canaan can ever fall short of it more: if Election be the fruit
of the eternal purpose of God according to the counsel of his own will, so
says the spirit of our being Predestined or Elected, Ephesians. 1. 11. In whom
also we have obtained an Inheritance, being predestined according to the
purpose of him who works all things according to his own will.

Now if this will of God admits of no change, as the Scripture speaks,
Malachi 3. 6. Romans 11. 29. And that it is his will that all those he elected,
or chose to glory shall inherit, John 6. 39. Then certainly its not of the
ultimate glory which the Apostle intends in Heb. 4. 1. but of a rest much of
this side that rest which the Apostle makes to agree with Canaan of old, with
respect to the conditions of it, upon which they were to be enjoyed. But if you
understand by the (rest) that Christ will have a glorious Kingdom or Canaan in
this world, which he has only appointed for such as have or shall follow him
with faithfulness in this life wheresoever he goes, as that none of all the
Saints shall taste of it, but suffering faithful ones; then according to this
notion, the exhortation, in Hebrews 4. 1. will hold with election and
predestination, or else it will not; for we say that the Scriptures which
speaks of absolute election and predestination to a thing; which election and
predestination is an absolute fruit of Gods unchangeable council and will; and
yet to say that the same thing is conditional, as that if the conditions be not
performed, the thing may not be, is to me so great a mystery which cannot be
unridled: But if we place it nere (as it must be to reconcile the point) that
the ultimate Canaan of glory is a fruit of Gods absolute will which cannot be
altered: (Therefore says our Savior, those which are appointed unto it shall
never perish, John 10. 28) And that there is a Canaan which the Saints (that
are faithful to Christ) shall enjoy in this life, as for the promise of which
(though the Elect cannot, any one of them fall short of the promise of the
ultimate glory) yet they may of this. This Doctrine will hold good in both ends
without thwarting other foundation truths, and that this Kingdom of Canaan
promised the suffering faithful Saints, must be (as I have said) here below. I
shall give you some Scriptures to prove it.

But first you are to note, that our Savior gives you to understand that there
are two Kingdoms or Canaans which he makes to be distinct, the one from the
other, one he calls his own, that is, its his by purchase and promise, as he is
a Mediator and undertook to bring about Salvation to the Elect, as you may read
in Isa. 53. 11, 12. with Psalm. 2. 6. with ver. 8. I say our Savior makes this
Kingdom to be distinct from the fathers, read that place in Rev. 3. 21. To him
that overcomes, I will grant to sit with me upon my Throne, even as I also
have overcome, and am set down with my Father in his Throne; so that you see
here is the Son of man's Throne, and the Fathers Throne, so Mat. 19. 28. And he
said, Verily I say unto you, that ye that have followed me in the Regeneration,
when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory. Mark that, when the
Son of man shall sit in the Throne of his glory, there is the Son of man's
Kingdom of glory, or Canaan of glory, as well as the Fathers: So in Rev. 20.
There is by the Holy Ghost two Canaans or Kingdoms of glory spoken of in a
distinct manner one from the other, in ver. 4. And I saw Thrones, and they that
sat upon them, and judgment was given to them; which answers to that in Matthew.
19. 28. Which Canaan or Kingdom you see is given as the to reward the Saints
for their sufferings for Christ, therefore in the same verse its said to be the
portion of those which were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word
of God, and which had not worshipped the beast or his Image, neither had
received his mark upon their fore heads or in the hands, and they lived and
reigned with Christ a thousand years.

Now look you into the 11. ver. of the same Chap. And you shall see the Fathers
Canaan or Kingdom very distinct from the former which was Christ's, but by him
given to the suffering Saints; And I saw a great white throne and him that sat
thereon, from whose face the Earth and the Heavens fled away.

Secondly, That this promised Canaan or Kingdom which is in Heb. 3. 11. is
called a rest, must be here on Earth and in this world, which will appear if
you examine the Scriptures which speak of it. To instance in that of Mat. 19.
28. Its said there, that in that Canaan Kingdom they shall sit upon twelve
Thrones Judging the twelve tribes of Israel; now how can this be applied to the
ultimate glory; if the Saints must sit upon Thrones to Judge, then it follows
there must be some to be judged, but if this be meant of Heaven, pray who shall
the Saints Judge there, or who will there be in Heaven for them to Judge, so
Rev. 2 26, 27. He that overcomes and keeps my works unto the end, I will
give power over the Nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of Iron, and as
the Vessels of a Potter shall they be broken to pieces.

Now pray observe, how can this be applied to the ultimate glory, what Iron
Rods of severity will there be in Heaven, beside the Saints shall rule over the
Nations; what Nations will there be in Heaven for the Saints to rule over, you
read in Mat. 25 31, 32. with 41. That when the Canaan of ultimate glory comes
to take place, that all the Nations shall be gathered together before God, and
the Godly taken up into Heaven, and the wicked at the same time sent away into
eternal darkness: Now if the wicked must go down into Hell, at the same time
that the Godly must be received up into Heaven, where then will the Nations be
for the Saints to Rule over with Iron Rods, so in Luke 11. 2. You are bid to
pray for a Kingdom, saying, when thou prayest, say. Thy Kingdom come. Now this
very Kingdom must be on Earth, for is not the Kingdom of grace as the Kingdom
of grace is commonly understood, because the Kingdom of grace was then in
being, and had been in being all along in all ages of the world before: But
this Kingdom which Christ bids his Disciples to pray for, was a Kingdom yet to
come. Thy Kingdom come. Neither can it be the Kingdom of glory, for that is not
said to come to us, but we are said to be carried up to it, 1 These. 4. 17. Yea
its so far from being the Kingdom of ultimate glory, that its a Kingdom which
comes down out of glory upon the Earth, Rev. 20. 2, 3. And I John saw the holy
City, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of Heaven, prepared as a Bride
adorned for her Husband, and I heard a great voice out of Heaven, saying,
behold the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they
shall be his people, and God himself will be with them, and be their God.

This you see how Canaan of old, and this Gospel Canaan (which the Apostle
calls a rest to the people of God) do agree for matter of place.

Secondly, They are made to agree for the conditions upon which the subjects
were to enter each place, faith was required as necessary to the entering of old
Canaan, Heb. 3. 18, 19. The same is required as necessary to this Gospel
Canaan, Heb. 4. 1. Again, a following of God fully was required as necessary to
enter the old Canaan, Numb. 14. 21, 22. 23, 24. The same is required as
necessary to the entering of this Kingdom, Mat. 19. 28.

Thirdly, They do agree for privileges only in the general, Canaan of old was
a very pleasant, delightful, good land, which afforded abundance of comfort,
wealth, and safety, a full reward for all their travels, temptations, and
afflictions, which they went under for the Lord; so is it with this Kingdom or
Canaan, much more full of glory will this be found to have.

I shall briefly present you with some of the glory and excellency of it in
some few particulars. In the general it is set forth to you as a glorious
thing, or a great piece of glory, Isa. 60. 1. Arise for thy light is come, and
the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee: But to be a little more particular
about this Kingdom, and here we must take notice of these.

First, Something done, or is to be done by Christ at the setting up of this
Kingdom.

Secondly, Then the privileges of it.

But as to the first, there will be a general and total destruction fall upon
all the enemies of the Lord which shall be found in a way of hostile opposition
against the setting of this kingdom: for if you observe you may see how
excellently well Isreal's coming into Canaan does agree to this particular, with
respect to what the Scripture says, shall be done upon the wicked at the
setting up of this kingdom; for it is to be observed, that just before their
entering into the good Land, the greatest slaughter that ever was made of the
enemies of the Lord was at that time, as you may see, Josh. 10. 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14. This was but a type of what shall be the portion of the wicked, at
the Saints entrance into their great Canaan privileges: Read Isa. 43. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8. So Isa. 63. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, Isa. 66. 15, 16. Joel 3. 2.
with 14. Revelations 19. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.

Secondly, when this is done, and the great battle fought, and the Lord Jesus
has struck through the loins of his enemies; then will he take their kingdoms
from them, and give them unto the Saints in the whole world, made up of both
Jews and gentiles, Dan. 2. 44. with Dan 7. 22. 27. Rev. 20 4. Matthew. 19. 28.
Rev. 2. 26, 27. In which Kingdom it is clear that the Saints shall rule the
Nations of the earth, as the earth has governed them for many years together
in this world, Psalm 45. 16

The Kingdom being delivered up into their hands, then are they freed from the
oppression and the oppressor, which evil will never anoy the Saints more; the
Lord will so much restrain and moderate the rage of the wicked, Isa. 11. 6, 7,
8, 9. Isa. 35. 9. Isa 6. 18. Isa. 54. 14.

Secondly, the Saints shall then in an eminent manner be a righteous holy
people, no hypocrite shall be there, Isa. 35. 8. Isa. 60 21. Zach. 14. 20, 21.
Revelations 22. 15. Revelations 21. 17.

Thirdly, The Saints shall be then set wholly free from a timmerous and
distracting fearful spirit in duty, Zach. 12. 8. Isa. 35. 4.

Fourthly, Their knowledge in all divine as well as in humane things, will be
wonderful, to the administration of those which shall have to do with them;
yea, so great shall the wisdom of the Saints be at that day, that those persons
who have been accounted the learned and wise of the times before, shall be
ashamed to acknowledge that ever they were such men, Zach. 13. 4. 5. Isa. 29.
24.

Fifthly, There shall so great a spirit of fear and dread drop from their
countenances upon the wicked, as that the very majesty of their presence will
daunt them through the whole earth, Cant. 6 10.

Sixthly, There shall be a mighty spirit of glory upon all the attempts and
achievements which the Saints shall bring forth at that day, though now it be
clothed with shame and disgrace in the eyes of the world, yet then it shall
seem otherwise, Isaiah 54. 11, 12. Isaiah 16. 14, 15. Isaiah 66. 10, 11, 12.

Seventhly, This Canaan shall afford the Saints all manner of riches, plenty,
and peace, Isaiah. 60. 78. with 12. 13. verses. Zach. 14, 14. Revel. 21. 7.
Revelations 22, 2. Psalm 72. 6, 7.

Eighthly, The very heavens and the earth shall receive their primitive
excellency and first purities, Ezekiel. 34. 27. Isa. 65. 17. 2 Pet. 3. 13.

Ninthly, In this Canaan God will so bless the substance of it, as that he will
remove out of the way all these thorns and prickling briars which did any way
render our comforts unpleasing to us, or did any way imbitter them to our
taste, as the shortness of life, God will take away that, Isaiah 65. 20. with
ver. 22.

As likewise God will remove all occasions of loss, either as to goods or
estate, Isa. 65. 21, 22, 23. Also all pains of body, or decrepidness of limbs,
Isa. 35. 5, 6. Revel. 21. 4. Revel. 22. 3.

Lastly, And that which will crown all will be this, they shall be under the
constant shinings of Gods face of glorious love and mercy, which will never
admit of any withdrawings more, Rev. 22. 4, 5.

Object. But some may say, does not our Savior say, That my kingdom is not of
this world, 1 John 18. 36. and that the kingdom of heaven comes not with
observation, Luke 17. 20. and that the kingdom of God is within you, ver. 21.

How is it which you say, the kingdom of Christ shall be on earth in this world.

To which I answer, That there is a threefold kingdom which is attributed to
Jesus Christ.

1. A kingdom of providence, or his providential kingdom.

2. And a kingdom of grace.

3. A kingdom of glory here on earth.

As for his providential kingdom, of that I shall say but little.

But there is his kingdom of grace in the heart. This Kingdom comes not with
observation indeed, and this is not of this world; for nothing in the world can
procure or effect it in the heart of any creature. The strongest Caesar, or
wisest Philosopher, or richest Nabal in the world, should they put all their
strength, and parts, and riches together, can do nothing in this case, without
the mighty power of God. This kingdom of grace is within in the heart indeed,
and it affords no signs, or fore-running tokens of it in the least: but as the
wind blows where it lists, so is the spirits coming upon a soul at the
time of its conversion; you hear the sound of it, but know not from whence it
is: so says our Savior, John 3. 7, 8.

But thi^dly, There is his glorious Kingdom, or Kingdom of Glory, and that is
what is of this world; and that which comes with signs and tokens of
observation, that Christ is to have a Kingdom in this world, a Kingdom of
external glory, has been the business which we have proved already: but for
better satisfaction take this Scripture, Revel. 11. 15. And there were voices
in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our
Lords, and of his Christ's.

And that the coming of this kingdom is with observation, that is, its attended
with its fore-running signs and tokens, there is nothing more clear: read Mat.
24. from the 1. ver. to the 30. You shall meet with little else but matter of
observation touching the coming of this kingdom into the world, ver. 30. So
that Christ saying, My kingdom is not in this world, and my kingdom comes not
with observation, and my kingdom is within you, does not in the least fight
against this truth, if we consider the various administrations of the Kingdom:
I grant all this to be properly applied to the kingdom of his Grace, but not to
the Kingdom of his Glory, which he shall have here, as he is the Son of man.

Further, Now the Jews Canaan was an inheritance which God gave the people
freely, Deuteronomy. 19. 1. So is it in this case, to have a right to this Kingdom, or
Gospel Canaan of rest and peace, it is the free gift of God, without any desert
on our part at all: take the kingdom as it is of grace here in the heart, or of
glory in the Nations, or of ultimate glory above, to have a portion in it, its
of free gift: therefore says Christ, Luke 12. 32. Fear not little flock, it is
your fathers good pleasure to give you the kingdom.

Likewise Canaan it was an inheritance which was divided to the children of
Israel proportionably, to every one by lot, Numb. 26, 54, 55, 56. So is it in
this case of the Gospel Canaan, every true Israelite shall have his portion of
grace and glory in this kingdom; none shall say then, that his field shall
yield no meat, or that his flock be cut off the fold: no, no, but rather with
David to cry out, Psalm 16. 5, 6. The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance,
and of my cup, thou maintainest my lot, the lines are fallen in a pleasant
place; yea, I have a goodly heritage.

Again, The Jews were to march in an armed state to their Canaan of old: so
should all the Saints get on about them their spiritual armor, as the Apostle
speaks in Ephesians. 6. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Wherefore take on thr whole armor
of God, that you may be able to withstand in the evil day, and when you have
done all to stand: stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth,
and having on the breast plate of righteousness, and your feet shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace; above all things take on the shield of
faith, wherewith ye shall be ab^e to quench the fiery darts of the wicked, and
take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of
God, praying always with suppl^cation in the spirit, watching thereunto with
all perseverance, and supplication for all Saints.

Without this armor on about you, never think to march safe to this good Land,
take it either for the kingdom of glory here on earth, or the kingdom of glory
above with the Father. Your enemies are worse then those which stood in Isreal's
way to their Canaan, says Paul, Ephesians. 6. 12. For we wrestle not against flesh
and blood, but against principalities and powers, against the rulers of the
darkness of this world, against spirital wickedness got into high places.

Likewise the Jews were to fight for the good Land; they were not only to put
on their armor, but they were to use it, Deuteronomy. 7. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 So
must Christians, not only put on their spiritual armor, but they must use it
against the Devil, sin, and temptation: Armor signifies but little if a man
make no use of it; therefore says Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy 6. 12. Fight the
good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life, whereunto thou art called.

Lastly, They were to fight under their captain Joshua. So this shows
Christians under whose banner they should fight. and who they should engage
with them in the quarrel, their spiritual Joshua, in whose strength alone they
are more then conquerors, Romans 8. 37. Nay in all these things we are more then
conquerors, through him that loved us.

Saints, your enemies are great and politic, and truly they contend with you
for things of a very great concernment; its for your souls, things of more
worth then the world; and in your selves you are poor weak things, but Christ
is the power of God, yea, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah: be sure if you intend
to overcome and prevail, get under the shadow of Christ's wing, set Christ
before you, make him the captain, and he will fight your battle for you, and
make the necks of your stout enemies to lie under your feet.

CHAP. 37. Of their Cities of Refuge.
THese Cities were six in number; their use was for this purpose, that if any
man had committed murder accedentally, yet if he did immediately repair to any
one of these Cities (before the officer that was appointed for execution) did
overtake him, then he was not to die, provided he did not get out of the City
until the death of the present High Priest, Numb. 35. 11, 12, 13, 14.

These Cities, as to the use of them, they were all types of Jesus Christ, with
respect to the safety Christ administers to poor guilty sinners, in a way of
protecting of them from the wrath of God. Look as the avenger of blood did
pursue the mur^herer in open field, so does the Justice of God the sinner every
day, Psalm 7. 11. God is angry with the wicked every day; so ver. 12, 13. If he
turn not he will wh^t his sword, he has bent his bow and made it ready, he
has also prepared for him the instruments of death; he has ordained his
arrows against the persecutors.

But if the soul can make to Christ before the justice of God has overtaken
him, he will be safe; fot Christ is the great City of refuge; there is no kind
of evil can enter the gates of this City, says Solomon, Prove. 18. 10. The name
of the Lord is a strong tower, and the righteous run thereat and are safe:
therefore it is said in Isaiah where the prophet is speaking of Christ, Isa.
25. 4. For thou have been a strength to the poor, a strength to the needy in
his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, when the blast
of the terrible one is as a storm against the wall.

Therefore soul, if thou would be protected from the blast of the terrible
one, from the stroke of Gods justice, maste haste to the City of refuge, which
is Christ, get into him and thou will be safe,

CHAP. 38. Of the Scapegoat offered to God for the People.
THere was likewise a live Goat, which that the Priest was to take, upon the
head of which he was to lay his hands, and there to make a public confession
to God of all the peoples sins, and when so done, the Priest was to lay all the
sins of the people upon the head of the Goat; then was the Goat to be sent away
into the Wilderness, never to return with them more, Leviticus 26. 7, 8. 9.
with 21, 22. verses.

This Type as well as the rest was to set forth the wonderful grace of God in
Christ to sinners, who has prepared a escape Goat for them, to carry away their
sin upon his own head; which escape Goat is Christ, his only Son. O this is
wonde^ful love, says the Spirit, John 3. 16. God so loved the world, as that
he sent forth his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should
not perish, but have everlasting life.

O look to Christ, he is this escape Goat, he bears all the sins of his
people, they are confessed over Christ's head, and translated upon Christ's head,
Isa 53. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 24. And so made his sins (not ours) and he has carried
them into the wilderness of forgetfulness, where they shall never come into
mind more, Jer. 31. 34. From the least of them unto the greatest of them, says
the Lord, I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember the sin no more;
Christ will leave all the sin and guilt (which he took upon him) behind him in
the Wilderness (says God,) I will cast away their iniquity behind my back: And
assure your selves when ever Christ comes again he will come without sin to
Salvation, Heb. 9 28.

CHAP 39. Of the other smaller Sacrifices in use amongst the people.
THere were other Sacrifices which they offered to God, besides what have been
mentioned, all holding forth something of a Christ to come; now these
sacrifices were of two sorts.

First, Of things solid.

Secondly, Of things liquid or moist.

Those solid things which they offered to God in sacrifice, they were likewise
of two sorts.

First, Of things living.

Secondly, Of things dead.

Now the living sacrifices, or the sacrifices of those things that were living.
They were either Bullocks, Levit. 16. 11. Goats, Levit. 16. 15. Rams, Levit.
16. 3. Lambs Exodus 12. 3. And young Pigeons, Levit. 1 14.

Now all these living sacrifices were to be put to death, which answers to the
death of Christ, pointed out to them, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 9. 26. That
(Christ) toward the latter end of the world should appear to put away sin by
the sacrifice of himself.

And these sacrifices were not only to be put to death, but their blood was to
be shed forth, that so an atonement might be made to God by it, Levit. 1. 14.
Levit. 16. 15, 16. Which answers to that of the Apostle touching Jesus Christ,
Heb. 9. 13, 14. And where as well these sacrifices were to be without spot or
blemish, Levit. 3. 6. This answers to the Apostles pure nature of our
Gospel-sacrifice Christ, as the Apostle speaks in Heb. 9. 14.

Secondly, As for these sacrifices which were of things sollid but of a dead
matter, it was Meal or Flower, and this was to be bruised or broken, which
answers to that of Christ, which the Prophet speaks of him in Isa. 53. 10. Yet
it pleased the Lord to bruise him, and to put him to grief when thou shall make
his soul an offering for sin.

As for these sacrifices which were liquid, they were either of Oil, Wine, or
Water; and this was to be poured out upon the ground, Exodus 29 40. Which
answers to that of Christ which the Prophet speaks in Isa. 53. 12. Therefore
will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with
the strong, because he has poured out his soul unto death.

Thus soul, I have spoken my thoughts of these great mysteries of the Gospel,
and I hope that I was not wholly left to my own spirit; in the thing I found
much of the presence of the Lord going along with me in the work, the
foundation of which was laid in prison when I was shut up for Jesus Christ.
J^has Isle of Patmos brought him in his great Revelations from God, and I hope
that my impisonment was attended with somethng of a Patmos blessing, if thou
receivest any benefit by it give God the glory, and say the Lord has brought
whom light to thee out of the midst of ignorance it self, and thou have met
with instruction from the mouth of a mere Babe. But what is there too hard for
the Lord, who when he will work who shall let him, who brings to naught the
things that are, by the things that are not, and by foolishness to confound the
wise and prudent.

My desire is, that as I have labored in the strength of God to bring this
forth for thy spiritual profit and advantage, thou would not content thy self
only with the keeping of this piece in thy house, and the letting of it stand
upon thy shielf, or to let it lie in thy window, but be much in the reading and
meditation of it; things no farther profit us then we are diligent in the use
of them. Remember that Timothies spiritual profit came in by much reading and
meditation on the word, 1 Timothy 4. 13. with ver. 15^.

Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly, above all that we ask or
think, according to the power that works in us, unto him be glory in the
Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all Ages, world without End.

Amen.
FINIS.
THese are to inform the Reader, That whereas the Covenant mentioned amongst
the TYPES, is left out, and nothing spoken of it, the reason is, the Author
intends to publish it in another Treatise.

By reason of the Authors Remoteness from the Press, there are several Mistakes
in this Book; Wherefore the Reader is desired to compare such places as are
doubtful with this following ERRATA.

Page line. 3 14 FOr such read they 8 8 for strength r. straight 11 4 for
executioner r. execution 17 14 leave out so no some 27 10 leave out of 32 4 add
is 36 10 leave out the 69 6 leave out never, inherited 73 26 leave out who have
76 20 for shall r. that 78 19 for imagining r. engaging 84 17 for loose r.
leave 87 32 for meanest r. means 90 33 for that r. the 96 3 add it 109 30 for
Church r. Gentile 120 26 leave out thoughts 121 3 for mind r. wind 134 11 for
work r. word 137 11 add were 142 25 add an 144 29 add eace 147 29 add not 180 9
leave out pride 187 36 add what with 189 30 leave out comma at with an instance
202 27 for times r. sometimes, and at the last line of page 202 add for his
people in all ages; Therefore 207 10 for tears r. words 209 6 leave out all 216
32 for sacrifice r. house 220 21 for his r. this 223 32 add may 228 17 for
neither r. either 233 6 for will r. does 245 35 r. who has despised, etc. 266
31 for careful r. fearful 270 26 for laudable r. audible 273 2 for laudable r.
audible 274 29 for me r. them 300 32 for he r. here 301 8 add not 9 for whom r.
home 304 18 r. a view of him as 307 28 for mark r. word 317 last for
administration r. admiration 325 9 leave out well,


