THE Decency and Order OF CHURCH AND STATE, AS NOW ESTABLISHED, Asserted in a
Late Visitation Sermon.

LONDON: Printed for Joseph Lawson, Bookseller in the Bail of Lincoln, 1684.

1 CORINTHIANS. CHAP. 14. VERSE. 40. Let all things be done decently, and in order.
NOW adays, when Wit and Fool, Papist and Fanatic, are the consequents of Whig
and Tory; those exotic and opprobrious Nicknames, and men's Principles are
rather tried by the Verdict of an Ignoramus Conscience, than by God and their
King, Religion and Loyalty. When he passes for a Protestant big enough, that
stands up for the safety of himself and his lawful Successors, that thinks he
has Liberty and Property worth Insuring; a Religion or Interest, A Good Old
Cause, or a New Commonwealth worth promoting; which the Turk and Tartar, the
Jew and Jesuit, the Blackmoors and Indians have as well as such: When right
Dominion is founded in the power of Grace; according to that Whiggish Machiavel
of Malmsbury, Mr. Hobbs; and Grace depends upon success, and that upon
Predestination, according to the Epileptick Half Moon Doctrine of dissenting
Mahomet: When the Extempore men are for arbitrary Consciences, as well as
arbitrary Prayers; not stinting the Spirit either in Church or State, but to be
governed by a Law that gives them liberty to do what they please, making their
Governors in Church and State, like the Prophet David's Idol, that has a mouth
and speaks not, eyes and sees not, ears and hears not; mere Statues, Figures,
and Political Nullities; when Churches are debauched into Renegado
Conventicles, and Clubs into Associations, the counter-parts of the Old
Covenant; no wonder that our Decency and Order is debauched too: No wonder that
the English man verifies his Proverb viz. (That he is one that never knows when
a thing is well, by thus doubling and disguising, chopping and changing his
Laws and Religion: So he swaggers against the Pope, it is no matter though he be
for Mahomet, or Menitto, i. e. in America the Indian God: Though he be against
the Trinity, Christ and God; i. e. be he Socinian, Quaker, or Anabaptist, so he
hold, that the End, does hallow and justify the Means. The very name
Protestant, in its Composition, does correct and antidote the malignity and
poison of all wickedness, though the main Ingredient may be a Dose of Jesuits
Powder; by such popular general Notions, true Protestants are only a
Commonwealth of men composed of all Religions whatsoever, provided they do but
side in a common opposition to the Church of Rome. And it was just with the
Forty One Puritans, as it is with the Whigs now; they are all but one Chaos and
Faction, made up of an Oglio of Seven or Eight Score Religions; and if we take
Protestants in the Latitude and Comprehension with our Dissenters, they are not
so much a Religion, as a Party; a Church, as a Commonwealth; a mere Rare Show,
cloak'd and shaded over with the imaginary Scenes of a Landskip'd Conscience,
whilst they are hag'd out of their wits with the visions of Antichrist and
Predestination, strong impulses and fortunate in-comes the Factious Wheedles
and Enthusiastical Whimseys of Forty One. -- It Is true, the name Protestant was
at first derived from the Protestation entered against the Decree of Spires, in
the Year 1529. and by Protestancy, in its original extent is signified and
commonly meant, a Separation of Christians from the Communion of the Church of
Rome; but to oppose Errors on the one hand is not enough, unless we preserve
our selves clear and free from Corruptions on the other. And it was the
Reformation, not the Protestation that settled and established us upon a true
Medium betwixt the two extremes of Superstitious Tyranny, and Fanatic Anarchy;
and the former, by the Providence of Heaven, introduced and made way for the
latter. And it is the Reformation, i. e. The Uniformity and Canon, the Articles
and Constitutions of our Church, its Decency and Order by Law established, that
we must stand to, and regulate our selves by; for the understanding of which
general Rule, we need only refer our selves to the Act of Uniformity, the
Rubric and Method of our Liturgy, and the Articles of Visitations, which have
so well provided for all parts of our Offices, that we have nothing to do but
to observe, and let them be done Decently, and in Order, as they are prescribed
and enjoined. For the particular vindication of which, and the satisfaction of
our selves, Dr. Comber's Companion to the Temple, Dr. Faulkner's Libertas
Ecclesiastica, and the late Tracts of the London Divines are fully sufficient,
and principally necessary, which I heartily recommend with all honor and
submissive experience. But at present (just mentioning them) I only design to
plead for our Duty in general; And that I shall do

First, With reference to the exercise of the Spiritual Court Power.

Secondly, By way of address to our selves of the Clergy, with relation to the
Dissenters.

Thirdly and lastly, To our Lay-Brethren, of the same Communion with relation
to their Uniformity and Reverence in public Worship; showing the Decency and
Order of our several Offices and Parts; and in all the excellent Constitution
of our Church.

First, As to the Spiritual Power of the Church, (notwithstanding Mr. Selden's
and Mr. Hob's civil Jurisdiction of it,) It is of Apostolical Antiquity and
Descent: when at first all the Churches being incorporated under the same
Numerical Constitution of Government, making but one Community, had their
Elders to take immediate cognizance and inspection of them, with subordination
to, and dependence upon the Apostles; answerable to whom (I humbly conclude)
that our Apostles the Bishops have their Representatives, their Delegates and
Vicars, Archdeacons, and Diocesan Chancellours, in the Canon Law termed
Episcoporum Oculi, to whom is deputed the power of Excommunication, Injunctions
of Penance, to reform the abuses and irregularities of Parochial Churches: For
though the Universal Church, as such, is built upon a Rock; yet Particular
Parish Churches are liable to Dilapidations, so that the Church must
unavoidably decay and perish, if she be not supported and maintained by such
advantages, as other Communities and Corporations are, viz. a Charter and a
Power to defend her self, and allay all heats by wise determinations, to
moderate and amend what is amiss by prudent Admonitions, Paternal Censures, and
Fraternal Correptions. The holy Scripture lays down the Fundamentals of
Doctrine in particular Commands, but the Discipline and Circumstantials of
Decency and Order in general Rules. And further, besides the Antiquity of this
Power derived from the Apostles, and the reasonableness of it from the nature
of all Communities; there seems to be another, but too little urged and
considered, namely; that a tender observance of it, and due obedience to it,
would prove a fair Title to salvation. For the Spiritual Power is exercised
upon the Consciences and Souls of men, and refers to the happiness of the other
world; as the Civil Temporal Power aws the outward man, and relates to this
present life. Our Savior first invested St. Peter, and in him the rest of the
Apostles, and their Successors with his Power, by his Conge D'eslire by the
Charter and Patent of the Keys; and how can the Keys of the Church to let in,
and shut out, be called The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 16. 19.
except there be a necessary Relation and Conformity between the Communion of
the Church on Earth, and the Kingdom of Heaven: The Christian Church as a
Church, has not any Secular coercive Power, therefore how shall it defend and
protect it self against the conspiracies of Men and Devils, if it has no
Spiritual Power neither? And that it cannot have, if the Communion of the
Church be so indifferent a thing, that men may be saved as well out of the
Church as in it; for who then will regard its Unity, value its Discipline, or
respect its Authority; and why may not Schismatics or Dissenters (though upon
other accounts they may pass in See the Vindication of the Defense of Dr.
Stillingfleet. Chap. 3. p. 120.
the world for very plausible men) be censured for their Schism and
Nonconformity, as well as Rebels for their Treason and Disobedience, whatever
other good qualities they have? the reason of both is parallel, the Government
in Church and State is so Essential to our quiet and peace, that the disturbers
of them are not to go unpunished, and Schism is so much worse than Rebellion,
as the happiness of the Soul is of greater concern than the welfare of the
Body. Thus I have just touched upon the reasonableness and usefulness of that
Power which has been so lately slurr'd and defamed by the Black Nonconformist
of Colchester, who in the heat of Greek and revenge, resolved to lessen and
scandalize the Power that he feared, for which he was fairly Surrogated to
those Censures, which he censoriously undervalued: The necessity of exercising
of which Power, is grounded upon this general Reason, Because if the Bishops
eyes do wink and connive at the Irregularities of private and single Members,
by that they are made the sins of the whole Body, and though the Account and
Trial of particular Persons may be prorogued and put off till the last great
Visitation, yet Societies and Corporations having no resurrection in the life
to come, may justly dread and expect to be punished and judged for their
Exorbitances in their present State and Community.

Secondly, By way of address to our selves of the Clergy. -- Now adays when
Condescension, Comprehension, Toleration and Moderation are so stiffly pleaded
for, and cried up, some Dappled Py-ball'd Conformists, and halfway men of the
Laity, Oating and crying about, nothing but the Church of England, the Security
of the Government and His Majesty's Person, till you bring them to that
Sciboleth and Test, (as now by Law established) which they cannot relish, the
35th. of Elizabeth, and the Oxford Act about Corporations being in it, do
wonderfully expect a compliance on our parts, by dispensing with the Decency
and Order of the Church Service; they are a sort of Trimmers, who are for any
Tooth, turning their hands to every Face and Beard of Religion, and can split a
hair betwixt a Church and a Conventicle; this is the Composition of those we
call Moderate Men, which is but a soft Trimming phrase for Knaves and Juglers
in Religion; and are so far from being instrumental to compose our Divisions,
that they rather animate and credit them; and it is upon their Accounts that
there is a new Distinction set up amongst us, viz. A Court and a Church of
England, as well as a Court and a Church of Rome; and for any Clergyman to
comply, and humor such persons, is a kind of playing booty between the Laws
and them. For he that takes upon him to abate of his Duty, and moderate his
Oath, violates it, and sets himself above the Laws and the Act of Uniformity,
to dispense with the Obligation of which, as to the use of those things
enjoined, it is not in the power of any private person: The usual
Characteristick of a moderate occasional Clergyman is this, He is one, who
when a man is put to a pinch or strait upon the Sacrament, for an Office and
Qualification, will stoop and comply more for easiness of a tender squeamish
Conscience than another, one who will not scruple to marry without a Ring, to
baptize without the Sign of the Cross, Godfathers and Godmothers, bury a
Corpse with a Consolation and Extemporary Harangue of his own, administer the
Sacrament in any posture, Church Women in a private house, which (pardon the
Digression) is as contrary to the End, as to the Name of the Office, and
renders one Verse of the proper Psalm improper and impertinent, which expressly
tells us, She pays her Vows in the presence of all his See Dr. Comber's fourth
and last Part. Page 513.
People, in the Courts of the Lords House; and is directly contrary to a
Council, as Dr. Comber in his Introduction to this Office tells us in these
words, viz. It is decreed that the Priest do not go to the Woman's house to
make the accustomed Prayers there, no, not though she be so weak, as not to be
able to come to Church. Council. 3. Mediol: Cap. 5. Binius T. 4. Part 2. Page
417.
-- And the Reason hereof is evident, because she may stay till she is
stronger; she is not obliged to come at a certain time, but only so soon as she
is able. Therefore thus to gratify the Humors See Dr. Puller of Moderation.
Page 20.
and Fancies of all Parties, and to comply with them by condescensions of this
nature, is an unaccountable and unwarrantable kind of prerogative which any
person arrogates to himself; and if there be any such, they have a great share
of the Vice of Moderation, but little or none of the Virtue; such Persons are
not to be looked upon as steady, faithful, and honest in their Function; I do
not certainly know that I have any such Neighbors, nor can I accuse any
Minister whatsoever, but do believe them to be as Regular, Conformable and
Loyal in this County as any; from such an occasional Moderation therefore as
shall overawe us to relax these Obligations of Uniformity, Decency and Order,
which we are under, to gratify and claw with either the Pride or State,
Perverseness or Preciseness of any Person whatsoever, Good Lord deliver us.
Seeing we Clergymen have by private Subscriptions at our first Admission into
holy Orders, consented to use the Form in the said Book prescribed in public
Prayer and Administration of Sacraments; and likewise upon our promotion to a
Benefice or Cure, stand obliged publicly in the face of the Congregation, on
some Lords Day within Two Months, to declare our unfeigned Assent and Consent
to the use of all things in the Book of Common Prayer, contained and enjoined;
and likewise by open Declarations and Solemn Oaths to our Diocesan, bind our
selves to the constant use of the Rites established by Law, to confirm and
encourage us in all. It was resolved in 1662. Feb. 25. Nemine Contradicente,
(That it be presented to the Kings Majesty, as the humble Advice of this House,
That no indulgence be granted to the Dissenters from the Act of Uniformity.)
From all which, it may be undoubtedly concluded, that nothing less than a
strict, close and impartial performance of our Duty, and a constant, steady
Conformity is required on our parts, and that no one can dispense with himself;
to be so easy, courteous and tender to a Fanatic, as upon his request and
account, to adulterate my Conscience, to violate my Obligations to God and Man,
by being treacherous and unfaithful to the Church which I have espoused, is
such a piece of Good Nature and Obligingness, as I cannot apprehend, nor shall
ever practice; I am confident such Actions would be a reflection upon the
Constitution of the Church, as if her Canons and Injunctions were too high and
severe, and needed some Allowances and Abatements. -- It Is true, if it were
left to my choice to perform or not perform all the Offices of the Rubric, and
I out of Humor, Peevishness, Ambition or Malice, would not stoop to the
Desires of a Parishioner, by dispensing with them, such a one then might upon
some plausible grounds impeach me as uncivil, morose and churlish; but since we
stand engaged as we do, it would on the contrary in my judgment, be very unkind
and unreasonable on their parts to stand upon it, and highly blameable and
unlawful in us to grant it: For as we ought to give none offense, neither to
the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, (as they plead:) so neither to the Church of
God, 1 Cor. 10. 32. Which such a compliance as this would do. Whatever Religion
or Party a man owns, and espouses, so he be steady and hearty to his
Profession, he is more to be valued and reguarded, than he that gives Security
for his Conformity, and after he has obtained his Ends (by Preferment) plays
booty, fast and loose; for of all sorts of men, the Semi-Conforming Conformists
are least to be esteemed, who to keep their Benefices, have complied with, and
humored the Religion established, though in their hearts they are uneasy
under it, and by their occasional Administrations endeavor to weaken it, as
far as they dare; all who are just such Friends to the Church of England as
Joab was to Abner, when he took him friendly by the Beard and kissed him, and
betray her as Judas did his Lord with a kiss.

To be moderate, is not to be indifferent in doing or not doing what is
required; or an omitting what is matter of duty, or doing quite contrary; as
those who make their Appeals for moderation would understand, and have it to be
a remission of the Obligation and Observance of the Laws, as if the Terms and
Conditions of our Communion were very unlawful, very immoderate and
inexpedient. -- No, but with respect to Law, it consists in supplying that by
right reason, which is not provided for by the Law in written words: In such
Cases as the Lawgiver (could he have foreseen) would have provided for. But in
the present Instance there is nothing but what the Lawgiver did foresee, and
provide against: Benignity or Tenderness of Nature, is not to exclude Justice,
and in these Laws which relate to Ecclesiastical Polity, and particularly the
Administration of Public Worship, there is to be considered a Justice to God,
as well as to one another, because it is his Worship and Service which is to be
performed, and the Justice which we owe to God cannot be satisfied, nor his
Honor consulted, unless all things be done Decently and in Order, because he
is the God of Order, and not of Confusion; and that all things be done so, some
certain Rules are to be prescribed and observed, and not to be dispensed with
by the mistaken Pretenses and Notions of Moderation. -- And this Church of
ours, deserves our steadiness and constancy, as it is by 32 Acts Established;
by great Learning and Charity Reformed; by the Example and Zeal of the Supreme
Power Maintained; by the Word of God, and the Blood of Martyrs Tried and
Adjusted; In its Doctrine, Orthodox; In its Liturgy, Devout; In its Government,
Apostolical; in its Constitutions, Reasonable and useful; and in its
Ceremonies, Decent and Orderly. A Church that does not trespass upon the
Regalia of Princes, nor imposes upon the Faith of Christians. -- And nothing
can keep out Popery so effectually as a conscientious and undaunted adhering to
it, as a being firm and true to the present Establishment till our Governors
shall see fit to make any Alterations. -- But further to enforce our
Moderation, We are told that we of the Clergy that are strong, must bear with
the weak. But why must our Duty be less'ned by any Obligation to comply and
comport with the infirmity of the weak? When these Obligations (to obey
Authority) and to yield to the weak, meet together, and both cannot be
observed, the last, which is certainly the less must give place; and we ought
to bear a greater regard to our Public Governors, than to our Private
Brethren, and to obey them, rather than to satisfy these, for a Governor is a
Brother See Bishop Sanderson's View.
too, and something more; and Duty is Charity too, and something more; and the
Public Interest is more valuable than any Private Concern. -- It Is true,
Indeed when a Person comes to me very seriously, and acquaints me how he has
been Educated in such a Persuasion, and his Ancestors before him, and that he
has done what he could by Prayers and Books, by Thinking and Discoursing to
search out the Truth; and after all Inquiries he is not able to apprehend that
he has any Reason to change his Opinion; I say, when such a Person from the
bottom of his heart, sincerely declares he cannot discern things as others can:
A man that is strong, i. e. One that knows what is lawful and unlawful, ought
to consider and pity such a man's weakness, i. e. ought to take notice of him
with a great deal of civility and kindness, affability and mildness; not to
triumph, Lord and Domineer it over him, but by all fair means endeavor to
reconcile him to the Church. -- Though in common observation, it is a strange
Mystery, if what these weak Brethren pretend be true: Take one of them out of
the Church, and they shall tell you, That a Tree is a Tree, and a House is a
House, and judge of such things as Metaphysically and Distinctly as another
man, and yet take him into a Church or a Steeple-House, (in his own Phrase) and
you cannot convince him, but a plain whited Wall is a Carved or Molten Image;
and this seems to be the plain Case, viz. That in Worldly Concerns and Affairs,
they should be as Judicious, Discerning, and Intelligent as any others, but in
Religion very untoward, odd and untractable; as if Religion, which designed to
inlighten men's minds and understandings, should darken and eclipse theirs; this
gives a shrewd suspicion, that it is rather wilfulness than weakness in them,
whilst they plead they are weak at one time, and take it ill if you confer
with them as such, at another. -- I can hardly be persuaded, but those
Venetian, or Commonwealth Protestants, for all their pretended love and even
dotage upon Parliaments, value them the least of all Mankind: For there is
never a day they rise to go to a Conventicle, in which they do not break a
matter of 20 or 30 of their Acts, and therefore no wonder if they endeavor to
pull down the power of those Laws which they fear and hate: Instead of rooting
out Popery, which is Militant in England, Triumphant in Italy, and disguised in
France; they would reduce Episcopacy under the Mask of Tantivism, to the
Primitive condition of Timothy and Titus, to be poor and persecuted, root and
branch; and the same Spirit that posted so many honorable Patriots for
Straffordians, would now expose them as French Pensioners and Arbitrary Tools,
and by their Seditious and Virulent Libels, sacrifice them to the odium of the
Profanum Vulgus. -- Amidst all their Clamours for Toleration, I wish they would
but seriously consider these following Particulars:

First, That the Model and Constitution of any Government, can never provide
against all the petty Exceptions of every particular Person, and to make the
most of our innocent Ceremonies, there are but six in all: (Viz.) Bowing at the
Name of Jesus, Kneeling at the Sacrament, Ring at Marriage, God fathers and
Godmothers, Cross in Baptism, and the Surplice; and the two last, the Laity
have no more to do with than to be present, and see them used by the Clergy,
all Decent and significant Helps and Ornaments of Devotion; which I shall but
just mention, and proceed to tell them, That it is impossible all Dissenters
can be satisfied, for all come in with an equal cry and loudness, and that Plea
will serve a Papist, as well as a Protestant, may tolerate Idolatry as well as
Schism; and little do most believe and know, that His Majesty's Declaration for
Liberty of Conscience 15th March 1671 / 2 was See Packet of Advice to the Men
of Shaftsbury, p. 19. and Coleman's Letters.
promoted chiefly by the Lord Clifford, a professed Roman Catholic; and
presently closed with, by that Noble Peer of three Names. -- And as violent as
they pretend to be against the Papists, I remember Dr. Pierce Dean of Sarum, in
his Sermon of Schism, Page 46, 47. in his Decad of Caveats, makes a Schismatic
worse than a Heretic in these words, An Heretic, as such, does only offend
against Faith and Truth, and keeping his error to himself, is no body's enemy
but his own, is a Regular Citizen, and a good Subject, living friendly with his
Neighbors, and in an Uniform Obedience to his Superiors, whereas a
Schismatic as such, does also offend against Peace and Charity, and cannot
possibly keep his Schism to himself, because it is public in it is own Nature,
but affronts the Governors, sets up Altar against Altar; a Conventicle,
against a Church; the one is an active Divider, the other's but passively
Divided; the one destroys a whole Society, and the Legislative Power, whilst
the other does but violate a particular Law; and a vicious Practice is
naturally worse than a wrong Opinion. -- A Schismatic is mostly an Heretic,
for he renounces the Ninth Article of the Creed, The Holy Catholic Church, and
the Communion of Saints, and disowns one of the Principal Doctrines of our
Religion, i. e. Obedience to Authority, which is enjoined under the pain of
Damnation; and Rebellion against the Second Table, is as bad as Rebellion
against the First; and Obedience is due to Governors as the Ordinance of God,
let their Practices and Opinions be what they will, even to a Tiberius and a
Nero; and as Peace without Holiness, is but adherence to a Faction, so Holiness
without Peace, is but Hypocrisy; and he that is of an Unpeaceable, must needs
be of an Unholy Spirit: If so, why may not an Heretic be tolerated as well as
a Schilmatick?

Secondly, I wish they would consider, That as the Papists have been earnest
Solicitours for the Indulging of Protestant Dissenters, so likewise Julian the
Apostate, the bitterest enemy that Christianity ever had, was the man that set
up this way of Toleration, sending for the Prelates: Monebat ut civilibus
discordiis consopitis, quisque nullo vetante, religioni suae serviret
intrepidus; quod agebat ideo obstinante, ut dissensiones augente licentia non
timeret unanimantem plebem: i. e. He decreed, That all civil Animosities be
laid aside, and that every one might serve God in his own way, without fear or
danger, hoping by that License and Toleration, their Divisions would be
increased, that so he might have the less Reason to fear their unanimous
opposing of his Grand Design, which was to restore Paganism and Idolatry again,
as Ammianus Marcellinus, one of Julian's Soldiers tells us, Lib. 22. which is
enough to show, That this fair and plausible Indulgence, may be designed for
very bad purposes. -- Is it not strange then that the Author of Julian the
Apostate, with those of the same Clan and Covey, comparing Popery with
Paganism, should be so violent against a Successor of another Religion, under
whom, if he should prove as they pre-judge him, a second Julian, they may
expect the like Toleration, which they now so strongly appeal for? that
dangerous Libel has strangely tickled the Mobile, who for the choice of Kings,
imagine they may come like the Tribunes of Rome, with an uncontrollable Veto;
what can there be at the Core of this Apostate Author, but a Design to make a
Constantine miserable, for fear that Julian may succeed to bring on a present
evil, which is sure and incurable, to avoid one that may never come? what is he
but a Doleman, or Robert Parsons Redivivus, who in the Days of Queen Elizabeth,
wrote against the Succession of King James, because his Religion did not please
the Papists, whose Maxim was, That all Monarchies are de jure elective? What
does he but set up Lancaster against York, by pleading some dubious Titles
against a settled Succession? according to him, we must make our Kings by an
Army, as the Roman Emperors were commonly established, or come to a Pole and
HUSSA'S for them; what a strange consequence must it needs be, to draw an
Argument from the State of the Roman Empire in Julian's time, when Laws were
made by Arbitrary Edicts, to such an Establishment as ours is? I could be more
particular in examining this Diana of theirs, but it would be much a Digression
and Apostasy from my Text; I have so far spoken of it at this time, because the
Author is put upon our Function to credit his Libel, but whatever he has been,
he ought to be looked upon as an Out-lyer, and a blown Deer, to be avoided by
his own Herd, and the preferment he gets by it (to use his own Phrase) may be
put in his eye, or be paid for it over the left shoulder. -- For our Church
(thanks be to God) as Constantine left a Religion, which neither the Malice of
an Arian Son, nor the Policy of the new Apostate could extinguish, is
established upon such a Foundation, as neither Popish, nor Pagan, nor
Mahumetan, nor Commonwealth Successor, no not the Gates of Hell and Rome, shall
be able to prevail against it. It may be persecuted, as it was under the Pagan
Emperors; it may be laid in the dust as it was in the late times, but all the
Art and Malice of Apostate Men and Devils, can never alter the Establishment of
it, and those that endeavor it deserve a Julian to grant them a Toleration,
that are so uneasy under a Constantine, who made his Edicts against it in the
Fifth General Council held at Constantinople. -- The Church of England would be
glad of the favor and protection of Princes, but it is her Credit and Glory,
which they would make her Crime, that according to the Apostolical Primitive
practice, she will not purchase this outward. Establishment, at the rate of
Disobedience and Rebellion: She leaves that to the Pope, Jesuit, Munster and
Geneva Christians; She is no more concerned for the Succession of a Decius or a
Maximinus, than a Titus, so as to endeavor to alter it by unlawful Acts; the
holy Gospel it self, nor Religion, is to be advanced by wickedness and
unwarrantable means; we must not out of zeal to the honor of One Commandment,
break the other Nine; we must not (like the too officious Uzza) extend our
assistance and helping hand to the stumbling Ark, and tottering Church, beyond
our Duties and Commissions, beyond God's Laws and Commands; In a word, We must
not do the least evil, though the greatest good may come by it; for that is but
distrusting God, over-acting Religion, and serving our own ambitious Designs.
-- Though we may do all we can as Christians, and honest men, to avoid
Persecutors and Tyrants, yet since we can no more choose our Governors than
our Parents, and that we may as well renounce the one as the other, upon the
account of Religion, we ought to pay all Obedience to Gods Ordinance. -- It Is a
strange thing to observe, that were a man as exemplary for Piety, as St. Paul;
as great an Advocate for Christianity, as Tertullian; and as good an Apologist
for the Reformation, as Bishop Jewel; they would Transubstantiate him in an
instant to a Jesnit, because he does not wholly spit his Choler and Phlegm
against that Transubstantiate Religion, but preaches up Obedience to the King,
and his subordinate Ministers. -- May they not with as much Justice and Modesty
challenge and impeach Christ and his Apostles, and charge them with the Guilt
of setting up Pagan and persecuting Successors, because they did not enjoin
their Christian followers, to Preach, Write and Fight them down; -- But we have
already seen, that neither a Popish, nor Commonwealth Successor, have been able
to ruin the Church; and her Innocence, as it is her Glory, will be her
Protection, and in a short Revolution her Triumph too. -- But further, they
urge another plausible Popular pretense from the Example and Constitution of
the States of Holland; and is it not well remembered, what an impious Ravage
these sort of Creatures, made at first in Germany, till they were casheer'd by
open force? and then afterward when the Reversion or Remainder of that
Colluvies, came to discharge and disembogue it self into that Amphibious
Quagmire of Europe, the Low Countries; what Blasphemy and Confusion went along
with it? till they were forced to have a standing Army over them in Holland, a
State-Padlock upon every Pulpit, and their Teachers upon the good behavior;
for there they are Pensioners altogether upon the States Pay, and have no other
Tenure, but Durante Beneplacito, whereas here we have our Free-holds, not to be
ejected, deposed, or suspended, but in a Legal way. -- No Conventicle Doctrines
are suffered there; no praying to God for the raising up of the Spirit of
Testimony, i. e. of Contumacy and Rebellion; if they keep to their Texts well
and good, but if they come once to la unch out into Politics and Problematical
Discourses upon the Extent of Civil Power, away with them Marshal de snap to
Erebws; (and this I have good reason to believe, from my acquaintance with some
of their Dominis or Pastors;) and what came on it when they cried, Come out of
Babylon, and whip't away with the Gospel into New England, under the color of
flying from Persecution? did they not fall into the highest degree of
persecuting one another? to my own observation in New England, they will not
allow Toleration to Brownists, Anabaptists, Antinomians, and Quakers, of the
last of which Sect not many years ago, they Ketch'd and Snicked up two or
three, one of whose Names I have some reason to remember, from my acquaintance
with her Son, now living in New York in America. -- And Mr. John Cotton
himself, one of their preciousest men, was against Toleration, as appears by
his Letter to Mr. Roger Williams of Providence in New England, who was banished
for holding some contrary Tenets, which Letter I have in my hands, more of
which we may read in the two first Pages of the Dissenter's Sayings, collected
by the Industriously Loyal, Mr. Le Strange: All which, I shall sum up with one
remarkable Instance; Viz. That the Presbyterians denied His late Majesty the
benefit of His own Chaplains in His Family, for the exercise of Religious
Offices, and as they debarred Him the use of the Common Prayer whilst He was
alive, the Independants would not allow Him to be buried by it when He was
dead. And of what a strange fiery Spirit were they, who at Chichester in the
year 1642. picked the very eyes out of the Picture of Edward the Sixth, in
revenge for Establishing the Book of Common Prayer? Let them but reflect upon
their own Demeanor, when they were in Power, and then be as loud as they
please for Moderation, Tenderness, Forbearance, and Condescension. -- But
again, I wish they would consider the Opinion of the Excellent Dr. Tillotson,
who in a late Sermon as I remember, declares himself in this sense, Viz. That
all, that Persons of a different Persuasion from the Established Religion may
do, is, to enjoy the private exercise of their own Conscience, and not
publicly to attempt to Proselyte others, (though they are never so confident
and peremptory, they are in the right) till they can justify themselves by
extraordinary Miracles, as the first Preachers of the Gospel did, or the
Providence of God makes way for it, by the permission of the Supreme Power, and
so long they ought not to disturb and affront the Established Religion of a
Nation, though it be false; for they may as well travel into the unciviliz'd
and Heathen, and Popish parts of the world, for no Difficulties, Hardships or
Inquisitions, ought to daunt and stint the Obligations of Conscience, it is so
far from that, that it rather makes men pull off the Mask of Disguise and
Hypocrisy of it. -- And certainly, After that men have Disputed, and
Scrupuled, and Written what they can, if they are not willing to comply with
some things quietly, which they do not approve of, they must hurry themselves
into Mr. Hobb's State of Nature, or Calculate their Consciences for the
Latitude of an Utopian World; they must look for more perfect Creatures than
Men, for there will be Defects in all Humane Constitutions, there will be
variety of Judgments and Opinions, even in such things which God himself has
Revealed and Established, and after never so many Turnings and Alterations, we
shall be as far from a Fixation and Settlement as ever; if we will not be
satisfied till all things exactly suit, jump, and correspond with our Reaches
and Desires; for the very best things, the greatest and clearest Truths are,
and always will be obnoxious to some Cavils and Objections; and I presume we
may positively declare, and safely vouch, That our Lawgivers will allow of any
Expedient for redressing of Conventicle Grievances, when all the Sectaries will
pitch upon what to ask, viz. Upon that which will make us all one according to
Christ Jesus.-Suppose a Covey of Rogues, Strolers, and idle People, should cry
out, They were persecuted by the 29th of Elizabeth, the 10 of King James, and
the 24th of this King; and some Wheedling Religious Juglers, should whistle
them into Conventicles upon pretense of Conscience, and preach Community of
Goods to them, as the Anabaptists did at Munster; or pulling down the Nobility
and Gentry, as our Levellers did in the days of Commonwealth; or that to pay
Rent and Taxes is Popery and Tyrannical; by the same Reason, the dry Quakers
will pay no Tithes, because The Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof,
and the Faithful had all things in the Apostles times: Must these men be
favored and suffered because they say, it is for Conscience sake? Grant it,
and the work of the Government is done; for what should we be the better for
Laws, when every Offender carries his Supersedeas about him, by having the wit
to disguise the Conspiracy, and call it a Scruple? and we are come to that
pass, that the very Doctrine of the Gospel is in great danger of being
impeached or bound to its good behavior; Huge tampering there has been of
late with the 13th Chapter to the Romans, and 2d Chapter of the 1o of St.
Peter, to make these two Apostles recant their Evidence, as if these two
Epistles deposing Obedience to be due to Magistrates, would not stand good, or
prove Canonical upon Examination; and probably, if it should come to a Push or
a Pole, we might be afraid of an Ignoramus Jury, or an Index Expurgatorius. --
For they are reputed but malignant Texts and Chapters, if they are not
Paraphrased and Applied according to the Expositors of Sion-House, Geneva
Notes, Smectimnuus or the Committee of Safety. -- Nay, But to grant and allow
these Pleas of theirs, yet would they but consider further, That though
Separation were in it self Lawful, there would not be many that could Separate
Lawfully, because there are not many, scarce one in twenty, are able to know
and comprehend the Terms of Communion; or do sincerely, and without prejudice,
peruse and measure these Arguments that are used on both sides for the Church,
as well as the Conventicle, and he undoubtedly Divides and Separates without a
Reason, who does not understand the Reason and Grounds of his Separation; and
how can he know whether there be a just occasion for it, who Dissents and
Separates before he impartially and equally examines what is offered Pro and
Con. As that Person is accounted perjured and forsworn, who deposes nothing but
what is true, but without knowing it to be so: What Spiritual Dragoon of the
Army-Colledge, with all his Polemical Drumming-Divinity? what Mechanical
Hammerer, or Penny-wise Retailer of holy stuff, who scarce either study or
think, can be supposed what is meant by Symbolical, Antichristian, Idolatrous,
or Superstitious? And as for the Learning and Parts of their Teachers, they are
as incompetent and ignorant Judges of their being in the right, as they are of
the Controversy; yet these kind of men swagger and bluster about
Predestination and Election, as boldly and imperiously as the tallest Doctor of
the Tribe. From all which, one may think it more safe for them to be under the
Ministry of those Teachers, who are set over them by the Laws of the Land, and
the concurring Providence of God, because then if they Err, it will be an Error
on the right hand, for Obedience will be their Excuse. -- But whilst they are
so perverse, they are worse than Hobbists, for Hobb's himself, though he had no
great Opinion of Religion, yet thought considerable, when it became the
Established Law of a Nation; for if to act according to our Belief and
Persuasion, be sufficient to answer for, and justify us, then an honest Jew,
Turk and Indian, are as acceptable to God, as the best Protestant; and all
Religions in the world would be indifferent, then they who crucified Christ,
and persecuted his Apostles, believing they did God good Service, were very
Godly men, all which shows how necessary it is to inform our selves very well,
and observe this general and undeniable Rule, viz. Not to neglect any thing
which God has commanded, nor to do any thing which he has Prohibited; and where
he has not Determined, to acquiesce in the Determination of our Superiors. In
sum, If they really pretend weakness (as far as I may judge of the Temper of
our Clergy) I dare vouch, That they will not Refuse nor deny Communion with the
weakest Brother; but the Case is quite otherwise, than that in St. Paul's
days; the Weak refuse Communion with the Strong, which shows this Weakness to
be Wilfulness and Hypocrisy, and to aim at the unsetling of our Decency and
Order, which I hope we shall all stand by, till our Governors shall see Reason
to make an Alteration.

Lastly, By way of Address to our Lay-Brethren of the same Communion: Of these,
there are two sorts, the One Irreverent in Public Worship, the Other
Irreverent in Public Houses; the latter of which, His Majesty has taken
notice of by a late Proclamation, in these words, There are a sort of men, of
whom we have heard much, and are sufficiently ashamed, who spend their time in
Taverns, Tipling-Houses, and Debauches; giving no other evidence of their
Affection to Us, but in Drinking Our Health, and inveighing against all others,
who are not of their own Dissolute Temper, who in truth have more discredited
Our Cause by the License of their Manners and Lives, than they could ever
advance it by their Affection and Courage. And this is but too true, that many
whose Arms and Affections wait upon the Royal Standard, yet fight against it
more effectually by their Sins; like the Soldiers of Ptolemy, the last of that
Race, while they followed their pursued King, sunk the Vessel in which he was
embarked. Such by their Debauchery do so make a mock and sport of sin, Affront
and Blaspheme God, Burlesque and Ridicule Holy Things, and serious Persons,
that many are even afraid to appear Sober and Strict, lest they should become
the Objects of their Drolling and Buffoonry, and be run down by those who think
every thing Witty and Taking, that is Impudent and Profane; which certainly is
the easiest of all, as consisting in such bold Allusions as any man may make,
who has neither Modesty nor Grace.

And what Wiseman admires his Wit, (though never so salt) who abuses his
Prince, his Father, or his Friend. It is not wild Huffing and Hectoring,
Swearing and Drinking for the King and the Church; it is not our Cursing the
Papist or Whigg, that will do us any Service, or them any Harm. Though such men
add to our Numbers, yet they lessen our Reputation, and incense God against us;
and if the different mockeries of Hypocrisy and Profaneness, should stand for
Victory, who knows but God may rather countenance and shine upon the shadow and
resemblance of Religion, than upon the wanton contempt of all that is Religious
and Good; that Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites in Masquerade, may have the
Preference and a Toleration before the Sadduces and Libertines, who live as if
they believed neither a Spirit nor the Resurrection, neither Heaven nor Hell.

Since it is the Favor of God, and not the huffing Toryism of Men, that
Protects and Guards the Royal Throne; what Assistances and Advantages can be
hoped for from those Persons who bid Defiance to God, upon whom all Safety and
Success depends. We must Fear God, as well as Honor the King, and by joining
Religion to Loyalty, Reverence the same Power in both. If ever His Majesty
(says Dr. Fowler in a late Sermon) and the Church should be again set upon by
Scribes and Pharisees, God grant us better Assistance than that of Publicans
and Sinners; for how can they be good Protestants, who are bad Christians. The
other sort of Persons, who appear so zealously against Whigs and Fanatics,
seem to be very Grave, Sober, but yet very Irregular, Nonconformable, and
Disorderly in their Behavior at Public Prayers. As the former is too Brisk,
this is too dull in Religion; and notwithstanding all his zeal against
Dissenters, he is much the worse Fanatic of the two. For many of our Whiggs,
though they are against Ceremonies, and Bodily Worship, yet they seem and
appear very serious and earnest in their way: And this looks more like Worship,
than when Men Loll and Lean, Stand and Gaze about them, Laugh and Whisper at
their Neighbors, which bewrays Vanity and Lightness of Mind, and how
Conformable soever they are in their Responses, it is downright Profaneness. And
by this one would think they were Fanatical too, and believe that God does not
much regard the Worship of the Outward Man; for bare Standing and Kneeling in
Public Service, does not make it Worship, unless it be performed with Gravity
and Seriousness, with Decency as well as Order. It is the visible appearance of
External Devotion, that must Grace the External Bodily Worship. And certainly
did men heartily believe, that God and his holy Angels did look upon our
Actions, it would awe them to a greater Seriousness and Devotion; and either
make them afraid to come to Church, or more Reverent when they do.

And thus I have done with my Text. I am sensible that speaking of these things
may offend some Men, who gravely bid us Preach Faith and Repentance, Jesus
Christ, and him Crucified, and not to meddle with matters of Government; But I
rather think it our Duty to make some amends for that great mischief, that was
done out of the Pulpits in the late Times, by contrary Talk and Insinuations.
And if this be our Greatest Fault, God grant we may all live under this
Disgrace, and dye under this Ignominy. But I hope the public opportunity of
this Place; as I hold my self both in Conscience and Subscription obliged, will
plead my Pardon, if I have gone beyond the Measures of Decency and Order, by
going beyond your Patience and the Time.

Both which I commend to the God of Order, the Bishop of Souls, that in the
great day of Visitation he may find us all like good Stewards, with our Houses
set in Order, and our Souls Decently fitted to appear before his Spiritual
Court in Heaven; which that we may be, The Peace of God, etc.

FINIS.

