A Word within-doors: OR, A REPLY TO A WORD without-doors: In which The diverse
OPINIONS of Succession to the CROWN of England, are compared.
In a LETTER to a Person of Worth.
SIR.
AFter my Thanks to you for your double Favor, first in laying your commands
on me, and then thinking me able to resolve that so
much-every-where-controverted Question, and everywhere so differently decided,
of which indeed I may say, that the different Interest and Affections of
particular men, are more than any other thing, the occasion. But, Sir, the
people of your parts mistake the Question, in making it, Whether the Duke by
being a Papist, is ipso facto disabled to succeed? The many Statutes they
allege for preserving the Protestant Religion, make nothing for your
conclusion that therefore the Prince must be a Protestant. To these men we need
return no other Answer than the sense of the late House of Commons, in which
his R.H. had perhaps as few friends as ever any Prince had in that House: For
what other inference shall we deduce from their preparing a Bill, and earnest
endeavor to set him aside by Act of Parliament; but that as yet there is no
Law that dis-inherits a Papist.

No better is that other Argument of theirs, from the Coronation Oath to
maintain the established Church; and which his good Father, say they, was so
religious an observer of, that he long for that very reason resisted the two
Houses for taking away the Bishops Votes in Parliament. This Oath is part of a
ceremony, nothing adding to the Kings right, who is absolutely, to all intents
and purposes, King before his Coronation; nor need he ever proceed to it. Some
of our Kings have reigned years without it; some have received it more than
once. King Edward the Fifth was never Crowned, yet he is reckoned amongst our
Kings: And our present Sovereign, not to speak of his twelve years abroad,
ruled near a year before he was crowned; and yet I think no man will question
his Actions then as King.

But, Sir, we have in Town another Question, viz. Whether (admitting the D.
unquestionable Right) it may be lawful for the preserving Religion, and the
Peace of three Nations, to divest him of that Right because he is a Roman
Catholic? for to this indeed, however the words may disguise it, is the
Question brought; Whether we may not rob a Prince of his Right, because that
Right suits not with our Interest? The doing of evil, though good come of it, I
read is forbidden; and I do not find that there is any one Exception to so
absolute and general a Rule.

But leaving the decision of the Question as to Jus Divinum, natural, and
politicum, to the professors of those Sciences, I shall answer this Question
with an Example, as well for that this better convinces, and is the shorter
way, long a per praecepta via, per exempla brevis: Whoever will reflect on the
fortune of Mary Queen of Scots, whatever the civil pretensions were against
her, will find that the cause of Religion was that which destroyed her; and
sure there were all and greater Motives for that, than here are: yet is that
death reproacht, and for ever will be, to a Queen in whose whole life, though
long, and filled with as great, strange, sudden, and important Actions and
Revolutions, as that of any one Prince whatsoever; there is nothing to accuse
her of besides. Whatever she might endure in her person and conscience, sure
her Reputation has greatly suffered, though it be uncertain how far she were
privy to that Action, whether by direct order and appointment, or by bare
consent and connivance only; though, if we believe Mr. Cambden, it was
neither: Yet then if ever there was a necessity of doing wrong, and then if
ever might that necessity have been justified, and that for these following
Reasons:

1. The Kingdom was on a double account in despair of Issue, from the Queens
absolute aversion to, and often repeated declaration in Parliament against
Marriage, and from her years, she being then some Fifty four. 2. The next Heir
the Queen of Scots had been born and brought up a Papist, and having never had
other Faith, it was unlikely she should at her age embrace new Principles for
which she had sucked Hatred with her Milk; which Hatred received no small
increase from the actions of Murray and other Rebels, who pretending to profess
the Reformed Religion, acted, under those pretenses, such Villainy and
Injustice, as could not but continue the Queen more averse to a Religion which
as she believed gave color and countenance to such Practices. 3. The state of
the Kingdom at that time; The Reformation as established by Queen Elizabeth was
not yet thirty Years old, and more than half the Kingdom was yet living, who
remembered it, and had known Queen Mary; and therefore might easily under
another Queen Mary be brought to return to their first Opinion.
The contrary of these three in our present case, there is no man but can
inform them, and therefore I shall omit it, to show that even the Case
expressed was an unlawful and unjust act. Turn we to the Story, and there see,
what ways and means were studied for, what endeavors were used, to secure the
Protestant Religion, without destroying that Princess and her Right, and that
by all the Ministers of State: we shall have cause to believe, they, as
Ministers of State, were obliged to actions that themselves in their Conscience
believed unlawful; and yet these were wise and able Ministers, if ever Prince
had any.

But if we consider the Queen herself, and what was her sense of, and her
behavior after her Cozens Death, we shall have all the reason in the world
(knowing her great Judgment and Knowledge) to conclude, that herself was well
assured, that what had been done was wicked and unlawful. But some will say, We
desire not nor design the Death of the Duke, but to exclude him. Such men argue
ill; a private man may outlive his fortunes, but it is not so with Princes: he
that would deny a Prince his Throne, would as little allow him Life, if he
could.

But not to tire you, I shall conclude with this: Q. Mary died sitting the
Parliament: Heath Archbishop of York and Lord Chancellor, by Order of both
Houses declared the Lady Elizabeth Queen, though well known to be a Protestant;
they article not with the Queen, but rely on Gods Providence for their
Religion. Let us not then, Sir, declame against their Principles, and our
selves practice them; leave that to the Puritans, who with all their pretended
Reformation agree with them in this: the Pope pretends a Power superior to
Kings, and so do they, though they place it elsewhere; what else means that
Maxim of theirs, A King is accountable to his People collectively Assembled in
Parliament; Again, the Pope and his Followers maintain, That a King if an
Heretic may be Deposed. The Puritan will not have the Duke to succeed, because
he believes Popery, that is, Heresy.

I shall take my leave with my Prayers for your Health, and that you may
continue firm to your Mother Church of England, of which to write any other
Encomium, or make any other Character than that which is left us by our late
King in his Eikoon Basilikee, to do wrong to his most incomparable Pen, take it
then, Sir, in his words; I have tried it, says that Wife and Learned Prince,
and after much search and many Disputes, have concluded it to be the best in
the world, not only in the community as Christian, but also in the special
Notion as Reformed; keeping the middle way between the Pomp of Superstitious
Tyranny, and the Meanness of Fantastic Anarchy. These are his words, and in
them is great truth. But I shall tire you. Farewell, Sir: God keep you long in
Health, and send you better Neighbors. Do Justice, and fear nothing, it is both
the Advice and Resolution of

Your very etc.

FINIS.

