Brief Instructions For Making OBSERVATIONS IN ALL Parts of the World: AS ALSO
For Collecting, Preserving, and Sending over NATURAL THINGS.

BEING An Attempt to settle an UNIVERSAL CORRESPONDENCE for the Advancement of
Knowledge both Natural and Civil.

Drawn up at the Request of a Person of Honor: and presented to the ROYAL
SOCIETY.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Wilkin at the King's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1696.

Imprimatur,

December. 29. 1695. Robert Southwell, V. P. R. S.

Brief Instructions for the making Observations, and Collections, in order to
the promotion of Natural History, in all parts of the World.
I. At Sea.
KEEP a Journal of the Ship's Course: Of the Latitude, Observations to be made
^t Sea.
as often as taken: Of the Variation of the Compass: of the Soundings,
observing what sorts of Shells, Sand, or other Matter is brought up with the
Plummet. In Calmes, or with any other Opportunity, both at Main Sea, or
elsewhere, sound to the Bottom, if all the Line or Tackle you have will reach
it; but if not, only note what Length of Line you used. In the said Journal
also keep an Account of the Currents: of the Brizes, and other Winds, as well
those which are settled and constant, as those which are accidental: of Storms
and Hurricanes: of the Rise and Fall of the Weather-glass: Of the Weather, Heat
and Cold, Fogs, Mists, Snow, Hail, Rain, Spouts or Trombs, vast Discharges of
Water from the Clouds, Thunder, Lightning, Meteors, etc. Observe whether some
Seas be not salter than others, or distant Parts of the same Sea differ not in
Saltness: Whether the Water of the Sea be not warmer than ordinary, or suffer
not some unusual Bubblings or Commotions before Storms, or there do not some
other like uncommon Accidents forerun them, whereby they may be foreseen: What
Voragines or Whirlpools appear at Sea, to what Distance the Force of their Flux
or Stream extends, whether they only receive and swallow in the Water, or spue
it forth, or, if both, with what Periods, i. e. at what time does each begin
and end: What sorts of Fowls occurr at Main Sea: What Fishes, what Weeds,
Shrubs, or other things. In brief, take notice of every observable natural
Occurrence throughout the whole Voyage, and this too in as full and
circumstantial a manner as may be.

II. Upon the Sea-shores.
OBserve to what perpendicular Height the Sea rises at high water: Upon the
Shores.
what Space of Time passes between the Ebb and Flood, and again, between Flood
and Ebb: What kinds of Fish reside near the Shores, particularly what
Shellfish: What Fowl are most frequent there: What Weeds, Shrubs, etc. also
what Shells, are flung up by the Sea: What Shrubs, Weeds, Mosses, Sponges,
Coralls, or Coralline Bodies, e. g. Sea fans, Sea-roses, etc. grow out upon the
Shores, Rocks, or Cliffs: What sorts of Pebbles, Flints, Marchasues, or other
Stones, lie upon the Shores, or are washed out of the Cliffs, by the Tides, and
beating of the Sea-waves: Whether there be not found Grains of Gold, or Silver,
or Lumps of other Metalls, or Minerals, Amber, Crystal-pebbles, Agates,
Cornelians, or other Stones that have somewhat observable in them, either for
Luster, Texture, or Figure; and particularly Stones that resemble Muscles,
Cockles, Periwinckles, or other Shells. But more especially take notice whether
by great Inundations, Storms, or Hurricanes, there be not thrown up out of the
Sea, some sorts of Shells that are not flung up ordinarily, and at other times;
as also whether upon the Seas beating down, and washing away the Earth from the
Cliffs, there be not disclosed Glossopetrae, Teeth, Bones, or Shells of Fishes,
that were originally lodged in those Cliffs, but since beaten and washed out,
these being commonly somewhat decayed, as also more dusky, foul, and black,
than those Shells, etc. which are thrown up by the Sea.

In all such Places where there is any sort of Dyveing, and particularly
Directions to the Dyvers, for Pearl, Coral, and Amber.
for Pearls, observe what sort of Earth, Sand, or other Terrestrial Matter, is
found at the Bottom of the Sea: What Weeds, Shrubs, etc. what Shells of all
kinds, or other Bodies, taking a particular account of all the several kinds of
Shellfish that yield Pearl; as also at what Distance from the Shores the
diveing is made: To what Depth and how long the Dyvers can endure under Water.
In the Coral-fishing observe in what Manner or Posture the Coral, particularly
that which is shrubby, and the Sea-Fans grow; whether upright, horizontally, or
flatwise, or hanging with the Heads downwards: To what Bodies it grows or
adheres: Whether it grow only in such Parts as are constantly covered by the
Sea Water, or such only as are uncovered when the Tide is down, or both
indifferently: If constantly under Water, whether in the the Shallower, or
deeper Parts of it: And whether it grow chiefly in such Places of the Water
that are calm, and still, or where it is more rough and agitated by beating
against the Rocks, Cliffs, etc. Of how many several Colors it is: And to what
Bigness both the rude Coralline Mass, and the Shrubs, and other Coralline
Bodies ever arrive. The same Directions may serve indifferently for the
Amber-fishers, with this only Addition, that they carefully observe whether the
Amber be not also found in the Earth, and Cliffs, in all such Places where it
is found upon the Shores: And whether that which is thrown up by the Seas
Flood, may not justly be presumed to have been born down from the Cliffs by its
foregoing Ebb.

III. At Land.
1. TAKE an exact account of the Brizes, and other ordinary Winds, with the
Quarter from whence they blow, Observations of the Weather at Land.
what time they begin, and how long they last: Also of other Winds, Storms, and
Hurricanes: As likewise of the Weather, Heat, Cold, Fogs, Mists, Snow, Hail,
Rain, Thunder, Lightning, Meteors, etc. with the Seasons of the Year most
obnoxious to these Rains, etc. Their Quantity: The Time of their Duration:
keeping also a Register of the Weather-glasses, both Thermometer and Barometer.

2. The following Experiment being of considerable Importance, An Experiment to
be made.
as serving to determine several Difficulties in the Natural History of Rains,
Vapors, etc. and being likewise very easily tried, it is desired it may be
done with Care and Exactness in all Parts of the World. Get some Vessel either
of Copper, Wood, or Earth, about 2. Foot wide, (or if wider the better) and at
least a Foot and half deep; be sure it be firm and sound, and that it do not
leak in the least. Fill it about full of Water: Cover it over with a Net, or
very thin fine Wier-grate, to keep off Birds, or other Creatures from drinking
the Water; and then set it forth, either upon the Leads of some flat-roof't
House, or in the midst of a Garden, or some other fit Place, where the Sun may
shine upon it all Day from Sunrising to Sunsetting, or at least as much as
may be. Then with some Rule or Measure take the just perpendicular Depth of the
Water, noteing down the Depth, and the Day of the Month, and so leave the
Vessel standing out. Once or twice a Week (or oftener, if either the Rain be so
much as to fill the Vessel, and endanger its running over, or the Heat and
Drought such as to quite dry up all the Water, for either of these Accidents
will elude the Experiment) Visit the Vessel, and take nicely the Depth of the
Water, noteing that Depth, (in a Register to be kept for the purpose) and the
Day of the Month; and if it be dry Weather, so that the Water is evaporated and
sunk lower than it stood when the Vessel was first set forth, then put in just
as much more Water as will raise it to its original Height: But if it has
rained, so that the Water is raised higher than it was when first set forth,
after that the just Measure of it is taken, and noted down, take out so much of
the Water as to reduce it to the Level at which it stood when first set forth.
This Experiment ought to be continued thus for one whole Year at least, but
longer if possible; only during the Time of Frost, no Observation need be made,
the Water in the Vessel then neither rising nor falling.

3. Let there be an account taken of all Springs; both the standing or stagnant
ones, and those which emit forth their Water, Observations concerning Springs.
forming Brooks, and Rivers; observing whether they rise out of high or low
Grounds; whether they be turbid or clear: hot or cold: Whether they ebb or
flow: Whether they incrust or petrifie Sticks, Straws, or other Bodies that lie
in them: Whether they contain Bitumen, Petroleum, Salt, Nitre, Vitriol, or
other Mineral Matter in their Water: Upon what Occasions, or at what Seasons
chiefly their Water increases or decreases. In the Running Springs observe the
Quickness of the Stream, and Quantity of the Water discharged.

4. As to Rivers, observe their ordinary Depth, Breadth, and Concerning Rivers
and Lakes.
the Quickness of their Stream: The several sorts of Fishes, particularly the
Shellfish in them: All sorts of Plants that grow in them. On their Shores take
notice whether there be not Amber, Cornelians, or other Stones valuable either
for their Color, Texture, or Shape, and particularly whether any Stones that
in Figure resemble the Shells of Muscles, Cochles, Perewinkles, or the like.
The same Directions for the main may serve for Lakes and Meers, only it were to
be wished that these were carefully sounded, and their Depths taken, in several
Parts of them.

5. Observe the several sorts of Marls, Clays, Loams, or other Concerning
Metalls, Minerals, Stones, Earths, etc.
Soils, at the Surface of the Earth: And whether there be not almost every
where a Coat of one or other of these at the Surface, whatever else lies
underneath. Take an Account of the several sorts of Metalls that the Country
yields: As also of the Minerals, Rock-salt, Alum, Vitriol, Sulphur, Nitre,
Loadstone, Cinnabar, Antimony, Talk, Spar, Crystal, Diamonds, Amethysts,
Topazes, Emeraulds, and other precious Stones: Their Number, and the manner of
their Growth: Likewise of Marchasites, Amber (for it is found in the Earth and
at Land as well as at Sea) Selenites, Belemnites, Flints, Pebles, etc. in what
manner they are found, and at what Depths: In what Quantities, and whether the
Metalls and Minerals are separate and pure, or mixed: Of what Figure they are,
and whether the said Metalls. Minerals, precious Stones, etc. lie in the Beds
of Earth, Cole, Chalk, Stone, etc. or in the Veins, Clefts, or perpendicular
Intervals, of the Stone, Marble, etc. Endeavor to get Information whether
Metalls or Minerals have a Natural Growth, or a Natural Decrease, in any Part
of the Mine: And what Rules the Miners give for the Discovery of Metalls and
Minerals latent in the Earth; or by what Signs they find them. Also take
Account of the several sorts of Stone, Marble, Alabaster, Cole, Chalk, Okers,
Sands, Clays, and other Earths: Their Depths: The Thickness of their Strata or
Beds: The Order in which they lie: the Situation of their Beds, whether level
or not.

In deep Quarries, Mines, Cole-pits, etc. observe in what manner Of Water, of
Wind, and of Heat in Mines: also of Damps.
the Water comes in: in what Quantity, and at what Season of the Year it
abounds most: and whether it be clear and tasteless, or be impregnated with
mineral matter. Take an account of the Damps: of what kind they are: what harm
they do: at what season chiefly they happen: and whether there be not Sulphur,
or Nitre, or both, in all Places where there are Damps. Observe also the Heat
of Mines, by Assistance of the Weather-glass, if to be had, both Summer, and
Winter, noteing how much it exceeds, or falls short of the Heat at the Surface
of the Earth: and whether it be not greater at certain Depths, than at others.
And enquire whether in Mines, Colepits, deep Grottoes, or Caverns, the Work men
are not sensible of Gusts of Wind breaking forth of the B^owels of the Earth.

6. Get an Account of all Grottoes or Natural Caverns in the Earth: their
Breadth, Depth, Length: what Rills or Rivers of Water Concerning Grottoes, and
Mountains.
passes them: what Metallic, Sparry, or other Mineral Incrustations cover
their Stones, or hang down, like Iceycles, from them. Get an Account likewise
of the several Mountains, and Rocks: the Stone, Marble, or other matter, of
which they consist; what Plants grow upon them: what Metalls or Minerals they
yield: what Springs or Rivers issue out of them: the Height of them:
especially it is much to be desired that the height of Pico Teneriffe, of the
highest Alps, and Pyrenaees, of Mount Atlas, of the Mountain called the Table,
nigh the Cape of good Hope, of the Armenian, Persian, and Chinese Mountains,
and of the Andes, and other high Mountains in America, were exactly taken by
Observation. Enquire farther, whether they are not by little and washed away by
Rains, and so become lower: whether their Tops be not covered with a Fog, or
Mist; especially before Rain: whether some of the highest of them have not
their Tops covered with Snow, a great part, or all the Year: whether at some
times great Quantities of Water do not burst forth of them; with the Season
that this happens, and whether attended with Heat, Thunder, Lightning, Storms,
or what other Circumstances: whether some of them emitt not Sulphurous, or
other Steams, Flores Sulphuris, Nitre, or Sal-Ammoniack: whether any send forth
Heat, Smoke, or Flames, as Aetna, and other Volcanoes do: and whether near such
there be not constantly Thermae or Hot-springs.

7. But in regard that Sea-shells, Teeth, and Bones of Fishes, etc. Of
Sea-Shells, and other Marine Bodies, at Land, in Stone, etc.
are found very plentifully in England, and many other Countries, as well upon
the Surface of the Earth, and the Tops of the highest Hills, as within the
Earth, in Cole-pits, Mines, Quarries, etc. the said Shells, Teeth, etc. being
lodged amongst the Cole, in the Mass and Substance of even the hardest Stone,
Marble, etc. it is very extremely desirable that careful search be made after
these things in all Parts of the World, and an account kept wherever they are
found; particularly search ought to be made after these Shells, and other
Bodies, at the Tops, and on the Sides of Rocks, and the Stone of the said Rocks
be broken with Hammers, or other fit Instruments, to discover the Shells lodged
within the Stone. And it would be of very great Use if the Top of Pico
Teneriffe, and of the rest recited in the foregoing Section, and indeed of all
high Mountains whatsoever, were thus well examined by those who have
Opportunity of doing it. Search likewise ought to be made upon the Surface of
the Earth for the aforesaid Sea-shells, and for Stones that resemble them,
especially upon the higher Grounds, as Hills, and particularly those which are
plowed, where these Shells are very frequently found in great Numbers, and this
too at great Distances from any Sea. But above all, wherever there is any
digging for Metalls, Minerals, Marble, Stone, Chalk, Cole, Gravel, Marl, or in
short any other terrestrial matter whatever, if due Enquiry be made, there will
be found of the abovenamed Shells in the said Marble, Stone, Chalk, Marl, etc.
And in the Cole, and Stone above it, are
frequently found Fern and other Plants, and sometimes in other Stone too,
especially that which is very fine and compact. Wherever these Shells, Teeth,
Plants, etc. are found, the Enquirer may please to note, along with the Place,
what sorts of Shells they are: and whether they be of the same kinds with those
found upon the Shores of those Parts or not: in what Numbers they are found: at
what Depths: and what Earth, Sand, or other Matter, they contain in them.

8. In Stone, Marl, etc. there are sometimes found Trees, of Concerning Trees
found buried in the Earth.
several kinds, buried, and, along with them, Nuts, Acorns, Pine-Apples, etc.
but much more commonly are the said Trees found buried in Moors, Boggs, and
Fenns, especially those out of which the Peat-Earth, or bituminous Turfs are
dug for Fuel. Where Trees are thus found, be pleased to Note what kinds of
Trees they are: and whether there be of the same sorts now growing in the
Country: what bigness they are: and whether they be entire, with roots, and
branches, as well as Trunks: in what numbers they are found: at what depth in
the Earth: in what kind of Earth, or other matter, it is that they lie: and
what else is found along with them.

9. Take an account of the more observable and peculiar Diseases Of Diseases,
Casualties, Earthquakes.
of the Country, with what seasons of the year are most subject to them: and of
the other Casualties, particularly Earthquakes, noting all circumstances that
precede, attend, and follow after them: e. g. the condition and temperature of
the Air, as to heat and cold, wet or dry, thick or clear, calm or windy, before
the Earthquake: and whether the Springs are warm, turbid, or emitt Sulphurous
or other offensive steams: noting likewise the extent of the Shock, to what
distance it was felt, and whether in all places precisely at the same minute of
time: how great was the force of the Shock: whether it cracked and tore the
earth: removed any tract of Ground: raised, or sunk it in: whether any heat,
fire, water, etc. issued out at the said Cracks: whether, in case there be any
Vulcanoes, or burning Mountains, near, they emitt not flames with greater
violence and noise than usual, at the time of the Earthquake, or a little
before, or after it: or whether they spue not forth water: whether the Water of
the Wells, Springs, and Rivers thereabouts do not become warm, turbid, or send
forth more Water than usual, at the time of the Earthquake: whether the
Neighboring Thermae, or Hot-springs, if any, become not more hot, and muddy,
than before; whether the Sea adjacent does not become warm, or hot, and suffer
great Commotions, and extraordinary Tides, at that time: whether there follow
not great winds, rains, thunders and lightning after the Earthquake is over:
and whether fevers, and other distempers do not then invade the inhabitants of
those parts, yea the very beasts, fowl and fish: whether lastly, Earthquakes
happen in any, unless mountainous, cavernous, and stoney, Countries, and in
such as yield Sulphur and Nitre.

10. As to the vegetable and animal productions of the Earth, Concerning Plants
and Animals.
observe whether the Country be fruitful or barren; what kinds of Trees,
shrubs, and herbs it produces that we have, and what kinds that we have not in
England: whether in those Countries that lie betwixt the Tropicks, the Plants
be not all in perpetual verdure, without ever falling all their leaves: and
whether they have flowers, green, and ripe fruit upon them all the year round:
or whether there be any of those sorts of Plants there which are called annual
ones, and dye yearly: or any whose taps, and all, save their roots, dye away,
and sink into the ground for some time, but afterward spring forth and grow up
afresh, as Daffadils, Tulips, and other bulbous Plants, do here: also what
Fowls, what Beasts, Serpents, Lizards: what Flies, Moths, Locusts; what
Beetles, Grasshoppers, Spiders or other Insects: what Tortoises, Snails, or
other Creatures covered with Shells, are found living upon the Earth.

An Appendix relating to the Natives of Guinea, Monomotapa, and other the less
known parts of Africa: of the East, and West Indies: Tartary, Greenland, or any
other remote, and uncivilized, or Pagan Countries.
1. AS to their Bodies, observe the features, shapes, and proportions of them;
but more particularly the features of their faces: their Eyes whether large, or
small: their noses whether flat and low, or sharp and raised: their Hair long,
or short and curled or woolly: the color of their Skin whether white, brown,
tawny, olive, or black: the color of their Infants when first born: whether
white people removing into hot Countries become by degrees browner, etc. and
Blacks removing into cold Countries, paler: whether People that inhabit the
Countries which are hottest, be in Complexion of all the blackest: whether
there be true Negroes Natives of any parts of the world, besides Guinea, and
the adjacent parts of Africa. Observe also the size or bigness of their Bodies:
their strength, agility, etc: and to what age they commonly live. Observe
likewise whether they paint their bodies: what parts of them they paint, what
colors they lay on: what figures they paint: and how they do it.

2. Observe their Tempers, Genius's, Inclinations, Virtues, and Vices. Their
Manners.


3. Enquire into their Traditions concerning the Creation of the World, the
universal Deluge, the People from whom they are descended, Their Traditions.
and the Country from which they Originally came.

4 Enquire into their Notions touching the Supreme God, Angels, or other
inferior Ministers: whether they pay any worship or reverence to the Sun, the
Moon, the Earth; to high Mountains, to Their Religion, etc.
Rocks, Grottoes, or Caves in the Earth: to the Sea, Lakes, Rivers, Springs: to
Serpents, or other Animals: to Trees, Woods, or Groves: and whether they do not
use to build their Temples, and set up their Altars, or Images, in Groves.
Enquire into all their other Religious Doctrines, and Ceremonies: their
Sacrifices: whether they offer Men, or Children: their Idols: their Priests:
their Temples, Altars, Feasts: their Lustrations, or Purifying themselves by
Water: their Sortileges, or casting of Lots: their Divinations, Charms, and
Conjurations: Also their opinions concerning the Devil, and whether they pay
any sort of adoration to him: likewise their Doctrines concerning the Soul (its
Immortality, its Transmigration into men, or other Creatures,) and a future
State: their Customs and Usages at the birth of Children, and in the education
of youth: their Ceremonies at Marriages, at Funerals, and whether they burn, or
bury their Dead: if the latter, whether they embalm the body, or dry it, and
bury money, Victuals, Cloths etc. along with it: the form of their Year: the
time it begins: the method of their Computation Their Laws and Government,
their Arts and Sciences, with their Customs both Civil, and Military.
of time, and to how many years backwards their Tradition reaches.

5. Get an Account of their Laws, and Civil Government: their Language, their
Learning: their Letters, and whether they write on Paper, the leaves of Palms,
or other Plants, Bark of Trees, etc. or, instead of writing, use Painting, and
Hieroglyphics: their Music: their Diet: their Agriculture, or Tillage: their
methods of Hunting, Fowling, and Fishing: their Physic, Surgery, and the
Simples they use: their Poisons; their Navigation, and the make of their
Vessels: all their other Arts, and Sciences: their Manufactures, Traffic,
Commodities, Money, Weights and Measures; whether they understand the melting
and ordering Iron, and other Metals: their Apparel: their Houses, and other
Buildings: their Utensils and Instruments, whether made of Iron, Stones,
Fish-bones, Shells etc. their Exercises, and Sports: their Government and
Discipline in War: their Weapons, Bows, Arrows, Darts, etc. their Warlike
Instruments, Drums, Tambours, Cymbals: their Punishments, and Executions. To be
brief, make enquiry into all their Customs and Usages, both Religious, Civil,
and Military; and not only those hinted in this Paper, but any others whatever.

Directions for the Collecting, Preserving, and Sending over Natural things,
from Foreign Countries.
1. IN the Choice of these Things, neglect not any, though the most What things
to choose, and how many of each.
ordinary and trivial; the Commonest Peble or Flint, Cockle or Oyster-shell,
Grass, Moss, Fern, or Thistle, will be as useful, and as proper to be gathered
and sent, as any the rarest production of the Country. Only take care to choose
of each the fairest of its kind, and such as are perfect or whole. As to the
Number, six or eight of each sort is enough; But where so many of the same sort
are not to be easily got, send one, two, or more as they can be procured.

2. For the time of making Observations none can ever be amiss; All Places and
Seasons afford somewhat worth the Observing and Collecting.
there being no season, nor indeed hardly any place wherein some Natural Thing
or other does not present it self worthy of Remark: yea there are some things
that require Observation all the Year round, as Springs, Rivers, etc. Nor is
there any Season amiss for the gathering Natural Things. Bodies of one kind or
other presenting themselves at all times, and in Winter as well as Summer; only
for Amber, Onyxes, and other Stones that lie in the Sea Cliffs: as also for the
Glossopetrae, Teeth, and Shells that are there, search may be made to best
purpose after Storms, because they are then chiefly beaten and washed out of
those Cliffs. So likewise for the Gold Grains, Stones of all sorts, and Shells
that are found upon Mountains, search ought to be made especially after Rains,
because these wash of the Soil, and so discover them.

3. It were very well that there were sent over hither some Minerals: and
Fossil-Shells, of all sorts, to be sent.
Specimens of all Natural Bodies whatever: To begin with Fossils; Let there be
sent Samples of all the several Varieties of Marble, Ores of Metals, Native
Minerals of all kinds, e. g. of Antimony, Sulphur, Nitre, Alum, Talck, Sparr,
etc. of the Metallic, Sparry, Vitriolick, Nitrous, Aluminous, and other
Iceycles that are found hanging down in Grottoes, and the Fissures of Rocks:
the Crystallized Sparrs, Salts and Ores: common Pebles, Flints, Marchasites,
etc. I call that a Variety wherein there is any difference as to Color or
outward Appearance, or in Weight, in the Quantity of the Metallic or Mineral
matter or in the manner of its mixture. Of the forementioned, three or four of
each Variety will be enough: but for Agates, Cornelians, Amber, Crystal,
Diamonds, Amethysts, Selenites, Belemnites, or (as the Vulgar calls them)
Thunderbolts, and the like, be pleased to send (of those which are found single
and loose) six or eight of each, wherein there is any difference in Figure,
Bigness or Color: but for those which grow together (in Clusters or Bunches)
to the Rocks, send Samples of them with part of the Rock to which they grow. As
to those Stones that resemble Cockles, or other Shells, be sure to send six or
eight of each wherein there is any the least difference, etc. For the
Seashells, Teeth and Bones, that are found at Land, on Hills, etc. and those
which are dug up out of the Earth, and lie loose in Gravel, Chalk, Marle,
etc. six or eight of each sort will be sufficient; but for those which are
found lodged in Marble or Stone, and are not easily got out single, send pieces
of the said Marble and Stone, of all sorts, with the Shells so lodged in them;
choosing only to break off (for these Samples) such parts of the Stone that
contain the fairest and most entire Shells, and such wherein they lie thickest.
The same likewise for the Fern, and other Plants found in Cole, Slate, etc. It
were also not amiss that there were Samples sent over of the Nitre, Sal
Ammoniac, Flores Sulphuris, Cinders, and other Bodies, that are flung forth of
the Vulcanoes.

4. In order to the sending over these Stones, Minerals, Ores, Fossil-Shells,
How to be packed up.
Teeth, etc. each ought to be put up carefully in a piece of Paper (the Place
where 'twas found being first noted thereon) by it self, to prevent rubbing,
fretting, or breaking in Carriage: and then all put together into some Box,
Trunk, or old Barrel, placing the heaviest and hardest at the Bottom. Those
Minerals which are tender and easy to be broken, as also the tenderer kinds of
Fossil-shells, ought to be put up carefully together in a Box that is not
large, and (besides the Papers) Coton, Chaff, or Bran, put up with them, the
better to secure them.

5. As to Plants (as well those that grow at Sea, in Rivers, and Plants of all
sorts to be sent over: and how to gather them.
Lakes, as those which grow at Land) four Samples of each kind (wherever there
is any difference in Color, or Figure, of the Leaf or Flower) will be
sufficient. Where the Plant is large, as in Trees, Shrubs, and the like, a fair
sprig, about a foot in length, with the Flower on, (...) if that be to be had,
may suffice: but of the lesser Plants, such as Sea-Weeds, Grasses, Mosses,
Ferns, etc. take up the whole Plant, root and all. Choose all these Samples of
Plants when they are in prime, I mean in Flower, Head, or Seed, if possible;
And if the lower or ground Leaves of any Plant be different from the upper
leaves, take two or three of them, and put them up along with the Sample.

6. To preserve these Samples of Plants, put them each separately, Plants how
to be dried, and preserved.
betwixt the leaves of some large Book, or into a Quire of brown Paper,
displaying and spreading them smooth and even. The next day, and afterward
three or four times at due distance, shift them into other Books or Paper, till
they are sufficiently dried, when a weight may be laid upon them to press and
smooth them; and so keep them, in some dry place, till they be sent over,
sending them in Quires of brown Paper, and writeing on the outside in what
Country the enclosed Collection of Plants were gathered. For, both for these,
and all other things, 'twill be proper to put up the Productions of each
Country apart, or at least with such distinction that it may be known whence
they all came.

7. Be pleased likewise to send Samples of Seeds of all kinds of Plants, even
the most Wild and Common. But gather them not Seeds, and Fruits, of all sorts,
to be sent.
till they are Ripe, and then put each sort by it self in a piece of Paper,
and, along with it (if to be had) a leaf and flower of the Plant off which
'twas gathered, writing on the said Paper the Names (if any) by which the
Country people call the Plants to which they belonged, and the Medicinal, or
other uses, they make of them. Also Samples of such Nuts, Pods, Berries, or
other Fruits, that will keep. But both these and the Seeds ought to be well
dried before they are put up, and to be afterward kept dry. I had like to have
forgot to desire that Patterns might be sent over of all such Woods, Barks,
Roots, Gumms, Rosins, Not. Balsoms, etc. that are of any use, or have any thing
remarkable in them: likewise of all sorts of Fuss-balls, and Mushrooms which
are hardy and will keep, as most of those that grow out of Trees will: but for
the Earth-Mushrooms, which are more tender, they ought to be put up in Glasses
filled with Rum or Brandy; many of them being so very elegant and curious, as
well to deserve such care in the preserving of them.

8. In like manner Roots of Plants would be very acceptable. Roots of many
Plants may be so ordered as to grow when brought over into England.
And there are many Sorts of them that, with very little trouble, might be so
ordered that they would grow again when brought over, and set here, tho after a
long Voyage. Particularly those which are Bulbous, Tuberous, and Fleshy; Such
as the Roots of Tulips, of Lillies, Crocus's, Onions, Garlicks, Squills,
Anaemonies, Potatoes, Yaums, etc. These, I say, and all like Roots, may be sent
as easily and safely as Seeds, if taken up out of the Ground, and laid to dry
till the Ships come away, and then only put in very dry Moss, Coton, or Sand.

Then for all kinds of Ferns, or Brakes, Maiden-Hairs, Polypodyes Particularly
of the Fernkind.
Harts-tongues etc. which are indeed a very Beautiful Family of Plants, their
Roots may be taken up, (to be in readiness) and laid again into the Ground, and
covered there, in some shady place, till the Ships are ready to Sail; when each
root need only be enclosed or wrapped up in a lump of Clay or Loame, and then put
up into a Box with Moss, and so sent over. In the same manner may Roots of
Gingers, Turmericks, Flower-de-luces, and the like be sent. As also of all
sorts of Arums, or Cuckopints, Herb-Dragons, etc.

9. Yea the very entire Plants themselves will, several of them, Some whole
Plants will grow when sent over hither.
keep so long that they may be securely sent over hither; and will, if Set,
grow afterward, and thrive well enough. Such as all the kinds of Aloes,
Semporvives House-leeks, Prickley-Pears, Turks-Caps, Euphorbiums,
Torch-thistles, or indeed any others that are of a very juicey, crass, or thick
substance. These need only be hanged up in the Air, at the top of some Cabin,
to keep them from rotting, and they will come safe without any further trouble.

10. For all larger Creatures, whether Beasts, Fish, or Fowl, Beasts, Fish,
Fowl, Serpents, etc. to be sent, and how.
'twill be best to take off their Skins carefully and well, and send only one
or two of each. But for the lesser Creatures, such as small Birds, and Fishes,
Lizards, Camelions, Salamanders, Serpents, and such like, they may be most of
them well enough preserved by drying, especially if their Guts and Entrails be
taken out. Unless you rather think fit to put some of the more rare, curious,
and tender, into small Jarrs, filled with Rum, Brandy, or Spirit of Wine, which
will keep them extremely well; and you may safely put as many of them into the
same Vessel as it will well hold without crowding them, filling it up
afterward with Rum, etc. and then carefully closeing it up. Of each of these
three or four will be enough.

11. As to Sponges; Brain-stones, Sea-fanns, Sea-roses, Corals of all sorts,
Crabs, Lobsters, Sea, River, and Land Shells, whether Coralls, and Shells to be
sent.
common or uncommon, great or small, send five or six of each, wherein there is
any Difference in Figure, Color or Bigness. Of the Shells, where they are
easy to be got, choose those that have the Creatures still living in them
(which yet ought to be plucked out, or they will putrify and stink) such being
by much the freshest and fairest: but where such are not to be got, take the
empty and dead Shells as you find them; only of the Bivalves or double Shells,
endeavor to send both the upper and under Shell together.

The several sorts of Starr-fishes, and of those round Shells (beset with
Spikes or Prickles) which are called Sea-eggs, or Sea-urchins, are Star-Fishes,
and Sea-urchins.
all very beautiful, and deserve well to be preserved. The Starrfishes may be
very easily dried, or put up into Brandy, and so sent. But the Sea-urchins are
very tender and brittle, so that it is not so easy to preserve them, especially
with their Spikes on, which it is greatly desirable might be done; and of all,
those that are beset with the largest Spikes, are the most rare and curious, so
that too great Care and Exactness cannot be bestowed in Preservation of them.
If they will not dry well, they ought to be put up, each by themselves in
Vessels of Brandy, e. g. Gallypots just big enough to contain them, so that
they may not shake, and be thereby dispoiled of their Prickles. But if any of
them are capable of being dried, they may be put up (with their Spikes on)
carefully with Coton in Pill-boxes that just fit them.

At the fishings for Pearl, Amber, or Coral, save Samples, not only Directions
to the Fishers for Pearl, Amber, and Coral.
of the several sorts of Pearl-shells (as also of the Pearls themselves of all
Sizes, Figures, and Colors) of Corals, and of Amber, but any other thing,
whatever it be, that either the Diverse, the Nets, or the Engines, bring up out
of the Sea along with them. These several sorts of Shells, Corals, etc. ought
to be put up each in Paper, Shells, and Corals, how to be put up, and sent over.
and then all into some Box, with Coton, Bran, or Chaff, and great care taken
of those that are small, tender, and brittle.

12. The greatest Difficulty of all will be to preserve, and send Flies, and
Insects, how to be sent.
over safe, the Flies and Insects, by reason of the great Tenderness of them.
Endeavor to procure some of all the several sorts of these, not exceeding 3.
or 4. of each. Worms, Grubbs, Caterpillars, Spiders, Beetles, Grasshoppers, etc.
will keep best if put up, as many as conveniently may together, in Bottles with
Brandy, etc. But the several sorts of Flies, Bees, Wasps, Butterflies, etc.
ought to be put upon Pins, and stuck to the Bottoms, Sides, and Tops of small
Boxes; but care must be taken that they stick very fast, for if one of them
fall off and get loose, 'twill tumble about, and so break and destroy all the
rest that are in the Box.

13. It were likewise not amiss to send over some of the Idols of the East or
West Indians, or any other of the less civilized Nations, Some of the Idols,
Pictures, Money, etc. of the Savages to be sent over.
as also of their Pictures: their Writing, whether upon Paper, or the Leaves or
Bark of Trees: their Money, Weights, Measures: their Instruments of any kind:
their Domestic Utensils: their Habits, or the things they wear, Skins of
Beasts, Feather-dresses, Rings, Beads, etc. their Medicines: their Poisons:
their Musical Instruments: their Weapons, Bows, Arrows, Darts, especially those
that are headed or pointed with Flints, Bones, or Shells: their Drums and
Tambours, etc.

But for these, and especially for the natural things, that are thus A Caution
about the sending the Boxes to and from the Ship: and about the Officers of the
Customs.
sent over, great Caution ought to be used that the Boxes wherein they are, be
not turned topsyturvy, or much tumbled and shaken in carrying to and from the
Ship. And above all, that the things be not broken, or risled and confounded by
the Custom-house Officers and Searchers; which may be prevented by giving
timely notice to your Correspondents here to get a Warrant, from the Honorable
the Commissioners of the Customs, that the Cases and Boxes may not be searched
on Shipboard, but brought into the Custom-house Warehouse, and that some
careful person attend there at their opening, to see that no Inconvenience or
Damage befall them.

There remains now only one thing more to be hinted, and The Conclusion, to the
Collectors of these Natural things.
that is, in regard the Observations to be made both at Sea and Land are very
many, and the Plants, Minerals, and Animals, to be collected, are also very
numerous, it is not expected that any one single Person will have leisure to
attend to so many things, and therefore it is only requested that he make such
Observations and Collections, more or less, as may be best suitable to his
Convenience, and to his Business. If there be never so few Observations made,
or things collected, yet even they will be very gratefully received. But for
such curious, and inquisitive Persons who shall generously bestow a yet greater
Diligence and Application in the Promotion of these many of them so very useful
and considerable Parts of Knowledge, the learned and better Part of Mankind
will be so much the more highly obliged unto them. And here are many of these
things, especially the gathering and preserving of Insects, Shells, Plants,
Minerals, etc. may be done by the Hands of Servants; and that too at their
spare and leisure times: or in Journies, in the Plantations, in Fishing,
Fowling, etc. without Hindrance of any other Business, the things herein
desired being common, and such as (one or other of them) occur in almost all
Places.

Some Additions to be inserted each in their proper Places.
WHether some Seas be not salter than others.] This may be Page 1. line 18.
tried partly by boiling or evaporating an equal Quantity of the Water of
different Seas, and then observing what Proportion of Salt each yields: and
partly by finding the several Gravities of the Waters of the said Seas by means
of the Instrument mentioned Numb. 4. in the List beneath. By the same
Instrument may the Weight of the Waters of Mineral-springs, Hot-bathes, and
Lakes, be tried; which it were to be wished might be done in all Places. But
above all, Enquiry should be made whether the Sea, in some Parts of it, and
Lakes, have not their Water impregnated with Nitre and other Minerals besides
Salt. This may be discovered by the Taste or Smell of the Water: by evaporating
it, or some other proper means. The different Color, Thickness,, and Muddiness
of the Water of the Sea and Lakes ought likewise to be noted.

What perpendicular Height the Sea rises at high water.] I mean how much it
rises above the Level of low water. Observe further Page 2. line 2.
at what time of the Moon, and seasons of the Year, the Sea ebbs lowest, or
flows highest in any Place; not neglecting to note all other Accidents and
Circumstances of the Tides whatever they be.

Things flung upon the Shores by the Sea.] Amongst the rest look diligently for
Amber-gris, the Natural History of which is yet very ibid. line 5.
little known. It Is supposed to be cast out by the Sea; but whether it be so
really, or be drawn out of the adjacent Cliffs (as many other Bodies are, that
were supposed to be owing to the Sea) is to be determined by future Enquirers;
who would do well not only to make this a Part of their Consideration, but to
observe likewise its color, smell, and taste: The Quantity of it: what other
Bodies are mixed with it, or lie near it: Also the condition of the Sea
thereabouts, whether turbulent usually, or calm: whether the Water be frothy or
oily; and, to be short, all other circumstances that may give any light into
this matter.

Of Winds.] Also of the different Effects, Constitutions, and Page 3. line 17
Temperatures of Winds, which hot, which cold: which moist, or attended with
Mists, or Rain: which dry, etc.

Of Springs.] And whether there do not sometimes happen extraordinary Page 4.
line 10.
Eruptions, or vast discharges of water out of them, without any externally
apparent Cause. The same also concerning Lakes: as likewise concerning Grottoes.

Rivers.] And whether these do not also suffer sudden and unusual ibid line 2^.
Eruptions of Water forth of their Sources: whether they have not periodical
Inundations, occasioned by the great Rains that fall at certain Seasons, as the
Nile, Ganges, and several other Rivers have: how high the Tides rise at their
Ostia or outlets, and how far they flow up them; with the periods, of the flux
or reflux.

Mines.] How deep are the deepest Mines and Colepits: whether Page 5, line ^^
there be not water continually draining and ouzing through the Ores of Metals,
and the Spar, and other Minerals that lie in the Clefts of the Stone: what are
the peculiar Diseases that attend the Miners: what Mines are chiefly
detrimental to Health, and whether there be not some that are observed
considerably to shorten the Lives of the Miners: also whether the Smoke, Ashes,
etc. that fall upon the Grass near the Forges and Smelting-works be not hurtful
to the Cattle that feed upon it: Lastly, Whether the very Waters of the
Springs, Rivers and Brooks near, especially about Lead-Mines, are not sometimes
infected with the Mineral steams, so as to be likewise noxious to the Cattle
which drink of them.

A List of such Instruments, and other things, as may be serviceable to those
Persons who make Observations, and Collections, of Natural Things.
1. THE Weather-glass now lately contrived by Robert Hook, M. D. Professor of
Geometry in Gresham College, and S. R. S. of use at Sea as well as at Land.

2. The common Barometer.

3. The common Thermometer.

4. The Hygrobaroscope, or small Glass Instrument, with the Neck or Stemm
graduated into small Divisions, serving to try and compare the Gravity of
Liquids, Waters, etc.

5. A Dipping-needle; in order to observe the several Degrees of its
Inclination in all Parts, both at Sea and Land.

6. A large Quadrant, for taking the Height of Mountains, etc. also for the
making Astronomical Observations, etc.

7. A Level, whereby to judge of the Situation (in respect of the Horizon) of
the Beds of Earth, Stone, Marble, Cole, etc. in Mines, Quarries, Cole-pits, etc.

8. A two-foot-rule, or other like Measure, exactly graduated, as well to take
the Depth of the Water in the Experiment related above page 3. as for other
Uses.

9. Hammers, bigger and smaller, to break, and examine the interior
Constitution of Ores, Native Minerals, Stones, etc. with a Chissel wherewith to
dissever or strike off shells from the Mass of Stone, Marble, etc. conf. page
6. and page 11. above.

10. Crucibles, Fluxing-powders, etc. for melting and trial of Ores.

11. An Eradicator, or small Iron Instrument to take up the Roots of Herbs out
of the Earth.

12. Several Quires of brown Paper to dry and keep Plants in.

13. Several Nests of Dutch, or Pill-Boxes: also Deal Boxes of several Sizes,
in which to put up, and send over Natural Bodies.

14. Bottles, Jars, Gally-Pots, or other like Vessels, wherein to put the more
tender Creatures, with Spirits etc.

15. Spirit of Wine, Rum or Brandy, to preserve the said Creatures, e. g.
Insects, Lizards, Serpents, etc.

16. A Solution of Mercury Sublimate; or the same in Powder, a small part of
which may be dissolved in a little Water, by boiling it gently in a Pipkin;
which Pipkin ought to be kept for this only purpose, it being dangerous to put
it to any other use, the Sublimate being a Poison. When the Liquor is Cold, a
little Spirit of Wine may be added to it, if to be had. The use of this
Solution is to chase and rub upon the Insides of such Animals whose Entrails
are taken forth (as Page 14. above) in order to dry and preserve them; this
serving to fence off Worms and Insects from preying upon them, preventing also
the falling off of the Hair or Feathers, and securing them against
Putrefaction, Stinking, etc.

It would be of incredible advantage to this Design, were all the Thermometers
and Hygrobaroscopes used in it adjusted nicely and exactly after some one
common Standard. Which would be a Thing very easy to be done, were they all
bought of the same Person. Nor can I, if I may presume to recommend one for
this purpose, nominate a fitter than Mr. Hunt, Operator to the Royal Society at
Gresham College; who will not only procure the two mentioned, (graduated very
carefully) or indeed any of the other Instruments, but likewise be ready to
direct any one, who shall desire it, in the method of using them; or to advise
and assist them in any other thing tending to the promoting of this Design. For
the Thermometers, were they thus all of them, adjusted to the same Standard,
(to be kept constantly in the Repository at Gresham College, where any Man
might have recourse to it) 'twere easy to make a true and certain Estimate of
the Heat or Cold in any part of the World where these Thermometers were used,
for they would all of them constantly answer to one another, in what Country
soever they were. By this means the Heat or Cold of all Places in the same
Climate or under the same Latitude may be compared and known, for any, or all,
Seasons of the Year. The same way may a comparative judgment be made of the
Heat or Cold of Climates tho never so different and distant: the Heat of one
Country or Place may be conferred with another; of one Mine, Cole-pit, Grotto,
or other ^^bterranean Cavern, with another: the temperature of Valleys or
^lains with that of higher Ground, and with the sides or Tops of Mountains;
which would be a thing of real and very great use in many respects. So likewise
for the Hygrobaroscopes: were they all adjusted after the same Standard, there
would be a fixed and standing Rule whereby to judge of the Gravity of Fluids all
over the World wherever these Instruments were used. The Gravity of the Water
of one Sea might be compared with that of another: of the Northern with the
Southern Seas: of the Seas under the Aequinoctial, with those at the Poles. So
also of different parts of the same Sea, the Shores with the Main, or the
Waters of the very same place, taken up at different depths, with each other.
In the same manner may be examined the Water of Lakes, of Rivers, of Mines,
Cole-Pits, etc. of Springs of all Sorts, both the Mineral ones and others, all
over the World.

FINIS.

