THE Freeness of Gods Grace IN THE Forgiveness of Sins, BY JESUS CHRIST,
VINDICATED. Against the Doctrine of Mr. Fergusson, in his Sermon Preached at
the Morning Lecture, the fifth of August 1668. in a Letter to a Friend. By H.
W. a lover of the Truth that is according to Godliness.

Romans 3. 24. Being justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that
is in Jesus Christ. Col. 1. 14. In whom we have redemption through his Blood,
even the forgiveness of sins. Prove. 12. 15. He that justifies the wicked, and
he that condemns the just, even they both are abomination to the Lord.
London, Printed for J. J. and are to be sold at William Crooks, at three Bibles
near Temple Bar, and at Peter Parker's in Billeter Lane, Anno 1668.

My Friend,
BEing the other day in your company, you told me of your being the fifth
instant at the morning Lecture, where (as you said) a great company of well
disposed people were assembled to hear: I was glad to hear it. Then you gave me
to understand that one Mr. Fergusson there preached at that time from Heb. 2.
10. And you also gave me in writing an account of his Sermon, desiring me to
peruse it. Sir, your Paper I return with many thanks, and therewith also a few
Animadversions upon the Sermon, which you may read when your leisure permits
you.

There are three faults inexcusable in a Preacher, as all do acknowledge, for
it is in it self most evident.

First, To propose a Text out of the Holy Scriptures, and thence to draw
Doctrines which are true in themselves, but which the Text affords not. This is
one way of profaning the Word of God, and of doing the Work of the Lord
negligently. But,

Secondly, It is a greater fault, and much more to be lamented, when such
Doctrines or Theses are grounded upon a Text of Scripture, which are so far
from being rightly drawn from that Text, that they are deducible from no other
Text, being such Doctrines as contain not the truth in them, but are false, and
therefore contrary to the Scriptures of Truth. But,

Thirdly, The fault is then greatest and most of all to be lamented, when the
Doctrines or Articles proposed as from a Scripture, are not merely false, and
errors of a mean import, but are false in matters of high concernment in Faith
or Manners.

These three things, Sir, came to mind by the unhappy occasion of your
Preachers Sermon, whom I may charge, though not with the first of those faults,
(for he was not so little unhappy, as to preach Truth from a Text that reached
it not to him) yet I may charge him with not only the second; but the third
also: For alas! (I grieve to speak it) he preached such a Doctrine, which
greatly reflects disparagement upon Almighty God, in respect of his Goodness,
Wisdom, and Power, and therefore must needs have much of malignity in it, how
devout soever the Preacher may seem to be.

Now that you may not think me to be rash and inconsiderate in thus charging
that Gentleman, give me leave to evince by a few words the truth of the Charge.

I pray consider his Text, and his Doctrine grounded thereon.

The words of the Text are these,

For it became him for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in
bringing many Sons unto Glory, to make the Captain of their Salvation perfect
through sufferings.

His Doctrine was this;

That there was no other way imaginable or possible, whereby God might forgive
sins, but by a full and plenary satisfaction made to his Justice by the death
of his Son. He branches this Doctrine into three Propositions; which are these,

1. That it is not possible for God to pardon sin and save sinners, without
satisfaction to his Justice.

2. That it was impossible to obtain satisfaction by any other way but by
Christ.

3. That Christ has given God a full and plenary satisfaction, and thereby
made way for the bringing of all those Sons to Glory that the Father and he
agreed about when he undertook this work.

Now consider (I pray you) seriously whether any man but one that is first
prepossessed with such an Opinion, could have drawn such a Doctrine from that
Text. The terms I am sure are at a vast distance. The Text says, It became him
for whom are all things, etc. Now suppose that to be in the Text which is not,
viz. That Christ made satisfaction to the Justice of God for men's sins, in Mr.
F's sense; it will not follow from this, It became God, etc. First, That it was
impossible to have been otherwise; for Mr. F. knows well enough, that though
God cannot choose good or evil, yet he may choose this or that good; so that when
it is said, That such or such a thing becomes God, it does not follow that the
omission of that, and the choosing of another, might not also have become him.
It did well agree with the Wisdom and Goodness of God, to make the Captain of
our Salvation perfect through sufferings; But what are we, poor silly Worms,
that we should hence conclude, That the Wisdom of God could have found out no
other way for his goodness to appear unto us in! Let us be thankful for this
that he has done, and admire his Wisdom in it; but let us not by our wisdom
set bounds to the only wise God. However, let us not do it, grounding upon a
Text that will not justify us therein, as this Preacher does.

But secondly, How does it arise from this Text, That Christ made full
satisfaction to the Justice of God? The Text says, -- To make the Captain of
their Salvation perfect through sufferings. As if for God to make Christ
perfect through sufferings, and for Christ to make satisfaction to the Justice
of God were all one. Whereas, for God in bringing many Sons to Glory, to make
the Captain of their Salvation perfect through sufferings, seems plainly to
imply no more but this; To make the Captain a perfect and complete Captain or
Leader. 1. By making him to be to his Soldiers or Followers, those Believers
he was to bring to Glory, a Pattern in doing, in suffering, and in receiving of
Glory. 2. By making him to have pity and compassion toward them in all
difficulties and sufferings, through having experience of the same himself. 3.
And lastly, By giving him power to supply them in the way, and give them glory
at the end, inasmuch as by his sufferings he came to sit down at the right Hand
of God. If any man of a more refined wit than ordinary, can draw any thing more
from these terms, yet I persuade my self, That no man will ever be able to
convince an impartial hearer, that Christ's being made perfect through
sufferings, is, Christ's making full satisfaction to the Justice of God. But if
this Proposition be not to be found in the Text, much less the other two; that
it was not possible for God to pardon without a satisfaction, and that no other
could do it but Christ.

Now having showed you, that his Doctrine is not in his Text, nor deducible
from it; I shall show you in the second place that it is false, and therefore
not deducible from any Text, but contrary to the Scriptures. But to make good
this charge, it would behove me to write a large Volumn, if I should disprove
all the frivolous Arguments that are wont to be brought for the maintaining it,
but I intend only a short Letter, and therefore shall content my self, 1. To
show you the contradiction of this Doctrine to it self, and to the holy
Scriptures. 2. To vindicate those Scriptures, or the chief of them he brings
for proof, from giving countenance to his Doctrine. And,

First, That it is contradictory to it self and the Scriptures, observe two
clauses in it; one is, Making full satisfaction to the Justice of God; the
other is, God's forgiving sins. To make full satisfaction to the Justice of God
for sin, is in this Preacher's sense, To bear all that punishment which is due
to men for their sins in their stead. To forgive sin, is, according to the
Apostle Paul, (Romans 4. 7, 8.) Not to impute sin, or to deal with the sinner as
if he had not finned. But now every one may perceive that these two are
contradictory; as, to bear all the punishment due to sin, and to bear none of
the punishment due to sin. To exact of the sinner or his surety (as they speak)
all the punishment which he owes; and, to exact neither of the sinner nor his
surety any thing that he owes: For whether the sinner himself or his surety
bear the punishment of his sin, sin is in that case imputed. If these be not
flat contradictions, I know not what are; for the terms in the affirmation and
negation, are taken in the same sense and latitude: So that for any one to say,
That God could not pardon men's sins till Christ had made full satisfaction to
his Justice, is alike as to say, The King cannot pardon a Rebel without
punishing as the Law requires; forasmuch as to pardon, is, not to punish as the
Law requires. And this is so clear and evident, that in all other cases save in
this, even the Asserters of this Opinion do easily perceive the absurdity:
Which of them having committed an offense, deserving death by the Law of the
Land, would account himself pardoned, if all that punishment were exacted that
the Law required? In debts of money, which may be transferred from one to
another, which of them would account himself forgiven a debt of an hundred
pounds, if he himself, or any other paid it in his name? What an empty vain
word would Forgiveness be at this rate? Pay me all you owe me and I will
forgive you, is either a senceless or cruel saying. What! must we be absurd
only in our Faith? Must Absurdities there be reputed for Mysteries? Why not
believe the Papists then, when they assert the Bread to be Flesh, and say it is
a Mystery? Nay, much rather believe them than these, for they have the words of
Scripture on their side, but these have not, save ill-forg'd premises. Thus you
may see this Doctrine is contradictory to it self, as much as punishing and not
punishing, exacting a debt and not exacting it, are flatly contradictory.

That it is contrary to the Scripture, is proved by the same labor, for every
thing absurd, and contradictious to it self, must needs be contrary to the holy
Scriptures. But more particularly, 1. It is contrary to all those Scriptures
that speak of God's forgiving, or pardoning, or remitting our sins through
Jesus Christ, or through his Blood. And I think I need not tell you, the
Scriptures are full of such. Will it not be impertinent to name a few among so
great a number? Nay, is it not the main purport of the Gospel, to show that God
forgives us our sins by Jesus Christ? John Baptist the forerunner of Christ,
-- Preaching the Baptism of Repentance for the remission of sins, Luke 3. 3.
Christ himself taught us to pray, Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our
debtors, Mat. 6. 12. and v. 14, 15. For if ye forgive men their trespasses,
your Heavenly Father will also forgive you. But if ye forgive not men their
trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses. Will any man be
beholden to us for forgiving his trespasses, when we have received full
satisfaction, as much to a tittle as the Law allows? Or, dare we say, We
immitate God, when we do not pardon them any thing, except we have our due to a
doit? Might not the Servant in the Parable (Mat. 18.) have excused himself for
his severity to his fellow servants by this Doctrine? For his Lord said, v. 32,
33. O thou wicked Servant, I forgave thee all that debt, because thou desiredst
me; Should not thou also have had compassion on thy fellow servants, even as I
had pity on thee? Might he not have replied, Lord, thou did receive a full
and plenary satisfaction for me, but I received no satisfaction for him, and
therefore thy example is no Argument in this case? Is not this to clude the
most plain and excellent Precepts and Arguments in the Gospel? Christ says in
the institution of his last Supper, Mat. 26. 28. For this is my Blood of the
New Testament [Marg. Covenant] which is shed for many for the remission of
sins. He does not say, for the satisfaction of divine Justice; for the bearing
the punishment of your sins: for what has a Covenant or Testament to do with
satisfaction, or punishment for sin? And after his resurrection, he said unto
them, [the Diciples] Thus it is written, and thus it behoved the Christ to
suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day: and that repentance and
remission of sins [not satisfaction for sins] should be preached in his name
etc. accordingly the preachings of the Apostles and Evangelists are full of
this Doctrine of remission of sins. See a few, Act. 2. 38. chapter 3. 19. chapter 5.
31. chapter 10. 43. chapter 13. 38.

2. This Doctrine of Christ satisfying the Justice of God by bearing the
punishment due to their sins, is contrary to all those Scriptures, that
attribute our Remission or Salvation to the Grace, Mercy and Kindness of God:
for what is more contrary to Mercy than punishing the miserable to the utmost?
what is more contrary to Grace, than to give nothing but what one is paid for?
what more opposite to Kindness or Goodness, than exacting all that strict
Justice may require? Now the Name of the Lord is proclaimed, Exodus 34. 5, 6, 7.
The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering and abundant in
Goodness and Truth, keeping mercy for Thousands, forgiving iniquity, and
transgression and sin; (Here it follows, that I may take notice of it in my
way, because the Preacher urges it to prove that God cannot forgive sin without
satisfaction) and that will by no means clear the guilty. I pray Friend,
consider this Text that is cited by us both, and that upon a contrary account,
and see if it can possibly be meant by the Lords not clearing the guilty, after
his being merciful, gracious, etc. that he will indeed pardon sin, when he has
taken as much punishment as the Law requires, but he will by no means bate any
thing of that. As if the Lord were very gracious and merciful, because he takes
no more than the Law allows. O wonderful Mercy, that this Preacher attributes
to the most merciful Lord God! see Psalm. 103. 8, 10. The Lord is merciful and
gracious, slow to anger and plentious in mercy. He has not dealt with us after
our sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities. But according to this
Gentlman, God must reward every one according to his Iniquities; for every one
must bear the full punishment of his sins, either in his own person or in the
person of another. See v. 13. Like as a Father pityeth his Children, so the
Lord pityeth them that fear him. That is, if the Lord can get any body to be
punished in their stead, and make full satisfaction to his avenging Justice,
then they shall go free. See also Jer. 3.12. Joel 2.13. Jona. 4.2. or shall I
transcribe a great part of the Bible to this purpose. I cannot omit to mind you
of our Lords precept, Luke 6.35, 36. where he says, Love ye your enemies, and
do good and lend, hoping for nothing again: and your reward shall be great, and
ye shall be the Children of the Highest: for he is kind unto the unthankeful
and to the evil. Be ye therefore merciful as your Father also is merciful. Is
God kind to the unthankful and evil? how comes it to pass? according to this
Gentleman, either Christ or some other made satisfaction for them, or else I
know not how it could be. 2 Cor 1. 3. God is called the Father of mercies. In
that Prophecy, Luke. 1. 77, 78. To give knowledge of salvation unto his people
by the remission of their sins, through the tender mercy [marg. Bowels of
mercy] of our God. The great reason of the blessings of the new Covenant is
this: for I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their
iniquities will I remember no more. Heb. 8. 12. I would sain pass from this
matter as obvious to every one, but that text in Jam. 2. 13. will not let me
go. For he shall have Judgment without Mercy, that has showed no Mercy: and
Mercy rejoices against Judgment. Where you may observe that Mercy is opposed
to Judgment or satisfaction of Justice, and that gloryeth against this.
Whereas were this Gentleman's doctrine true, Judgment would glory against Mercy.

That this Doctrine of full satisfaction to avenging Justice (I say) is
contrary to all those Sriptures that attribute our remission or salvation to
the Grace of God: me thinks I should not need to cite texts in this case to
such as profess to live under a Covenant of Grace, and commonly suspect every
thing that is but said to lessen the Grace or favor of God. But give me leave
to mention one or two among a multitude. And that of the Apostle to the
Ephesians, ( chapter 1. 7.) does first present it self, In whom we have Redemption
through his Blood, the forgiveness of sins according to the riches of his
Grace. Here forgiveness of sins is ascribed to the riches of Gods Grace, though
it comes through the Blood of Christ. Would it have bin any such rich Grace for
God to let men alone after he had punished their sins to the utmost? See Col.
1. 14. a parallel place to this in Ephesians. I. In both which you may note that
redemption is expounded by remission of sins. See also Romans 3.24. Being
justified freely by his Grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ.
How justified by Grace or savor, if by a full satisfaction? O, you will say;
Because God gave Christ, and procured him to make this satisfaction. But
suppose that could be; How then justified freely or gratis by his grace, if he
received a full satisfaction? Can a man be said to deliver his imprisoned Debtor
freely or gratis by his Grace out of prison, and from his obligation, though he
procure another to pay him the money? sure Mr. F. would not think so, if he were
that captive Debtor and so delivered. And this Apostle in the next Chap. Romans
4. 4. and 11. 6. argues the opposition between Grace and Debt, and Grace and
works, showing that they mutually destroy each other; so that if God received
full satisfaction, he is obliged in Justice, as this Preacher says, to take no
more; and our Justification accordingly will be no longer of Grace, but of
Debt. -- Thus this Preacher does unawares destroy the Grace of God, while he
preaches up a penal satisfaction of Justice.

Now I might proceed to other Scriptures and Arguments to which this Doctrine
of satisfaction is contrary: but I am writing a Letter, and perhaps I may have
occasion to produce some of them by way of Answer to some of his
Argumentations. And I shall as I go along, prove against him that which I
proposed in the beginning, as the third and greatest fault in a Preacher,
namely, That his Doctrine is not only false, but false in a matter of high
comcernment in the faith of a Christian.

And first I take notice he argues from Gods threatenings that there must be a
satisfaction: but he allows this satisfaction to be made either by the Criminal
or by his Surety. But I would fain have him to show me that threatening of
punishment, that may be satisfied either by the party offending or his Surety.
To Adam he says, In the day thou eatest -- dying thou shall die, Genesis 1. 17.
and, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things, etc. Deuteronomy.27.26.
and Call.3.10. The soul that sins it shall die, Ezekiel.18.4. Here is no mention
of a Surety. Let him that adds, or its Surety, take heed of the Curse
denounced against him that adde^^ or diminishes etc, but perhaps he has a
Surety that can and will bear it for him.

2. He argues from the congruity of it to the Righteousness, Wisdom and other
Attributes of God, to pardon sin upon a full compensation. He cites Rom.3. 25,
26. -- that he might be just. But we have seen already in the 24. verse. of that
Chap. that the Justice there meant, is such as consists with justifying gratis
and therefore without a full compensation.

3. He argues from the Holiness, Purity and Righteousness of the Nature of God
to the necessity of the punishment of every sin. But he does here again take
the boldness of adding a surety, for the bearing of this punishment. I beseech
you my Friend, make a stand, and tell me, supposing such a nature in God as
obliges him to punish every sin, whether that Nature can be satisfied with the
punishment of another that is innocent instead of him that is guilty? And
again, whether that Holy Nature of God does not oblige him as much not to
punish the Righteous, yea though he be willing, as to punish the guilty? He
says, He cannot see how it was consistent with the Righteousness of God, to
punish an innocent, if he could have saved sinners without it. O wonderful
Righteousness of God, that obliges him to punish an innocent person, because he
cannot pardon freely the least sin! An innocent person did I say? You must
suppose that this person is of equal worth to a whole World of innocent
persons; and then you must suppose that God is necessitated from his Nature to
punish eternally this whole World of innocent persons, if he will save from
eternal punishment a few guilty persons. This may seem strange, but if you
consider it, you will find it full of Truth; For it is supposed, even by this
Preacher, that Christ did as much in the bearing of the punishment of men's
sins, as if the whole World of sinners should have been punished eternally. Now
it follows clearly, that if you suppose the Surety to have been Righteous Men,
and not Jesus Christ; there must have been a whole World of such Righteous Men
to have suffered eternally, to have done that which Christ did in satisfying
for men's sins. I know, they that receive this Doctrine from the Pulpit, are
wont to consider the sufferings of Christ as the sufferings of a few hours, but
they ought to consider them as equivalent to eternal sufferings: They ought
also to consider them, not only as the sufferings of a single Person, but of as
many persons as it is possible may be saved by him, or rather, of as many as
they are of worth to save, which are, they say, all the World, and more if more
there were: And then let them if they can ascribe such a nature as this to the
most merciful and just God. O, whither does Error drive men? Here perhaps they
will argue, That it was the single manhood only that suffered, it was the
Godhead that supported it, and gave weight and vallue to the sufferings; but
the Godhead cannot suffer. But what is that to say, but either to confess the
charge I have laid against that Doctrine, or else to make the satisfaction
childish and ludicrous. For if the satisfaction given by Christ be real and
something distinct from what God had before, then it contains all that horrible
cruelty I have spoken of; if it be not real nor distinct from what God had
before such satisfaction given, then it is childish, giving with the one hand,
and receiving with the other, or putting the thousands of pounds of his own
Godhead into the scale with the penny of the manhood, (as I may so say) to make
up a full satisfaction or payment; Who that considers it can bear such a
Doctrine?

He goes about to prove the necessity of punishment of all sin from two
considerations; first, From the nature of sin to which punishment is due
without any determination of God. That he that does ill should suffer ill, is
not so much (says he) from the Will of God, as from the Nature of ill. But
then, 1. How comes it to pass that this punishment is not inflicted upon him
that does the ill, but upon another? Does not his bringing in a Surety here,
overthrow his reason? If sin require to be punished, it is in him that does the
evil, not in another? But, 2. suppose sin does in its own nature deserve
punishment, yet this does not necessitate God to punish every sin: For we men,
although we have a natural right to our limbs, and he that maim's us deserves
punishment for so doing, if there were no positive Law to that purpose,
notwithstanding he that is so maimed may forgive him that offense. So he that
sins, gives God a right to punish him, but God may dispense with his right, if
he please, or else he were more impotent than we contemptible worms.

He says, We may observe throughout the Bible that the Principle by which God
punishes sin, is the Righteousness of his Nature, so that it is against
Justice in him not to punish: And he cites, 2 These. 1, 6, 7. It is a Righteous
thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you
that are troubled, rest. Here we see it is as well righteous to recompense to
them that are troubled, rest, as to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble. But is that also from the necessity of God's Nature, and not from his
gracious Will, and merciful Determination? Again, says he, The necessity of
sins punishment is argued from the Heathens having a sense of it without Divine
Revelation. But did not the same Light in the Heathens teach them, that God was
Merciful and Gracious, pardoning sin without a satisfaction or full punishment?
The Ninivites did not believe that God either by the necessity of his Nature or
Threatening was obliged to punish. Who can tell (say they, notwithstanding an
absolute threatening) if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce
anger, that we perish not? Jonah 3.9. And in verse. 10. it is said, And God saw
their works, that they turned from their evil way, and God repented of the evil
that he had said that he would do unto them, and he did it not. What? Did he
inflict this evil upon some other that should bear it in their stead? Where is
this necessity of his Nature, or veracity of his threatenings, obliging him to
punish every sin?

He says, It would render all Laws ludicrous, if the breach of them should not
be punished. And will not all men hate and abhor that Government as cruel and
tyrannical, where every the least breach of the Law must certainly be fully
avenged? Do not all Governors forgive offenses which they might punish, and
that with great applause of their clemency, and as that wherein they do most of
all resemble God the great Governor? But are therefore all the Laws in the
World ludicrous? But he will make us amends for this intolerable severity, by
an execrable cruelty, and that is, by substituting one who is in respect of his
worth aequipollent to so many, or so many hundreds rather of innocent persons
as are needed for sureties, to suffer this punishment instead of the Offenders.
But how contrary is this to the reason of punishment, and to Scripture? which
though it says that Christ was made a surety of a better Testament, (Heb. 7.
22.) yet never our surety, much less to bear punishment in our stead. And here
he cites (indeed in a quite contrary sense to its true meaning, so strangely
impertinent are his proofs) Genesis 18. 25. Shall not the Judge of all the Earth
do right? For Abraham urges this against God's destroying the few Righteous
with the many Wicked; but Mr. F. urges it for the many righteous, or of one
equivalent to many that a few wicked may go free. This is the natural
Righteousness of God the Judge of all the Earth, which he Preaches. The
Phoenicians and Carthaginians sacrificing a few men, or some of their Children
in the behalf of the whole people, seems to come short of this in cruelty and
unrighteousness.

Now he comes to his second Proposition, That it was impossible for
satisfaction to be made any other way but by Christ. But having made it appear
that the satisfaction he talks of is inconsistent with the Nature of God, with
his Righteousness, Mercy and Grace, as they are set forth in Scripture, this
Proposition falls to the ground, and is impertinent. Only I may observe, that
in rejecting of Sacrifices, new Obedience and Sufferings, though he cites
Psalm. 51. 16. for the defectiveness of Sacrifices, yet he takes no notice of
the next verse, where the Psalmist says, The Sacrifices of God are a broken
Spirit; a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise. So he
cites Psalm. 50. 12. to the same purpose, but waves that which follows in verse
14, and 15. Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most High.
And call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. He does not reject slain Beasts, and burnt Offerings, that he may
have slain men, or such as may be eternally or infinitely punished and
tormented in the stead of the guilty; but he requires in those places sincere
and hearty obedience in things morally and truly good, in place of things
ceremonial and only positively good.

Here he tells us, That the sufferings of men cannot satisfy, because they are
not infinite in weight, for men are not capable of that. They are capable of
infinite sufferings in respect of length and continuance; but that is to be
always suffering without ever completing satisfaction. Thus we see that the
punishment laid upon Christ, is according to him equal to the sufferings of men
for evermore. But these men if they had been sit sureties, must have been
righteous men; so the sufferings of Christ are equal to the sufferings of
millions of righteous men for evermore. But how dare we say, That God, who
loved his own Son more than millions of Righteous men, much more than millions
of sinners, should yet lay upon him the punishment due to sinners, and that
which is equal to the eternal sufferings of millions of righteous men, for the
saving of a lesser number of sinners? would it not even grieve a man of
Ingenuity to be saved (if it were possible) at this rate?

He says the Satisfaction is always spoken of, as having been done to
reconcile God. But it will be very hard, I think impossible, for him to show
but one Scripture that says so, nay that says but that Christ dyed to
reconcile God to us, which is far less. How ordinary is it for men to think the
Scriptures speak what they would have them speak? It says indeed, that -- when
we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the Death of his Son, Romans 5. 10.
And that God has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ. And God was in
Christ reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto
them, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19. what need of reconciling him that so loved the world
that he gave his only begotten Son? etc. Joh. 3.16.

We come now to his proof of the main matter, (viz.) That Jesus Christ has
given the Father a full and plenary satisfaction, etc. Here by the way, he
says, Christ has given the Father Satisfaction. I desire therefore to know
who satisfied the Son and Holy Spirit. Or is the Son and Holy Spirit of a more
merciful and gracious nature, so that they will pardon sin without a
satisfaction, though the Father cannot?

For the clearing of this proposition he says, 1. That Christ underwent what
we should have undergone. And this, he says, was in point of feeling Death and
the Curse, an infinite punishment as to weight, though it was but short as to
time: as Hanging is shorter than sitting in the Stocks two or three hours. He
did not only undergo the Death which the Law cursed, but all the Curse which
God could put into his Death. Thus far he. Here he cites Luke 22.44. Mat. 26.
37, 38. Mar. 14. 33. Heb. 5.7. Mat. 27.46. Joh. Now my Friend, I pray read all
these texts consideratly, and as many more as ye please, and see whether all or
any of them say, that Christ underwent an insinite punishment, or all the Curse
which God could put into his Death. Whereas he says, Christ swett great drops
of Blood, Luke says, -- as it were great drops of blood. But I would ask him a
question or two hereupon.

1. Whether it be not part of the curse that men must bear, to know clearly and
to be deeply sensible that they have no interest in Gods favor, and that they
never shall have any, and that God hates them with an everlasting hatred?

2. Whether a stinging and guilty conscience, as having justly deserved the
Curse in their own persons, be not a main Ingredient in the Curse which men
must bear? And if these be parts of the Curse, then let him tell me whether
Christ when he was in an Agony in the Garden, or when he was on the Cross, or
at any other time underwent either of these? for did he not pray to God in the
Garden, and call him Father? Did not God send an Angel to comfort him? Did he
not upon the Cross invocate God, saying, My God, my God, though he had forsaken
him in giving him up to the power of his enemies? and did he not then comend
his Spirit into his Father's hands? Luk.23.46. Are these the Actions, and this
the state of a man under the greatest Curse that God can lay upon him? Then be
comforted ye damned, for it will not be so hard with you, as is imagined? Did
Christ think that God hated him, when he knew he was his wel-beloved Son? and
that this obedience of his in dying, should be rewarded with eternal Glory?
what Doctrine is this, that brings in the Holy One of God, despairing of Gods
favor, hated of God and tormented in his own conscience with sense of
unpardonable guilt! as it necessarily follows from his assertions.

He says, it would be to lessen the courage of Christ, if his Agony proceeded
from a foresight of his Death: not considering what his Text says, that, It
became him for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing
many Sons to Glory, to make the Captain of their Salvation perfect through
sufferings. How should Christ be a complete Captain, if he did not experience
as great trials, as any of the Soldiers are like to meet with? And do not many
of the Soldiers his followers, meet with such a sense of sufferings that are
before them, as put them into an Agony? But what if he being to break the Ice,
to go first, to be a glorious example, met with with greater Hardships and
difficulties, than any of those that are to follow him? Is he not thereby the
more fit to be their Captain? may there not from hence be given a good account
of all the sufferings and the death of Christ, that he was to be the Captain of
our Salvation? Did it not well become the Wisdom and Holiness of God to give
repentance and remission of sins through such a person, as should obtain this
Glory and Power by an obedience accompanied with the hardest sufferings?

He now goes on to tell us that Christ underwent this Curse in our stead. And
here he cites Dan.9. 26. Rom.4. 25. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Isa. 53. which in my Judgment
are not the most probable prooss he might have brought for that purpose. But it
being salfe that Christ underwent the eternal Curse, there is no place for his
doing it in our stead. Neither did he undergo, that which he did undergo, in
our stead, but on our behalf, for our good, and that we should follow his
steps. So says the Apostle Peter: Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an
example, that ye should follow his steps, 1 Pet.2.21. He that does any thing in
another's stead, does it, that the other may not do it; but Christ suffered for
our Example, not to free us from suffering the like. Christ suffered for us, so
he entered into Heaven for us ( Heb.6.20.) not in our stead, but for our good,
to be a Priest, and to interceed for us that we may come thither also.

Under this third particular, concerning what Christ has wrought for us, he
talks of a price for Grace, and that all Grace is given by virtue of the
satisfaction of Jesus Christ. He cites to this purpose, 2 Pet. 1. 1. To them
that have obtained like precious Faith -- through the Righteousness of God, and
our Savior Jesus Christ: Whence he collects that God is bound in Justice to
give Grace and Faith, because Christ has bought it. It Is strange he should be
unmindfull of the Apostle Paul's making Grace and Debt such opposites as
destroy each other, and cannot have place in the same matter, Of which I have
soken something before. Again he considers not the words he utters; for Faith
is said in this Text to be obtained by us, not only through the Righteousness
of God, but also through the Righteousness of Jesus Christ. Is Christ obliged
to give us Faith because he bought it? It is in the Greek, Faith in the
Righteousness of God, etc. so Righteousness may be taken for the Object of
Faith, and denotes here the saithfulness of God and Christ, promising to us
eternal life. These are the men that cry up the Grace of God, the free Grace of
God: bat my dear Friend, if you will be but at the pains to weigh the matter
thoroughly, (which alas few will) you will perceive that their Doctrine of Grace
rightly understood, does quite overthrow Grace. I have showed you here how his
Doctrine of Satisfaction is diametrically opposite to the Grace of forgiveness
of sins, which God did design before the World, to magnisie by Jesus Christ in
the Gospel. But he has a pretty setch here, whereby he thinks to free himself
of this charge; and that is by telling us, (as he does in his Application) That
the great Mercy as well as Justice of God, appears in this Satisfaction;
because my Friends (says he) though God will have a Satisfaction, yet he will
procure it himself, be will be at the cost of it himself. O the wisdom of God
in finding it out!

O that men would but consider what this means! But men are mighty idle and
popishly credulous in matters of Faith. The meaning then is this: That God
Almighty is necessitated by his Nature to execute the punishment due to all the
sins of men; for so he says that by sin punishment became due, and being due,
it became necessary to be executed; So that God can no more pardon one sin
without due punishment, than he can lie or deny himself. Now it seems this
necessity of his Nature gave him liberty (I know not how) to execute this
punishment upon others that were righteous, in case they had been Sureties (if
any such there had been) instead of the guilty. But there being none such, but
only one, to wit, Jesus Christ his wel-beloved Son, who was of so excellent a
Nature, that he could bear as much punishment in a few hours, as all the World
deserved, and was not able to bear to eternity; Therefore he commands this Son
(who would not disobey him) to take upon him a humane nature, and therein to
bear this infinite punishment, that so his avenging Justice being satisfied, he
might then justify some part of those that had finned. This is God's procuring
the Satisfaction himself; this is being at the cost of it.

But let me argue with him a little: How can that be a true and proper
satisfaction, which the Creditor is at the cost of himself? It is but a show of
satisfaction, when one receives but what he himself gives, or is at the cost
of. And so this specious Doctrine of satisfying Justice, will be but a mere
representation of a thing that is not real. If the Creditor did receive what he
did not give, then his Mercy is just so much diminished. If he received all
that was due, his Mercy is nothing at all. You will say his mercy appears in
this, that being at liberty to punish the sinner himself, or a righteous person
in his stead, he chose to punish the righteous person and to let the sinner go
free. This seems to have some little weight in it, but consider it narrowly.
Here is indeed some kindness shown to the person of the sinner: but there is
just as much unkindness showed to the person of the Righteous: but in respect
to the sin, there is no mercy at all, for whether he punish the Sinner or the
Righteous, the sin is fully avenged. And what good Governor I pray, would not
rather in such a case punish the sinner than the Righteous? But you will say,
he rewarded the Righteous for bearing this punishment. I answer, that is just
as if one did owe me a Thousand pounds, and I should procure another to pay me
the money in his stead, and for his encouragement I tell him I will give him a
Thousand pounds value in somewhat else. -- I say this is no real, but an
imaginary and represented satisfaction. So that let him turn himself which way
he will, he shall never be able to make full satisfaction to Justice, and Mercy
in forgiveness to stand together. By all this it appears that his doctrine is
false in a matter of great concernment, as that which obscures, lessens,
disparages or overthrows the Righteousness, Goodness, Mercy and Grace of God in
the Gospel.

Having now finished what I intended, wherein I pray excuse me if I have been
too long, and pardon the errors of haste, I will take my leave; beseeching you
to be very careful of receiving any Doctrine you do not understand, especially
if it seem to darken the Wisdom, or any way lessen the Grace of God: but
cherish such Principles as represent God and Christ full of Wisdom, Grace and
Goodness, and so beget in you humility, love, and considence toward them.
Suffer not your self to be imposed upon by the bare name of Mystery, nor by the
multitude of those that profess any Doctrine, but look whether you can find it
in the holy Scriptures. Consider the great Vanities, Superstitions, yea and
Idolatries that have crept into the Church, so that it is no great marvel if
many err in this point also. Let us pray that God would be pleased to vindicate
the Truth of the Gospel from the Inventions of men, that it may appear in its
native beauty and loveliness. I hope you will not satisfy your self with only
reading what I have wrote, but will weigh it seriously as a matter of great
concernment. I shall much rejoice to be serviceable to you in it, for I am, Sir,

Your Friend in the best bands. H. W.
London, Aug. 13. 1668.
Page 6. line 14. for impale, read impute.


