A VINDICATION OF THE True Account OF THE SIEGE OF DERRY IN IRELAND.

By Mr. GEORGE WALKER, etc.

Published by Authority.

London: Printed for Rob. Clavel, at the Peacock, at the West End of St. Paul's.
1689.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
I Having been so often with M. Walker that I could take notice of his great
Care that his Account of the Siege of Derry should give as little Offense as
possible, do think it a piece of Justice to him, to let the World know how far
his Intentions were from contriving that Book, as is given out, to the Injury
of any Party. He knew very well some Dissenters of his own Country had
insinuated into their Friends here, That they and their Brethren were the
People that did the Work in Derry, and that all others were but Ciphers in the
whole Action. Notwithstanding this Mr. W. would rather take occasion by his
private Discourses to reprove them, than express their Partiality in Print, and
therefore he gave them, particularly their Ministers, the fairest Character he
could; and when he gave the Printer a List of the Church of England Clergy, he
ordered a Title to be prepared for a List of the Names of the others, and did
make all the Enquiry he could, for fear they should think his omitting them, a
Design to make them inconsiderable there; but not finding any way to be
informed, he was forced to dismiss the Book without their Names; but if he had
thought it material, he was willing enough to oblige them, and did stay some
days for some Papers of theirs, they sent him word they desired might be
inserted, but he heard nothing more of them. After the printing of the Book he
was loaded with many Reproaches, which he has endured all this while, 'till his
Silence was counted an Argument of his Guilt, and that 'twas said, He knew well
enough how he had wronged them. He was still willing enough to pass by all
this, 'till the Scandal grew too heavy for him, and they interpreted the Book
as a Design to set up a Party, and the like, and to interest a Country that he
loves in their quarrel. They very well understand his Behavior in Ireland, how
far it was from any warmness or severity against them there; and I do appeal to
them, Whether his affection to the Scottish Nation (where he had his Education
and some Honor done him) as well as Favor to themselves, and Charity to some of
them, has not formerly been a disservice to him.

But since they have animated their Friends here, and been such ill Instruments
to put them out of Temper, when all things are preparing, with all imaginable
calmness, for an Accommodation, he does think himself obliged to undeceive
those People that are lead by such Men into Mistakes, that may put them into a
new Ferment, and Di^appoint the Expectations of all good Men of their
Moderation and Willingness to Unite with us. Mr. Walker would think himself the
unhappiest Man alive, if he should contribute any thing to so great a Mischief;
and to clear himself, has at last been persuaded to write this Vindication, in
which he is forced to reprove and rebuke with some Authority and Resent, but
hopes none will take it to themselves, but those he intended it for of his own
Country; and such he hopes will be cautioned by it to find some other way of
Recommending themselves to the Friendship and Charity of their Brethren in
England, than by increasing their Jealousies, and begetting new Distances among
Persons of the same Christian Profession.

A VINDICATION OF THE ACCOUNT OF THE Siege of Derry.
MAster Walker being very sensible how ready some People have been to take
advantage of some Omissions in his Book of the Siege of London derry, and to
improve them, not only into very angry Reflections on himself, but to a
Disparagement of those Actions Providence was pleased to interest him in, to
the preservation of the Place, thinks himself under some obligation to publish
this Paper; not so much to establish his own Reputation, as to assert the Truth
of His Account, and to do every Man right (as near as he can) that is concerned
in it: And the rather, because he does without vanity believe it some
Disservice to the King, to suffer those things to lie under any Doubt or
Aspersions, that have been done for His sake; and because he finds some that
are Enemies to the Government, very industrious in running down that Business,
to make it little in the Opinion of the People, and to discourage the Kings
Subjects in his Service, and from the like Undertakings.

Others he sees, that are very well pleased with the late happy Change, but by
their Unkindness to Mr Walker, are too easily seduced into the like Prejudices,
and do unawares contribute to the Ridiculing That and other great Providence,
that have attended these Revolutions, and that are a mighty support to all Good
Men in their approbation and love of the present Constitution.

Mr. Walker hopes, that under these Considerations He may be allowed the
liberty to remove any Prejudices against him, and to endeavor, at least, to
satisfy those Readers that have used him with such Severity, that the very
Errors of the Printer are all accounted to him; the importunity and forwardness
of those Offcers did get the Book out of his hands much sooner than he
intended, so that it was neither so perfect nor correct as it should have been;
but he considered it was all plain Matter of Fact, and so did require less Art
in the Expression or Method: And his aversness to make any thing public, and
the load of Business then upon him, made him very unfit to prepare it against
the Assaults of Critics, or the Reproach of those that were not his Friends.
He was indeed very uneasy to find so many Mistakes of the Press, (which he
(...) o^dered to be Corrected) and was too willing to excuse them to himself,
to avoid further labor, by flattering himself most People would be so kind, to
give him those Common Allowances that persons may pretend to, that are not used
to such Adventures.

To omit things of lesser moment. the first thing complained of was that
Insinuation (as they called it) in the Preface, By what Hand he would defend
and maintain both, etc. By which Expression our Irish Dissenters would incense
their Friends in England, and will have it, Mr. Walker intended to exclude them
from their Just pretentions to the Credit of the Service done the King and the
Protestant Religion by their means and Interest.

God forbid he should go about to do so great a Wrong to any Party; for it is
not his business, no more than in his power, to set up one Party, or to pull
down another. It would please him much better to see some Expedient that might
Unite them both. But his Intelligence from England was not so good, that he
could understand all the Proceedings at that time, or be now so exact to
distinguish between the Merits of one Man or another; and when by Gods
Providence the Work was done, he was too well pleased to be troubled with any
Curiosity of that kind. Indeed he owns the little Correspondence he had, did
afford great Characters of the Writings and Sufferings of the Church of England
Men under Popery, tho the Gazets were commonly filled with Addresses, yet there
was sometimes room left for such Accounts; but for want of Correspondence with
any of the other Communion, he did not hear of the Books, nor had accounts (he
has since met with) of the Performances of their Great Men against the Common
Enemy. He did understand some of them were seduced into the Councils of the
late Reign, that were never designed for their good or ours; but he always had
Charity to think, They closed with that and such like opportunities, and
endured the Favors of that Government, with intention to do good Service to the
Protestant Religion, as well as to themselves in particular.

But Mr. Walker is not willing to argue upon such Matters, tho he must needs
own, whether from the Accounts he had from England, or the great esteem he had
for those Great Men there, or the willingness most people have to favor their
own Principles, or from his Observations in Ireland, he did not think he did
wrong to any by that Expression, but rather believed, that he should find all
People convinced of the Truth of it; and that the strength and interest of the
Protestant Religion lay in the Church of England, etc. the late Reign he
thought had determined that Point; but however, when he is better informed, he
will be very willing to retract, and if in the mean time he has done wrong to
any, will as heartily beg their pardon.

These things, when Mr. Walker considered them, might very well incline him to
use, at least so innocent an Expression on behalf of the Church of England. But
he thinks fit to deal a little more plainly in the Matter, so that whatever he
says of this Nature, will, he hopes, be more easily excused: He does confess,
that in the writing that Book, he thought it necessary for him, with as little
Offense as possible, to discover that he was a true Son of the Church of
England, not without the greatest Charity and Tenderness for his fellow
Christians. But because the Contrary was averred so positively, and generally
received all over the Kingdom, and prevailed so much, that all the good
Services at Derry were wholly appropriated to that Party, with great wrong to
the other; he does acknowledge himself extremely obliged to their People, and
he will never, while he lives, neglect any Opportunity of doing them Justice;
but he knows they themselves would not desire any Character that should exclude
their Fellow Sufferers; and however the Matter may be disputed here, it was
never Contended at Derry. And as for his own share, how much soever it may
injure him in his Advantage or Reputation; and though they may think themselves
kind in their making him one of their Opinion, and design him Honor by it, for
which he is very thankful to them, knowing very well that his known kindness
and zeal for the Scotch might give some color to those Discourses yet it
cannot give him any fair Character to suffer himself to be represented a Person
that would act so contrary to his Profession, That he could dissemble to such a
degree with God and his Church; therefore he hopes all People will be willing
to pardon him if he shows some aversion to such an Imputation, and is desirous
to avoid the Reproach of so fickle and unconstant a Man. Besides this, Mr. W.
was not a little concerned to see some of his Countrymen, of another Communion,
so forward in establishing themselves the great Contrivers and Promoters of the
King's Service and Interest in Ireland, he would not say any thing that should
reflect upon their Number or Quality or Performances there, that may make them
seem unfit for such an Undertaking; he knows well what to attribute to them on
those Accounts, and it would be wrong to others to flatter them; he would
rather advise them to more Moderation, and less Partiality, and they will find
very little Reason to continue those Pretensions. How considerable they were in
Derry Mr. W. may be allowed to judge: For the better Sort, he knows them so
Modest, they will not contend for them, they being all good Churchmen; and as
for others, they may be deceived in their Accounts of them, for many thousands
deserted the Garrison, and took Protections from the Irish; and what sort of
People they were, they might inform themselves if they please, and find reason
enough to abate of their Severity against Mr. Walker for denying the Credit of
that whole Affair to their Friends or Party. But one thing Mr. Walker desires
leave to recommend to them, to consider their own Temper and Constitution, and
ask themselves the Question, If they were in Derry, and were the greater
number, and more considerable, whether they would have chosen Church of
England- men their Governors, and been contented with so moderate a share of
the Church, and in the Afternoons, and have suffered others to have the
property in it, and to enjoy it all the rest of the week? This, one should
think, would convince them where it was the Power and Number lay, unless the
Air of England does dispose men to more Modesty than other Countries, which Mr.
Walker would be glad for their sakes it had that virtue. These things
considered, Mr. W. does not see what reason they have to quarrel so much with
him, That he did not give their Ministers a higher Character; After he had
passed the Church of England men so slightly, how could he in Justice to them
say more for the others? the wrong certainly, if any, was to the other side;
but that he could make more bold with his Friends, and they had been used to
dispense with him on the like Occasions, he gave them the credit of an equal
Care; and though their Friends here, out of Complement to themselves, may
expect a greater Character, he does not doubt but they are well pleased with
it, if they are in the same Temper he left them, and are not warmed by the
Resents on this side the Water, and the Letters sent them. In their Behavior
at Derry, they were not only an Example and Credit, but a Reproach to their
Brethren now in England, for the Good of the Public; they could lay aside
their Animosities and Distinctions, and not contend for any thing, but were
satisfied with the bare liberty of their own Service on Sundays in the
Afternoon in the Church, which being the safest place, and most convenient for
Assemblies, would have been great Cruelty to deny them, as well as Mischief to
the rest, to expose their Friends to the danger of other places. Mr. W. thought
fit to make some addition to their Character, by some Reflection on two others
of a different behavior, a liberty very common to illustrate and explain
things by their contraries: As for Mr. Os. Mr. W. is concerned he had any
occasion to name any to their disadvantage, but he did it with that notion that
he had of him in the Garrison, and those of his own Profession there, and
thought it would on that account give the less Offense, but he could not easily
forget the effects of his Letter which Mr. W. had shared in to his Sorrow, and
that Clause of the Letter wherein my Lord Tyrconnel threatens to Massacre all
the English by sacrificing them to the Rabble, made it very material to insert
it. Mr. W. will be very ready to give that Gentleman all opportunity of
justifying himself, and shall make him all imaginable satisfaction, if he has
done him wrong. He has heard of the Gentleman's good Intentions in his
proceedings, Mr. W. is sorry they were no better understood, that he might
clear him from the imputation of those Mischiefs his management and advices
brought upon that part of the Kingdom; but it is hard to serve too such
Masters, the British and the Irish; if he was not more industrious and
serious, Mr. W. is too sure he was more successful in his Service to the
latter, by his impression, not only on the meaner sort, but on some of the best
quality. As for the other Gentleman. Mr W. thinks they do themselves a great
deal of right, that they do not seem concerned for him; and since Mr. O. is so
much their Care, he is sorry he placed his Resentments no better but joined
them together, that are of so different a Character among those (they say) they
are better known to; though he thinks it advisable they should not put him upon
justifying himself any further in that particular.

Another thing that the same People think a great wrong to them, is, The not
naming the Non Conforming Ministers. Mr. W. allows they might very justly
reproach him if he had designedly omitted it; but he really professes, he was
not only unacquainted with their Names, but, though he took some pains to inquire
into them, could not be informed, and tho he has since that desired a Friend to
make a more narrow search for them among that have reflected on him on this
account, he finds them still more teady to reproach him, then able to inform
him better. But that this Omission was not cut of any prejudice to the
Gentlemen, is very evident from the care he hastaken of them before and since
that in his Recommendations of them to an equal Reward with those of his own
Communion; and though some idle persons have insinuated his wilful neglect of
them, he protests against it: But if it were not more out of regard to them,
than those that concern themselves so much for them, he should not think he
were obliged to give them this satisfaction But they might have prevented this
themselves if they had pleased, Mr. W. having waited several days for some
thing he understood they would have inserted, and they are not strangers to
this themselves, and therefore have the less reason to complain of Mr Walker in
that matter, since they took so little care to inform him, when they had such
Opportunity to do it, and may have the like again if they please.

Mr. Walker is sorry he has any Occasion given to insist upon such little
things as these for his Vindication; he little expected to meet such Usage and
Reflections any where, except it had been in an Irish Camp: And he does very
much wonder how it proves to the Reputation or Interest of those People that
would make themselves so considerable in the North of Ireland, to show
themselves Enemies to him that contbuted all he could to the defense of it, and
their Interest in it, some will be apt to think it is a sign they had not much
to thank him for. But if he had committed some Mischiefs or Faults, he had more
reason to expect from such, that they would have concealed or excused them,
than that they should be so industrious in exposing either him or them.

Mr. W. understands he is further accused for his neglect of naming those that
died in the Service of Derry, his Silence in that is injurious to their Widows
and Children. But in hopes those that complain of him in this matter have some
charitable Intention toward them, and want Mr. Walker's direction, he does
promise them he will publish a List of them as soon as he can make it perfect,
and will in the mean time dispose their Charity, if they please to contribute
to their Relief, with the best Advantage he can. Others, he thinks, that have
no such Occasion (and are not Relations) may dispense with his neglect herein,
and he has no reason to satisfy them. He did make an Apology in the Book for
his not being more particular in the Character of the Dead, as well as the
Living, which he thought would excuse him to all but those that will never be
pleased; and he did not make any Provision against the Cavils of persons of
that disposition. But all that were at Derry, by the King's Favor, have been
largely considered, at the instance of Mr. Walker and they shall be his
constant Care as long as he lives, and he will never be wanting in doing all
the right and service he can, which he thinks himself obliged to, not so much
to avoid any man's Reflection, or to humor those that find fault without any
design of Friendship to him or to them, but out of a just sense he always must
retain of their Courage and Sufferings in that cause he engaged them in.

Mr. Walker does think he should be very impertinent to take notice of all
their Exceptions; but every little thing is advanced by their industry so much
to his disadvantage, that he is forced to triflle, as all Men must do that
speak for themselves, and to take notice of another Quarrel they have against
him about Colonel Philips, he could not well contrive how to omit the naming of
him upon such an occasion, without doing him the greatest wrong; and as to that
Letter which they say is a downright Forgery, after he had seen it in the Hands
of Colonel Philips, in two several Papers, acknowledged under Mr. Norman's own
hand, one of which Papers has not only been seen, but is subscribed to by his
very Accuser, he thinks he had Authority enough to mention it. Mr. Walker does
wonder with what Forehead any man can dare to impose upon the World such
Impudent Falsehoods; and what Designs such men can have, that they drive on with
so little regard to Truth or Honesty? He is sorry he cannot pass by such things
without Resentments.

Others, Mr. Walker understands, reflect upon some Passages of his Book, not
writ with that Gravity that may be expected from him: He must confess
ingenuously, That the difference was so great betwixt Acting and Writing that
Story, that he had much ado to forbear showing it was some Entertainment to him
to feel the Alteration, and so many Comical Passages occurred to him, that he
had since time to laugh at that if they had not been very Vulgar, he had
disobliged his Reader to a greater degree in that particular; but Mr. Walker
thought himself amongst his Friends, and so has used a little freedom; but
since he has been mistaken, he will take care to make his next Discourse more
Stoical and Austere. But Mr. Walker does wonder how they come to expect all
this management from a man they had represented with so different a Character:
But Persons that take such liberty, sometimes forget themselves.

For (that) Mr. Walker was very inconsiderable, alas! He did nothing, Mr. Baker
was the Man, and such like stuff has been as common, as unkind Discourses of
these Men. Mr. Walker has not been wanting in doing Mr. Baker right, his Skill
and Conduct was of that advantage to the preserving of that place, that he
cannot do him too much honor, but Mr. Walker's value for him is sufficiently
testified by his care of his Widow and Children, yet (if Mr. Walker may put
them in mind of it) the Letter writ from Derry to the King, subscribed by the
Officers in Colonel Baker's life time, Mr. Walker's name being the first, shows
him to be a Man of some Consequence and Authority: and if it had pleased God
Mr. Baker had lived, other things would have been said for Mr. Walker, that it
is not proper for himself to enlarge upon.

The next Grievance is, That Mr. Walker has concerned himself more than he
needs with Colonel Lundy, and Colonel Cunningham: But Mr. Walker is of another
opinion, and thinks it was a piece of justice he owed himself and Profession,
to explain the necessity he was under to take that Government upon him; for he
well knows it did engage him in some Actions, that without such a necessity, he
could not justify, being obliged by his Coat to be a Man of Peace. And some
ancient Canons are so severe upon Clergy-mens taking Arms, that they have been
pronounced irregular upon doing it; but at the same time, Clergymen are
allowed to be capable of the privileges of Mankind, and of all Creatures in the
World, they all may defend themselves, and there may such necessity lie upon
them, that it is their duty to do it: we do not want Examples of the best sort
to make this out, and if they failed, there is so much Reason to back that
practice, that he is a Felo de se that neglects it.

The old Canonists, indeed do look upon it as a great absurdity for Clergymen
to meddle with Arms, or to engage themselves in War: and Gratian is a little
more particular, and states the case of a Clergyman in a Siege, and under
those Circumstances that he cannot well avoid annoying his Enemy. The Judaical
Notions that Christians retained in those days, made them look on such a one as
polluted, and therefore he has some Penance enjoined him, or sometimes only
recommended to him: though some proceed to that severity upon this very
Foundation, that such a person must forbear exercising his Function for some
time. And all this is done to distinguish that Sacred Office from other
Professions, and to discourage those that are set apart, and Dedicated to the
more pure service of the Altar, from concerning themselves in any other
imploys; and therefore you find those Laws, not only forbiding Clergymen to
turn Soldiers, but also forbiding them to turn Merchants or Lawyers, etc. and
all this with the greatest reason; for God has a property in such Persons, as
he has also in Places, and Times, set apart for his Worship, and they ought not
to be put to any other use. But Grotius brings the matter to a short issue, and
after allowing all this, speaks of this very Law that obliges a Clergy man to
that degree. Quae tamen lex, ut omnes ejus generis summae necessitatis
exceptione intelligendae, that in cases of the greatest necessity it is not
binding, and that that, and all Laws of that kind, are to be understood with
exceptions in cases of great necessity, for in such cases he remains the same
Man still, and is discharged of all manner of guilt or impurity.

Now Mr. Walker thinks his Case has all the Authority that the greatest
necessity in the World can give to any Action, the lives of thousands, besides
his own, were at stake, his Religion that is dearer than them all, and the
English and Scotch, equally dear to him, next door to an utter Extirpation out
of that Kingdom, not to speak of the danger of others: how can any imagine,
there should be an Obligation upon any Man that can exempt, or excuse his
unconcernedness in such a Case? Mr. Walker confesses such Performances would
have better become persons whose Profession it was to do them, and he would
never envied them the Employ; but since the trouble came to his share, and God
Almighty has blesssed him with success in his Undertaking, he hopes they will
be the more willing to excuse him; and to make it easy to them, that it might
not be too great a favor to him, he thought fit to show the occasion of his
first taking the Government of that Town, or rather to show the necessity that
threw it upon him, which he is sorry he cannot justify without reproaching
others.

Another thing that Mr. Walker is upbraided with, is that his Account is very
imperfect, and for that matter he will not dispute with them; for it is
impossible it could be otherwise, or that the little time and convenience he
had to be exact in such a thing could prevent it; he is the more willing to
allow this, because two very extraordinary things occur to him, which at the
writing of that Book he had forgot, and being so considerable in demonstrating
that Providence that attended the defense of that Town, and that was so
remarkable in our Deliverance, he begs leave to insert them in this Paper.

In the Account of the Siege, you may find that people every day going out of
Derry, the Enemy by that means had constant intelligence, and we had reason to
be under great apprehension, and concern, more especially for our Ammunition,
we considered how to preserve that, and having a great quantity in Mr. Camsy's
Cellar, we removed it to another place: the very next day after we removed it,
a Bomb broke into the Cellar, and if our Powder had been there, we had
certainly been destroyed.

Another thing of as great moment was omitted, and that was a Bomb from the
Enemy broke into a Cellar near Bulchers Gate; some had the Curiosity to examine
what mischief it had done, and there they saw seven Men lying dead, that had
been working at a Mine unknown to us, that if it had not been for so miraculous
a Countermine, might have gone on in their Work, and have ruined us. Mr. Walker
will not say, but there may be other as considerable things omitted, but they
may too nearly concern Mr. Walker himself, and it would not become him to sound
his own praises, no more than to reproach others.

There are many other things objected against Mr. Walker, but he does not think
them worth the notice, and especially since they come from Papists and
disaffected persons, whose interest it is to vilify not only him, but all the
Kings Friends, and make them despised, and to put a slight upon every thing
that God is doing for the King and our Religion against theirs, Mr. Walker has
done his part against them already at Derry, and for any thing that they can do
to him here, he is as little concerned now, as he was at that time, because he
cannot doubt but it will meet with the like success. -- Quid enim quamvis
infida levisque
Caesare tam dextro possit fortuna timeri?


Mr. Walker understands that some people have a new quarrel to him, about a
Book writ in his Defense, he thinks himself not at all accountable for any
thing in that Pamphlet, having never seen it before it was Printed: he is
obliged to the Gentleman for his care and concern for him; but he knows he
cannot pretend to the Character he gives him, and would never have let such a
thing pass if he had known it, and he hopes the World will be so kind to
believe him a Man of less vanity than to suffer himself to be commended at such
a rate. This he hopes will clear him of another imputation from the account the
Gentleman is pleased to give of his losses, as if he were privy to this, and
instructed the Author to lessen the Kings favor and bounty to him, which he
knows does not only exceed his losses, but his merit too, but if it had been
below both (as much as he owns it above them) he hopes few will think him so
ridiculous and ungrateful, after he was so willing to lose all, and himself
too, in his service, but will be satisfied with what is said already in his
Defense; that he was altogether unacquainted with the Printing that Book, yet
knows very well the Author did intend to Justify Mr. Walker, and that being
his Friend, and provoked by the discourses he met reflecting on him, he writ
those Observations, but is well assured without any design of exposing Mr.
Walker to any constructions to his disadvantage, but Mr. Walker thinks his
refusing such generous offers as have been made him, does demonstrate he has
not served only for gain and interest; and his leaving his four Sons in that
Service, shows he has still the same Zeal for it.

All this put together, Mr. Walker cannot but admire, what it is he has done
that should disoblige people so much, that he has been so tender of, that they
should be so industrious in bespattering him upon such little occasions: if he
knew his fault he would be glad to rectify it, and save them that labor, and
till he does know it, he cannot think them so just or kind as he expected to
find them, to one that has done them all the service in his power, and since
they do him the honor to say God was pleased to make him an Instrument of some
good to them, they have (one should think) the less reason to be angry at it.
Mr. Walker has not taken this pains to satisfy them, or to establish himself
in their esteem, as if it were so great a discouragement to want their good
opinion; he does not know whether it would be for his credit to have it, for
there is a woe against him of whom all men speak well, and he is very well
pleased to want that mark, and he knows that no Man can be so innocent, but he
must endure reflection and abuses, and that therefore the Slanderers Throat is
called an open Sepulcher, like Death, that all Men must submit to, and in such
cases Mr. Walker is not so unreasonable to desire to be singular, only as he
could not propose to get any Reputation by Writing, so he had some hopes he
should not lose any. And he has not writ this, not that he thinks he has so
great occasion to justify himself, as to satisfy others, and that he thinks
he ought in Justice to all those poor Gentlemen, and People, that were
concerned with him in Derry, to keep up the Reputation of their services, that
they may never receive any stain from the Dirt, or Scandals any envious Persons
can throw upon them, to prejudice them in the Kings favor or sense he has been
so often pleased to express of their Fidelity and Courage, as well as their
Sufferings in his Service, and particularly in this following Letter.

To our Trusty and Well beloved George Walker, and John Michelbowrne, Esquire
Governors of Londonderry.
William R.

TRusty and Well beloved, we Greet you Well, The eminent and extraordinary
Service, that you have performed unto us, and our Kingdoms in general, by your
late resolute and unparalleled Defense, of that our City of Londonderry: as it
does oblige us in the first place, to an humble acknowledgement to Almighty
God, for his signal mercy in supporting the Hearts and Courages of our good
Subjects. amidst their great and various difficulties and distresses, arising
from a furious opposition without, and a yet more pressing necessity within
those Walls, and sending them at last deliverance, and bringing them, by your
Conduct, to triumph over their Enemies, which we cannot but attribute to an
immediate Divine Assistance, inspiring them with a Zeal for the True Religion,
and Love for their Country, and an unshaken Fidelity toward us, and must ever
own as a continuation of that Miraculous Providence, which has hitherto
Conducted us throughout in our endeavors, to resettle these Nations, in all
their Civil and Religious Rights and Liberties. So in the next place, taking
into a serious Consideration, as well the importance of this Success, as that
Constancy and Bravery, by which it has been brought to pass: we would not omit
signifying unto you, the just Sense we have of his whole Action, in which
having the greatest opportunity, that can be put into the Hands of any Subjects
of obliging their Prince, you have in all Points acquitted your selves to our
Satisfaction, even beyond what could have been expected, insomuch, that it now
lies on our parts to make such retribution, as well to you, the Commanders in
Chief (who have been the happy Instruments under God of that Deliverance) as
others who have signalized their Loyalty, Courage and Patience in this time of
Trial, that all our Subjects being encouraged by this example, may be stirred
up to the imitation of it in the like hazardous, but honorable Enterprises. We
will therefore that you rely on our Royal Favor toward you, and also, that in
our Name, you assure the Officers, Soldiers, and Inhabitants of that our City,
that we will take fitting occasions, to recompense their Service and Suffering,
in our Cause, so that neither they, nor any of our loving Subjects, shall ever
have reason to repent them of a faithful discharge of their Duty, and so we bid
you farewell.

Given at our Court at Hampton Court, this 16. of August 1689, in the first
year of our Reign. By his Majesty's Command. Shrewsbury.


IMmediately upon the Reading of the Kings Letter, Colonel Mitchelbourn, (Mr.
Walker being in England) forthwith ordered all things to be put in readiness
for a day of Joy, and the next day the Drums to beat, and all the Soldiers and
Inhabitants, being thereby assembled together in the Marketplace; his
Majesty's Letter, to be Read publicly to them, all the Cannon to be fired
round the Walls, and from the Shipping in the River, several Barrels of Ale to
be placed at the Market House, for all persons to drink to the Health of their
Majesty's, and Prince and Princess of Denmark, the Duke of Gloucester, General
Schombergh, etc. and at every Health a Volly of small Shot to be fired: and
then Treated all the Officers and Gentlemen, etc.

Mr. Walker had left Derry before this Letter came thither, but his Majesty has
since been pleased to enlarge upon it, by his great bounty and favor to Mr.
Walker in particular, Colonel Baker's Widow and Children, and with due
consideration of every Officer and Soldier in the Garrison, giving them
Commissions, Money, and Cloths, to the great encouragement of those poor Men, as
well Officers, as all his Majesty's good Subjects, that see they have a Prince
that knows both how to deserve and reward their Services. Of which the Garrison
of Derry have showed themselves sensible by the following Address to his
Majesty, which his Majesty was graciously pleased to accept, and order to be
Printed.

May it please your Majesty,
HAving made the most humble, hearty, and sincere tender of our Loyalty, and
Duty to your Majesty, by the hands of your Majesty's most faithful Subject and
Servant Colonel George Walker, we did not think it would again be easily
excusable, to importune your Majesty by any other Wrighting of that kind: but
the Lord General of your Majesty's Army, and General Governor, his Grace the
Duke of Schomberg, having transmitted hither your Majesty's Letter of the 26.
of August last; it so raised and transported us, that we could scarce believe
our Eyes to see, or Ears to hear, what is contained therein: and we should be
as stupid and senseless as the Walls we governed, if silent on so extraordinary
occasion, for certainly, never did so great a Prince, condescend so much to a
poor handful of his unworthy Subjects. Never was Sovereignty, and Goodness, the
Wisdom of a King, and Bowels of a Father of the People, better manifested and
exemplified, than by this Example your Majesty set to Posterity, the like
perhaps not known to former Ages. Your Majesty without our Motion or
Application, has at once outdone, and prevented our expectations: nay, almost
our very wishes. Your Majesty mentions Services, to the performance of which
our Necessities, and extremity of Dangers, as well as our Loyalty, compelled
us, and placed such a high value on them, as all our lives, had they been spent
therein, would be too mean to answer: what we shall say on an Occasion, for
which we can find no suitable Words, or Expressions: even thus much truly, that
those lives which your Majesty, out of your transcendent Goodness, is pleased
to take care off, and to provide for in Measure, so infinitely exceeding their
worth, shall with all imaginable Cheerfulness, Resolution, and Loyalty, be laid
down in your Majesty's Service, whenever your Affairs can be advantaged
thereby. In the mean time, that your Majesty may be ever happy, and may Triumph
over your Enemies, by your Victorious Arms, and ever be blessed with obedient and
faithful Subjects, shall be some of those Prayers, which the Soldiers, and
Citizens, of this poor City, daily and devoutly send to Heaven on your
Majesty's behalf: and which we shall never be so impious, and ungrateful as to
neglect or omit, being most entirely and resolvedly,

Your Majesty's Dutiful, Faithful, and Humble, Subjects and Servants,


THE Names of the seven Nonconformist Ministers, which Mr. Walker at the
writing of his Book could not learn, when he Printed the List of the eighteen
Church of England Clergy.

Mr. W. Kil-Christ. Mr. Jo. Machiny. Mr. D. Brown. Mr. To. Wilson. Mr. Jo.
Hamilton. Whether he was one of them Mr. Walker cannot certainly learn.
Mr. W. Leston. Mr. Th. Boyde.
FINIS.

