(...): OR, The Dust returning to the Earth. BEING A SERMON Preached at the
INTERRMENT Of that Excellently accomplished Gentleman Tho. Lloyd Esquire. Late of
Wheaten-Hurst in the County of Gloucester, upon Tuesday the 22th of December,
1668.

By THO. WOOLNOUGH, Rector of the Parish of St. Michael in the City of
GLOUCESTER.

(...). Greg. Naz. In the SAVOY, Printed by T. N. for James Collins, and are to
be sold by J. Jordan Bookseller in Gloucester. 1669.

(...): OR The Dust returning to the Earth. BEING A Sermon preached at the
Interrment of that excellently accomplished Gentleman Tho. Lloyd, late of
Wheaten-hurst in the County of Gloucester Esquire, upon Tuesday the 22th of
December 1668.
ECCLES. 12. 7. Then shall the Dust return to the Earth as it was, and the
Spirit shall return to God that gave it.
MAn is frequently wont to be termed a Micro-cosme or Little World, not without
cause. The great World consists of two general parts, Heaven and Earth; so does
Man of two parts not unlike, Soul and Body. The Heaven is superior both in
Place and Nature, of a substance pure and splendent, and altogether Divine; the
Earth is both in site and dignity many removes off, the matter of it sordid and
ignoble; the very sediment, dreggs, and settlings of the Chaos: Thus is the
Soul of Man a Spirit, bearing the resemblance of God himself, whom we call so;
Divinity in a less Volume, a smaller Character: The Body is but a heap of
rubbish. The Heavens are continually in motion, so is the Soul of Man: their
motions are incredibly swift, so are those of the mind. The Earth is sixth and
unmovable, and so is the Body in and of it self, and for its motion is
beholding to the Soul which acts it. Thus then has the Little World as well as
the Great One, its Heaven and its Earth; which are no other in the Language of
my Text, than the Dust which returns to the Earth as it was, and the Spirit
which returns to God that gave it.

Various are the mutations and vicissitudes of Man's life, yet after all our
postures we come back to, As we were. Thousands of miles does the Sun pass in
the compass of 24 hours, yet where he began his journey to day, he will not
fail to set out to morrow.

This circulation of humane life is and cannot but be visible, even to the
ordinary Observers of Nature in her course. Our first Stage is Infancy, thence
we advance forward to Childhood, thence to Youth, so to Man's Estates, to
Middle Age; at last we arrive at Old Age, and when at that which is called
Decrepit, we are got to Infancy again, come back to, As we were: yet is not
this the last Stage neither, there is one farther, when Death approaching, the
Dust returns to the Earth, as it was, and the Spirit to God that gave it.

If we look into the Antecedent part of the Chapter, we shall find Solomon
giving young Persons good Counsel, to make use of that Flower of their Age, and
to do betimes that Work, by the leaving of which undone they will undo
themselves. To make Hay (as we say) while the Sun shines; Old Age he warns them
is coming, and brings its indispositions along with it; the clouds return after
the rain, v. 2. He that puts off the Service of God till then, is likely to
serve him but lamely at the best.

Whilst Blood is in our Veins, and Marrow in our Bones, Religion is to be
minded; God will have the best of our years or none. When an aged Frost has
chained the Current of the Blood, Devotion is hardly like to thaw it. Now is
the acceptable time, now is the day of salvation; To day if ye will hear his
voice, Heb. 4. 7.

Graphically does our Preacher here describe Old Age and its infirmities, and
that at large in sundry verses; ye may know Apelles by his Draught. It were too
tedious for me at this time to paraphrase upon the several elegant (though
seemingly mystical) expressions hereunto accommodated: He closes all at the
close of all, and that is Death, in the words of the Text; He brings Man to the
Grave and there he leaves him, The Dust returning to the Earth, etc.

The Words are then you see a Periphrasis of Death, represented to us under the
notion of a return, twofold, with reference to both its Subjects and Terms. The
Subjects of it are Soul and Body, the Terms of it to the Earth, to God: [ Then
shall the Dust return to the Earth as it was, and the Spirit shall return to
God that gave it.]

That I may go plainly to work, and not soar above the apprehensions of any, I
shall in this Verse take notice of but two things; and they are, The rise and
tendency of Man's Body and Soul. His Body's rise, from the Earth; its tendency,
to Earth; Dust thou art, and to Dust thou shall return, Genesis 3. 19. His Soul's
rise, from God, he gave it; its tendency, to God: It shall return to God that
gave it.

These particulars in the words easily resolve themselves into two Propositions:

One touching the Body of Man, the other the Soul.

That touching the Body is this: That it was from the Earth at the first, and
to Earth at length it must.

That concerning the Soul this: That it had its being originally from God, and
to God ultimately shall it return.

Of which Propositions by way of Explication first, as far as shall be needful,
and then by way of Application.

The Body was from the Earth, how? Our Bodies we now have according to the
ordinary course of generation, from our Parents, they are not immediately made
of Earth; true: But Adam's Body the Holy Story witnesses was so made, Genesis 2.
7. whence then the first Body came, all are said to come; his Body was from the
Earth immediately, ours from his, and therefore mediately from the Earth. The
greatest of Men is but Terrae filius, and may say to Corruption, Thou art my
Father, as Job 17. 4. What signifies a long Pedigree? In vain do men tire the
Heralds to prove the antientness of their Descent, whilst the rising one step
higher, might serve to bring down their Pride many steps lower; put in but the
Son of Earth too, and Solomon will be found to have done them more right than
Clarenceaulx. One ap there is which even the Welshman has omitted, ap Dust.
Would thou have thy Pedigree drawn out O Man or Woman who ever thou art? Let
me commend thee to this King at Arms, and he will quickly tell thee whence thou
come, even from Earth.

(...). [ Then shall the Dust return to the Earth as it was.] The Dust, Mark
that too, He vouchsafes the Body no better a Name than Dust, upon good grounds.
Why should it be rather named what it is, than what it both was and shall be?
The reasons of this Appellation are two to one.

Dust, A bold word if Solomon had not spoken it, a King, a great King, a wise
King. What the spruce Gallant, the ruffling Courtier, these Dust? What they
that rustle in Silks, and glitter in Gold; that dazzle the Sun with their
Jewels, and choke the Air with their Perfumes? Yes, all alike Dust. So
Naizanzen, (...). The Original of all is but the same, and that Dust. What,
though in some more refined? Differ they may in degree not in kind. Worshipful,
Honorable, Royal Dust is Dust still. Let Calice sand be finer than ordinary,
yet is there no reason it should lose its Name, it is Sand. Well, that the Body
is from the Earth we see, yea and not only so, but it must return to it also.
[ The Dust shall return to the Earth, as it was.]

Ocular Demonstration saves us the labor of both Explication and Proof as to
this: We every day see the truth of this return made good.

Were the Body from Earth once, yet were it to return to it no more, Pride
would not be so irrational a sin.

Tell me not what I was, is the voice of Up-starts; but the Preacher tells us
likewise what we shall be.

No man so ridiculous as he who having risen from a mean beginning, falls
again; who first begins to fall is pitty'd, but he whose rise and fall are both
remembered, scorned.

-- Heu! quantum mutatus ab illo! Is the Ironical Language of the beholder in
such a Case; nor is it to be wondered at, if as the Poet has it,

-- Moveat cornicula risum
Furtivis nudata coloribus. --
Have thou forgotten that thy Body was Dust once, and beginnest thou to swell?
Remember it must be Dust again too, and let that humble thee.

Witty Lucian (whose ingenuity deserves to be no less esteemed than his
language) has a Dialogue wherein he brings the Ghosts of beautiful Nereus and
deformed Thersites together; the latter of which is now bold to challenge the
former; so little of difference is there between ugly and handsome, when both
are dust: the Body being returned to the Earth as it was.

[ As it was.] Hoc autem ipsum non sic intelligendum, quasi revertantur in
certam portionem terrae corpora humana singula, ex qua formavit Deus Adam, etc.
says Lorinus.

This is not so grossly to be understood, as if all the bodies of men did return
into that very individual Earth, of which God created Adam: But because as his
body was made of dust, and did return to it; so shall our bodies return to dust
like thereunto.

I have done with the Explication of the first part of the Verse, touching the
Body's rise and tendency, and the Terms from which, and to which of its motion;
which are indeed but one, Earth; thence it comes, thither it goes.

I Will run over the following part next, that I may reserve the Application of
both together till the last.

[ And the Spirit shall return to God that gave it.] Spirit, Is an aequivocal
word signifying other things beside, but the use of it in Scripture for the
rational Soul of Man, is better known than that I need spend time about it.

When a word has diverse significations, the sense must point us unto that
which we are to fix on; so it does here, determining it to be as I have said
meant of the reasonable Soul. And, It is moreover critically observed by
Divines, that when this word is put alone for the Soul, it always signifies
the rational Soul; otherwise it has this additament, The Spirit of life; as
Genesis 7. 15. But of that enough.

The Spirit shall [Return] to God that gave it. Origin had a conceit (as indeed
he had many) borrowed from the Platonists, That all Souls were created from the
beginning, as were the Angels; and that for their sin they were afterward
thrust down into Bodies: and so according to that Opinion, their return to God
should insinuate their having been with him, been in Heaven before; but the
words following clear the sense, To God that gave it. Therefore is the Soul
said to return to God, because it was from him as its Author. I shall not enter
the dispute here with those that maintain the traduction of the Soul, that it
is not immediately created by God, but derived from our Parents: I suppose were
there no better Arguments to confute them, than that which is drawn from this
place, that Opinion might well enough keep up its credit.

It Is enough that the Soul of the first Man was given by God, as well as the
first Body of the Earth; whence it may be no less proper to say, that the Souls
of all Men return to God that gave them, that is at the beginning, than that
their Bodies return to the Earth of which they were made, viz. then also. But
how do the Souls of all Men return to God? What of wicked men too?

The wicked shall be turned into Hell, Psalm. 9. 17. And without holiness no man
shall see God, Heb. 12. 14. To go to God seems to be the Privilege of the
righteous only, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, Mat. 5.
8. Yes, the Souls of all go to God, though to a different end; of the bad to
receive their Sentence of Condemnation, to be doomed to punishment; of the good
to receive their Absolution, and to have a reward bestowed upon them. Both must
meet before Gods Tribunal, to be tried and sentenced according to their Works.
The Souls of the just return to God willingly, as to their Father; of the
wicked unwilling'y, as to their Judge. The Soul of the Saint longed for its
return, its motion naturally tended that way, no wonder; whither should every
thing tend but to its Center? Whither should Rivers run but to the Sea? God is
the Center of Souls, nothing rests out of its Center, nor can the Soul rest
disjoined from God.

The Souls of good men return to God during their life time, they are the
wicked, who return only at death, when they cannot help it. The World is full
of troubles, perturbations, cares, anxieties, where should the believing Soul
rest but in the bosom of God? Fecisti nos Domine ad Te (says the Father
excellently) and inquietum est cor nostrum donec requiescat in Te. Thou made
us O Lord for thy self, nor can our Souls be at quiet, till they rest in thy
self.

The words then are sufficiently explained; let us spend the rest of our time
in picking out that matter of Instruction and Exhortation, which may be
beneficial to us.

The Body is from the Earth, that is the first branch of the first Proposition.
Let us learn hence,

(1.) Humility. What a piece of Earth pufft up? Who art thou that magnifiest
thy self upon the account of bodily accomplishments, Beauty, Strength, or the
like? Alas! thou art but Earth.

That Body of thine which thou so trimmest and pamperest, is but a piece of
handsome clay, a piece of white earthen ware; it makes a pretty show, it is
confessed, but have a care of a knock; keep it whole as long as thou can, for
if once it fall asunder, it is no longer of any worth; the matter of it is but
Earth, good for nothing, however the form of it may for a time commend it, both
to thy self and others.

Let young people think of this especially, in whom the sin of Pride is wont to
be most predominant. When thou art dressing thy self at thy Glass (O young
person!) admiring thine own form, and ready with Narcissus to fall in love with
thy self; think then, What do I take all this pains for, to deck a piece of
Earth? my body is no better. And as Humility within our selves, so let us learn
it with reference unto others, from this consideration:

Who are we that contemn our poor Brethren? Are they ragged and beggarly? Are
they misshapen and deformed? what then?

Their Bodies are made of no worse matter than our own, all are but Earth. Much
less let any of us dare to magnify our selves against the great God, adventure
to take up the Cudgels against Heaven. Will the Terrae filii, the Sons of Earth
make war with Jupiter, yea though Giants, great in strength and stature? Alas
poor Earth! Shall the Clay magnify it self against the Potter? Good God! that
ever Earth should be so proud as to defy its Maker!

What are we, all the men of the world joined together, but so many Earthen
Vessels? Let but God smite us, and we crumble to dust; yea how easily can he
dash us to pieces one against another?

Let not Earth then dare to incur the displeasure of the Almighty, let us in
all humility reverence and obey him; O Earth, Earth, Earth, hear the Word of
the Lord. Let us serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling, as Psalm.
2. 11. least we be broken with a rod of iron, and dashed in pieces like a
Potters Vessel, as v. 9. Again, Are our Bodies of Earth? then,

(2) Let us not make our selves slaves to them; What shall the Divine Soul
serve the Earthen Body? for shame! This is for Servants to ride, and Princes to
go on foot. Let us not make provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts
thereof; as Romans 13. 14. Let us curb and check the Body when it grows malepert
and domineers; let us make Earth know it self. Do we come hither think we into
the world, for naught but to gratify our Bodies, to eat, and drink, and sleep,
etc. These bodily services, how much of our precious time do they take up? Some
they must as we are men, but as little as may be they should, as we are
Christians.

Let it not be said of any amongst us, Dum comuntur and aluntur annus est. How
many are there who make Idols of their Bodies, who worship an earthen god, the
grossest and most stupid Idolatry imaginable? Some make their back their god,
others their belly; these we read of Phil. 3. 19. Whose God is their belly, who
mind earthly things. The things of the Body are, and must needs be earthly
things; for the Body it self is but Earth. Let us mind the Body less, and the
Soul more; Let us not feed the Swine and starve the Child. The Soul is the
Treasure which we have in these Earthen Vessels., as they are called, 2 Cor. 4.
7. Let us secure the Treasure, and not be much solicitous about the Vessels.

(3.) Are our Bodies Earth? We might from hence too take notice of the infinite
Wisdom of God, the (...), as the Apostle calls it; who of such rough matter can
frame such excellent pieces. This commends the Workmans art, that he can make
Earth so glorious. Let us take notice of this, not to make us proud (which we
have been already caveated against) but to cause us to glorify God with these
Bodies of ours.

By the way too, Let us be hence confirmed in our belief of the Resurrection,
if God could of very Earth make such Bodies as these, why can he not of Earth
raise them up again? No matter what the stuff be, if God be the Workman.

(4.) See we hence the necessity of death, or something aequivalent to it, that
change mentioned, 1 Cor. 15. 51. Why we have Earthen Bodies, and these are not
fit for Heaven. What should Heaven do with Earthen Pitchers? The azured Windows
of that Imperial Palace need no such Flowre-Pots. No, This corruptible must
put on incorruption, this Earth must be refined from its dross and dreggs, ever
it be fit Company for Angels. Again,

(5.) Let us learn not immmoderately to fear them that can only kill the Body,
break an Earthen Pot; a great matter, who cannot do as much as that? Neither is
the Conquest great on their part, nor the loss much on ours.

Let us not fear the wearing out of our Bodies in Gods Service, or the laying
down these Earthly Tabernacles in his Cause for his sake, and at his Call:
Little will we do for him, upon whom we will not bestow a piece of Earth. A
Crown of Glory is a good reward. It Is a thriving way of negotiation thus to
barter with God, to get Heaven for a piece of dust laid out. But I hasten, and
pass from this to the later Branch of the Proposition, The Body must to Earth
again, As it was, says the Text. Had it not been for the sin of Man the Body
should have been immortal, it was sin that brought in death; In the day that
thou eatest, thou shall die, Genesis 2. 17. Yet this immortality of the Body would
have been not ex natura, sed gratia. The Body is made of dying ingredients,
Earthen Ware will crack, one time or other: The Pitcher goes not so often to
the Well, but it comes broken home at last, To die, is in Nazianzen's Phrase,
(...), To pay a Debt to Nature.

There are then two reasons why the Dust must to the Earth: 1. The natural
frailty of Man's Body, which declines toward the Grave. 2. Gods Decree for the
punishment of sin. To the Earth the dust must, such is its Nature; and to the
Earth it shall, such is Gods determination. Well, Learn we hence too,

1. Not to be too fond of these Bodies of ours, not to tiddle them, to satisfy
all their wanton appetites and desires; to live like Epicures.

How will that delicate Body do to lie down in the Grave, which here even tires
the Soul to invent ways of making much of it? Yet this it must come to, nolens
volens. The wind must not blow upon thee O Man or Woman here, what a care thou
have of thy self? This and the other is not good enough for thee to eat, nor
this or that to wear. Thy Luxury must rifle no less than 3 Elements, yea thy
Eye must be fed as well as thy Belly; Quasi gula crapulae non sufficeret etiam
oculis caenamus, ipsis oculis est gula; says P^tean. And remotest Countries
must be ransackt to furnish thy Back, and why all this? Must not thou shortly
to the Land of Darkness? Must not this Body of thine resolve into rottenness
and putrefaction?

2. See we hence how little the Grandeur and Gawdery of this World is worth,
that the Body must to the Grave, when all is done, it must to Earth. Palaces
and Crowns cannot keep off Death.

Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede, Pauperum tabernas
Regumque turres --
says Horace aptly. Tell not Death when it approaches of Noble Blood, of
great Estate, of Honors, and the like; all these signify nothing. Art thou a
Son of Adam yea or no? Is thy Body from the Earth? If that thou can not deny,
he values not thy high looks. If from Earth thou came, to Earth thou must
return. Thy Mother Earth (says he) desires thy embraces, be not too proud to
own her; yet if thou be it matters not, I bring power enough with me to
force a stronger than thy self. This same Honor is a taking thing. See Men in
their Ruff, in all the Pageantry of Fortune, and weak eyes will be dazzled by
their splendour; who would not desire to be in their case, and say with Saint
Peter at the Transfiguration, It is good for us to be here? I, but follow a
great Man to the Grave, see him but making this return, see his Body descend
into the Slymy Valley, the Dust returning to the Earth as it was, and then who
can envy him? His G^ory and his Pomp shall not descend after him, says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 49. 17. Again,

3. If the Body must to the Earth, let us be advised hence, to endeavor whilst
we are here to redeem our selves from the power of the Grave, by worthy actions.

Our Bodies must rot, let us not so carry our selves, as that our Names should
do so too; that is the Curse of the Wicked, Prove. 10. 7. The name of the wicked
shall rot, but, The memory of the just is blessed; says the same verse.

There are three things belonging to every Man, his Soul, his Body, his Name;
the one must die, the other cannot die, the third may be preserved. The Soul
must live for ever in weal or woe, the Body will to the Earth, none can help it:
To procure the dissolution of the one, or reprieve the other from death, is not
in our power; but the keeping alive our Name is in our own hand. This is one of
the Stoics (...).

It is in our power by deserving well or ill of the World, to leave a sweet
savor or a stink behind us. It is the advice which Pliny the younger (a man no
less ingenious than learned) gives his Friend, from the consideration of the
shortness of life, in the 70th Epist, of his Third Book; Sed tanto magis hoc
quicquid est temporis futilis and caduci, sed non detur factis certe studiis
proferamus: and quatenus nobis denegatur diu vivere, relinquamus aliquid quo
nos vixisse testemur.

This most concerns Persons of rank and quality, that have many eyes upon them,
that are taken notice of in the World, by reason of the inequality of their
height; they being like Saul, higher by the head and shoulders than the rest of
the people: for such Persons to live in a Cloister, like Snails in their
Houses; to steal away like Plebeians through the Crowd unseen, to have their
way like the way of a ship in the sea without track; to leave no token that
they were, unless this, That they begat Children. What a Disgrace? What a
shame? Much more to live only in the Curses of the People, to be remembered for
naught but Cruelty and Oppression, grinding the faces of the poor, and the like.

The generous spirits among the Heathens were always wont to affect
immortality, which for that their bodies could not reach, and to the Doctrine
of the Soul they were in great part strangers; they endeavored by their
virtues to supply and make out, wh^ was wanting to the frailty of their Bodies.

It Is true we are acquainted with the Souls immortality, and know that death
makes not an end of the whole Man; we know that there shall be a resurrection
of the Body too: but yet, next to the care of providing for the Souls happy
Eternity, should be that of leaving a good Name behind us. A good Name, which
is as precious Ointment, Eccles. 7. 1. This is the way to deliver our selves
from Death indeed.

Never does he die, whose Soul lives in Heaven, and whose Name lives in the
World; the Grave has only its Thirds in such Cases, which cannot be denied it.

I have done with the Body, to which our first Proposition had respect, and I
fear I have given it too large a share; so great is the advantage of coming
first: It were pity that the Souls part should be scanted, I Will do it what
right I can, by the leave of the time and your patience.

[ And the Spirit shall return to God that gave it.] The Spirit is from God,
That is the first part of the Proposition, which we are now to improve. And so,

1. Learn we hence to think aright of the Dignity of our Souls, they are of a
heavenly Extraction; (...). We are his Offspring, Acts 17. 28. Is not this
Soul too good to debase to the service of sin, to the service of Satan? What?
Did the Soul come from God, and shall it be given to the Devil? God forbid.
What a Fool was Esau to sell his Birthright for a Mess of Pottage? Worse Fools
are all they that sell their Souls for the Pleasures of Sin, less substantial
than so, mere smoke and air.

We laugh at them, who having Estates descending to them from their Ancestors,
improvidently squander them away: No Spendthrift like the Sinner, who trifles
away his Soul the Gift of God.

2. Learn we the immortality of the Soul, if it be from God, that is (as we
have seen) immediately created by him, then can it never cease to be by the
means of any thing besides him: He only who gave it a being, can take away its
being: He can annihilate it if he pleases, otherwise it must needs remain.

That which is made of matter, can be no more durable than that matter of which
it is made: Hence the Earthen Body must of necessity have its period. It is one
property of Earth to be friabilis, subject to crumble into dust; but the Soul
having no prae-existent matter, but being created of nothing, is necessarily
evinced to be, a part post, eternal.

3. Did God give us our souls? Let us then bequeath them to him to keep. He
only can keep them, who created and gave them. It is St. Peter's counsel, to
commit our Souls to God in well doing, as to a faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4. 19.
where he hints at this very thing that we are upon, viz. the resigning of our
Souls to God upon this consideration, That we had them from him.

To the same purpose speaks St. Paul, I know whom I have trusted, and that he
is able to keep that which I have committed unto him, against that day, 2 Timothy
1. 12.

We shall all be desirous when we come to die, to commit our Souls to God;
saying, Lord into thy hands we commit our Spirits: Why let us cheerfully
bequeath our Souls to God now, by the resignation of a holy Life, that he may
willingly receive them then, at the resignation of a happy Death. Let us devote
our Souls to the service of that God from whom we had them; Let us give them
back to him that gave them us: what more equal? His giving of them was grace,
free mercy; our returning of them to the Giver is Duty. God calls for them, My
Son give me thy heart, Prove. 23. 26. He requires to be loved, with all the
heart, with all the soul, and with all the strength; Luke 10. 27. How c^n we in
reason or conscience deny it?

God gave us these Souls not to use as we list, he made all things for his own
glory; Our Souls are his, let us therefore according to the Apostles counsel,
glorify him in our Souls, which are his. They are not at our own dispose, we
are not Masters of them; Have we promised them to Sin and Satan? We may retract
our promise: A promise unlawfully made, may lawfully be broken; yea cannot
lawfully be kept: We gave what is none of our own, such a gift is therefore
void in Law: Our Souls are Gods.

Do they think of this who are so free of their Damme^s? Poor wretches! How
madly do they give away their Souls! Should God say Amen to such Imprecations,
what would become of them? Are Souls so cheap? Did they cost so small and
contemptible a price, when Christ shed his Blood to redeem them; that we should
make so little account of them? Let us remember whence we had our Souls, and
let that make us mind their welfare, and take care what becomes of them. Did
they come from God, from Heaven? It were sad they should go to Satan, to Hell:
This is not for them to return, but to wander, to be lost: And what shall it
profit a man if he gains the whole World, and lose his Soul, Matthew. 16. 26.

4. Are our Souls from God? Let us then mind more their Divine Original; think
of our Country, our Home Heaven; Our Father God, The Father of Spirits, Heb.
12. 9. Children from home, are often thinking of it, and wishing to be there.
Home is we say home, though never so homely; no place like that to them. Why
Heaven is our Home, Let us have our Conversation there, while our abode is on
Earth. What do we sojourning in Mesheck, and dwelling in the Tents of Kedar?
How? Shall we not desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ; which is far
better? as Phil. 1. 23. Does no place use to seem like home to Strangers,
though indeed better? Much less let Earth be taken by us for our home, when it
is so much worse than that. What comparison between Earth and Heaven? Trouble
and Rest? Sorrow and Joy? Misery and Happiness? A Crown of Thorns and a Crown
of Glory?

We must indeed stay Gods time for our going home: Children at School must
expect to be sent for, ever they stir; but yet let us in the mean time be much
in the thoughts of Heaven, and of Glory: Let the bent of our desires be, and
the byas of our Souls draw that way. It Is strange that men should generally
have so much forgotten the descent of their Souls, that Heaven should have so
little place in their thoughts and discourses. Do they think they had their
Souls from God, who have not God in all their thoughts.

Men brag of their Corporal Descent, and yet mind not that which is their
greatest Honor: They make their Heaven-born. Princely Souls embrace Dung-hils.

5. And lastly, If God gave us our Spirits, our Souls, then let us be hence
informed of the absolute and undoubted right God has to dispose of our lives.
May not he take away that gave? See Job's argument, cap. 1. 21. The Lord
gives, and the Lord takes away; What then? Why, blessed be the Name of the
Lord. He breathed our Souls in, and if he will have us breath them out, he
dothus no wrong.

All Souls are mine, says God, they are indeed, for he gave them. When God
calls us by death, let us submit quietly: What will we deny God his own, our
Souls? That is Injustice, we ought not so to do; and it is folly to boot, we
cannot withold them from him if we would.

And as in respect of our selves, so our friends and relations, Does God take
them away? Who can say to him, What do thou? Where the word of a King is,
there is power. That they were at all was from him, that we enjoyed them, long
was his mercy; let us part therefore cheerfully and contentedly, and with holy
Job in the forenamed place, as well bless God when he takes away, as when he
gives.

I am now come to the last Branch of the latter Proposition, touching the Souls
return to God that gave it. As it was from him, so it must and shall return to
him.

The Souls of good men are conveyed by the holy Angels, as was the Soul of
Lazarus, Luke 16. 22. and the Souls of bad men by the evil Angels, the Devils;
they shall require or fetch away thy soul from thee, Luke 12. 20. This Night,
says God to the rich man, shall thy soul be required of thee. So we read it,
but in the Greek (...), They do or shall fetch it away, viz. the Devils, as
before. The Devils like Catch-poles shall seize upon the Souls of the wicked,
and carry them before Gods Tribunal, before the Seat of Justice, thence to be
sent to that Prison out of which there is no redemption.

The improvement which I shall make of this Consideration, shall be only by
way of Exhortation. Let me stir you all up to an expectation of, and
preparation for this return: So prepare for it, as that you may return to God
with comfort.

To that end,

1. Beware of those things which may render unfit, or make unwilling to come
before God. Take heed of Sin, take heed of Slothfulness in Duty; the one will
make afraid, the other will make ashamed to appear in Gods presence

1. Take heed of Sin, guilt begets fear, the guilty person does not love to
think of coming near God; but rather endeavors to keep at a distance. When
Cain has sinned, he will go out from the presence of the Lord, Genesis 4. 16.

Here the guilty person is jolly, because he thinks he is far enough from God,
out of his sight; (so foolish men are apt to persuade themselves) and procul a
Jove, procul a fulmine. But when they come to return to him, when there can be
no creeping into Corners to hide themselves, but they must appear, how will
they then tremble? How shall a man do to appear before that God whom he has so
much offended, and apprehends to be his enemy? He says within himself at such
a time, in the language of Ahab to the Prophet, Have thou found me O mine
Enemy? But the righteous will then hold up his Head with comfort and
confidence, The righteous is bold as a Lion, Prove. 28. 1. And as Sin,
Commission of Evil, so,

2. Beware of Slothfulness, Omission of Good. Let us not be slothful in
business, but fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord, as Romans 12. 11. The slothful
Christian will be ashamed that God should see and call him to an account; he is
able to show so little that he has done, so little use that he has made of
the time and talents lent him by God. Has he hid his Talent in a Napkin? How
must he needs blush when the improvement of it is inquired into, and when he
sees others give God his own with usury? as Matthew. 25. 20. This is a degenerate
Soul, which may well be ashamed to appear before God, a Soul which seems to be
Earth, as well as the Body; for so St. Chrysostom I remember speaks, of him
that hid his Talent in the Earth. (...). The diligent person is the person who
can with some good measure of Confidence approach the presence of his Maker at
this return. See thou a man diligent in his business? says Solomon, he shall
stand before Kings, etc. Prove. 23. 29. Again,

2. If we would have our Souls comfortably return to God, let us labor here so
to trim and adorn them, as that they may be in some measure fit for such an
approach, as being suitable to him. God is a holy God, and loves holiness, let
us endeavor to be like him, Perfecting holiness in the fear of God. Let us
purify our selves, even as he is pure: Strive to be perfect, as our Father
which is in Heaven is perfect, Matthew. 5. 48. Let us put on by Faith the White
Robe of Christ's spotless Righteousness, that the shame of our nakedness may be
hid. We need not then be ashamed that God should see us, if we come thus
clothed. Men are loath to be surpised by Great Persons in their old Habit and
Attire, but if they have had time to shift and adorn themselves, they come
forth confidently: The case will be the same here.

Let us not dare to carry our old Natures into Gods presence* Let us put off
the old man, and put on the new; which after God is created in righteousness
and true holiness, Ephesians. 4 22, 23, 24. Let us labor to have our Souls
beautified with the Graces of the holy Spirit, and let not those Graces sleep
in the habit neither, but be put forth into act. Let us stir up the gift of God
that is in us, according to the Apostle's Counsel to Timothy, 1 Ep. 1 cap. 6
ver. Let it not be sufficient that we have Oil in our Lamps, but let us trim
those Lamps also (as they did, Matthew. 25. 7.) and be in readiness to meet the
Bridegroom. Many men are habitually prepared for this return to God, but for
want of that actual preparation which is requisite, they go out of the World
uncomfortably; their Sun sets in a Cloud, there is not that abundant entrance
administered unto them into the heavenly Kingdom, which otherwise there might
have been: They return like Weatherbeaten tattered Ships into the Port, with
Masts broken and Sails torn, and although they find fullness of joy in Gods
presence, yet come they not with that fullness of joy into his presence, which
were to have been wished.

Consider what has been said, and the Lord give us understanding in all
things. I Have done with my Text, and it may now justly be expected from me,
that I should speak something touching this our honored Brother depared: with
whom I have had the happiness of being for the space of twice 7 years well
acquainted.

Such a Theme I can assure you, as falls not in a Ministers way every day; and
where it is much more difficult to determine what to leave out, than to find
out what to say.

I shall not touch at any thing which concerns his Extraction, that is the
Heralds work not mine; and the Escutcheons may speak enough, though I be
silent. Let them be copious in displayes of this Nature who have little else to
say.

Stemmata quid faciunt? -- Who boasts his Descent, extolls his Ancestors and
not himself. That surely is most praiseworthy which is most our own. I had
rather blazon the Virtues of any Man than his Arms.

And here, oh for the Pencil of an Apelles, that I might be able to promise a
Draught somewhat worthy of the Original! The only commendation of his Picture
would be its likeness to him, and whom to strive to flatter, would be to court
an impossibility; for Coelum non patitur hyperbolen.

Forgive me then thou always great and now glorious Soul, that I attempt to
pourtray thy lineaments with so unskilful a hand; whose perfections whilst I
least express, I shall yet herein most praise, that I acknowledge them to be
in-expressible.

Logicians have exempted transcendent beings from the Praedicamental Series;
nor did Aristotle take the worst course of commending his Master the Divine
Plato, when he ingeniously confesses him to exceed commendation.

-- (...). Yet is it expedient that something should be said, though all
cannot, and though Phaethon falls, he falls not without the testimony of being
at least a daring Undertaker.

HE was then a Gentleman in every dimension, and the real owner of all those
Accomplishments, which the most account it enough but to pretend to.

In whom was to be found, whatever from Excellent Parts of Nature, improved by
excellent Education, Studies at home, and Travails abroad, might be expected.
He brought from beyond Sea the rich Commodities, leaving the Apes and Peacocks
behind him.

A Person of a quick Apprehension, solid Judgment, tenaceous Memory. His
Learning not only vast and comprehensive, as extending to the most of what was
worthy to be known, but profound also: He dived to the bottom of whatsoever he
set himself to inquire into. He was no Smatterer or Superficial Sciolist, but a
well-grounded* and thorow-pac'd Scholar: One who had eaten and digested the
whole Encyclopaedy of Arts and Sciences, and whose mind had not barely received
a light Tincture of Knowledge, but was even died in grain.

Whilst others minded Pleasures of a baser alloy, he was for the (...): (in
the language of the Philosopher) Pleasures intellectual, and suited to the Gusto
of a sublime, raised, a high-soaring Soul.

How assiduous he had been at his Studies, witness the decay of his sight
whilst yet but young; he with a resolution worthy of himself, choosing rather
to endanger the darkening of his Body, than to neglect the enlightening of his
Mind.

The Company which he ordinarily kept was choice and select; known to,
familiarly conversant with, and highly esteemed by Men most eminent for Parts
and Learning, whether of our own Nation or Foreigners: And when without such
living company as was most acceptable to him, he failed not to entertain
himself and his time, with the Discourse of dead, but in their Works yet living
Authors; of which he had gotten together the most excellent of every sort; nor
was it possible for any Modern Piece worth reading to steal out into the World,
with which he was not wont quickly to become acquainted.

There was not a Controversy in Divinity which he had not traced, not a nice
School-Speculation to which he was a Stranger: What the Orthodox say, and what
the Heterodox, no man better knew; and not many better able to distinguish
between things that differ. This for Intellectuals.

For his Morals, He was a Person in whom gravity and affability were
excellently mixed; hugely serious, and yet exemplarily civil and obliging: No
truer Friend, no pleasanter Companion. One he was in whom the Homilitical
Virtues did all shine forth with equal splendour.

A man in all his Undertakings Prudent, in all his Dealings Just, Mature in his
Deliberations, Steady in his Resolutions, Punctual in his Performances; with
whom to say and to do, were only not the same. A Complemental Verbalist he was
not, his great Soul knew not so far to debase it self; he was all Reality,
semper idem; and if any was ever indeed so, (...).

And which much added to all the rest of his Perfections, he was a Person of
singular Modesty, Learned and Wise in the Opinion of all men besides himself;
sparing of Discourse, and apt rather to conceal than publish his own worth; the
only Dissimulation wherewith he ever was acquainted.

Thus whilst the shallow waters make a noise, the deep glide silently by; and
the Ship heaviest laden with rich Commodities, has least above water that is
visible.

Such was his Life, after which, who can question that his Death was happy?

That Infirmities he might have, I shall not dare to deny; unless I could
affirm him to have been an Angel, and not a Man: and indeed were it not for
some few grains of allowance given in, what Pieces would be weight?

Suffices it, that Virtue where it is predominant, God accepts; and men ought
to commend.

To conclude in a word, He has now made the twofold Return in my Text, his
Dust is returned to the Earth as it was, and his Spirit to God that gave it.

To which God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be rendered Honor, Glory, and
Praise, henceforth and for ever. Amen.
FINIS.

