A WORD in due SEASON TO THE Ranting Royallists, AND Rigid Presbyterians, etc.

By a Person wholly Disinteressed in any of the late, or present Factions.



Printed, In the Year, 1660.

A WORD in due SEASON TO THE Ranting Royallists, AND Rigid Presbyterians, etc.
Gentlemen,
IT is too manifest, That, in the first War, some of you (I mean the
Outrageous Royallists) did more prejudice the KING your Master, then the Swords
of his Enemies; many of you brought more Scandal on Him, then their tongues;
And as Divines tell us, It was not only Judas that Betrayed, nor Pilate that
Condemned, nor the Jews that Buffeted our Savior, but every presumptuous
sinner acted, and still acts his Part, in the Tragedy: so by Gods just
Permission, and for our deserved Punishment, your Exorbitances (I fear)
conspired with the malice of others, in bringing that sacred and innocent head
to the Scaffold: What an odium brought you upon his Actions? What a jealousy
upon his Counsels? Nay, what contempt upon his Person and Authority? The worst
of their Proceedings from thence received, (I will not say, Justice) nor scarce
Color; but sure I am, that what pretense they had, they borrowed of you:
Otherwise, his Innocence fighting with Arms (Charity binds me to believe in
his judgment) purely defensive, and with frequent Solicitations pursuing
Peace, would either have prevailed with the Parliament for an Accommodation, or
left them generally condemned, as malicious Contrivers, and obstinate
Continuers of the WAR, whereby most of the good people of England, but
especially of London, and the Associated Counties, would soon have been
undeceived, as they have since been by late and woeful experience; for it is
well known, that many (then) the fiercest Zealots for our unhappy Reformation,
never hated the Person of their SOVEREIGN, nor envied his just Power, but
sincerely loved him, and heartily embraced his Govenment; yet being first
terrified by your threats, and exasperated with your Provocations, were,
afterward, by their factious Teachers and Ringleaders, too easily cheated of
their Loyalty, and led captive, as it were, into mere Sedition, under the
specious (but stale) pretense of removing evil Counselors, and rescuing his
Majesty's Authority and Person (as they were told) out of the hands of a
desperate Crew, which abused his goodness and facility: The truth whereof, does
since evidently appear, by their frank confession, hearty contrition, and late
most effectual endeavors, with sober and generous Actions, to cancel the
memory of their former errors, and satisfy the World (at least the judicious)
they never sinned presumptuously; for insolent and malicious Treason commonly
festers the soul, and ends in the gangrene of a despairing and implacable
Guilt; whereas, their desire to trust that Prince, whom once they disobliged,
savours, though of much Error at first, yet now of more Ingenuity, and must be
construed to proceed only from such soundness of heart, and clearness of
spirit, as by good men ought to be highly cherished; and, perhaps, far better
esteemed, then the mere ostentation of perseverance in pretended Loyalty, but
real Animosity: Wherefore, Gentlemen, in true friendship to you, (whom I would
willingly, in part, excuse, upon the score of your great Suffering, and
Oppression, which transports even wise men) but especially, in zeal of his
service, whom we all profess equally to desire, give me leave without offense,
a little to expostulate with you.

Do you think it a small matter, That after a long consumption of our blood and
spirits in a civil War, or a Peace, more hostile then it, God has, at length,
miraculously afforded us a possibility of Settlement? That after a tedious
night of Egyptian darkness and bondage, God has given you a glimpse, and
indeed as yet, but a glimpse of hope, That you, as Englishmen, may in due time,
with others, enjoy your birthright, ( viz.) an Equal Protection and Benefit of
the Law; and will nothing, now, already, content you but absolute Dominion, and
to have all things prostrate at your feet? Is this a fitting return of
thankfulness to God, for your deliverance begun, or a probable means of
prevailing with him, to continue and perfect his mighty work? Have you so soon
forgotten your Sequestrations, Prisons, and Scaffolds? Can you remember no sins
of yours, that entitled you to those Punishments, or might modestly oblige you,
at least to confess the justice of God, in the unjustice of Men; but must all
your sufferings be imputed to mere supererogation and glorious Martyrdom? Was
it a Crime, unpardonable, in your Adversaries, as you pretend, to rebel, though
many of them transgressed, more out of ignorance, then contempt of their Duty;
and is it no fault in you, who glory in being so Orthodox, to breath out
Violence, cherish your lusts, and steep your souls in Revenge? Are you of the
Nature of those Elements, which, in our Proverbial dialect, are good Servants,
but ill Masters, and which, if not confined, will drown and devour all? Were
you fatally designed either to be Slaves, or Tyrants, Gibeonites, or Bashawes?
Are you like those in Bedlam, not to be tamed but with hunger and stripes? Can
you imagine, the lofty pretenses of a Party, which has been so often foiled,
so long suppressed, so much suspected, will consist with the satisfaction of
others more considerable, the Settlement of the Nation, the Exigence of
Affairs? Or can you ever hope to carry it with a high hand by your silly
Rhodomontado's? Has not experience yet made you sensible, That the People of
this Nation, having tasted the forbidden fruit, are now become sinfully wise;
That their eyes being indeed opened, but withal their natures vitiated, and
wills depraved, they are quite fallen from their primitive innocence, so as I
fear, the KING, if restored, must buckle to inconveniences, and Reign, at
least, for some time, rather as a Probationer then a Prince? Were not some of
you drinking your late Masters health, whilst his Cause, nay, perhaps, himself
was bleeding his last? Have not you since served his Son, much at the same
rate, and with like success? Will you never learn to govern your Passions, to
allay your Cups, or turn, if not truly Virtuous, yet ordinarily Discreet, so,
at least, as not to fall miserably into the Pity of your Friends, the Scorn of
your Enemies, and Obloquie of the People: That a Righteous cause may no more be
blasted with your Scandals, Good men branded for your Licentiousness, and the
sober and numerous Royal Party (which certainly has no Peer for constancy,
justice, and modesty) decimated, as it were, again in its reputation, for the
Enormities, of a few (that being God be thanked your number) Do you not know,
how the KING disowne's you, the People dislike you, your Friends blush for you,
and the Enemies of our quiet now make use of your exorbitances or treacheries
(a belief of the latter your irrational Rantings extort from me) to obstruct a
lawful and happy Settlement. And if (which God in mercy prevent) now in this
great Crysis of our hopes, and fears, through your folly and frenzy (I wish I
could forbear to say, some of your falsehood) the hands of true Englishmen
should be weakened, the Factions exasperated, the jealous alarmed (though
falsely) the tender sprouts of Loyalty nipped and discouraged, so that our hopes
and endeavors should prove abortive, and your poor Country return to its
thraldom, would not the present Age and Posterity, have cause to curse you,
more then any of our late Tyrants and Taskmasters? And who indeed would then,
be accounted such Traitors, and firebrands, as you? However, think seriously,
if you can, whether (you persisting) the Nation (now inclined to vomiting) will
not spue you out amongst the Phanaticks, as a morsel, which if it were
swallowed, can never be digested, but must oppress nature, putrify in the
stomach, and poison the blood; in fine, a mere Faction, and an Extreme, no
less nauseous and dangerous, then the Rump it self.

AND you my good Friends of the Presbyterian Party, know, that you are
generally distinguished into Two Classes, (viz.) Moderate and Rigid. You of the
First rank are by all sober men acknowledged, now, to be of the best sort of
Englishmen, not differing (materially at least) from the Moderate Royallist;
Generous Assertors of our Liberties, stout Oppugners of encroaching (and
consequently) Maintainers of Just Prerogative; above all, you are considered as
Persons, that will modestly acquiesce in Freedom of Parliament, the only Cure
proper to our Distempers. For we suppose your Moderation, which to you was
natural, cannot but be greatly improved, by your Experience, since many, even
the Principal of you, having been for your Loyalty, and Temper, forcibly
excluded from the Government, more then Eleven years, have, thereby, had
leisure to reflect on Errors, to observe passages, and to design Expedients,
without the Partiality of Gamesters; Great reason therefore, we have, to
promise our selves, That you, who have not only, with others, seen, and felt
the fatal consequences of the Swords interposing in our Laws, but more
signally, in your own Persons, suffered those memorable insolences and
indignities from Red-coats, will be for ever most tenderly concerned for the
honor of Parliaments, and careful never to encourage, much less (under any
pretense, how specious soever) your selves to practice that Violence, which you
have so justly and notably branded in others, when exercised on you; And this
honest Principle, wherein the Sober Royallists shake hands with you, I take for
the only basis, upon which, we can, possibly be settled.

But for you, of the other sort, (viz.) The Violent and Rigid, I must tell you
Plainly; You are esteemed, but a kind of Franticks, and very paltry ones; In
your Policy, Pedantick, in your Justice, Narrow and Mechanic, selvish in
Conversation, Waspish in Argument or Debate, Perverse in Business, Excentrick
in your Motions, and true to no Principle; You are observed not to walk by the
Golden rule of doing as you would be done to; nor think your selves concerned
in that Sacred Precept, of doing no evil, that good may follow; Per fas, aut
nefas, and Flectere si nequeo superos, etc. are no small part of your
Decalogue. Waving therefore the design of convincing your Judgments, as
impertinent, if not impossible, give me leave to acquaint you, That the Nation
has, hitherto, seen little of you to enamour them; That the most Extravagant
of Sectaries are more grateful to us, then you, in regard they allow others the
same freedom, they arrogate to themselves; That the Discipline of Geneva is
every where censured, as a Government, by Princes justly suspected and feared,
by Nobility scorned, and by the People of England, loathed; That it will never
be settled here, by fair means, nor surely, I hope, by foul, or if it be, it
must come, like Mahomet, with a Turkish Cimitar in its hand, and desolation at
its heels: You may, therefore, do well, for our sakes, and your own, to desist
from so hopeless a pursuit, and content your selves with the Liberty of
Christians, and Englishmen, without contending for a Dominion, so distastefull
to all, but your selves; However, I beseech you, refrain your factious and
unworthy Arts, in spreading and fomenting those Calumnies, which your selves
know to have no other ground then the levity of a few Malcontents, no deeper
root, then the Tavern, nor any Reputation, but what you delight to give them,
and which would vanish of their own accord, like froth, or bubbles, if you were
not as ready to uphold, as industrious to propagate discord; as the
indiscretest Cavaliers are apt, (and alas, too apt they are) to vent their
follies.

Finally, you Churchmen, whether of the Classical or Episcopal Judgment,
Remember, you are Ministers of the Gospel, not of the State: For which purpose,
our Pious Laws have provided you a peculiar Maintenance, to depend on no man,
have both Sequestered you from Public Offices, and exempted you from Civil
Duties: Thrust not then your Sickles into any other Harvest; Act not the parts
of News-mongers and Politicians; wherein, as your Errors are of themselves
Presumptuous, to the People most Contagious, so your best Abilities savor of
Impertinency, Ostentation, and a worldly mind: What say your Adversaries? You,
no question, struck the first stroke; for our Statesmen turned not Preachers,
till our Preachers turned Statesmen. It is, surely, high time, you redeem the
Credit, you have lost, whether as Evangelists, Christians, or good Citizens;
and stop their mouths, who have too much color to Object, That your Blessings
and Curses arr like those of Balaam; and that, indeed, you deliver not Christ's
Ordinances, but your own Passions; wherein, though, perhaps, you may not
always ere in the Main, yet, commonly, you transgress, in the measure. I could
much have enlarged upon these Subjects, but this, I hope, may suffice, if it be
read with the same spirit, where with it is written.

THE END.

