RIGHTEOUSNESS Encouraged and Rewarded with an Everlasting Remembrance.

IN A SERMON AT The FUNERAL of the Right Worshipful Sir Roger Bradshaigh of
Haigh, Knight and Baronet. Who died at Chester on Monday, March 31, and was
Buried at Wigan, Friday Apr. 4. 1684.

By RICHARD WROE, B. D.

Prove. 10. 7. The Memory of the Just is blessed; but the Name of the Wicked
shall rot. Eccles. 44. 7. They have left a Name behind them, that their Praises
might be reported. LONDON, Printed for Benj. Took at the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1684.

To the Right Worshipful Sir ROGER BRADSHAIGH OF HAIGH, KNIGHT and BARONET.
SIR,
SInce this Sermon was preached at your Request, and is now made public
through your Importunity, it challenges a Right in your Patronage, and being
you will needs have it so, that it must appear abroad, you are like to answer
for the Imperfections of it.

I hope you know me so well as to believe me when I assure you, that the Notice
I had both of the Occasion and your Desires, were equally unwelcome and
surprising; and your self and diverse others well know, that the Circumstances I
was then in, both straightened my Time, and robbed me of that Freedom of Mind
which was requisite for such an Undertaking.

But since you were pleased to judge so favorably of the ensuing Discourse
upon hearing of it, as to desire a Copy, and upon Perusal to think it fit for
the Press, and urge the Publication, I have yielded to your Importunity, being
loath you should be denied any thing that is in my Power to grant, and take this
Opportunity to tell the World how much I honor you, and value my self upon
your Esteem and Friendship.

And I must be so just as to acknowledge those real Respects and frequent
Obligations which I have received ever since I was first known at Haigh: For
which being able to make no other Requital, I offer you this small Testimony of
my Gratitude, as an Earnest of further Payment when I have any thing better
worth your Acceptance: And it will be abundant Satisfaction to my self, if I
may any way contribute to the Honor and Reputation of your Family, or the
Memory of your deceased Father.

I reckon my self happy that I was so well acquainted with his Worth, as to be
able in some measure to do him Right; and that the Character I have drawn of
him was so well approved by those that heard it, and were able both to judge
and witness the Truth of it. But I shall think my self more happy, if by
recommending one so useful in his Generation, of such approved Loyalty and
Integrity, I may not only publish his Worth, but provoke others to an Emulation
of his Fame, by an Imitation of his Pattern.

I know you need no Arguments to encourage you to copy out his Example, who
already inherit the Excellencies which were so commendable and Praiseworthy in
him, being Paternae Virtutis, Haeres and Aemulus, the Resemblance of his Merit,
no less than the Heir of his Fortunes, as if his Religion and Loyalty had
descended on you, together with his Name and Estate, that all might survive in
One, and conspire to make him as much Immortal as this State will allow.

And long may the Entayl remain on your Family in an un-interrupted Line and
Succession, that his Name may be perpetuated in his Posterity; and as he left
the World with Comfort and Satisfaction to see you matched into an Honorable
Family, and with a Virtuous Consort, whereby you are doubly blessed with the
Increase of a considerable Income, and an hopeful Issue; so, if departed Souls
be at ill interested in our Affairs, or it be any Accession to the Felicity of
the other State, to rejoice at the Welfare of those they leave behind them, he
may glory in the Prospect of a Lasting Progeny, and survive in their
Remembrance through many Generations.

And since we cannot recall him, whom God has been pleased to take from us,
it is You must retrieve that Loss which we justly lament; who are fixed in that
Orb in which he so regularly moved, and thence dispensed so kind an Influence
to all the Neighborhood.

Go on then (Sir) to tread in your Father's Steps; be as true to the Religion
you profess, as constant to the Practice of it, as Faithful and Loyal to your
King, as serviceable to your Country as he was, and you have all along
hitherto eminently approved your self to be.

And may you long and many Years live to enjoy the Blessings wherewith God has
enriched you, that when you also must lie down in the Dust, your Name may be
ecchoed out in the Praises of the People, and your Fame survive in an
honorable and precious Remembrance.

So prays Your Affectionate and very humble Servant, Richard Wroe.

PSALM. 112. 6. The Righteous shall be in Everlasting Remembrance.
AMong the several Encouragements to Virtue and good Living, there is none more
persuasive to Noble and Generous Minds, than that by their good Deeds they
shall perpetuate their Names, and make their Memories precious to after Ages.
For this State being the Scene of Mutability, One Generation still passing
away, and another coming, That which is present makes the chiefest part of our
Entertainment here; but the Impression of things past and gone is soon worn
out, and the Remembrance of Persons that were before us, easily lost and
forgotten. Virtue alone survives our Fate, and lives in the Memories of
Posterity; and thereby purchases that Immortality which our frail Condition in
this lower World will not allow. Though our Persons cannot be privileged from
the Arrests of Death, but early or late we must stoop to his inevitable Stroke,
yet the Names and Memories of good Men shall be registered in the Records of
never dying Fame. The righteous shall be in everlasting Remembrance.

And indeed, miserable were the State of Mortality, were there no hopes to
survive in the minds of those that live after us: Did we at once cease to be,
and to be remembered, Death were a dismal Silence. If when our Bodies are
consigned to the Grave, our Names also must be buried in eternal Oblivion, it
would increase the Horror of those darksome Caverns, and Extend the Conquests
of the King of Terrors. But the Hopes of being enrolled in the Catalogue of
those whose Names are Perfumed, and their Memories Precious: This gives a
Comfortable Prospect beyond Mortality, and refreshes our drooping Spirits with
the Cheerful Assurance of an Everlasting Remembrance.

And what greater Encouragement can we have to Virtue and Piety? Or what can be
more necesiary to alleviate the Miseries of Mortality, and allay those
shivering Fears that arise from the Sense of our own Frailty, or the Grief that
attends the loss of our nearest Friends, and dearest Comforts of this Life? For
alas! We need no other Argument of our own transitory Vanity then the
Experience of all that have gone before us, in the Characters of whose Dust we
may Read our own Epitaphs. We have frequent Instances of Humane Frailty, and
oftentimes sad ones too; Witness that which now lies before us. One, who ought
to be had in Remembrance, and will certainly be so among all that knew his
Worth, who are no fewer at least then they that knew his Person. One, whose
loss cannot easily be forgotten, being as generally lamented now he is dead, as
he was universally beloved while he was alive. One, whose loss is as extensive
as was his Influence, and may be Read in the sorrowful and dejected looks of
all here present. And were but Tears sufficient to enshrine his Memory, your
Orator could more easily bear a part, than in the just Tribute of his deserved
Praise, which he can better conceive then express; but is too much affected
with the inward Sense to be able to give a Description of it. He had long since
learnt, but never till now so intimately experienced, that Curae leves
loquuntur, ingentes stupent. That little Passions easily find vent and
disburthen themselves, whilst great Occasions of Grief and Sorrow lie long
smothered, and cannot without difficulty be expressed. And therefore I hope my
Concern may Apologize for me in what I shall fall short, tho I shall endeavor
to enbalm his Memory after the Modern Invention, without Mangling, Cutting, or
Wounding. Now that we may hear him tho dead, yet speaking to us, and his
Example may be (however Silent) yet prevailing Oratory with us, I shall first
enforce the Arguments which these Words contain to Virtue and Piety, that we
may learn to imitate the Righteous in his Life, that so we may share with him
in his Remembrance after Death.

The Words I take to be plain and intelligible; and suppose that every one that
is but meanly Conversant in Scripture knows, that Righteousness (especially in
this Book of Psalms, and that of Proverbs) is taken sometimes in a general and
complex Notion, as comprehensive of all Religion, sometimes in a particular and
restrained Sense, for the Virtue of Charity and Liberality. I shall discourse
of it chiefly in its general Acception.

The Words may be understood two ways; either,

First, As an Argument to persuade to Noble and Virtuous Undertakings.

Or Secondly, As a Description of that lasting Glory and Renown which Men
purchase by their Righteousness and Virtue. Who would not tread the Paths of
Righteousness, that considers that therein he is sure to meet with Honor and
Glory? And he that keeps close to those Paths shall certainly be rewarded with
Renown and Praise. So that consider them with Reference to our selves, and they
are a Spurr to Virtue: with Relation to others, and they are a Trumpet to their
Fame. We'll first examine how cogent an Argument, and effectual inducement to
Righteousness it is to be had in Remembrance: And next see how the Righteous
Person has deserved it, and in what Sense he shall never be forgotten.

I consider the Words as an Argument to persuade to Virtuous and Noble
Undertakings, in as much as by the Practice of Righteousness men certainly
arrive at Esteem and Honor. There is something of Ambition twisted in our very
Natures, which grows up with us, and diffuses it self through the whole course
of our Actions. Ambition I call it, tho perhaps it deserves a better Name,
being not the Vice so much as the bent of our Nature; our Natural Inclination
rather then a flaw in our Constitution, and does not debase, but rather perfect
our Nature. Now this as it is most apparent in great Spirits, so does it then
produce effects Worthy of it self when it meets with a Gallant Temper and
Generous dispositon of Mind. Yea, it often lurks where it is openly disclaimed
and disavowed: We have Stories enough to Witness how many Sparks of Ambition
have often layn smothered and raked up under Sackcloath and Ashes, and how much
Pride is often concealed under the veil of comely, but affected Humility. Yea
the greatest decryers of Applause and Glory, have often been its most eager
Pursuers, and they that have writ Tracts against Vainglory have prefixed their
Names to their Bacon's Sermon Fid. Montaign Essays.
Works, lest the World should either not take notice of them or forget to
praise them, more or less it levens most Men, who fain would be what they think
they ought to be, and so imagine themselves greater then indeed they are. Men (
Narcissus like) first, fall in love with themselves, and then the Pleasure they
take in fancying their own Worth, enflames them with desire that others be
acquainted with it. Thus a Secret Ambition Spirits Men's Designs, and to
purchase a Name sets them on Work: To this the World owes its greatest
Undertakings, and its Worthyes in all Ages have here cast the Anchor of their
Hopes, tho they have sallyed out from distant Ports, and steered diverse
Courses, and their desires have all centred in this one point, to have their
Names inserted into the Catalogue of the Worlds Worthies, and be enrolled among
the Sons of Fame. Thus many have attempted to climb up to the height of Honor,
that they may be in view of all the World: Others have thirsted for Power and
Sovereignty, that their Names may strike Terror into the Sons of Men: Some have
Studied to eternize their Names by Wisdom: Others by Acts of Bounty and
Beneficence: Yea some have embraced Death that their Fame might Survive their
Lives: And too many inferior Souls make themselves Notorious by their Vices,
and so their Names be recorded to Posterity, care not tho they be the Brands of
Shame and Infamy.

But he has made the Happy Choice who is known to the World only by his
Virtues, and is Famous for his good Deeds. For it is the great Prerogative of
Virtue to be beholden to none but her self, and its Praises are as it self
Immortal. (...) Virtue survives Mortality, and lives in the Names and Memories
of its Deceased Patrons, and gives the truest Title to an (...). And herein
lies the Advantage that Righteousness gives above any other Pretenders to Fame
and Glory, that its Luster cannot be lessened by any Tract of time, but rather
increases with continuance, and Shines more Bright and Glorious: Whereas other
Monuments of Fame are worn out and eaten with the Rust of Time, or Withered
with the Blasts of Envy, and after a few years Consume and Perish. So the
Founders of Babel, who said, let us make us a Name, and thought to eternize
themselves by building a Tower high as Genesis 11. 4.
their own Ambition, had their Names buried in the Ruins of that Fruitless
attempt; When as Pious Abel tho Sacrificed on his own Altar to his Brothers
Malice, yet has his early Piety transmitted to Posterity, and shall through all
Ages be known by the Epithet of Righteous Abel. The Favors of Fortune, Riches,
Power, or Honor, may secure a Man's Credit while he lives, but if he have no
other Deserts, his Fame will expire with him: These might beget him Admirers
who through Fear or Flattery would cry him up whilst alive, who when dead would
be ready first to trample on him. For tho Vice may at first Sight dazzle Men's
Eyes, and Glow-worm-like cast a glimmering in the Night, yet its Luster
vanishes when Men discern what it is, and time discovers the Imposture: Whereas
Virtue if for some while it lie hid and obscured, yet at last usually it breaks
out with the greater splendour, and makes Men condemn their own Blindness that
did not sooner discover its Worth and Excellency, and such is its attractive
Comeliness that it easily captivates the beholders, and Men cannot but admire
and commend it in others, tho they are sensible of the want of it in themselves.

This made the Ancient Worthys of the World, who bettered the Age they lived in
by their good Examples, be deifyed for it even by their Contemporaries, who tho
greater in Power and Place, yet wanted Virtue to make them much greater then
indeed they were. Thus Nimrods mighty Power tho it made him great and terrible,
yet could never procure him Adoration, whilst others far inferior in Dominion
and Sovereignty, yet excelling him in Goodness, were honored for their Virtue
whilst alive, and worshipped for it after they were dead. And if it happen that
Righteous Persons live without any notice taken of them, and dye unregarded,
yet the World has made them amends by setting an higher estimate upon their
Worth, because they so long looked of it; and being they did not value them
enough whilst living, they have often deified them when dead. It was this gave
Birth to most of the Heathen Gods, viz. The Esteem the World had for their
Virtue and Goodness: For being they were the best of Men here, they thought it
pity they should be any less then Gods hereafter.

Thus Virtue never misses her reward, but finds it if not here, in a future
State. And who would not run where the Prize is certain? Or who would refuse to
Fight where the Victory assures a Crown? What more pleasing motive to Man's
Ambitious temper, which makes him greedy of Applause and Renown, then to
propose that to his Choice, in whose embraces he is sure to meet with his
desired Content? What more forcible enducement to Religion and Piety, than to
be assured that it will procure the most durable and untainted Reputation?
Would the Men of Honor seriously weigh this, they would easily be convinced,
that the Crown of Glory is not to be attained but in the way of Righteousness.

Secondly, And so I pass on to consider the Words as a Description of that
lasting Renown which Men purchase by their Righteousness and Virtue; to show
how they shall be in Remembrance. The Psalmist tells us ( Verse 9.) His
Righteousness remains for ever, his Horn shall be exalted with Honor. The
latter referrs to this Life, the former to his future Happiness: He shall be
honored by Men here, and rewarded by God hereafter.

First, He shall be had in Honor here. The Son Ecclesiasticus 44. 8, 9.
of Syrach tells us, there be that have left a Name behind them, that their
Praises might be reported: And there be which have no Memorial who are perished
as if they never had been, and are become as tho they had never been born, and
their Children after them. But these were Men whose Righteousness has not been
forgotten, and he adds, their Glory shall not be blotted out. Glory not Verse
13.
only belongs to the Righteous, but is peculiarly entailed on their Posterity.
The Reason of this is that Obligation of Gratitude which Nature her self lays
upon Men: Praise and Esteem is justly due to merit, and therefore Nature which
Commands us to be just, obliges us to pay the Tribute of Esteem and Praise Huic
uni non posuimus legem, tanquam satu Natura cavisset.
where it is due. And never was there any Law made, nor need we any to bind us
to this, Supervacuum enim est in id quod imus impelli (as Seneca rightly
observed) we need not the force of Humane Laws where Nature has pre-engaged us.
And all Sen. de Ben. Lib. 4. C. 17.
Men do it; even Sinners love those that love them (...) (so it was anciently
Read) even the Gentiles Luke. 6. 32. Beza, and Luc. Brug.
do so.

And this being the bent of our Nature, makes the Impressions of Gratitude
proportionable to the Benefits we have received: In which is founded both our
Religion to God, our Honor to our Parents, and our Obedience to our Superiors.

For since in God we live, and move, and have our Acts 17. 28.
being, we should be highly ungrateful if we did not acknowledge that we owe
all that we have to him. But what shall we render to the Lord for all his
Benefits? Our Goods extend not to him: The Divine Beatitude receives no
Accession from any thing we can do, or bestow: Yet to adore him for his Bounty,
and esteem his Kindness, and Worship him with Fear and Reverence, these are
Duties which even Gratitude calls for to so great a Benefactor. And to our
Natural Parents, what can we pay less for their tender Care of us in our
helpless Infancy, than Respect and Honor, and a like careful Regard of them in
their decrepit Age? And the same debt we owe to our Princes and Governors,
under whose happy Influence we enjoy the Blessings of Peace and Safety, which
justly Merit the Returns of Obedience and Loyalty. Thus the Obligations of
Gratitude are of large Extent: and thereon too is founded the Honorable
Remembrance of Virtuous and Worthy Men, and a constant Tribute of Praise paid
to their Memories by grateful Posterity.

To this I add, that in this respect chiefly may that promise seem to be made
good, wherein Godliness has the Promise of this Life, Namely of that which is
1 Timothy 4. 8.
most valuable in this World: And what that is, let the Wise Man tell you, A
good Name is rather to be chosen than great Riches (Proverbs 22. 1.) and (
Ecclesiastes 7. 1.) A good Name is better than precious Ointment. For the great
Happiness of this World consisting chiefly in Idaea, and being more imaginary
than Real, he that has a good Name because he deserves it, has all the
Satisfaction that he can receive in himself, and that others can bestow: And a
Man cannot be more Happy than in a well acquired Reputation, and an Esteem
justly purchased by his Worth and Merit. And tho Virtue be many times the only
Reward to it self, yet God is oftentimes pleased to Crown Righteousness with
Glory here, for an Encouragement to others, and the Praise of them that do well.

But these are only Generals. I mention two or three Particulars wherein will
be more evident, that there is no such real Honor, or desirable Glory, as
accrews even here to Men from their Righteousness and good Deeds. And that. 1.
In the design of God. 2. In the Opinion of Men.

1. In the Design of God, who has contrived every thing for the Advantage and
Encouragement of Virtue and real Goodness. God has said, them 1 Samuel 2. 30.
that Honor me, I will Honor. Now Righteousness in his Image, and bears a
great Likeness and Resemblance to him; and as he delights to see it in the Sons
of Men, so he is pleased to Esteem himself honored thereby: Which made the
Wise Man (when advising to the Practice of it) say, hereby thou shall find
Favor and good Understanding in the Sight of God and Man. And it is the Voice
of Righteousness, Who so finds me shall obtain Favor of the Lord. Pro. 8. 35.
Yea it is Gods promise to the Righteous, I will deliver him, and bring him to
Honor. And David thus Is. 91. 15.
triumphed in his Abundant Sense of the Divine Favor Ps. 92. 10.
Mine Horn shall be exalted like the Horn of an Unicorn: I shall be anointed
with fresh Oil, intimating the Honor and Dignity that he would conferr on him.
Hence such Men are mentioned in Gods Word with Appellations of Honor: Abraham
his Friend, Moses his Servant, David a man after his own Heart, Nathanael an
Israelite indeed, in whom there is no Guile. And their Virtues are recorded as
the lasting Trophies of their Glory and Renown: The Faith of the Patriarchs,
the Meekness of Moses, the Patience of Job, the Uprightness of Josiah, the
Constancy of Daniel, to the Honor of their Memories and the Praise of their
Righteousness, which the Son of Syrach thus Ecclesiasticus 44. 7.
Sums up, All these were honored in their Generations, and were the Glory of
their Times: They have left a Name behind them that their Praises might be
reported.

The Holy Spirit of God which inspired the Authors of Sacred Writ, has affixt
Characters of Renown, and Remarks of Praise, to the Names of Religious and good
Men: And Honorable are the Titles of the Righteous, equal even to Kings and
Princes: For when in one Evangelist it is said, Kings desired to see Christ's
day, it is said in another, Righteous Men desired to see it: For they are (...)
the Sons of God, the Children of the most high, and God himself disdains not to
be called their Father. And Christ the Son of God is become their Elder
Brother, since he came into the World for the sake of Righteousness, and has
exalted Humane Nature to the highest pitch of Dignity, by uniting it to his own
Divinity. And the Holy Ghost contributes no less to the Honor of the Righteous
whom he condiscends to inhabit as his Temple: And greater Honor cannot be done
to Mortal Nature than to lodge so Noble a Guest, to entertain God himself, and
converse with Divinity. And if Righteousness be so honored by the Sacred
Trinity, we may conclude its Esteem is great amongst their Glorious Attendants,
the winged Train of Angels and Archangels: And so Scripture tells us of them,
they rejoice to Minister for the good of such Men while they live, they receive
the Souls of such as dye in the Lord with Joy and Triumph, and transport them
into the Regions of Rest and Bliss.

Secondly, Righteousness is Honorable in the Opinions of Men. I mean of all
Sober and Rational Men, and the estimate of all others I reckon of small value.
I know the Devil has long sought to obtrude upon the World what he taught
Macchiavel to insinuate that Religion and Righteousness are low and mean
Principles, unfit for Governors, and great Men; and has hoped to laugh them
out of Countenance, and render them ridiculous by his Agents, Profane and
Atheistical Men. But Wisdom is justified of her Children, and in spite of Hell
and Sinners, Virtue has yet the Vogue of the World, and Vice (tho too often in
Fashion) could never yet obtain an Universal Reputation and Esteem. No, it is
Vice alone that is sordid and contemptible. (...). Plat. All Wickedness is
dishonorable, and Sin the Disgrace both of our Natures and Persons. It brings
disgrace to Families, and wounds the Reputation of the Great Ones: It stains
the Blood, and leaves a mark of Infamy on the Pedigree: It Exposes Men to Scorn
and Contempt, and makes their Names odious to Posterity. Whereas Righteousness
enobles Men, and adds Degrees of Worth to Persons of Honor, and Advances the
Reputation of the great Ones of the World. Chiefly in three things,

First, It makes their Persons valuable. For it is Goodness only in Conjunction
with Greatness that makes Men truly Honorable, and Power and Grandeur without
Piety is but what the Apostle says of other Graces without Charity, as sounding
Brass, and a tinckling Cymbal. The great Titles of the World are but empty
Names without the Addition of Virtue, and they only have been truly great who
have been exemplary therein. (...). It is Virtue alone that is deservedly
Honorable, and has always crowned its Followers with Esteem and Renown.
Heathen Rome was not more Famous for the extent of its Dominions than for the
Virtues of its Inhabitants: Which made Saint Augustine say of them, that tho God
would not give them Heaven because they were Heathens, yet he gave them the
Empire of the World, because they were Virtuous. So true is that of the Wise
Man (advising to the Heavenly Wisdom of being Religious.) Exalt her Pre. 4. 8,
9.
and she shall promote thee: She shall bring thee to Honor when thou do
embrace her: She shall give to thine Head an Ornament of Grace, a Crown of
Glory shall she deliver to thee.

Secondly, It makes their Memories precious. It Is their Names that are
delivered down to Posterity with Characters of Renown, who have been Good as
well as Great, and they shall be had in Honor when the Sons of Fame shall
sleep in the Dust of Oblivion, and their Names rot with their Monuments. It Is
true the Memory of the wicked is sometimes also transmitted to after Ages, as
it is said of Erostratus, that he fired the Temple of Diana only to get him a
Name, tho it were never mentioned without that brand of Infamy. But we may say
of all such what our Savior does of the giver of Offenses, It were better for
that Man if he had never been born: It were better to have our Names buried in
Eternal Silence, than to have them ( like Jeroboams) made the Note of Infamy,
and the Monuments of our Shame. But a good Name is a sweet Perfume, and
Righteousness makes Men Immortal, and Virtue outlasts the Succession of Ages.
Let Solomon's words conclude this, The Memory of the Just is Blessed, but the
Name of the Pro. 10. 7.
Wicked shall Rot: And again, as the Whirlwind passes, Verse 25.
so is the Wicked no more, but the Righteous is an Everlasting Foundation.

Thirdly, It makes their loss great and Invaluable. Alas! the World is not
sensible what Advantages good Men bring and secure to it: tho it be spared for
the few Righteous Sake that are therein, tho its Blessings be derived chiefly
from them, yet generally it is not known, or not regarded. But when we are
deprived of them, then we become sensible of their loss as we do of other good
Things, carendo magis quam fruendo, more by the want than the Edjoyment of
them, and then begin to grow sensible how much we suffer by their absence, when
we have no Hopes ever to behold them present again. We daily part with our
Friends and Acquaintance, and however their Relations may be afflicted, the
World in general seems little concerned, nor loses much by it; but when the
Righteous Perishes, whose Example was so prevalent, whose Excellence was so
admirable, whose Influence was so Beneficial, it spreads a Darkness over all
the Neighborhood, and Clouds all Faces with the Blackness of Sorrow and Sadness.

When they are taken away who have left but few like behind them, then Men too
late begin to be affected with their Worth, and recount their Praises, and pay
their first Veneration in Mournful Obsequies, and attend them to their long
home with such a passionate Procession, as we read of David and his Men to
Mount Olivet, (2 Samuel 15. 30.) and David went up by the ascent of Mount Olivet,
and wept as he went up, and all the People that was with him went up, weeping
as they went up.

A Solemn Lamentation, and day of bitter Sorrow and Mourning that was: And
would to God we had not this days sad Occasion to parallel that Prospect of
Sorrow and Sadness; to see all the People Weeping, in a Sense of their loss,
for the value of his Person, to the Honor of his Memory, for all these
Conspire this day to swell the Channel of our Grief, and no wonder then to see
it so freely burst out.

Which leads me to another Subject, of which much more may be said than I have
hitherto discoursed of this, could my time allow it, or your patience bear it.
One, who ought to be had in Remembrance, and I hope it will be as everlasting
as this Place and its Inhabitants; I wish I knew how to contribute to its
Duration by such a Character of his Worth as you expect, and I am sure he well
deserved. I have this to Encourage me, that I can scarce mention any thing to
his Praise, of which I have not as many Witnesses, as Auditors: but withal this
discouragement, that I must conclude his Character as the Queen of Sheba did of
Solomon's Glory, half has not been spoken. It Is sometimes the Orator's
infelicity that his Subject is too Copious; and now if ever inopem me Copia
fecit, where so much is to be said, it is not easy to know where to begin, yet
more difficult to know where to make an end.

I will not therefore detain you with every thing that may be said, and most of
you know; nor trace his Character through all the Relations he stood in; as in
his Domestic Capacity and Government, wherein was remarkable, the Chastness of
his Conjugal love ( which was mutually answered, and resembled the Shine of two
Tapers, lighted but with one Flame) the goodness of a Father's Care, and the
Sweetness of a Master's Rule. But I am loath to touch on this, being too tender
a Theme both for you to hear, and me to enlarge upon, and would serve only to
swell that Channel of grief which the design of this discourse is to assuage.

I will but mention his Hospitality and good Housekeeping: Plenty and Welcome
were never wanting at his Table; and he was not like the Churl that loved to
eat his Morsel alone: no man entertained both acquaintance and Strangers with
greater Freedom and Affability.

I am loath to omit his kind and obliging Temper, which made him always Grateful
and Acceptable, and that Generous Kindness and Cheerfulness of Spirit which was
always discernable in him toward his Tenants, Dependants, and Followers.

And what was Kindness toward all, was Charity to every one that stood in need
of it, and he had not only a cheerful Heart but a liberal Hand, which I never
knew contracted or shut up, when any just Occasion called him to stretch it
out; but I have often been a Witness of his forward Bounty, that he might provoke
others by the Example of his own cheerful Liberality: Nor did he disperse only
what was superfluous to himself, but what was needful to others, he gave not
only the Crumbs that fell under his Table, but cast his bread upon the Waters,
the needy and necessitous, that (like that thin Element) creep on, cold,
murmuring, and tremulous.

His personal Qualifications I cannot at large decipher; nor shall instance in
any negative Virtues; that he was not Obnoxious to those Vices which are
incident to persons of Place and plentiful Fortune: Not to Pride and
Censoriousness: Not to Violence and Oppression: 1 Samuel 12. 3.
No, he might safely expostulate in Samuels words, whose Ox, or whose Ass have
I taken? or whom have I defrauded? Or whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand
have I received a Bribe to Blind mine eyes therewith? It is easy to acquit him
from fraud, or Malice, from Injury and Injustice from ignoble and dishonest
Designs, from Reach and Circumvention. But, privati and plebeii hominis est ut
vitio careat. It may be the Character of a mean and ordinary Person to be free
from Vice, but for those that exceed others in place and quality, it is a shame
not to outstrip them too in what is Excellent and Commendable.

I will therefore insist on two things for which he is to be honored, and I
hope will be so in a long and precious remembrance among all good men, His
Religion to God, and his unshaken Loyalty to his Prince: Which were equal and
uniform through his wholelife.

1. His Religion was true Protestant: Not that of late falsely so called, but
that which is by Law established, the Religion of the Church of England. In
which he was happily educated and instructed in his greener years by the care
and direction of the right Honorable James Earl of Darby; to whom he was
entrusted by his faithful Guardian John Fleetwood of Penwortham, Esquire; to whose
Religious designs, and the joint endeavors of his Virtuous Consort, he owed
the early Impressions of Piety, and in that Family first commenced Protestant,
and was thence sent into the Isle of Man, where the Principles he had already
imbibed, were soon cultivated and improved under the Umbrage of that Religious,
Loyal and Great Man: as indeed his Example could not but have a prevailing
Influence, who was so great a Patriot both of Religion and Loyalty, that he
dyed for both. He being hereby seasonably retrieved from the Errors of Popery
(in which the rest of his Relations were trained up) revived the Religion of
his Ancestors, and restored new luster to his Family by the choice of a better
Profession. An happiness which he thankfully acknowledged, and frequently
blessed God for, and always owned a grateful Veneration for it, to the Memory
of that Excellent Person, and a true value for his Honorable Family.

Nor did he only take up his Religion upon trust, but understood the
Constitution of it, and acquainted himself with its Principles, and studied to
defend it, and was zealous to maintain it, and true to it. So false was that
slander (which had no other ground but Spite and Ignorance) that he was a
Church-Papist, a Calumny as Black as their Malice that forged it, and believed
only by them who knew him not. But so blind is some men's mistaken Zeal, as to
brand every thing to be of the Romish fashion, that is not shaped after the
Geneva-Cut: and so spiteful is some men's Envy, that they leave no Engine
unplay'd to batter a man's reputation: and they well knew that nothing would
sooner blast his Credit amongst Vulgar and unthinking men. But (God be thanked)
the Calumny long since blown off, and the aspersion so clean wiped out, that
there remains nothing of it, unless shame in them that were ever so much
imposed on as to believe or report it. Would to God we had as much evidence of
the sincerity of all men's Profession, as we had of his; manifest in all those
respects by which a man can approve himself a faithful Member, and dutiful Son
of the Church of England: viz. his Constant resort to Gods House and
Ordinances; his affection to the Prayers of the Church, and devour joining in
them and Solemn of use them bothin the Church, and his own Family: his
frequenting the Holy Sacrament, not only in public, but also his desires of it
in private when debarred the Privilege of going up to the House of the Lord:
and now more especially at his latter end, when in view and prospect of death,
he resolved to meet it with the refreshing Comfort of the Bread of Life. An
undeniable Argument, not only of the Sincerity of his Profession, but of the
Power and Influence of his Religion, which was not only even and uniform
through his Life, but enabled him to conclude it with a pious deportment at his
death. Of which I have the following account from a reverend Person that
ministered to his dying comfort.

On Easter Day in the Morning he earnestly desired to receive the blessed
Sacrament, and whilst the Elements were preparing I suggested several things
proper to his Condition, and asked him several Questions as to the state of his
Soul, of which he gave me a very satisfactory account, that he had been
sensible of his declining Condition a great while, and hoped that he had made
his peace with God: that he was heartily sorry, and truly penitent for all his
Sins, and put his whole trust in Gods mercy: that he freely and heartily
forgave all men, and as heartily desired forgiveness at their hands: and
desiring absolution received it with great humility and comfort, During the
Prayers and Celebration of the Sacrament, I observed him to express great Zeal
and Devotion, by his steadfast looks, and fixing his eyes upon me, especially at
the time of receiving; and also by repeating the Prayers after me, which last
he fayl'd not to do even within an hour before he dyed: for he continued
Sensible to the very last, and God was pleased to take him to himself in a calm
and gentle way without any Convulsions of Pain or Impatience. At my last
waiting on him it was desired he might be recommended to the Prayers of the
Church, which were then beginning at the Choire, and it was observable that he
dyed immediately after those Prayers were offered up to God for him. A
Comfortable end when the Soul expires in pious raptures, and ardent
ejaculations, and ascends up in the incense of devout Prayers to the place of
rest and repose.

2dly. But I must not forget his Loyalty, which next to his Religion was most
dear to him, and most conspicuous in him. And indeed where should we hope to
find true and steady Loyalty, but in a genuine Son of the Church of England? In
him both commenced together, and he gave early proofs of his Loyalty in an Age
wherein it was judged a Crime: when Rebellion looked gay with success, and
Sacrilege had Providence to gild it over, yet even then he Judged not the Cause
by its Success, but the righteousness of it, and durst be honest in spite of
bad times. And since God in his mercy turned the Captivity of our Sion, how
firm and unshaken his Fidelity and Alleigance have been, how loyal his
endeavors in all the relations of his public qualifications, or private
Capacity, is too well known to need either a Description or Enlargement.

The King (who is a great Judge of Men, and was well acquainted with his Worth)
entrusted him with those Offices which witnessed the Esteem he had both of his
Faithfulness and Ability, and received so good an Account of the Discharge of
his Trust in each respect, and such undeniable Assurances of his Affection both
to His Person and Government, that he not only Honored him with a peculiar
respect, but was pleased to bestow those Marks of His Royal Favor on himself
and Family, which testified the just Sense he had of his Deserts and Honesty.

His Country judged him a true Patriot no less then a good Subject, and
therefore made choice of him for their Representative in Parliament, in which
Station he served many Years with great Diligence and Faithfulness; and in the
Recesses of that Public Employ, was not less serviceable to his Country at
Home, then Faithful to their Interest Abroad: For he was a Constant Attender on
all Public Business, and evermore Active and Industrious in the Service of His
King and Country, which he always preferred before any Diversions of his own,
or (what was most grateful to him,) the Cheerful Entertainment of his Friend.
Not like some who live only to themselves, but grudg the Public any benefit of
the Talents which God has put into their Hands; who contrive how to spend their
Time, Health, and Wealth wholly to their own Ease and Satisfaction; who as if
they were born to great Estates merely to gratify themselves, not to do good
withal, shuffle off all Offices of Trust and Service whereby Men of Estates and
Interest may promote the good of the Place they live in. But he was ready to
spend and be spent for the Common good, which he both rightly understood and
truly valued, making all his Designs subservient to the great end of
Government, the peace and welfare both of Church and State, and directing all
his Actions thereunto by the constant Measures of Loyalty and Allegiance. For
he was none of those who of late seemed to have unlearnt their Allegiance, and
repented of their former Loyalty: Nor of them who when we were ready to be
overwhelmed with the Torrent of Popular Madness, were willing to swim with the
Stream: Nor of those who would Trim the Boat, and so they could seem to keep it
even, care not much which way they Sail. But he was still the same Man, and
the same good Subject: One who made nothing worse; but endeavored to make
every thing better: To say all in a word, One Immovably Honest, unalterably
Loyal: For which he shall live in the Memories of all that knew him, and long
be had in Honor and Remembrance.

Secondly, There is yet another part of the Remembrance behind, which is most
properly Everlasting, viz. before God hereafter. His Righteousness remains
for ever (Verse 9) It shall come in Remembrance before God, when the Righteous
shall receive a Reward, not of Merit indeed, but of Favor; who tho they cannot
claim it of right, yet in Gods Esteem do best deserve it; tho they cannot
challenge it as a Crown due from his Justice, yet they shall receive it from
his Mercy.

And could we but raise our Souls in Contemplation high as their Happiness, it
would be a powerful Encouragement to an Imitation of their Virtue: For then we
should be in some Measure able to imagine how mean and despicable this Worlds
Felicity must needs appear to Glorified Spirits, to whose complete Happiness
all the Content and Satisfaction we meet with here bears no more Proportion,
then this spot of Earth we tread on to the unbounded vastness of the
wide-Stretch'd Heavens. For when they are once exalted into those Blissful
Regions, they shall outshine others in Glory, as far as they out-stript them
in Goodness here, and receive a recompense of reward proportionable to their
Righteousness and good Deeds; and when the Son of God has received them into
those mansions of Bliss which he has prepared for Holy Souls in the Kingdom of
his Father, then shall their Righteousness break forth as the Morning Sun, and
exceed the Stars in Luster and Beauty. The Heathens imagined that their
deceased Hero's were transformed into Stars, and having enlightened the lower
World with their Beneficence and good Examples, did after Death ascend to Gild
the Heavens with new Light and Brightness: and were it true, yet it falls far
short of that splendour that shall encircle the Inhabitants of the new
Jerusalem, for the Mat. 13. 43.
Righteous shall Shine forth as the Sun, in the Kingdom of their Father. Yea
as Stars disappear at the approach of the Sun, so shall the Sun it self vanish
at the appearance of that resplendent Glory, when the Sun of Righteousness
shall shine in his Meridian Luster, and fill his Kingdom with the Brightness
of his presence, then shall holy Souls rejoice in his light, with fullness of
joy, and transports of pleasure, and glory to behold their Savior interceeding
for the Righteous, and welcoming such as come under that winning Character into
Eternal Embraces, where they shall be blesied to endless ages, and happy in an
Everlasting Remembrance.

AN ELEGY UPON Sir ROGER BRADSHAIGH, KNIGHT and BARONET. April the 4th 1684.
I.
WHat mean these Echoed Groans, and Panic Fears,
And Showers of Tears?
Why does a gloomy Fog, choke and destroy
Our Easter Joy?
Why one day Public Mirth, and on the Morrow
As Public Sorrow?
What Is the Surprise, whence is this Mourning Bred?
Alas! the Great, the Good Sir Roger's Dead.
II.
In Loyal veins if Loyal blood e're ran,
This was the man.
Did Love, and Peace amongst Mortals ever rest?
Here was the Breast.
Did Justice ever dwell with Humane State?
Here was its Soul, here was its Seat.
If Heart, and Tongue true Unisons e're were:
Then it was here.
And has the Virgin-Church a true-bred Son?
Then this was one.
Does Charity once in an Age appear?
She took her Lodgings here.
And yet this Loyal, Loving, Peaceful, just,
Sincere, Kind, Genuine Son must yield to dust.
III.
Tell not this News in Caesar's Court, lest he
Should Mourn as much as We.
Be silent Fame! lest he for one long day
Should not the Scepter sway.
Should Phoebus one days space deny to throw
His Beams, the World would chill, and Stupid grow.
And should Great Charles but half that time dispense,
No Act of Justice, no kind Influence:
This blessed Eden, and this fruitful Isle,
Would thence become a Frozen, barren Soil.
Peace then! let not the Meanest, Smallest Part,
Of this our Sorrow seize Kind Charles's heart.
IV.
Tell not the Loyal Party this, lest they,
(Loosing so Strong A Fort) should Fear betray.
Conceal this Mournful Sense from Just Men's sight,
Lest feebl'd Justice take a Second flight.
Let Peaceful Souls be Strangers to this Fate;
Lest it Alar'm, and ruffle their calm State.
O tell it not to Sions Sons! lest thy,
Amazed, forbear to thank, forget to Pray.
Where Charity now moves in a large Sphere,
Lest it close-up her hands; tell it not there.
This News despoils of Joy, this robs of Rest,
The Loyal, Loving, just and Hospitable Breast.
V.
But it is too late; Fame cannot be withstood,
(Fame swift to broach bad News, slow to bring good)
Then let this Public mouth loudly Proclaim
The Old-Mans Glories, and the Young-Mans Name.
Tell it abroad! that tho a Glorious Star,
Is set, yet still another does appear.
Tho the Old Phaenix from our Coast is flown,
Yet here is another Strong and sprightly grown.
One, that inherits with Impartial Hand
His Fathers Virtues, with his Fathers Land.
May he do equal Good in equal Space,
As Worthy Heir of such a Worthy Race.
And when Life's stock shall all exhausted be,
Then may he scale the Walls of blessed Eternity.
EPITAPHIUM.
Hic jacet in Tumulo, Pacis, Patriaeque satelles;
Qui coluit Caroli faedera, jura Dei.
Cujus dicta simul Clarissima facta ferebant,
Vultu Laetus erat, Liber and ille Manu.
Hunc dilexerunt omnes, hunc Caesar amavit:
Hunc exornavit Gloria, Forma, Lepos.
Vivat, and immensum vigeat productus in Aevum;
Morbis, Morte vacet: Sic petiere pii.
Fata tamen vincunt; illorum Nemo Catenam
Solvere, Conatus frangere Nemo potest.
Fallor, non jacet hic: Animus transivit ad Astra
Lucida, and hic tantum Pulvis and Umbra jacet.
S. Shaw A. M.

FINIS.

