The Characters of the Books (the Author hopes he has fully answered) are
thus explained.
[P.] means the Book called A Proposition for the Safety of the King and
Kingdom, etc. [D. P.] is the Book called A Defense of the Proposition. [D. R.]
is A second Discourse of the Religion of England. [L. C. A.] is a Book called
Liberty of Conscience asserted and vindicated. [M. I.] is a Book called Liberty
of Conscience the Magistrate's Interest.
ANARCHIE REVIVING, OR, THE Good old Cause on the Anvile.

BEING A Discovery of the present Design to retrive the late CONFUSIONS both of
Church and State, in several Essays for LIBERTY OF CONSCIENCE.

By ABRAHAM PHILOTHEUS, an English Protestant, For the use of a Person of
Honor.

Avolent quantum volunt paleae levis fidei, quocunque afflatu Tentationum; eo
purior massa a frumenti in horrea Domini reponetur. Tert. praescrip. adv.
Haeret.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1668.

ANARCHIE REVIVING, OR, THE Good old Cause on the Anvile.
HONORABLE SIR,
I Read the Books you sent me with some heed, pretending, some for the Interest
of England, others for the Safety of the King and Kingdom, all for the public
Good, which every good man would readily embrace. But in perusing the several
Pleas, I found the Question to be, Whether the present Uniformity or former
Toleration, the present Order or former Confusions, or at least a Mixture of
these, were the happiest Constitution for England. So that what I expected to
be an Olive Branch of Peace; proved but a pricking Thorn, fitted into a Crown,
to expose our Savior and his Church a second time to vexation and pain.

It Is strange that men should think a Parliament so glorious for forming a
golden Scepter for Jupiter, would be diverted to hammer out an iron Trident for
Neptune. Their Counsel (like Praise-God Barebone's Petition) had suited another
Rump, whose Interest lay in breaking; but not this present Parliament, whose
glory is to be Healers of their Nation.

Who-ever will search into the bottom of most of these men's Design, shall find
them (while Cromwell and Vane are silenced with a Rope) bold Advocates for the
Good old Cause. Some indeed speak the King fair, but in as ambiguous language
as the Covenant spoke his Father: as may be instanced in the Relative [His,]
and [Le Roy le veult,] in the 87. page of the Proposition; being (when a keen
sword shall be brought to decide the sense) as intelligible of Deliverance
only expected from God, as from the King. And happily this and other Slip-knots
were left on purpose, to take the benefit of a Comma when time shall serve.

Others avouch plainly the Democratick Principles, That Government rises from
the People's Consent, and is radically founded in them; as the Author of
Liberty of Conscience asserteth, p. 42. Not considering, that in Adam's many
hundred years Monarchy he never asked his Subjects Consent: and had he not
fallen, he had prevented the French Design, and continued Universal Monarch to
the World's end. And though the King has prudently forbidden all public
Disputes concerning Prince and People's power; this Author ventures in many
pages to circumscribe his Prince.

And for the Parliament, though they are beholden to them for an Act of
Oblivion, whereby their forfeited Lives are secured: yet so unkind are they,
that one of them professes himself not very careful how he carries himself
toward them, Prop. page 4. he upbraids them for passing Acts against Innocent
men, p. 5. calling them Murderers, p. 74. and men of a hardy Conscience,
('it was too broad to say brawny) p. 76. that esteemed trouble for sin a Romance,
and accusing them for incompetent Judges of a wounded Conscience, as never
acquainted with such things, p. 77. he tells them the damned will cry out on
their Acts as made to damn men, p. 75. undertakes to convince the Parliament,
p. 19. And all of them strive to persuade them that their way will never do,
with such like Rhetoric, of which these Books are full.

Now for the Church; besides their usual Crackers, they constantly brand them
with a formal spirit, as may be seen in D. P. p. 16, 73, 106. not considering
Saint Paul's description of formal men, to be such as are traitorous, heady,
high-minded, creeping into widows houses, and conventicling there: of which (I
suppose) none have confidence enough to charge the Episcopal Divines, but these
tender Consciences. 'Twas those he say 2 Timothy 3. 5. had a form of Godliness,
without the power. But one of them runs a stranger Risque, and accuses the
great Statesmen, or his Majesty's Privy Council, for not wise in several
particulars. 1. For not committing Sacrilege, P. p. 48. That is, for not taking
Church-Revenues from Churchmen. 2. For not burying the Covenant (fetched out
of the Paw of the Northern Bear, who first whelped it) as honorably as the
Jewish Worship, that came from God, P. p. 51. Thus is the Northern Thistle
mated with the Olive of God's Temple. 3. For not compounding for Episcopacy: as
if they had retrived the Committee for Sequestrations at Haberdashers-Hall. And
for the Bishops, their sentence of Extirpation is past by him, P. p. 51. who
are farther threatened by them all, but especially the Prop. p. 86. It Is matter
of sorrow to me, that so sober a man as that Author is should run out into
such intemperate expressions against Authority; especially, the Presbyterians
having declared, in their Address to the King, that every good man (in things
he conceives to be sins) will be very tender of the honor of Superiors. In a
word, all that advise the King, compared to them, are judged persons of mean
counsel, as the Prop. phrases it, p. 46. You see these Icarus's upon the wing;
they hope to kiss the Sun, if their wings be but fastened by an Act of
Parliament.

Nor is their kindness to all these great Interests together much larger then
to them distinct. For they most scandalously reckon Church and State, King,
Lords and Commons, (the true Representative of every individual person in
England) to be but a Party, and match them with Presbyterians, Independents,
Quakers, or what other Party will pretend to Conscience. Nay, D. P. p. 57.
affirms the Non-conformers to out-balance (that is his word) the Conformers: so
trifling a thing to them is a King in Parliament. And farther, D. R. p. 5.
calls it an unhappy Error, when Parties (speaking of the Episcopal) take
themselves to be the whole, or equivalent, and act accordingly. Such ill Logic
these men conceive it, that the Legislative power of a Nation should swell into
a conceit of being equivalent to some mushrome Sect. Surely thus to libell
Governors is not the way to convert them to our humor; unless we conceive them
to be Spaniels, made pliable by Abuses.

Can we guess these Writers of the Scottish Footmark, that plead so hard for
Syncretism, a thing so hateful to that Party, that Love at Vxbridge- Treaty
would have no Peace, for fear lest they should mix Light and Darkness, Christ
and Belial, together; that is, King and Parliament? And the sagacious Sectaries
generally conclude them to be of an Imposing spirit; in regard Father Beza, in
his Haereticis morte mulctandis, has sentenced Heretics to death; and that
Calvin took care to see Servetus safe into another world, at Geneva, by the
light of his funeral Fire and Faggot: which made poor Bellius, Eleutherius,
and their fellows, to style him virum sanguinarium, a bloody Edomite; and
Erastus to contrive another way for a Prynian Government. Marquess Huntley,
Angus and Atholl, will be Scottish evidence of their enmity to Toleration: and
no less speaks their glorious attempt for outing Bishops, Root and Branch, out
of this Kingdom. Besides, they Covenant to bring the Churches of the three
Kingdoms to the nighest Uniformity they can. And in 1645. their Assembly gave
the Parliament their Testimony against Toleration. Not to omit, that Rigid and
Presbyterian are almost convertible terms in the vulgar Dictionary. Nor indeed
do some of them speak clear for a full Toleration: for D. P. tells us, p. 58. A
Toleration not stated will break us more to pieces, and do nothing else: and
D. R. p. 87. pleads only for a well-managed and limited Toleration: yea he
tells you, p. 43. that the Non-conformers will never endure a Toleration that
brings in Popery; and M. I. p. 14. utterly excludes Papists from this fair
Haven, to sink in the Seas of Oppression. Only L. C. A. deals ingenuously, and
speaks out for all, upbraiding the rest, for consulting private Interest.

It Is farther observed by many learned men, That the Calvinisticall Party have
ever strongly affected a Papal Dominion over men's Lives and Consciences. And
the Remonstrants observe, in their Preface ad Antidotum, That no man ever
opposed that Party impune, nisi cum ei potestas opprimendi defuit; like a Lion,
never guiltless but when his Nails are pared. Which note happily caused Dr.
Prideaux, in his Fasciculus Controversiarum, to propose that weighty Question,
An Suprematus Papalis vel Presbyterialis sit tolerabilior. Which one of these
Proctors for Liberty of Conscience justifies in English thus, P. p. 63. I know
no more danger in prevailing Popery, then prevailing Presbyterianism, as to
men's Lives and Souls. It seems, he fancies both to be but Sampson's Foxes tied
by the tails with Firebrarnds, to burn down the Harvest of Christ. And surely,
while thy cry out against Prelaticall Oppression, the Lordly Bishops only
convicted and confuted Servetus the Spaniard in S. Paul's Church, and so
dismissed him to Divine Justice; but the Geneva Discipline found Fire and
faggot for him as soon as he came thither. Which made Montfort draw Calvin's
Picture, not in a Gown and Cassock, (robes of Peace,) but in a Helmet, Back and
Breast, belted and armed like a man of War. So little does Patience rule those
sacred breasts, when they have the Overruled. Which farther shows these zealous
observers of Truth are but Time-servers, while their Principles warp with their
Condition.

But, alas! the Devil would turn Monk when he was sick and low. A Scottish
stomach is not so great, that it scorns to ask for mercy. Mr. Love's Submission
and Mr. Jenkins's Petition both show, the Elephantiasis (like the Gout) never
troubles them but when they are rich and great. The Rump-Act of Aug. 1650. for
Liberty of tender Consciences was against the Presbyterians Conscience and
Preaching too, and pronounced a great Sin in those days: yet now these
Consciences can tack about, and plead for that they once condemned: why may
they not tack a little farther, to a compliance with the Laws under which they
live? If their Bread be wholesome, being mixed in the Episcopal Batch, why may
they not (without danger of poisoning) eat all of the ancient and national
Baking? unless they will have something granted, to make the world believe
there was some color for the late Rebellion; which yet one of them confesses
to be nothing, and that Cause stark naught, Prop. p. 45. though soon after, to
wit p. 65. (as if he had offended his weak brethren) he licks that Confession
up again with a flat Contradiction, averring the great Causes of it.

But to return: what would these men have? First, and in general, the
establishment of the Protestant Religion in its full latitude, as D. R. p. 3,
etc. only L. C. A. seems to be more equal to all Religions, and thinks p. 52.
a limited Toleration pleaded for, infers no more then that none are to be
indulged but such as are punctually of their own belief and persuasion. Yea so
general is M. I. p. 10. that he would have no distinction used, but that of
Protestant and Papist, in this Kingdom. But what need this trouble? 1. Is any
other Religion established in this Kingdom, then Reformed Christianity in D. R.
p. 3. his sense? or any thing settled beside the Protestant Religion? True it
is, Accommodation or Toleration may settle something else, but the present
Establishment does not. For the settled Doctrine (I think) none will question
it: and for the Rites and Ceremonies; none other are required but such as were
settled by Law in the time of King Edward the Sixth, as is positively expressed
in the Rubric before the Common Prayer: and we think 'twas not Popery he
settled. Indeed it is true, Imposition it self is looked upon, by some of these
Pleaders for Liberty, as Popish: for M. I. tells us, p. 12. That he that is for
Imposition is a Protestant by mistake, and will find himself at home in his
Principles nowhere but at Rome. Now if this be justified, then was Calvin a
Papist, who in his known Epistle to the Protector of England advises, for the
confining of desultory wits and brainsick people in this Kingdom, that one
Form of Doctrine and Order should be drawn up, to which every Parish Priest
should declare his full consent, yea be bound by an Oath to follow inviolably.
Then was Luther a Papist, who everywhere pleads for a Form of Doctrine and
Discipline to be established and imposed against the wild Sectaries of that
Age. Melanchthon, in his Church-Policy, is so earnest for these Impositions,
that he thinks, if these Church-Ordinances be taken away, the Church it self is
in danger. And little less is confessed by D. R. p. 23. A Settlement must have
all things needful to Faith, a good Life, and godly Order; who therefore
pleads for a limited Toleration, p. 8. Yet he would not take it well, if you
say he is at home only at Rome. And D. P. p. 16. grants the Church power to
impose Ceremonies, and thinks himself bound to submit to the Church's
judgment what Ceremonies are most convenient, p. 17. yet esteems himself a
Protestant. It Is well if that Synod Act. 15. can clear themselves from this
Gentleman's imputation of Popery, for offering to impose burdens upon the
Church of Antioch in things indifferent, verse the 28. A Principle equally
embraced by Protestants and Papists is very unreasonably called a Popish
Principle. But this is the old trick of the Puritan, and too successful, (as
the late King and Church most sadly experimented) to brand with the mark of
Popery whatever they had a mind to render odious to the People. 2. Are they so
kind to the Protestant Interest as they pretend to be? See what a wipe another
of them has given it, D. P. p. 109. affirming that the Protestant Principles
lead directly to Separation: a blacker stroke then which was never given it by
the Pen of the most rancorous Papist. Yet let him be pardoned for it, since he
does but servire thesi: For how can a Separatist prove himself a Protestant,
unless Protestantism lead to Separation? Thus the AEthiopians paint the
Apostles black, that they may not seem unlike the Saints. 3. What Settlement is
that to Protestantism, when Toleration shall muster up all its Sects to beard
it in every Parish? As well might Job's eldest Son's House stand steady, when
the violent Gusts wreak'd their spleen upon the four corners of it; or the Ship
be safe, when winds and waves are permitted to toss her at their pleasure. 4.
It Is strange Presumption, and savours of but too large a stock of spiritual
Pride, to think they can settle Protestancy better then the most accurate
Diligence of the great Council of this Land. 5. Whom will they comprehend under
the name of Protestants? If all that protest against the Errors of the Church
of Rome; such are the Greek Churches, such are the Muscovites, yea such is the
Turk himself. If our Sects only; let them know that the most sober Protestants
have esteemed them but as the Ascarides bred out of our Bodies, but as Vermin
on the Body Ecclesiastic: they are reckoned amongst the ill humors with which
our crazy Body is distempered. Nor is it so heavily to be charged upon our
Constitution, since the purest bodies are not secured from the like Corruption.
The very Angelical State produced the blackest Devils. If they mean the bulk of
Protestants, they are comprehended already. If all this pother is made for a
few silenced Ministers, do they think the Protestant Religion lies choked
while they are silenced? is it so interwoven with their well-being, that it
cannot survive them? Or are they such ill Sons, that they will never let their
Mother sleep, till she hugs them in her arms? Must not the Father of their
Country rest, till he has given them satisfaction? Must Parliaments withdraw
their Acts, to give these men their wills?

For, as for the deluded People that follow them, what can they scruple at? Are
they obliged to Oaths or Subscriptions? are they tied to use any other Ceremony
then what these Ministers acknowledge they may lawfully use? and do they not
many of them allow the imposition of those things that are for Decency and
Order under Penalties, so they be but small? Hear D. R. p. 27. granting
Governors authority to use humane Prudence, the light of Nature and general
rules of Scripture, in ordering of their Church; not requiring express
Scripture for every Posture about Religious Worship. And D. P. p. 85.
acknowledges the Magistrate may be bold in exacting Conformity by lighter
punishment, which may serve to deter the Factious, and are not like to tempt
a man truly conscientious to act against his Conscience, if it boggle at all.
So that the Prop. did well observe, the people's heads were only filled with
empty fears, with Panick surprises, and childish frights.

It remains therefore that these Ejected Ministers are in a great measure the
Troublers of our Israel, as was their Father's house ever since the
Reformation. God grant them a timely sight of it, and true Repentance for it.
But, alas! how can that be, while they hug themselves in the arms of their own
Praises? See how affectionately they commend each other for godly, Prop. p. 79,
80. and declare themselves the slain Witnesses, and affirm themselves the most
serious and painful men of the Nation, D. P. p. 87. and bestow their richest
Garlands of Rhetoric upon each other, ubi causa est, ubi causa non est, as
Blondel says Ignatius pleads for Bishops.

Surely, it is not without contrivance, that these men now fill the Press with
their Pleas. They well know how ridiculous it would render the Parliament, (yea
and Government it self,) to withdraw an Act settled with so much care and
consultation, backed with printed Reasons, and deep Resolutions to stand by it;
and therefore can have but little hope to obtain its Repeal, without which
notwithstanding D. P. declares all Reconciliation impossible. If I may
therefore have leave to guess the cause, it is to cheer up the spirits of
gasping Factions with vain hopes of what the subtle conclude to be hopeless.
Much artifice has been used already to this purpose. At first, if great
numbers would leave their places, they promised that the Powers would soon
restore them. Then being willing to uphold their Party, (for want of better
things) they catch at the Rush of a fond Prophecy, MDLLLVVII 1662. BarthoLo
MaeVs fLet qIa DesIt Presbyter AngLVs. MDLCVVVI 1666. ADVentV Laeta est sanCta
MarIa tVo.


During the operation of this Prophecy they remained pretty silent; till the
time elapsed, and nothing effected, they saw it necessary to spread a false
report all the Country over, of a Toleration prepared for them. But words soon
vanishing, they turn to Printing, to uphold languishing expectation. So that
they hold each other from Conformity by these Stratagems, and call them
Conscience: but if the Parliament crouch not to them, they must consult the
Brazen head again, what to say next.

I conceive not all these Advocates for Liberty of Conscience Presbyterians,
but some act under a vizard, persuading themselves, that if they can get in the
Presbyterian Needle, the long thread of Sectaries must necessarily follow after.
However they know, that if pretense of Conscience can foil one Law, it will at
length foil every one it pleases to decry: and that if a man cannot save his Arm
from cutting off, nor can he save his Head. When the Outworks are taken, the
rest cannot long hold out. If the royal Globe in the hand of Majesty be once
struck out, it will tumble to the bottom of the Throne.

And indeed they give occasion to suspect no less, some of them pleading for
the free admission of all persons to Government. M. I. p. 17. desires that no
man's opinion may advance him, nor no man's opinion may prejudice him. Another
pleads for the restoration as well of Civil Ministers as Ecclesiastical, P. p.
89. And whether he means the Rump-Parliament, or the proscribed or pardoned
Swordmen, or fanaticall and disaffected Aldermen, is a Question: for you will
find him to justify that Cause, p. 65. and highly to commend Cromwell, as a
Mortal eternallized, p. 45. he esteems the Covenant, as the Jewish Worship,
from God, p. 49. and judges the Rumpers more publick-spirited men then this
present Parliament. And D. R. p. 47. desires a new Act for Sequestring
scandalous, ignorant and insufficient Ministers. So that at least they are
Latitudinarians, some of them, that is, of Henry Marten, Henry Nevile, Thomas
Challoner, or Aug. Garland's Foot-mark, with the rest of that sort of Rumpers,
whose Atheism, joined with Religious Canting, made them look like Ghosts with
bright Tapers in their hands; true Non-conformists to all that ever did believe
a Deity.

2. But now, for the Settlement of Protestantism, they conceive it necessary
that the Act for Uniformity be withdrawn, and some larger way proposed. This D.
P. calls an Accommodation, D. R. an established Order, L. C. A. Comprehension.
Whether the Act for Uniformity may be prudently withdrawn, shall be spoken to
anon: for the present we may observe, First, That these Pleaders are divided in
their desires so far, that to please one would necessarily displease the other.
D. P. and D. R. both think the Settlement must be by turning the King's
Declaration into an Act. But L. C. A. p. 52. would not have the Civil Sanction
at all; because such things are only cognisable in aliena Republica; and that
Civil Powers have only right to judge of things concerning the natural good of
mankind, not the spiritual good of Christians, p. 49. that they must not use
the Civil Sword about ought but the light of Nature, (fere per totum.) Thus are
the Powers accused by him for acting out of their Sphere, and meddling with
things they have nothing to do withal. Besides, he will acknowledge nothing
to be the Rule of Christian Communion (as far as I can judge) but the Creed:
which I gather from those words L. C. A. p. 51. How unmercifull a thing is it,
and how unlike the Primitive Christians, to make such Ceremonies a Rule of the
Church's Communion, which used to be nothing but the Creed! I shall not
digress so far as to examine the truth of this saying, though I know the
Author has more Learning then to believe it. But secondly, why is so great a
Noise made about these Non-conformers? Can they force the Government? I may say
as Cicero of Antony, he could never obtain that Power but by evil Arts: so that
it is their shame, not their glory, to be popular. And lest they should swell in
conceit, S. Hierom to Nepotian tells you, Admirationem sui facere celeritate
dicendi apud imperitum vulgus, indoctorum hominum est; and adds, (to confute
men's bold ignorance) attrita frons interpretatur saepe quod nescit: yea, to
show the levity of winning the Vulgar, he adds, Nihil tam facile quam vilem
plebeculam and indoctam Concionem linguae volubilitate decipere, quae quicquid
non intelligit plus miratur. He could not more exactly have described these
Rabbis, had he lived to have seen them on the Stage in Querpo. Yet will you
hear them bear record of themselves? One R. A. in his (...) p. 55. tells you,
Invenimus Ecclesiam Christi lateritiam, reliquimus marmoream. You hear him
bellow like a Bull, it is pity he should prove weaker then a Bulrush. Surely
these Megabyzi sermones will prove but swelling words of vanity. I appeal to
the sober of this Land, what is the Conversion there talked of, which these so
much glory in, but a turning men from the King to that which was then
nicknamed the Parliament? I have heard two or three of that Party say, (whose
names I suppress in charity) that they understood no Conversion for the first
seven years, but turning men from King to Parliament. That they should boast of
this success of their Ministry, is as much Impudence as Imprudence. It Is
Perversion rather then Conversion, to turn men from Religion to Rebellion, or
from Debauchery to Disloyalty. Such Proselytes are more the Children of
darkness then before. Nor was God long in Retaliating: for they soon found, to
their sorrow, Conversion signified turning men from Presbyterian to
Independent, from thence to Anabaptist, and so on from one corrupted Opinion to
another. And the Apostates thus gloried in the name of Converts and Enlightened,
even when changed to the grossest Errors. What Thraso would thus glory in his
shame? Faction has well thriven under them, but so has not Faith; Rebellion
prospered, but not Religion. Let the world judge, whether Honesty and Devotion
have been more practiced since the Wars then before.

And since these men thus trouble their Country with the loud noise of their
Merits; let them answer that sad, but serious, Charge laid on them by the
Author of the Modern Policy in the Pref. That our floods of Miseries were
swelled by Clergy holy water; That their Torches of saving Light were turned to
destroying Firebrarnds; -- Their Trumpets should have sounded Retreats, but
they sounded Alarms to fury. I am persuaded, would these Ministers lay their
hands upon their hearts, and impartially consider the effects of their former
Preaching, their just indignation at their own sins would justify any Act for
their future Silence, unless in a Recantation. The Consciences of all grave and
moderate men are ready to charge them with preaching Unity out of the Church,
Peace out of the State, Obedience to Superiors out of men's Consciences,
themselves out of countenance with all lawful, and out of maintenance with all
usurped Powers. What remains farther to complete the measure of evils, may be
left to Cromwell, Phocas, or ^ontius Pilate: for Judas the Disciple of Christ
has done his part already. Whoever will read their Volumes of Fast-Sermons,
preached before the Long Parliament, shall find Pope Hildebrand outshot in his
own Bow by English Presbyterians. Nor needs there any other Picture then what
they have there drawn of themselves, to show these men of God are in truth but
men of War.

Should these men be again admitted, what security will they give (that seruple
at Obligations) that they will not fall to their old work again of converting
Subjects from their Allegiance, and filling their hearts with variety of
Scruples? especially since it is doubted they are not purged clean from that
bitter Opinion, That Subjects, seeing their Sovereign to err, (of which
themselves will be judges) may lawfully enter into a Covenant, to stand by each
other, (as the late Army several times, by their example, did against their
Rump) and contend, till they have brought Sovereignty into due Order. Which is
not only a School-point, but an Article of Faith that makes up a Presbyterian
Creed, averred by most of their learned Writers. For which Opinion Paraeus's
Book died a Martyr in Cambridge by the hand of the common Hangman. Yet sure,
Mergi, non uri, debuit iste Liber, that flamed so hot in Fanatic zeal against
Christian Magistrates.

'Twas Roman prudence, not to permit any man to preach to the people, nisi
authoritate Magistratuum prius habita, Cic. Ep. l. 4. ad At. ep. 1, 2. where
also potestas Ciceroni and Clodio concessa est to have a public Sermon before
the Vulgar. I know not whether our Governors see cause for so strict a course
or no: but some Demagogues make an ill use of their Liberty, praying for
Authority in such scandalous language as they would be loath to be prayed for
themselves; poisoning Auditors hearts with holy Bread, and their Prince's
Reputation with religious Tears. They pray God to bring their Prince to a right
mind, that they may religiously from the Pulpit proclaim him perverse; and
only ask forgiveness of his sins, that the Vulgar may take notice how sinful
he is. It would behove Princes to command such Libellers to leave them out of
those Devotions, whose flames burn rather then warm.

Thirdly, What do these men presume they are, that the English Nation must come
to Accommodation with them? Are they grown Hoghen, Moghens, that strive to make
Acts of Parliament to strike sail to their Toleration? Shall the unparalled
Confidence of 300 men rule the Laws, rather then the Laws them? Satis pro
imperio: God bless their Majesty's. How strangely (think they) are Parliaments
cowed, that fear the Black coat as well as the Red? But why so? Are they
Christians? then there is no fear of them. Nunquam Christiani inventi sunt
Cassiani: There is no danger in a Sheep of Christ: Christians may be Martyrs,
but cannot be Murderers. Are they Antichristians? Pereat proles Babylonica. Who
will make much of naught? who would yoke his Teem to fetch a Wren home from the
Woods?

3. To make way for this Accommodation several things are declaimed against. As
1. the Act of Uniformity. Thus D. P. p. 14. No Reconciliation can be, till the
Act of Uniformity be down. But of this more anon. 2. The requiring more as the
Conditions of exercising the Ministry, then things necessary to Salvation,
after Examination and Approbation. D. P. p. 95. P. p. 82. It Is unmercifull,
says L. C. A. p. 51. to make Ceremonies the Rule of the Church's Communion:
yea he decries all Impositions but in moral things. So that the things decried
by some of them (for they most irreconcilably differ amongst themselves about
this part) are 1. the imposition of Oaths and Subscriptions. P. p. 18. declares
Oaths useless and provoking men to fall foul on the Imposers, p. 22. when their
Conscience smites them for them: and D. P. p. 27. makes a loud outcry against
the Oath in the Act of Uniformity, as it was modelled at Oxford, and contrived
on purpose to comply with these men's Weakness or Peevishness. The Covenant is
not so much as named in it, that the Covenanters might find nothing to boggle
at; yet are their Complaints as great as before: which may well discourage
Authority from striving to gratify them for the future. How diligent that
Author has been in picking holes in the Oath, may appear to any that will
read the place cited. Yet we are told by the Non-conformers, in their account
to his Majesty concerning the Review of the Liturgy, That they are
misrepresented, if they are represented causelessly or pragmatically inquisitive
into the Reasons of Superiors Commands. That he is causelessly and
pragmatically scrupulous, appears by this, (D. P. p. 25.) that notwithstanding
the many faults he charges upon the Oath, to affrighten others, he is ready to
write a Book for taking this very Oath.

But will you hear his Exceptions? 1. It Is against the freedom of the Subject,
to be tied from endeavoring Alteration, D. P. p. 27. His Reason is, because
Subjects have power to choose Parliament Men, who are to consult about
Grievances, etc. For answer, First, It seems by this Plea, that the Government
is a Grievance, else the Argument concludes nothing. Secondly, Their Writs will
tell you they are called to consult de arduis Regni, not to alter the
Government. And thirdly, Mr. Pryn thinks, to consult is but to advise as
Counselors, not to enact as Legislators distinctly. And fourthly, The man
brings a sword with him to stab this exception in p. 44. where he asks, What
have men in a private capacity to do with Government? Either the Electors are
private, and then what have they to do with Government? or public, and then
who are the private Subjects? Fifthly, The Government is recognized, as a
previous qualification to all the People's Representatives; and what Alteration
can they then make in it without Perjury?

2. His second Exception is against that Clause, that declares it traitorous to
hold we may take up Arms by the King's Authority against his Person, or any
commissionated by him; putting the Case of a Sheriff's using the Posse
Comitatus by Writ against any commissionated by the King to the contrary. For
answer, First, He confesses that he believes the Parliament never intended by
this Clause to advance the personal will of the King above the Law, D. P. p.
28. nor do the words enforce any such sense: therefore (it seems) he never
intended by the Exception to prove the Oath unlawful; but the Parliament weak,
that could not see the Objection, or not so word the Oath as to exclude that
one Case. Secondly, The Sheriff is made by Commission from the King; therefore
to take Arms against him is to take Arms against one commissionated by the
King. The Law requires a Sheriff, but it is the King's personal will that
declares and individuates the Sheriff. So that the whole Exception is
groundless. Thirdly, It bespeaks great suspicion, of and little charity to,
Superiors, to imagine they will issue forth two directlycontrary Commissions,
and suffer both to be prosecuted to blood. But it well accords with these men's
former carriage to Authority. But fourthly, Let Authority look to it, they are
fairly warned: they may see the Roots of the hemlock are still in the ground,
and who knows how soon they will bud forth? The King's Personal is still
distinguished from his Legal or Regal will: And Armies may be raised against
the King's Commissioners, though not against the King. Which were the genuine
Principles of the late Rebellion.

3. Now for his Exception against the word [ I abhor,] which he calls Mr.
Calamie's Scruple, D. P. p. 28. First, He confesses he may say'tis unlawful,
when he cannot say he abhorrs a thing. But, sure, every honest man abhorrs all
unlawful things. It Is true, there is in every Christian a regenerate and
unregenerate part, an outward and an inward man, flesh and spirit, the carnal
mind and the spiritual part: Now the flesh lingers after what the spirit
abhorrs; and this comes up full to his instance, (that a man may say it is
unlawful to accompany another woman as his Wife, when he cannot say he abhorrs
it.) It Is true, the carnal mind, judging it unlawful, may yet hanker after
her: but the mind as far as it is spiritual utterly detests the sin. If this
were Mr. Calamy's Scruple, the judicious will be tempted by it, to think him
more versed in the Scruple-house then the University. Secondly, His instance
persuades me, that, as the carnal mind has some inclinations to his
neighbor's Wife, so have they to a fresh Rebellion.

4. His next Exception against the Oath is, That it affirms it unlawful upon
any pretense whatsoever to take up Arms against the King; alleging several
Authors to determine it lawful, in some cases, to take up Arms against their
King. D. P. p. 30. First, The Author acknowledges he is not like to say any
thing against the sense and meaning of the Oath, id. p. 31. So that his
quarrel is against the Composers, (viz. the Parliament) for their weakness in
expressing their sense. Secondly, The Authors cited speak with respect to the
Laws under which they live: but sufficient Authority has declared it unlawful
in this Land, upon any pretense whatsoever, to take up Arms against the
Sovereign, and accordingly has imposed this Oath. Thirdly, Holy Scriptures,
that supersede all humane Laws, allow no Opposition upon any pretense
whatsoever: if they do, the Author may take his own time to show where, that
we may see God's Anointed murdered by God's command, and our holy Religion to
countenance a holy Rebellion. Fourthly, Admit it lawful to rebel on any
pretense, and Traitors will not want a pretense for any Rebellion. No Treason
shall be unreasonable, because some Reason may be given for Treason. This Truth
has been most lamentably experimented in our past Commotions, where the same
reasons were given for outing the Secluded Members that were used for rejecting
the King, (viz. they were a corrupt Interest, that strived to ruin the good
People;) and the same Sword that cut off the Bulk lopped off the Rump of that
Parliament. The Army found no Sword like it, to overturn whatever carried any
face of Authority. Being taught by such fatal instances, it is time to break
that Sword that has been the death of so many Powers. Fifthly, To suppose a
Case in which Opposition may be lawful; who shall be judge of the matter of
Fact? nor Governors nor Governed, for both are parties; and unusquisque sua in
lite judex est corruptus. It remains then that the senseless Sword must be the
sole Arbiter of the Controversy; and then the Sentence must needs be a keen
one, let it fall which way it will. How much better is it for this man to
consent with those Non-conformers in their Address to the King, cited D. R. p.
16. That the public judgment, Civil or Ecclesiastical, belongs to public
persons only, and not to any private man?

5. His last Exception is, That men are forced to swear to a doctrinall
Proposition, which we cannot be sure of, because man is not infallible. To which
we say, first, Many things are infallibly true, though delivered by a fallible
man: as that Twice five is ten; that there is a Deity, etc. Secondly, A man may
lawfully swear what he certainly believes to be true, and this the Author
seems to do. Thirdly, His Exception would prevent Oaths in matters of fact as
well as doctrinall Conclusions; for his Eyes are no more infallible then his
Brains, as a Juggler would soon convince him. So that this Oath would never
have choked him, had it been swallowed without so much chewing.

Having done with the Exceptions of D. P. because the rest seem to oppose all
Impositions of this kind, I shall farther say, Their Opinion may be that of the
Anabaptists and Quakers, that there is no jus jurandi, no Oaths lawful: To
which I mean not a Plea for Swearing, but only tell them that God swears by
himself, the Angel by him that lives for ever, S. Paul by the rejoicing of
Christians, which is the Gospel, and most School-Divines make Oaths a part of
that Honor and Worship that is due to God, when upon just occasions and
reverently taken. If Wickliff and Hus were of another opinion, (as the Council
of Constance affirms) yet the evidence of Divine truth has led the Protestants
(not to say the whole Catholic Church) this way. The Christians were not
accused by Saturnius for refusing to swear at large, but for refusing to swear
per genium Caesaris, (as Tert. Ap. c. 32. plainly proves.) Yet I would not be
thought a Patron to common Swearing, the Gentleman's sin, who thinks his Coat
cannot be well emblazoned but by a field of Oaths; as if his Oratory were not
pungent until he stabbed his God; as if 'twere impossible for him to be
damned, till he had prayed God damn me. I could wish that the Groans of
Christians might drown the Oaths of these Antichristians.

But now, allowing Oaths lawful, what reason can these men have to rob
Authority of this Bond, by which Inferiors are linked to Superiors? They say,
indeed, they are useless; but they have the concurrent judgment of all Ages
past to the contrary, and that too glossed with perpetual practice; so that
anciently Sacramentum militare was the form of listing a Soldier. And can they
believe all men deceived rather then themselves? If Oaths be no Tie, why do
they refuse them? if a good Bond, why do they refuse to give it to their
Prince? It Is a strange Paradox, That the way to settle a Government in peace is
to take away all Ties and Obligations of Fidelity to it.

If they mean less then they say, and so confine their thoughts to Oaths and
Declarations about Religion only; I reply, That it would accuse the Licensers
of horrible negligence, should they admit a man to guide the Flock of God, yet
not require him to declare beforehand which way he would lead them. Then may
the Fox be set to keep the Goose, and the Wolf appointed to direct the Lamb. S.
Paul, Gal. 6. 16. would give his blessing to none but such as (...) would walk
by his Canons. Woe be to the Souls of the undiscerning Vulgar, when men shall
be bid to speak before we know what they will say; when vent shall be given to
their Commodity, though it be Poison. What safety is a City in, when any one is
permitted to enter the Gates? The best Ties fail of holding all from evil; and
what will be done where is none at all?

Yet were these men's Pleas ever lawful, it is so now: for they have learned
(like masterless Swine) to run through Quick-set-Hedges with Yoaks about their
Necks. How nimbly did they skip from Allegiance and Protestation to the
Covenant, from thence to the Engagement, without Scratch or Prick complained of
in their Consciences? As if the Fishes in Christ's Net were all Eels, you could
have no hold of them: As if Christ's Freemen could not be bound with Word nor
Wax. No doubt they were good Graecians, that practiced so much Graeca fide; the
Fathers fideles Infideles, that had so well studied the Art of fast and loose;
Brothers to Severus, of whom Herod. l. 2. says, (...), rather then fail, he
made his Conscience serve under his Projects, the better to effect them. They
preserve Kings by their Oaths as Ladies do Apricocks, plucking them from their
tree of life, and boiling them in scalding water. They swear to advance him to
a Throne, and interpret it a Scaffold; (...), (as Pertinax tells his
Soldiers;) they new drew their Covenant in red Letters, dipping their Pens in
Royal Blood. But whist! one of them silences me with the Act of Oblivion;
without which themselves had sat very mute.

Now for their Clergy, as Mr. Calamy, Case, etc. yea all Ordained before 1640,
they swore Canonical Obedience to their Bishop for the time being; and about
three years after expounded it by a Covenant to root them out. How can we call
that a tender Conscience that can digest two-edged Oaths, Oaths of an ell long,
Oaths that speak Daggers to each other, and that too without the least wince or
haesitation? I think a man may have better hold of them by their Purse-strings
then Conscience-ties. And therefore I should think Authority far more secure
against that Party by a Bond for their Good behavior, then the exactest Oath.

As for an Objection brought in against taking the Oath by P. that it binds not
to a Duty more then before, it is very pretty: for, First, Oaths are taken for a
stricter Tie; and how comes that to be an Objection against imposing Oaths,
that they do not bind us more then before? Secondly, Is it not a contradiction
to say, Oaths bind no more to the thing then we were bound before they are
taken, yet presently to say, they bind by more degrees? What is more, but a
degree? Without the Parenthesis there wants truth, and with it it is scarcely
sense.

But it is urged, The Cavaliers formerly complained of the many Oaths imposed,
and esteemed it a great Oppression. It Is very true, and methinks Clem. Romans ep.
ad Cor. 1. p. 72. does think so too, for he puts (...) for Oppression, (if I
understand him.) But then, First, The Cavaliers found them contrary to each
other. The Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy bound them to preserve the King in
his Civil and Ecclesiastical capacity: the Covenant would bind them to
preserve the King, but against his Ecclesiastical capacity: the Engagement
bound them to preserve the Government without the King. Secondly, They were
imposed as Traps to ensnare them, and put them out of their paternal
Inheritance. Thirdly, They were imposed by insufficient Authority; which left
them that knew it so, yet took them, without excuse. Now neither of these is
our present Case.

That this Party has holes to creep out of Oaths is no doubt. M. I. p. 6.
acknowledges the juggling of that Party, and you may take his word, for he well
understands them. And indeed without this skill in Picklocks, how got they out
of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, Protestation and Covenant, etc? I am
sure they never had the Golden Key of Authority to unlock the door. They are
something like Philoctetes, who swearing to Hercules, that he would never
discover where his Arrows or Relics were, nor the place of his Burial; yet
being urged by the Graecians to reveal, he thought to save his Oath by his
Silence, yet pointed out the place with his feet. I will not say the
Covenanters did so; seeming to dislike the King's Death by their Silence, yet
made way for it by treading him under their feet: let their Consciences make
application. But having taken the Oaths, let them creep out of what holes they
will, it must be a hole in their Consciences, and that will make another in
their Reputations, and that again a great hole in all honest men's opinions
concerning them. But enough of this.

They farther desire leave to take the Oath in their own words, some of them,
as D. P. p. 45. So may they for me, for being Non-conformers, how could the
Parliament hope they would swear in a form? And they have too great a conceit
of themselves, to think a Parliament could not find out fitter words then they.
In a word, such great Speakers ought not now to be taught to speak.

2. They decry Rites and Ceremonies, and a Subscription to them, as
tyrannical, and would have nothing as the condition of Communion for Ministers
and people, but what is necessary to Salvation; as is proved before. But,
first, Why should the Presbyterians plead thus, since they judged other things
necessary to be subscribed, in their attempts for Association, then merely
necessaries to Salvation? They then thought it no Oppression, to urge the
Episcopal and Independent Brethren to subscribe their printed Books, the bulk
of which did exceed that of the Church-Canons, and contained in them a thousand
things not necessary to Salvation. Secondly, S. Paul thought it no Oppression,
to oblige the Ministers of the Church of Corinth to a public acknowledgment of
those Canons he gave them, 1 Cor. 14. 37. yet sure they were not necessary to
the being of a Christian, but the well-being of a Church. Thirdly, I am of L.
C. A's. mind, that in the Primitive times the Creed might have sufficed, and
now may for the Communion of Churches; but not so for Communion in Churches.
Faith is a good foundation of the Catholic Union; but Union of particular
Christians must be grounded on an obligation to observe certain Rites and
Canons, which ought to be owned and submitted to, yea and subscribed, if the
Church shall think fit. How else can men know the time and place and posture,
the Order and Decency of Worship, that is required 1 Cor. 14. 40. which Calvin
confesses to be required in that place? Fourthly, S. Paul praises the Church
of Corinth for keeping certain Ordinances that he delivered unto them, 1 Cor.
11. 2. of which one was, that men should sit bare-headed in the Church;
concerning which Ceremony he spends no less then the 14 following verses to
enforce it. Now all the Arguments almost of the Non-conformers against
Ceremonies, do as strongly militate against this Ceremony of S. Paul's
Institution, as against any now imposed. And it is observable, that the last
Reply the Apostle thinks good to make against these Non-conformers contentions
is this, 1 Cor. 11. 16. that the Apostles used no such customs (as covering of
heads in the Church,) no nor the Church of God. Now let the Author of L. C. A.
consider, whether the Arguments for Ceremonies can be traced no farther then
Bellarmine and Suarez; and let the Author of D. P. consider, whether S. Paul
be not as much to be blamed for defending this Ceremony, as Bp. Whitgift for
defending (...) of his time. It Is surely an easy way to conquest, to persuade
men not to defend those necessary Rites that these men please to assault.
Fifthly, It seems to me that some of these Pleaders are not so heartily engaged
against Rites and Ceremonies, how-ever they are pleased to affrighten their
deluded admirers with the danger of them: for D. R. p. 24. tells us,
Comprehension excludes not Decency, but would have in no more Ceremonies then
needs must. And pray who shall be judge what are needful? D. P. p. 17. thinks
very honestly that the Church must judge: if so, they have judged already, and
so we may end this Dispute in a friendly agreement.

Having thus discharged the General cry of this deepmouthed Pack, come we to
consider the Particulars. Let them but enumerate what they would have, and be
their own Carvers, and 'twill amount to no less then the Good old Cause; or
rather more, for they desire a Positive Law for Toleration, as P. p. 69, 70. L.
C. A. p. 11. D. R. p. 8. etc. while a general Praeterition served before. And
certainly that great Roman Orator was right; Non enim idem est, far, si quid
ferendum est, and probare, si quid probandum non est. Cic. fam. Ep. l. 9. ep.
6. Nor is this all, but one of them would have all things taken away for which
the people rebelled, P. p. 65. judging it more reasonable that the Sovereign
should conform to the Subject, then the Subject to the Sovereign. Which
produces that Libyan Serpent Pareas, Luc. Phars. 1. 10. that leads with the
Tail. That Author quarrels with the Age, for striving to root out people's
ill Principles, rather then Princes ill practices. God knows what the people
may call ill Practices: but we know a Roman sued at Law, for not tak^^ a Dagger
deep enough into his Bowels, with which his adversary strived to stab him. It
may in time be laid to the Prince and Parliament's charge, that they buried not
the Murder of the late King in honor and silence; as well as now it is, that
the Covenant was not so buried. I will pursue this no farther, lest it whet the
Sword of justice too keen against this kind of Pleaders.

Now pray hear them branch their desires (with some confusion) into these
ensuing Heads.

1. They would have Tithes taken away, or at least altered. Israel was chidden
for robbing God of Tithes and Offerings: if these be Israelites, let them apply
it to themselves. It Is strange that hypocritical Pharisees should boast of
paying them, and these strive against them. Surely these men's Consciences grow
in their Purse or Field, that scruple at payments: and so the Poet was right,
(...) etc. How likes Cornelius Burges these Presbyterians, that strive to
baffle his whole Divine right with one Act of Parliament? 'Twas hard for a man
to commit Sacrilege before, according to Burges's notion; but (if these men's
motions take place) it will be impossible for the future: so wise are these
Pleaders to prevent sin. Eusebius. l. 4. praep. and Dion. Halic. l. 1. tell us
that the Pelasgi, (the Offspring of Phaleg, as Bochartus well proves) being
under great Judgments, sent to inquire of the Oracles, whether they would be
pacified with the Tenths of Men: The Oracles answered, they would. But these
men think to remove our Judgments by taking away the Tenths of Goods from God.
Where the Conscience scruples payments, it is a sign it is tender of Profit
rather then Piety; and that People aim at saving their Purses rather then their
Souls. But this is the old complaint: and Tithes are like the Chaldaeans in
Rome, always proscribed, yet always there. Thus Dogs of Scyrum always bark
against the Moon, yet it still abides. Tithes, like the Church they sustain,
semper concussae, nunquam excussae. Yet let it be confessed, that Tithes and
Landlords Rents are the two great Grievances of this Nation.

2. To prosecute the Good old Cause, in Rank with Tithes are servile Tenures,
called Copy-holds. O rare Saturnalia! Lords must cease to be Lords, that
Tenants may be Freeholders. Their ancient Rights must be parted withal, not
for Coin, but Clamor. In other cases Causes make Complaints, but here
Complaints make Causes. They hope to get Free-holds as Children do Rattles, by
crying for them. Unjust men like not to continue their Lands on the Conditions
they came by them. Time (that makes all things worse) must make their Tenures
better. I may say of this Cause as Cicero did of Caesar's, it is causa sine
causa. The business is, Jack will be a Gentleman: as if a man could make a silk
Purse of a Sow's ear. It Is pity these Saints throw not up their Estates, as
their Ministers their Livings, because being Christ's freemen, it is against
their Conscience to hold their Lands on humane Constitutions, and servile
Conditions.

3. The third branch of the Good old Cause that the Proposition requires is,
the Register of Estates. A thing often attempted, but never effected: the only
single thing that looks like just, of all they plead for: in which I wish them
success. Yet wants it not its Inconveniences, that may make it unpassable.
Tacitus prefaces his Annals with a Story, that the world was first oppressed
with Tyrants, at length with Laws. A Court of Record in every County newly
erected would increase Lawyers and Fees good store: but whether Honesty would
be increased, time must show. This way leaves little room for Charity, and cuts
the sinews of Commerce; which is Credit. In a word, humane Affairs are the
Game; Dealers are Gamesters; and the design of Registring is to let the
adversary over-see one's hand, which spoils the Play. I look on the design as
hopeless, because four hundred men will scarcely ever be found so entire, but
some will halt on that sore, and can no more consent, then proclaim themselves
bankrupt.

4. The fourth thing pleaded for by them is, the damning all Pluralities, that
is, silencing those Laws that stint Chaplains to Kings, Dukes, Earls, Bishops,
etc. in shovelling up (as they phrase it) Church Livings. I confess, I believe
the Clergy get more envy then profit by it; besides that it does much narrow
their Interest. Yet let it be considered, that these Laws must be silenced, to
make a Nonconformist speak, P. p. 54. Laws are such trifling things with them,
that they are as easy repealed as scribbled against. These men think it no
oppression to out men of a legal possession, without their personal consent.
But why do these things now trouble? Cannot they remember their own practice but
a while since? Were not all the taking Preachers about London Pluralists, that
could procure entertainment? Did not Mr. Vines spread his branches from
Laurence Jury to Watton in Hertfordshire, till he went off on a golden Bridge?
How much was Mr. Case noted for heaping Church-Living together? Mr. R. V. held
seldom fewer then S. Olave's Southwark and S. Edmond's Lombardstreet. Mr.
Jenkins, Blackfriars and Christ-church. Mr. Mayhew, Kingston upon Thames and
White-Chappel. Mr. Griffith, a modest man, held the Charter House and S.
Bartholomew's behind the old Exchange. But see the subtilty of these men; to
avoid the imputation of Pluralists, they called themselves Lecturers: as if
that employment were neither a Cure of Souls, nor a catering for the Purse.
It Is well their Conscience and Credit both can be salved with a new word. But
Turpe est Doctori cum culpa, etc. The English Church brought not in
Pluralities: for before the Reformation no Pluralities were admitted nisi
dispensatione Apostolica, v. Lyndwood; and since, none were induced but by Act
of Parliament.

And what forbids the Legislative Power (to wit, King, Lords and Commons) to
allow the King, Dukes, Earls Chaplains, etc. more then one Living, for the
better managing that part they are to act about their Master's affairs, and for
the state of the Kingdom; especially where the Lay-Gentry are so plentifully
instated in Church Livings, for the upholding their Greatness? Is a man only
therefore incapable of more Church-Preferments, because a Clergyman? But else
the Non-conformers cannot find Livings. Are they sure, the present Occupiers
being disseised, that the Patrons will pin them on their backs? Are not the
Universities full of deserving men? and must they be put by till God knows
when? or must they turn Non-conformers to get a Living? It Is pity such vast
numbers of Expectants (who may do well) should be slighted for those that have
done ill.

5. The fifth thing desired is, that all may be allowed to preach and officiate
that are in any Orders. Here is a door opened to the Enthusiast, whom the
Spirit orders; to the Quaker, whom George Fox orders; to the Independent, whom
the people order durante placito; to the Presbyterian, whom Aerius orders, etc.
Here Nadir and Zenith are made to shake hands: the two terms of Contradiction
are here reconciled, to wit, potestas a Christo descendendo, and a plebe
ascendendo. England must have a public Ministry with private Orders, or only
fansied ones. Then must the Church prove a Poly-cephalist, more dreadful then
the Stygian Cerberus. 'Twas judged malice in Sergius the third, to re-ordain
those that Formosus had advanced to holy Orders; because he was Episcopus
Portuensis, and only deprived of his Bishopric by John the ninth, not of his
Episcopal Function. But the Church in her great Synod judged the Presbyters of
Colythus making, in the Church of Alexandria, to be no Presbyters, and the
Ordination a nullitie, (as is instanced in the case of Ischiras) because he was
no Bishop, though he pretended himself to be one, as also do these
Non-conformers. So likewise for the same cause were those Presbyters ordained
by Maximus pronounced no Presbyters, by all the Fathers in the Council of
Constantinople. And 'twere high temerity to establish that for good by a Law
that has been so often condemned by Law.

But here is nihil ad rhombum still, for what peace can be expected from
contrary Orders? Is it not listing the Clergy in several battalia's one against
another? And what satisfaction will that give to the Scruple-house, where five
Parties are still forced to scruple at one? Do not the whole Episcopal Church
account Ordination by Presbyters, or people, or vain pretensions to the Spirit,
or by a Se-ordainer, utterly uncanonicall? And can their Conscience choose but
take offense at the allowance of it? Or are they thought so tame, that being
offended they will make no noise about it? It Is pity they should fare the worse
for their peaceableness. Again, Is the Presbyterian satisfied in Conscience to
hear a Gifted Brother officiate that pretends to a Plebeian Ordination? Do not
both send a Quo Warranto after a wandering Star, that says he was lighted by the
Holy ghost? Nor will this please the wild Sectarie, who esteems Episcopal and
Presbyterian Ordination (in John Simpson's language) the greasy Palm of
Antichrist, and fancies a Priest in Orders the English Edition of the Pope. Yet
Luther in Com. in Galat. tells us, men without Ordination, quanquam quaedam
salutaria afferunt, nihil tamen aedificant: for laborem eorum nunquam fortunat
Deus. And S. Cyp. unit. Eccles. tells us, that by the Sacraments of unordained
men, non tam purgantur quam fordidantur, i. e. the water of Baptizing fouls,
and the Blood of the Supper stains. I dread to think what (...) the Church our
Mother will shed, when more then a Jacob and Esau shall be permitted to
struggle in her womb.

D. P. p. 36. has found an expedient here; consenting that the Bishops should
impose hands on the Presbyterians, already ordained, to commend them, non ad
ministerium, sed ad exercitium ministerii, in any Parish to which they shall
have a Title. I conceive the missive words in Ordination may be so formed, as
to admit to Orders in the Episcopal sense, and yet only to emit in this
Author's sense: but then, first, This provides but for a few Ministers, and so
is scarce worth the trouble. Secondly, It Is very probable, though the
Non-conformers agree in this, they will quarrel in something else. Let me
therefore remember them, that Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury being sent by
Vitalian to King Egbert, about the year 668, and finding Ceadda not lawfully
Ordained; the good man, understanding the error, said, Si me nosti Episcopatum
non rite suscepisse, libenter ab officio recedo: upon which Submission, been
tandem consecratus, in sedem Dorovernensem provehitur. Bed. Hist. Eccl. l. 4.
c. 2. An excellent example of true Christian meekness.

6. Their sixth Plea is for Liberty of Conscience: a principal branch of the
Good old Cause, and intended to open the door of legal Restraint to those
Legions of Devils that inhabit the fanatic Soul. To effect which, all these
Authors strive eminus cominus, trying every key in the bunch of their
subtilties. Not all of them so ingeniously as Bellius, Clebergius, or Sir H.
Vane have done before them; yet no less earnestly: for aequa tentant and
iniqua, they try by hook or by crook to break the door open. And why not?
tentantes ad Trojam tandem pervenere Graeci. He that never speaks, never
speeds. They therefore bring a whole troup of Arguments to make room for it.

If you would know what this Liberty of Conscience is, L. C. A. (who most
discreetly handles it) tells you, it is A freedom to do or omit as Conscience
shall direct, p. 11. so that his Question to be debated is, How far men may be
obliged to do what they say is against their Conscience; and, How far men may
be suffered to do what they say their Conscience obliges them to do, id. ib.
Now the granting this freedom by the Magistrate is called Toleration: which D.
R. p. 8. defines to be A permission of different ways of Religion without the
line of the approved way. So that in this latitude Liberty of Conscience looks
like Hobbs his Leviathan, a masterless Monster. This one Law would make the
world lawless, and do what is right in their own sight, not in God's nor the
Magistrate's: therefore its Advocates shackle and trammel this wild beast, some
more, some less. First, To save the King's life, L. C. A. p. 14. conceives the
Magistrate not bound to tolerate any thing destructive to his being. But that
if the Magistrate shall believe Toleration it self will destroy him? The
Author of the Proposition plainly affirms, that Liberty of Conscience
murdered the late King; and the Abettors of it were the greatest Enemies to
this Prince's Return and settlement. And it is to be feared, it has not yet
evaporated its venomous qualities. Secondly, Nor must the Magistrate tolerate
moral Evils, L. C. A. p. 50. Thirdly, Nor any thing against common Light,
common Interest, and natural good of mankind, L. C. A. p. 49. We thank him for
nothing: without these Concessions the Magistrate, like Serapis the AEgytian
God, might stand and hold his finger in his mouth, and all Government were
dissolved. But fourthly, D. R. p. 9. is more liberal, and acknowledges the
Magistrate not bound to tolerate dissensions, nor any thing against the general
Rules of Scripture in ordering the Church, p. 27. But fifthly, D. P. p. 85.
exceeds all his Brethren, and acknowledges the Magistrate may punish with
lighter penalties any practice he esteems erroneous in Religion.

Having thus set down these men's Concessions, which are only to leave some
work for the Magistrate, that he may not, like Epicurus's God, sleep in
intermundiis; let me observe to you, that these men jest with us when they
plead for Liberty of Conscience; a thing so inseparable from the rational
creature, that no Padlock can confine it. Conscience is so far out of gunshot,
that the most murdering Cannon cannot reach it. Conscience is subject to no
Exile nor Imprisonment, nor can a Rape be committed upon it. The birds in the
air or fishes in the sea are not more free. So that the matter of our inquiry
is Liberty of Action, rather then Liberty of Conscience. And so the Question
will be, whether the Magistrate be bound to let men do in matters of Religion
what they say their Consciences oblige them to; or to let them forbear what
they say their Consciences bind them to forbear. In answer to which we say, The
Magistrate may not permit men to walk by the light of their private Consciences
in matters of Religion.

First, Because the Magistrate ought to be a terror (not a tolerator) of
evildoers, Romans 13. but a man may pretend himself bound in Conscience to do
evil; as the Jew most conscienciously blasphemes the name of Christ. To this L.
C. A. p. 15. answers, the Magistrate is only authorized to punish moral evils.
The vanity of which will appear, First, by that Logical Rule, Propositio
indefinita in materia necessaria aequipollet universali. Now all evils deserve
a punishment, as well spiritual as moral: and many times spiritual evils are
the greater; therefore he is to be a terror to them as well as to moral evils.
Secondly, S. Paul justifies this explication, 1 Timothy 1. 9. telling us the Law
was made to punish not only what is contrary to sound Reason, but to sound
Doctrine too. Thirdly, The Roman Magistrate, though a Heathen, had right to
judge all Causes, as well spiritual as civil; as appears by S. Paul's appeal to
him concerning the Resurrection of the dead, about which he was called in
question, and referred the examination to Caesar.

Secondly, If a man may follow the dictates of his Conscience without control,
he may kill Saints for God's cause, John 16. 2. and believe himself bound in
Conscience so to do: which happily was the case of Vennor and his Accomplices. And
'twas once S. Paul's, who says, He verily thought (to wit, in his Conscience)
that he ought to do many things contrary to the way of Christ, and did
persecute from City to City. But no Magistrate can discharge his Conscience by
permitting men to kill their Neighbors for God's cause, and questions in
Religion. 'Twas Gallio's scandal, that he drove men from the Judgment Seat, and
would not meddle in such matters.

Thirdly, Every man is indispensably obliged to promote the glory of God, and
the Salvation of men, with such talents as he has received: But the
Magistrates talent is the civil Sword: Therefore with it is he to propagate
God's Worship, and stop men's sins. Advice and Admonition belong to every
Christian; Reproof and Censures to Church Officers; but Correction of sin by
the civil Sword is the Magistrate's propriety. L. C. A. p. 24. acknowledges
this Argument in the main, but thinks he may serve God as a Magistrate by other
powers then by the Sword, yet confesses no instance can fully reach the
explication of his notion, p. 27. And no wonder, since it must deny the
Proposition or Assumption of this Syllogism, both yet which are most evident
Truths.

Fourthly, The Magistrate's power is confessed by L. C. A. p. 12. to be
paternall: But a Father is bound to use the Rod to keep his child from
damnation: Therefore is the Father of the Country bound to use the Sword to
keep his Subjects from damnation. Magistrates govern not men as brute beasts,
but as endued with immortal Souls; and therefore must use their power not only
for the safety of men's bodies, but the Salvation of their Souls.

Fifthly, The Magistrate is God's Shepherd as well as the Minister: But
Shepherds must destroy the Wolves that strive to break in to the Flock to
devour it, in their proper sphere; the Minister by Church Censures, the
Magistrate by temporal punishment.

Sixthly, To multiply no more Arguments, the last shall be ad hominem: If these
men believe it is the will of God, that every man should enjoy the practice of
his Conscience, why do they resist the will of God by denying this to the
Papist? Yet this they do, M. I. p. 14. D. R. p. 43, etc. Has God, upon this
general Charter for Liberty, expressly excepted against the Papists? or rather
do not these Pleaders privately confess they believe not their own Arguments,
which happily prove stronger for the Papists then themselves, as may be seen
anon? Indeed M. I. p. 14. says three things for the excluding Papists from this
Privilege. First, Their giving no assurance of Fidelity. But surely they have
been more faithful then these Sects in the late Rebellion: and the Quakers and
Anabaptists refuse to swear Fidelity as well as they, etc. Secondly, By their
Principles they can never be good Subjects. 'Twere well if these men's
Principles were better. If we are urged to it, we shall make it appear, that
both halt on the same lame side. Thirdly, They themselves allow no Toleration.
D. P. p. 102. shall answer it: O thou Argument! thou art a vile naughty
Argument: the Lord rebuke thee. Do not these men remember themselves guilty in
the like kind, that allowed no Toleration of Prelacie? I am weary of these
fooleries.

Can a man truly love God, and yet sit patiently to hear his Name dishonored,
when he has power to suppress it? Shall a Magistrate punish the injuries done
to himself with all legal severities, yet be so cool in God's Cause as not to
unsheath his Sword? Surely men never were permitted to do what was right in
their own sight, but in times of Confusion, when there was no King in Israel.
But when Asa had obtained the Crown, a Vote was made, That whosoever would not
seek the Lord God of Israel, should be put to death, whether small or great,
whether man or woman; as you read 2 Chronicles. 15. 13. And why should the Jew be
more zealous for the honor of his God then is the Christian? Moses, that saw
the Looseness contracted by Israel's bewildred estate, tells them plainly, You
shall not do as you do this day, every man what is right in his own eyes, or
seems good in his own Conscience. Is Conscience such a^nct^uary to damnable
Doctrines, that being got in there, the Holiness of the place must defend them?
Can it be imagined that Head and Hand-sins must receive their punishment, and
only Conscience-sins pass under Protection? S. Paul says, Romans 13. 4. If thou
do evil, be afraid of the powers: but these men say, (If the greatest
Blasphemies be committed against God) be not afraid, for the Magistrate has no
power to punish thee. Be not afraid to bring in Doctrines of Devils, for the
Powers are bound to tolerate thee. Break what Laws thou will, and pretend it is
thy Conscience obliges thee to it, and it is a safe Plea, that cannot be
overruled.

But well fare Charles the fifth, that engraved on his Sword Custos utriusque
Tabulae; judging himself obliged to see the Laws of God executed as well as the
Laws of the Land; and to take care that Christ have his due, as well as caesar
his.

If you object, That then the Magistrate (if his Conscience should hap to be
erroneous) might persecute Piety: I answer, first, So may he in civil Causes
punish an innocent man, if his judgment errs; but that does not annihilate his
authority. Secondly, And we may as reasonably suspect an Angel will err as the
Magistrate, since the Apostle's charge is to believe Angels no more then men,
in teaching another Gospel, Gal. 1. 8. And thirdly, If any be possessed with
the spirit of infallibility, it is the Magistrate, since the Scripture speaks
more favorably of him then of the Jesuits Pope, or the Quakers Spiritual man:
for Solomon says, Prove. 16. 10. A divine sentence is in the lips of a King;
his mouth transgresses not in judgment. He may be ignorant in some truths in
Divinity, but not in the weighty things of the Law. And if his commands proceed
about circumstantials and lesser things, be they according to or dissonant from
the truth, the believer is obliged to be silent, upon S. Paul's rule, who
says, Romans 14. 22. Have thou faith? have it to thy self before God. He must
not flash his light in his brother's eyes, and much less may he set a Church or
Kingdom on fire with the scattering of it about. And thus much D. P. p. 101.
acknowledges, The tolerated must not broach principles to the scandal of
others: much less then to the scandal of a Church. And farther, fourthly, In
some cases we are obliged to force our Consciences, rather then resist
Authority; that by once passing that River of which it was so fearful, it may
at length go more boldly forward when commanded, without many blows to make it
enter. Christ's sheep may be forced into green pastures, where else they will
stand boggling at the gate. It Is the Doctrine of a great Patriarch in these
men's account, I mean Ames. l. 1. de Consc. in recollectionibus ad calcem libri
additis, Sect. 27. Licitum and consultum est, aliquando, agere contra scrupulum
aliquem Conscientiae. And then, methinks, where Authority appears, it is a
considerable circumstance to enforce: especially considering that of Plin. to
Trajan, A Te exigetur ratio; nos excusabit obsequium. And Cassiodore speaks but
the mind of the civil Law, when he tells you, Nimis iniquum est ut ipse
patiatur dispendium qui imperium fecit alienum. But then, fifthly, If Liberty
must be granted, then inclusive, as P. p. 62. grants, Sovereigns must have
their Liberty of Conscience as well as Subjects. And then if their Consciences
tie them to punish Errors, what room is left for others Liberty? Princes (if
conscientious) are or may be as really obliged to the making and executing, as
others to the transgression of the Laws: and then whose Conscience shall take
place? The Scripture enjoins the Prince to punish Disobedience, as well as it
forbids the Subject to obey: so that either the Consciences of Governors, or
governed, must be oppressed. Sixthly, What should Sectaries do with Liberty of
Conscience, that preach themselves a poor, afflicted, despised Flock, and make
Afflictions the note of a Child of God, if not a note of the Church? To grant
them liberty were to divert their Afflictions, and so unchurch them, yea to
stop up their way to Heaven, which (by false application of Scripture to all
persons and times) they hold must be through many tribulations. Now to justify
their Doctrine they will find something else to quarrel with Authority about,
if you grant them Liberty; and so pro thesauro carbones, by long fishing you
get a frog. Seventhly, The common Principles of the Sectaries can endure no
Accommodation: for they hold God's Flock a little Flock, whom the Powers of
this world must oppress, and they must have a World to rail at; and should you
conform to them in every thing, there needs no other argument for their
deserting their own way: as one of these Authors well observes, in the
instance of wearing short hair, which the Non-conformers Consciences much urged
them to, till they saw Bishop Laud to commend it to all the Clergy; then they
changed, their Consciences tackt about, and wore all long hair. The Sectaries
are men of narrow spirits, and love a little way. They think multitudes cannot
go together, but to do evil; and fansy huggling together, like a Covy of
Partridges in a field, to be the only Christian way. Like John the Baptist,
they love to be in a desert; or, like a Hare, to sit trembling alone in a bush:
and cannot be brought, like Doves or Sheep, to feed in great Flocks. Besides,
they have an irascible appetite in them, which is naturally trained up, like a
true Bull-dog, to bait Authority: so that Oliver, their great God-a-mighty,
could not save his Nose from their reproaches. In a word, Tacitus observes
that, evulgato Imperii Secreto, alibi Imperaetorem fieri posse quam Romae; it
taught every Legion to proclaim an Emperor for the future. It Is well if
Obstinacy and Scrupling, prevailing to overthrow one Law, do not at length
strive to overturn all, and translate the whole Government to themselves. I am
of Nich. Scomberg's mind, (though in a far better cause) That he that sees he
can force any thing, will at length believe he can force all; and so is, by
Concession of one, but invited to contend for another. Now they try your
patience, the next time they will try their own courage.

But stay, let us hear their Reasons for Liberty of Conscience. The First is
that in the Proposition, p. 3, 5, 6. That God has witnessed his displeasure
against the sharp dealings of Authority by manifold Judgments: he instances in
burning Ships, burning London, etc. But, first, Is he sure that this Government
is worse then all Governments, because England suffered such great things?
Christ says, I tell you nay: but they say, Yea, or nothing, Luke 13. 1, 2.
Secondly, Solomon thinks a man cannot know good or evil by what happens under
the Sun: but these know the Government evil by these Accidents. Thirdly, Did
that Author's familiar that he speaks of p. 86. give him a dark notice of the
Interpretation of these Providence? Fourthly, Do not these men turn Polypus's,
and servire scenae? having formerly told us Afflictions were a note of God's
people, are they now a note of the Devil's? Well, let them hear the Poet's
curse, Careat successibus opto, etc. It Is a brave thought of Lucan, Victrix
causa diis placuit, sed victa Catoni. Sure a man may justify God, without
condemning poor Abel for his misery. Job's Piety should not be condemned
because of his Misery. Let him read Eccl. 7. 10. and he must acknowledge it a
foolish Argument.

2. The second Reason common to them all is, that Toleration must be granted to
unite us, and make us strong in War. For answer, first, A combined Interest
reconciles all men of Estates so far as to prosecute a just War, in defense of
life and estate, and to secure themselves from foreign Oppression. Secondly,
Crouching to Malcontents at home disspirits Authority, and hinders foreign
Conquests. Thirdly, Advancing dissenting Sectaries is a civil War, where
Ringleaders are Generals, Preachers Captains, Congregations Camps, and words
at length proceed to blows. Fourthly, Toleration would increase both Papists
and Fanatics; and being let loose, and both increasing, who can assure us they
will not fall on both King and Parliament, sooner then on any foreign adversary,
especially while they smell so strong of Hacket's Principles, to destroy
Authority, to make way for the Fifth Monarchy? Fifthly, All sober Protestants
are reconciled already in the Act of Uniformity: if other men's Consciences keep
them from Obedience, what will keep them from Disobedience but Laws duly
executed? Sixthly, It Is insolent for Subjects to stand on terms of
Accommodations with Sovereigns, especially the meanest of Subjects with the
best of Princes. No language so well becomes their mouths as Submission.

3. The third Reason is, There is no hurt in Conventiclers, P. p. 10.
Non-conformers are serious and painful men, D. P. p. 87. They are like Christ,
P. p. 69, 70. Yea Christ 's brethren, P. p. 71. Therefore grant them Liberty.
For answer, first, I hold my self excused from meddling with this Argument,
because these men's too late crimes have proclaimed a confutation to the world
already. Nor am I willing to rake into so stinking a dunghill, being much more
delighted in Charientisms then Sarcasms. Only I take leave to vindicate my
Savior from these foul aspersions. Let these Authors show me where or when
Christ murdered his (even tyrannical) Superiors. Against what Authority did
he take arms? where did he teach Christians to turn from Prayers and tears to
Sword and buckler? when did he preach Subjects into the field against
Sovereigns, upon pain of Damnation, cursing Meroz for being backward to set
out, etc. as most of these Ministers here resembled to Christ did? What
encouragement did Christ ever give to Factions amongst those that professed
Christianity? My just zeal demands a blush from that Author, for belying our
Savior, and saying he was like these Sectaries. Besides, Conventicling against
Law is a sin of it self, if they sinned not in their Conventicles. For it is a
transgression of the Law of God mediately, of man immediately. The Civil
Conscience is obliged by the Civil Law, as well as the Spiritual by the Divine
Law. Nor is this a fansying two Consciences, but one distinguished by its
several Objects about which it is exercised; for the Conscience is mixta persona
as well as the King, and must be judge in all causes.

If you object, that if Conscience be so bound to the Laws, they must be just:
I answer, first, Until they are clearly proved otherwise, praesumptio est pro
authoritate imponentis. Secondly, They that see them unjust, presume themselves
to have more wit then the Authority of the Nation that made them, which cannot
be said without pride. D. P. p. 85. says well, An Act passed on a thing doubted
unlawful, makes it not presently lawful: yet sure, the judgment of so many
grave men may be a glorious Taper to illuminate, and a strong Cable to bind the
scrupling Conscience. Thirdly, The Laws are most probably just when the
generality of good men practice them; who have Inspection to discern,
Consciences to scruple, Courage to oppose, if they see cause, and Curiosity
enough to examine them. The Scruplers therefore must esteem their Notions
either Inspirations from God, or Demonstrations quibus non potest subesse
falsum; or else must judge themselves infallible: otherwise it is notorious
Insolence, to prefer their own opinions of a Law before the Law it self, and
the common judgment of man; especially since Res judicata pro veritate
accipitur is a necessary Rule in all Laws; and surely to err with Authority is
to err on the safer side. Fourthly, Admit the Law were unjust, yet it binds:
for it binds not as just, but as a Law; it binds to suffering, if not to doing.
Oaths may be Perjuries, yet the Judge passes sentence upon them without
scruple: so that the Magistrate's Conscience is secured in the execution of the
Laws upon Offenders, resigning his judgment of the justice of those Laws to the
Legislative power. Fifthly, Nor are Laws in a politic consideration such
trifling things as these men fancy. Petilius found a Book in Numa's grave
expounding the Roman Superstitions; but because by the Praetor's Oath they were
found contrary to the present Establishment, the Senate adjudged the Book to
the flames: so careful were they to uphold the reverence of their Laws.
Demosth. orat. in Aristog. tells us (...), etc. and therefore not lightly to be
contemned. Du Moulin tells the ingenious Balsac, though something in Laws be
unjust, it is just to obey them; for some States have thriven in obeying unjust
Laws, others in not obeying just have perished. I wish these men of Aurelius
the Emperor's modesty, who reasonably resolves, AEquius est me tot and talium
amicorum consilium, quam tot, tales, meam unius voluntatem sequi. But how then
shall these men answer S. Jude's description of Separatists, v. 8. that they
are despisers of Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities? 'Twas once said, Turpis
est pars quae cum toto non convenit: but now it is the highest pitch of Piety to
oppose Authority.

But secondly, Is there no hurt in Conventicling? Are they not the Trojan
horses whence armed men issued forth to sack great Priam's Territories? Are
they not like the Jesuits Order, the very nurseries of Rebellion? Are they not
the seed-plot of damnable Doctrines? Do they not slay the Souls of men with the
Sword of the Spirit? Is not verbum Domini amongst them (as Bishop Laud
observed) but verbum diaboli? Do they not poison the streams of the Sanctuary?
Yea does not their very Advocate confess, P. p. 57. that in them they speak
against the Government, and revile the Rulers of the people? But this with him
may deserve a blessing.

And thirdly, Does not their best Champion L. C. A. p. 48. judge that they
ought to be compelled to Church to hear Sermons? So that, by their own
confession, the Magistrate may be bold to execute his Laws to that purpose. Yea
and does not D. P. p. 20. declare, they may lawfully be punished for disturbing
the Ecclesiastical order, to the disquieting of the State?

4. Their fourth Reason is, They must have a Toleration because many
thousaends, P. p. 75. great numbers, M. I. p. 9. the Non-conformers out-balance
Conformers, D. R. p. 28. and D. P. p. 57. I doubt these men are drunk with
their opinion, and see double or treble. They swagger as if the Town were their
own. May they not be troubled with the Athenian Thrasylaus conceit, that all
they see is their own? But, first, Themselves, in their harangues amongst their
feminine troops, call themselves a despised little Flock. Secondly, The late
Army always held the spirit of this Nation (to use their Cant) an imposing
spirit: and therefore one Major Creed resolved, in one of their Junto's, to
draw his Sword against a free Parliament, as the common enemy to that
Army-darling, Liberty of Conscience. Thirdly, The most part of them are the
Riffe-raffe of the Nation: yet I say upon my conscience, that I believe not
above a seventh part of the people are inclined to Liberty of Conscience.
Fourthly, If their Patron may be a witness in the Case, L. C. A. p. 21. says,
The greatest part of men desire a visible Judge, to save them the pains of
tedious Enquiries. Fifthly, They have often tried, and never could choose a
Parliament for that purpose; which is a convincing evidence that they are not
the major Vote. Sixthly, They carry great animosities against each other.
Seventhly, The argument is a poling argument, where Sententiae numerantur, non
ponderantur, says Plin. l. 2. ep. 12. Eighthly, Is it prudent to forbear the
Cure, because the Leprosy is spread all over the body? A great Politician
indeed advises, Vir sapiens nunquam direxit brachia contra Torrentem: but sure
that advice is more Christian, Tu ne cede malis, etc. Faction is a fire kindled
in City and Country, and P. p. 37. tells us the way to quench it is to let it
alone: thus also counsels M. I. p. 5. and D. P. p. 6. Well; the Rump did so:
did that quench, or rather increase it much more? that is a convincing
Experiment. Error is a Gangraene, and will spread, if permitted. When these
floods break out, they must be banked up. Ninthly, Neutrality loses both parts:
as Hen. 4. of France found to his sorrow. He that has no Enemy, has no
Friend. How should any think himself obliged for that favor that is given to
all? Bats are most despised, because a middle between birds and beasts.
Tenthly, Be the Sectaries never so many, yet if Christians, they must not
disturb the Government. Tertull. found Christians to fill the Armies, Markets,
Senate, Courts and all; yet they never opposed the then-persecuting Emperors.
To conclude, I ever took King in Parliament to be the Strength as well as most
capacious Interest of the Nation. So that to affrighten them with numbers is a
Bugbear, a threat to the Government, and deserves correction.

5. You must tolerate men, for force will do nothing upon Christians. P. p.
13. Restraint makes Bedlams: p. 30. A mere Command makes Disobedience: p. 25.
Violence unites them: p. 38. Indulgence only makes them throw off Errors: p.
53. Conscience cannot be touched: L. C. A. p. 10. Force does no good: p. 29.
Sword cannot hinder Opinions: M. I. p. 18, 20. Force is an odious
Superintendency over Consciences. For answer, first, God appointed the Sword to
be a terror to evildoers, Romans 13. 3. and I do not think these Authors can
prove his Institutions frivolous or useless. If the Sword can do nothing, S.
Paul is mistaken, who thought it would terrify wicked men. I hope,
notwithstanding their discourse, they will avoid sin for fear of Hell.
Secondly, That setting a Law forces Disobedience, is an Objection that flies in
the face of God, as well as of the Parliament; for God has set a royal Law to
mankind, which he would never have done, if the mere setting a Law forces
Disobedience. Thirdly, Say that it did, yet the Law may be holy, just and good,
Romans 7. 12. the Chain may be Gold though the Dog break his teeth on it.
Fourthly, If they believe Indulgence will destroy the Sectaries, why do they
deny Liberty to the Papists? Do they desire to make the Papists more obstinate
by Persecution? or will they use those weapons against them that they confess
cannot work upon Conscience? will they unite them closer by acts of violence? or
are they so unmercifull, as to deny the Papists the gentle means of recovery
from their Errors? or will Restraint only cure Papists, and Liberty
Sectaries? If Liberty would diminish numbers, why must not the Papists be this
way diminished? At this Peep-hole one may see these men plead what they do not
believe. Fifthly, If force will do nothing, how comes one of them to say, the
King of Japan rooted Christianity out of his Country by violence. Sixthly, But
it is too certain that force upon Conscience will do much. The ingenious
Author of the Inconveniences of Toleration gives two sad instances of it in
Love and Jenkins. But to avoid envy, we will instance in S. Peter, who abjured
his Lord through fear of a Crucifixion. And if force was so prevalent on so
great a Saint, what may it be on this giddy Rout, whose tongue is their
hardiest part? Seventhly, To feed the humor with Liberty can never be the way
to cure it. Eighthly, The Heathen observed, that Anaxagoras being fined five
Talents, and banished, for asserting the Sun to be (...), a globe of fire, none
ever affirmed it after. Tully observes, in his Not. deor. l. 1. that when the
Philosophers saw Protagoras punished for saying, De Diis neque ut sint, neque
ut non sint, habeo dicere, they were all for the future tardiores ad sententiam
suam profitendam, quippe cum poenam nec dubitatio effugere potuisset. And who
knows not but the death of Socrates laid the foundation of the Academicks and
Scepticks? So that none dared positively to assert the unity of the Godhead for
a long time after. Christ says, in tribulation many will fall from the Truth;
and (think we) will none fall from their Errors? Should the Powers take that
wicked example of the Rump, and set up Committees and Sequestrations, we should
soon find our richest Zelots shrink. Ninthly, Beza openly protests coram Deo
and ipsius Angelis, quas hodie corruptelas passim in Ecclesia Dei maximo cum
luctu far cogimur, eas omnes ab hac tanquam scaturigine exortas, quod
Principes, etc. in his Haeret. mort. puniendis, page (mihi) 160. He found all
the Schisms and Heresies of the Church to spring from the negligence of
Princes, in not taking care to punish them. And does not England see them to be
the product of licencious times, when there was no Rod of Discipline in the
Magistrate's hand? Tenthly, It Is true, the Sword cannot force the Conscience
proximately, but it may remotely. It cuts the body, and thereby frights the
Soul. It works on the outward man by Passion, but on the inward by Compassion.
It cannot keep men from believing, but it may from publishing Errors. It can
confine the Infected from communication, though it cannot drive out the
Contagion. L. C. A. p. 29. says, we must not punish men for want of the Holy
Ghost, and supernatural Gifts: True, but we may for striving to poison their
own Souls, by coveting the Rats-bane of Heresies; or for distilling their
poison into other men's breasts. But of this more anon.

6. Their next Argument is, The English Religion has been under an ill name.
Serious men have ranked it with Popery, P. p. 31. Non-conformers believe it,
because you persecute, etc. p. 34. To this I say, I esteem it not worthy an
answer, being rather Railing then Reasoning; and may be used against any way of
Worship whatsoever. Was Christianity the worse, because Julian the Apostate
called it (...)? or Christ the worse, because ranked with Publicans and
sinners? or did not the Pharisees that reproached him look as grave as these
serious men? What if Pilate's malice will rank Christ with two Thieves on the
Cross? was he not therefore a child of God? What if Cyprian be called
Koprianus? They that reckoned Popery and Prelacy all one, reckoned also their
Prince a Papist: God grant they do so no more. Plato in Cratylo tells us,
(...). He that gives a name ought first fully to understand the thing: but most
of them that ranked Popery and Prelacy together neither knew one nor the other.
May not the Papists as well judge them and us both, that we hate the power of
godliness in them, because we persecute them, as these do us? Yea and may not
the Quaker argue from the same Topic? Yet it is Idolatry we dislike in the
Papist, Atheism in the Quaker, and Obstinacy in both. Were these men true Gold,
yet may they be cast into the fire, to purge out remaining Dross. I know not
what Protection God has given to Error, Schism, Pride, Self-conceit,
Rebellion, etc. in the breast of an Hypocrite, yea or real Saint, more then in
any other. If the Magistrate must be a terror to evildoers, then sure to
spiritual evils, because the greatest of all evils. Nor are any the less to be
punished, because they call themselves the Godly Party; since Authority
proceeds on matters of fact and palpable evidence. I leave this Objection as
trifling, and proceed to their

7. Which is, That Liberty of Conscience raises Courage in Soldiers, P. p. 45.
It breeds generous spirits, M. I. p. 8. The Sectaries Obstinacy is England 's
best Courage: It wrought all our Changes, Prop. p. 46. It makes men for ever
irreconcilable to all Impositions, M. I. p. 13. To which I reply, First, It
appears by the Omnipotency ascribed to Liberty of Conscience, that it is the
Sectaries God, whom they adore not for his Justice, but for his Power. It is
the best overturning Tool in nature; and therefore its Advocates ought to be
carefully looked to, and timely suppressed. Thirdly, An Argument drawn from
Strength against a Government is no better then a Threat. I hope tonant sine
fulmine, their Threats are but Crackers. Fourthly, To grant all that is true in
this Argument, it amounts to no more, then that the Devil is strongest when he
fights from that Fort called Conscience. Men thus possessed with a spiritual
frenzy are always stronger and more mischievous then at other times. But must
we make a League with the Devil, to be of the stronger side? Fifthly, I confess
this Liberty is a terrible thing; for no man knows what to call his own, while
this Freedom is in use. So true is that Maxim, Cui plus licet quam par est,
vult plus quam licet. Give the Slave a Sword, and he will slash his Master.
Sixthly, The Pleaders are deceived with that usual fallacy of non causa pro
causa: For it is a strong presumption of being God's people, and favored by
him, that raises valor to so great a pitch: and this is a stale trick in the
world. All Nations consulted their Gods; by Birds, Intrails, etc. gave their
Soldiers some Omen or other of divine favor, which made them presume of
Victory, and so to run any hazard whatsoever. What made Severus's Soldiers so
undaunted, but the (...) and (...) that he told them he had? The (...) made
Constantine to be the Great, and his Soldiers invincible. 'Twas Cato's error,
that he would not deceive himself and Soldiers with a fine story brought from
the Oracle of Delphos, where he was, and much urged by his Army to inquire; for
want of which they were conquered before they fought: whereas some pious cheat
would have made them more terrible then Bellona her self. Curtius observes,
that it much furthered Alexander's Conquests, that he was voiced to be the Son
of Jupiter Hammon. 'Twas the strong conceit of Saintship in Oliver and his
deluded Army, grounded on these Ministers encouragements, their Officers
frequent and fiery Prayers, and their high pretense to Responses from Heaven,
that (joined with good Suits of Armor and the City Purse) made that Army so
mettlesome. Toleration was scarcely pretended in their most bloody conflicts;
but was the Itch of an insolent Army, too highly pampered with Loyal blood.
Again, seventhly, The Turks are a valiant people in War, and Cromwell was but a
Pygmy to Mahomet the great: yet none will say Turks are for Liberty of
Conscience. And surely the Roman valor has left monuments of its Greatness in
a very large tract of the world; yet none opposed Liberty of Conscience more
then they in their most flourishing times, if you will believe Live. Dec. 4. l.
9. who says, A Romanae reip. initiis negotium fuisse Magistratibus datum, ut
sacra externa fieri vetarent -- Sacrificulos vatesque foro, circo, urbe
prohiberent; vaticinos libros conquirerent comburerentque; omnem disciplinam
sacrificandi, praeterquam more Romano, abolerent. If these mean it
restrictively of England, let them tell us whether we deserved the name [
gentis bellicosissimae] better when the Rebellious Army was on foot, or 400
years before, when Ireland, Wales, France, Scotland, etc. were subdued by us.
But, eighthly, These men rightly account for Liberty of Conscience, showing
that it is a more successful device for the blowing up any Government then the
Powder Plot was. But it is a strange argument to commend it to the King, because
it murdered his Father; and to the Parliament, because it overturns
Government. It Is certain, it is the most fatal Wildfire of a Nation, and a
sworn enemy to all Government; and its genuine issue are Factions and
Dissensions, whilst each party struggles to promote his way. It distracts the
vulgar, who tend strongly to a Settlement; and invites the Gentry into Faction,
to become the Head of that Party are most like to receive them. It cuts off the
Magistrate at the half, leaving him no more of the Subject but the outward man.
And could we but see the face of it without a vizard, we should discern it to
be Vngovernableness. One of these Advocates calls it the mad Earl of Warwick:
then Bedlam is fittest for it; and thither the Honorable House of Commons
having voted it, for me let it go.

Here I cannot but observe the pretty Artifice of the Prop. p. 60. persuading
us to believe, that if Liberty of Conscience be granted, Episcopacie would
drain all the Sects. If Episcopacie could drain the Sects without an Act of
Uniformity to assist it, why not with it? But, alas! a disease is infectious,
but so is not health: we may get Heresies by contagion, but seldom Truth. S.
August. tells Boniface, experientia edoctus, nulla re magis quam Severitate
Donatistas and Circumcelliones in officio contineri. Sure these Seas of Errors
never so much overflowed their Banks, till the Rumpers pulled up the Sluices:
and whether Liberty made our Factions dwindle, let the world judge. It Is too
true a Proverb, Opportunity makes the Thief. To set open the door, is not the
way to keep Errors out.

8. Their eighth Reason is, It Is a sin to make men act against Conscience: for
Force either debauches Conscience, or brings Persecution on men's bodies or
estates; either of which do make the Forcer guilty, L.C.A. p. 45. It Is a
greater sin then lying, stealing, whoring, etc. P. p. 74. You were better stab
him, p. 73. He is damned that is made to do what he thinks not lawful, and he
may never recover his Conscience again, p. 75. To this we answer, first, All
this Argument is as strong for Toleration of Papists as for any else; yet these
men do unitedly deny liberty to them. So that certainly they conceive it not a
sin; or else are content to damn themselves, to suppress the Papists. Secondly,
They know that Papists, Quakers and Anabaptists do declare it against their
Consciences to come to our Churches, and hear our Sermons: yet L. C. A. page
48. and elsewhere asserts that the Magistrate may without sin compel men to
hear Sermons. Did he therefore believe himself, and this Argument to be true,
it did ill become him to give the Magistrate that direction. If you force the
Quaker to come to Church, according to this Argument you debauch his
Conscience, etc. Thirdly, This Argument we are not concerned in; for we plead
not against liberty of believing or loving, but of professing and practicing
Errors. We say with Cic. to Marcellus, l. 4. ep. 9. Dicere fortasse quae
sentias non licet, tacere plane licet. Were their Case that of the Roman
Senate, Senatus ad otium summum, vel ad summum nefas vocaretur, Plin. l. 8. ep.
14. they might save their Consciences by doing nothing. If the Libertines fansy
it a false Doctrine they are required to believe, let them hold their peace,
and all is well. Laws can make men hide, though not hate, their Errors. It Is
true, Conscience ought not, no nor cannot, be touched; but yet men's practices
must not be allowed. Thus Beza determines this Case, Vt non sit punienda animi
opinio, neutiquam tamen ferenda est pestilens and impia professio. Conscience
is that (...) that cannot be bound; but men's lips may be sealed, their tongues
may be tied, and their bodies moved from Conventicles to Church, etc. and that
is all intended. Fourthly, If the Powers could, or some men would make
themselves act against the false suggestions of their Consciences, they would
find it a saving rather then a stabbing Act. For it is a false suggestion that
of M. I. p. 7. That he that is true to an erroneous Conscience is true to God:
for then are all the worshippers of Sun, Moon and Stars true to God: then was
Adam true to God, when he was beguiled to eat the forbidden fruit. The truth
is, Conscience is indeed God's Officer; but the Devil has bribed it to his
devotion: and it is no felony to thrust the Devil out of what he has no right
to. But I have spoken to this part elsewhere. Fifthly, Say that Persecution
were great Cruelty to them that are in Error; yet it is better one then all to
perish. Surgeons never scruple cutting off one member to save all the rest.
It Is certain, Kindness to Error is Cruelty to Truth; Charity to the Wolf is
Murder to the Sheep; Permission to Conventicles is Persecution of the Church.
Indeed D. P. p. 114. tells you, he pleads the Cause of our Lord: i. e. that his
Name may be blasphemed without fear of punishment; that any Worship, be it
never so antiscripturall, may be offered him without control. He farther adds,
that he and his Partner plead for mercy, etc. to wit, that the Wolf may be
gently dealt with who worries the Lambs in Christ's fold; that the Serpent may
be protected to seduce Adam to his Damnation. Yet certainly, it is a sinful
patience, to suffer God's Vineyard to be rooted out. What glory is it to show
tenderness to the Weed that suppresseth the Corn? He is no cruel Shepherd that
kills the incurable Sheep, to save the Flock from infection. Haereseos (says
Erasmus in praef. ad Hieron. ep.) ea est insimulatio, in qua tolerantem esse
impietas sit, non virtus. Sixthly, For Gamaliel's advice to let men alone, Beza
says, ex veris principiis falsam elicit consequentiam: and Calvin on the place
upbraids him for a doting and deceitful Counselor. Whose answers I leave with
these Pleaders, supposing they will be more grateful then any I can give.
Seventhly, to conclude, This very Argument in the Magistrate's mouth rises up
in judgment against all our opposers: for supposing the Magistrate's Conscience
commands him (as it ought to do) to take care of the Honor of God, to punish
Blasphemy, to nurse the Church, to be a terror to evildoers, to lay out his
talent of Power for God, to endeavor God's glory, and the suppressing of sin;
If he should observe his Conscience, he must punish these men; if not, he sins
against his Conscience, and so wastes it, that he may never recover it more. So
that these men were better stab him to the heart, then thus to force him upon
Damnation for neglect of his Duty. Thus are trifling disputes returned upon the
head of undiscerning, and therefore forward, men. See this Case in Edw. 6. who
being urged vehemently by Cranmer and Gardener, with Charles the Emperor, to
permit the Mass to his Sister Mary, he would not for his life: they press the
Suit; he wept, and desired them to forbear: they also wept, saying, He had more
Religion in his little finger then they in their whole bodies; as Sir Richard
Baker reports in Vita Edvard. 6. The occasion of this trouble to the young King
was, a Resolution given by Cranmer, before he forbad the Mass to his Sister,
That to wink at sin in hope of return with patience, was no sin; but wholly to
wink after long patience, or to give permission to sin, was sin. And indeed
'twas very true, for demise ac facile pati, probantis speciem habeat, says Cic.
ep. 3. ad Brutum. If now our adversaries Argument stand good, it concludes
stronger for the Magistrate then for the Subject.

9. Their next reason is, Force is no weapon of Christ's institution, L.C.A. p.
30. and therefore not to be used. It Is unproportionate to the malady, to beat
the body for the Soul's fault: a Lion or a Dog may thus convert as well as men,
L. C. A. p. 36. The Apostles never took this way, id. p. 40. nor is any service
acceptable to God but willing service, id. p. 39. nor can force ever settle the
Gospel, id. p. 47. To this I answer, first, Force may be lawfully used,
(though not commanded) if it be not forbidden; else nothing were indifferent.
D. R. p. 15. denies Non-conformers to hold indifferent things unlawful.
Secondly, That the rod of Correction is not of Divine institution, I think no
sober man will assert. David ventures to call it God's Rod, Ps. 23. 4. and Mic.
6. 9. tells us it is a preacher of God's mission, Hear ye the Rod, and who has
appointed it. S. Ber. will tell them the will of God is, that the Priest should
smite gladio oris, and the Prince ore gladii. Thirdly, That the Rod should do
no good is yet more strange, since the Scripture everywhere asserts, that in
men's affliction they will seek God early: and certainly one way (and the best)
to chastise men is by the Sword of the Magistrate. Fourthly, That Lions and
Dogs may thus reduce men to better manners, is no question, when God shall
sanctify a danger that shall befall men by those Beasts: an instance of which
you have 2 King. 17. 25. the Lions that ravaged in Samaria made the people
inquire out the true God. Fifthly, This thour acknowledges, the Magistrate's
Sword may drive men from moral evils; and then what color can there be to deny
it in spiritual evils? Sixthly, We must remember them, that this Argument is as
true in the Papist's mouth against them, as in their mouth against the
Magistrate. Seventhly, They allow the body may be punished for the moral evils
that the Soul commits; yet think it unsuitable for spiritual evils. Eighthly,
It was not (in an ordinary way) the Apostles duty to use the civil Sword in
settling the Gospel, for that was to invade the Magistrate's right: yet we
find S. Peter sentencing Ananias and Sapphira to death. To which our Pleaders
reply, 'twas extraordinary, L.C.A. p. 3, 4. I answer, it is true it was so, in
the manner of the punishment, 1. because inflicted by a Priest, 2. without
visible means: but in the matter it was not so, for Lying is a moral evil. And
therefore it is to be admired why the Author should oppose it, and so swerve
from his own principles: but I take it to be the product of a spirit of
contradiction, or the effect of sleepie oscitancy. But had the offense been an
error in Conscience, the punishment had been equally defensible. Ninthly, The
Civil Sword is most proper to settle the Gospel, as to the public profession
of it, (which is all contended for:) but it is the Holy Ghost must assist, to
erect a throne for it in the heart. Tenthly, That forced service is
unacceptable to God, is very false: for God sends afflictions upon men to force
them into obedience; he scourges his children to bring them home to him, and
then accepts their Devotions. Thus Manasseh's chains bound him to his duty; and
yet God rewarded it with eternal life. And though the service of compulsion be
not so candid as that of a springing spontaneity; yet it is not so drossie as to
be rejected. But say it were, yet is there ground enough for Force; as S.
August. to Gaudent. Ep. 2. l. 2. c. 17. Quod autem vobis videtur, invitos ad
veritatem non esse cogendos, erratis, nescientes Scripturas, nec virtutem Dei,
qui eos volentes facit, dum coguntur inviti. If the Magistrate's power bring
their bodies, God's power will bring their Souls. If the Magistrate's Pole
drive the Fish together, God will encompass them in his Gospel-Net.

I see nothing more (that is considerable) left unanswered in either of these
Authors; unless it be, That men are bound to follow an erroneous Conscience,
where the Director or Imposer is not infallible in his Prescriptions; and
therefore they ought to have their Liberty. This is urged by L.C.A. p. 41, 42.
and proved by these parts. 1. That we must try all things our selves. 2. We
must do all things in Faith. 3. That God will judge us according to our own
talent of knowledge, not the Magistrate's. 4. A man's judgment is useless, if
he may not follow his own light. 5. If we must follow the Magistrate's light,
all Idoll-worshippers will be excused, id. p. 43, 44, 46. To which I reply,
first, These men do not believe this Argument to be true; for if they did, the
Papist must follow an erroneous Conscience: why then is he excluded from
Toleration? Yea it argues as strongly for the profession of Turcism, Judaism,
Heathenism, or any thing else, as for Presbyterianism. Secondly, It argues as
strongly for permission of Fifth-monarchists to murder the King, if they
believe in Conscience the destruction of earthly Powers is the way to advance
the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. Thus is Hugh Peter's justified for binding his King
in chains, and the Nobles in fetters of iron; for in the execution of that
Scripture-command he must have liberty to follow his Conscience. Nay, thirdly,
This Argument would justify poor men in seizing on the Estates of the rich; if
once their Consciences persuade them, that the meek ought to inherit the earth.
Fourthly, Who doubts but the Scripture is an infallible Director, especially in
the mouth of a Priest, from whom God has commanded us to inquire the Law, Mal.
2. 7. because he is a messenger of the Lord of Hosts? and who can tell the mind
of the Prince better then his Ambassador? And therefore S. Paul charges the
Hebrews, c. 13. v. 7. to follow their faith that have the charge over them.
Fifthly, The Jew was under the obligation of Conscience as well as the
Christian; yet no Liberty was granted to him to publish or practice what
Opinion he pleased: for Heb. 10. 28. he that despised Moses Law died without
mercy, under two or three witnesses: and is the Gospel of less moment then
Moses's Law? But L. C. A. p. 33. replies, a greater punishment, even Damnation,
is inflicted for contempt of the Gospel. Very true, but so was it for contempt
of the Law of Moses too. The temporal Judge kills for Murder, and the eternal
Judge damns; and so did they then, for damnable Doctrines that murdered Souls.
Sixthly, Men may use their judgment, and follow their own light, and try what
they will; only let them keep it to themselves: as Hester did her Religion in
the Court of King Ahasuerus. Seventhly, This Argument is no less strong for the
Magistrate to prosecute Dissenters; if he believe in his Conscience that he is
bound to promote the Glory of God, to propagate Truth, and to destroy those
Boars and Foxes that strive to root up the Vine, or to pick off the Grapes. In
a word, to follow an erroneous Conscience is sin; and for the Magistrate to
indulge a man in sin, is no less cruelty then that of King Philip, to bring up
his Wife's brother Alexander in all kind of Debaucheries, that he might
effeminate him, and so deprive him of his Kingdom. In this case S. Hieron.
Com. in Ezekiel. 18. would cry out, and every good Christian with him, Nolo talem
misericordiam, Domine.

Now then, manum de tabula, it is time to conclude. Only I pray leave to
propose to this present and Honorable Parliament the ensuing particulars:
which if they conduce not to quiet, yet certainly not to quarrel; if they have
little of Mercury, they shall have nothing of Mars in them: and therefore (I
presume) will be patiently heard by a Parliament whose Discretion vies with
their Justice, and both seem to be Conquerours. A true Parliamentum pacificum,
Antipodes to the Parliamentum insannum. Never any met with a more dreadful
Disease; never any made a more perfect Cure. A Parliament that have been
infinitely provoked, yet know no Passions but by their Names. A Parliament that
is like to verify Lucian's Character of England, Ver. hist. l. 2. that it is
Insula fortunata and Campi Elysti. When Julius Caesar entered it, captus
amoenitate loci redire noluit: He resolved to live and die here. With such a
Parliament what Caesar would not take up the same Resolution? Yet Carneades
tells us, wise men contrive Laws, and fools judge of them; and therefore no
wonder if some repine, that dote only on Liberty of Conscience. Let such hear
that discreet Heathen telling them, It Is optimus Reip. status, ubi nihil deest
nisi licentia pereundi. It Is a happy want, to be without temptation to sin.
Caesar, in l. 3. Com. de bello Gallico, observes every man to be a Rebel by
nature, Omnes homines natura libertati studere, and conditionem servitutis
odisse. In English, No man would be ruled, if he could rule: Obedience is not
of nature, but of grace: therefore it is, In bonos facile est imperium. It must
be Gold, if superlatively ductile. Which proves our seeming spiritual men to be
too natural, their temper is so ungovernable. Authority had need wear
Hedging-gloves, when they meddle with these scratching Thorns. These
discontented spirits breath so hot in the face of Authority, that they make the
cheeks of their reputation blister. But all sober men will consider how many
and wide Differences this Parliament has composed, how many Swords they have
sheathed, how many Grievances they have removed, how gently they have touched
the strings of our Concord, what pains they have taken to model Oaths, so as
men might disown nothing but opposition to the Government; and must needs
declare, That this Parliament (under his Majesty's influence) have been the
Healers of our Breaches, and Restorers of paths to dwell in.

To continue the Parliament's candor and fidelity, it is humbly conceived
necessary, 1. To discountenance for the future (as they have now done) all
attempts for the Lawlesness the Authors here answered plead for. I need add
no Reasons; their own in 1662. given to the KING are the Quintessence of the
Nation's Reason, and therefore must be eternal. Yet I may say, 1. If Scrupling
and Faction repeal Laws, then are they acknowledged stronger or honester then
the Government. Secondly, If Subjects see that Coin pass for current, they will
bid it for whatever Law they take distaste at. 3. If the Parliament be
unconstant to themselves, men will judge their Acts not to be the product of
great Judgment, grave Counsels, and good Conscience, but rather of Levity and
Humor; especially when an Act shall be repealed that was settled with great
debate, printed Reasons, and deep Resolutions to stand by it. I conceive,
though a Parliament be acknowledged fallible, yet an Act so carefully formed
comes near an Infallibility.

2. It Is absolutely necessary for the Parliament to stand by the Liturgy. 1.
Because they have solemnly declared in their Act of Uniformity, that it is
comfortable to all Christians, profitable to this Realm, fruitful in procuring
God's blessings, an honor to the Reformed Religion, and the neglect of it
scandalous and dangerous. If this were true in 1662, it is no less in 1668. 2.
In respect of the People's happiness, who have the same means and way to Heaven
with their Prince, their Nobles, the reverend Judges, the most reverend
Bishops, Doctors and Learned men of the Land. The meanest man sails to Heaven
in the same Bottom with the greatest and wisest. So that if men
conscienciously use it, all must swim, or all sink together. 3. In respect of
the Ministry, whose tender Consciences must needs otherwise be filled with
great anxieties, for fear lest their private parts, skill, reasoning, wisdom
and direction, should not be sufficient to convey so many Souls (as they have
charge of) safely to Heaven: from which they are in a great measure delivered
by the Liturgy; the studied assistence of the whole Church of England, by which
their Flock is fed and guided in the same manner, in their Devotions, with the
best accomplished man of the Kingdom: men of the greatest parts having no
higher way for the daily Sacrifice then they. 4. In respect of the Papists, who
may justly complain of our Persecutions in this last Century of years, for
their not coming to our Worship, since we our selves at last think it unfit for
use. Yea in so doing this Parliament would declare their Predecessors
Persecutors, and condemn all former Parliaments, (except the Rump) as well as
themselves, for unconscionable Acts; yea and with them condemn the very
Reformed Religion in this Kingdom. 5. In respect of the Consequences of such a
change; the sharpest Eye-fight being not able to reach the end of such an
attempt. It will well become a sober Parliament, constituted of the most
substantial and honest Gentry, to leave the Church in such a Constitution as
she had in the most flourishing times of our former Princes: leaving it to
Rumpers, and others of the like audacious Consciences, to bring in Sacrilege,
Confusion, Errors, Schisms, Blasphemies, Civil wars, etc. and so to entail
Tortures to their Consciences, Stains on their Reputations, Curses on their
Families, and Consumptions on their Estates. Which God avert.

3. The Parliament will find all Salvo's, to make way for an Accommodation,
utterly pernicious. 1. Because they accuse the Laws as too rigid. 2. Salvo's
oblige none to obey but Quicunque vult. 3. The disobedient seem equally
innocent with the obedient, and more conscientious. 4. They permit a Party
against the Laws, and proclaim variety of judgments. 5. Changing men from
compliance with the Law to the benefit of a Salvo, will be called Conversion in
a little time by scrupling Preachers. 6. All Salvo's are virtual Repeals of a
Law.

4. It Is certainly necessary thatx the Parliament stand fast to the Government
of the Nation, according to their own Explications. 1. Because without them men
had some pretenses to justify a Civil War, which was a strong temptation to
the raising of it. 2. Because if a Prince cannot wrong, nor can he right his
Subjects: if he could do no hurt, he could do no good. 3. Because Rebels
find always hands too strong for the best Laws, and just Princes generally
find the Laws too weak to protect them; especially in this Island, where old
Gildas long since observed, the people were fortes ad Bella civilia. Yea he
adds, Si quis Principum mitior and veritati aliquatenus propior videretur, in
hunc, quasi Britanniae subversorem, omnium odia telaque sine respectu
torquebantur. I groan when I read it; yet our late Times have most
emphatically Englished it. 4. It Is certain, what Odium they can receive from
Malcontents, they have received already; being judged (by so freely declaring
the Law) Propugnators of Laws, Religion, Settlement, the Prince's Rights, and
People's Interests, and thereby of the Loyal Party: for which the Factious are
their implacable enemies. 5. Because the Parties that would be gratified are
true enemies to all Government. The dispute being not what Government, but what
Governors, with them. They could no more endure the Long Parliament with their
Aristocracie, nor the Rump with their Oligarchie, nor the Protector with his
Olivarchie, then their lawful Prince with his regular Monarchy. In a word,
what they are in Church they are in State; always Reforming, but never
Reformed.

5. The late vote of the Honorable House of Commons, for putting penal Laws
in execution, is most just 1. Because every Magistrate ought to punish injuries
done to God, as well as those done to men. 2. To distinguish the good Subject
from the Rebel. 3. To take away temptations from others to grow Factious. 4.
To draw the Factious to Repentance by momentany affliction, for the saving of
their Souls. 5. To bank up the flood of Errors from overflowing an Island
aliquid semper audire volente, and nihil certi stebiliter retinente, as Gildas
observes of us, and Bid confirms Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 8. in the self-same
words. An Itch after new Factions being as natural to us, as after the new
Fashions of the French: a bad new way being in all Ages more welcome to us then
the good old way. 6. If the Law given be neglected, the Lawgiver cannot be
respected. 7. A dormant Law serves only to increase transgression, both in
them that swear to execute the Laws, and in them that disobey. 8. By this means
a Constable or Churchwarden in a Parish may void the best-contrived Sanctions
of Parliament. 9. If it be not possible to execute a Law, the Contrivers wanted
wisdom; if not lawful, they wanted Justice. 10. If former Laws be voided by
neglect of Execution, future Laws will not be feared; which tends to dissolve
all Government.

6. It Is humbly proposed to consideration, whether the Churchwardens Tax for
repair of Churches ought not to be levied as the Overseers of the Poor is, by
Justices Warrant; yea and Vicarage-Tiths be declared positive in favor of
Vicars, (who have commonly the greatest work and least wages) and made to be
sued for at Common Law. 1. Because Sectaries stand willingly excommunicate, and
are tempted so to do, by saving their money. 2. The heavy sentence of
Excommunication is unproportionable to the detaining a Groat. 3. An Act may be
so drawn as not to be Derogative, but Accumulative to Church-Franchises,
leaving the Plaintifi to take what way he pleases. 4. It would prevent a
thousand clamours against Spiritual Courts, for too frequent Presentiments,
buying of Time, Excommunicating for Trifles, etc. 5. If all Irregularities were
punished with Penalties, and only Crimes with Excommunication, it would remove
a great deal of offense; especially if Excommunication be executed with that
Conscience and Gravity a Censure of Christ ought to be, and by those hands in
which Christ left it. I know that Contumacie (as the learned D. Hammond, Power
of Keys, has proved) is the only sin that Excommunication punishes: but it is
pity to buoy men up into that stubborn Posture for every Trifle; since men may
guess from the equality of punishment, that the Church embraces that Stoicall
conceit, that Omnia peccata sunt equalia.

Lastly, That Liberty may be yet more confined, I humbly beg that common
Swearing and common Traveling on the Lord's Day may be stopped by
Parliamentary Authority; lest their general practice should make them (in men's
opinions) degenerate from Crimes to Virtues. I would that our Scruplers had set
their stomachs against these Vices, and we should soon have been Brethren.

Now (to turn the Tables a little) I become a Petitioner for Liberty of
Conscience, to wit, That it may be lawful for Priest and People (without fear
of Bailiffs or common Arrests) to repair to and retire from their
Parish-Churches upon Sundays: lest while your Acts command attendance on Divine
Service, and Arrests forbid them, they be forced upon transgressions.

NOw, Sir, by this you may see my sense of these Authors and their Designs,
and what I imagine to be more wholesome Counsel. If you wonder at my style, as
too biting for my temper; I allege, that the spirit of Meekness can be but of
little use against a Party that want Modesty. Besides, the nature of this Case
is such, that the discovery of these men's Crimes is a confutation of their
Cause. And our Savior (though meek and lowly) found a whip for the
Temple-beasts, never using bitterer expressions then to the Saint-like
Hypocrites. Wolves in Sheeps clothing are double-skinn'd, and must not be
whipped with a Nosegay. They cry, with the Donatists, Nos soli homines, caeteri
canes and sues; proclaim each other godly and serious men: so that to have
smothered the truth, had been to conspire with the Devil to their Damnation.
Upon these Reasons I stand at the Bar of your candid Censure for my Severity,
rejoicing that your Honor will be concerned in the Interest of Christ's
Church, and not, like the Gallio's of our Age, care for none of these things.

What now remains for me, but to lay down my Pen, and take up my Prayers, That
God would grant England to speak the same things, and think the same things,
and do the same things; and that (at length) all Animosities laid aside, we
may all with one heart and one mouth glorify the God of our Fathers; so that,
maugre all opposition, England may again appear a Nation at unity within it
self? Which shall be the daily prayer and endeavor of

Dated from my Study, Apr. 15. 1668. Your Honor's most humble Servant, Abraham
Philotheus.

FINIS.

