

THE Creation of the world BEING An Exposition on the Hebrew in the first
Chapter of Genesis.

As it was Delivered at Sir Balthazar Gerbiers Academy in White Friars.

BY HENRY WALKER, Minister of Gods Word at Knightsbridge, and formerly Student
of Queens College in Cambridge.

The first Oration, Concerning the First Days WORK.

Imprimatur,

Hen: Scobell, Cleric: Parliamenti.



Printed at London for Robert Ibbitson dwelling Smithfield near Hosier Lane,
1649.

To the Right High, and Supreme Power of this Nation, the Parliament of
England. And in particular, to the Right Honorable William Lenthall Esquire,
Speaker (and to every individual Member) thereof.
Right High and Honorable,
UPon the clear demonstrations of the Right Worshipful Sir Balthazar Gerbier,
his admired love to this Commonwealth, to make it as happy in a gallant Academy
as other Nations, I was easily persuaded to offer there this small talent of my
truest and dearest affections, toward the erecting of so stately a Fabric,
And here now it prostrates it self at your feet.

Me thinks Englands Reformation at this time, resembles much the world in the
first days Creation, here is a new form of a Commonwealth, by the Providence
of God molded, which is hoped to be the beginning of a new heaven and a new
earth. The ornaments of this State are not yet beautified in perfection, nor
have all men prowess to enjoy this glory yet, because a great darkness is
still spread over England. But were not men infatuated; they would see and
acknowledge that glorious work which God has put into your hands; And how
wonderfully the spirit of God, which moved on the face of the waters; has
supported you, and wrought by you; The Lord go on still with you, until he
has completed his own work, to his eternal glory and praise.

And as by many Acts so by your late Resolutions to furnish all parts in this
Nation, with able and godly Ministers to preach Jesus Christ; a glorious light
it is hoped, is breaking forth, as to settle, so to enlighten and refresh the
souls of Gods people, and to divide between light and darkness, which is the
first great work of Reformation, wherein go on and the Lord prosper you.

Yet in the midst of your great presents of State, be pleased, Right
Honorable, to accept this seasonable New years gift, humbly tendered from
(though a mean hand, yet) a cordial heart, by him, who can think himself
happy in no enjoyment, but what is sweetened by your prosperity, in the great
and glorious works of God, and is

Your most real servant in the Lord Jesus, HENRY WALKER.

THE Creation of the WORLD. BEING An Exposition on the Hebrew in Genesis the
first Chapter.
The first Oration, concerning the first Days Work.
Right Honorable and the rest, Lovers of Virtue.
MOses begins the History of the first days work of the Worlds Creation thus:
(...)

(bereshith bara elohim eth hashshamajim veeth haarets.)

Genesis 1.1. In which he shows how the visible world sprung from the outflowne
divine power: And Montanus translates it thus. In principio creavit Deus,
Coelos and terram.

And it is rendered in our English Bible as follows: In the beginning God
created the Heaven and the Earth. But I will God inabling me, explain every
word in order, clearly to your understandings, The Lord give a blessing to it.

(...) ( reshith) beginning; is a noune derivative (of (...) ( raash) to cause
beginning, or first) and from thence takes its signification; and it is of the
feminine gender, to show its natural production, of what God from all eternity
has appointed it.

And here being no emphaticall (...) ( h) for its prefix, it is not properly to
be translated in the beginning but in beginning: and it teaches us that the
first of all things (out of God) has beginning: God, and only God, is from
eternity.

(...) ( b) the prefix signifies in, by which we may learn, That all Gods
decrees are accomplished in his own time.

(...) ( bara) he created; It is the root it self, it signifies to make of
nothing, which is proper only to God: All Artists are said to make, according
to their several works, but God alone creates.

Some of the Hebrew Rabbis, have delivered their opinions, that the several
Letters of these two first words being summed up in figures; did presage the
time to be, in how many years after he creation of the world, the Messiah was
to come, as thus M. MM. CC. CCC. CCCC. X. 1000. 2000. 200. 300. 400. 10.

(...) to 3910. And about that time it was that Christ came.

(...) ( elohim) God, is Noune derivative of the Masculine Gender and plural
number, for (...) ( eloahh) is the singular.

But there is a great controversy of what root it is derived.

Some are of opinion, that it is of (...) ( ajal) to strengthen, and so it
signifies Gods omnipotency; but from thence he is called (...) ( el) God
omnipotent.

Others say it comes of (...) ( ala) to curse* and so it signifies Gods wrath;
And I confess it is under this root in the Lexicons, yet under favor, we
find it a name sweet to the remembrance of Gods people, as, oh my God, our
God, is frequent in Scripture, the joyful expressions of Gods people, where
this word is found.

It takes part with both these; and so is the name of God, as he is omnipotent,
to defend his people; and as he is a consuming fire to destroy his enemies.

And though it is a noune of the plural number, and joined with a Verb of the
singular number, as if you would say Dii Creavit, (an unusual phrase in Latin)
yet it proves clearly, that the world was created by the Trinity in unity.

And that the Eternal, Immence, Incomprehensible unity manifests it self in
it self, from eternity, in eternity, by the Trinity, and is Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, in a threefold working. And that the Father, by the Son, with the
Holy Ghost, in unity, created the Heavens and the Earth, and all the Hoasts of
them.

(...) ( eth) is only a sign that the word ^^^ing is to follow the Verb in
the Accusative case; but its self ^^^nifies nothing at all. (...) ( shamajim)
heaven, is a Noune derivatives of the duall number, and there are very great
disputes from whence this word should be derived.

Some say it comes from (...) ( majim) which signifies waters, taking (...) (
sh) for its prefix, which signifies which; as if one should say, that by the
heavens is meant that place from which the waters fall; But it is very well
known, that by the heavens is meant not only the receptacles of the waters
above, but of those higher Heavens, where the Sun, Moon, and Stars are; And
also of the Heaven of glory; But none of these were finished the first day.

And indeed, it seems clear to me, that it is derived of the root (...) (
shamam) which signifies to astonish; and so (...) ( sham) astonishment, taking
(...) ( a^^m) for its affix, which properly makes it the duall number we are
thereby rightly told what the heavens are; even those glorious manifestations of
God, which (though excellent discoveries thereof are made unto us yet) when we
poor mortal creatures have pryed all that we can into them, even then, the
more we know, the more we are astonished.

(...) ( h) emphaticall, here put for the prefix, as if it were said, these
heavens, those heavens, the heavens, pointing out unto all the heavens to be
created of God, even the heaven of glory, for Saints and Angels, which is
without end, was not without beginning.

(...) ( erets) earth, is a noune derivative, of both genders, sometimes
masculine, and sometimes feminine.

It is derived of (...) ( ratsats) and so of (...) ( rats) which signifies to
bruise; which does very well set forth the nature of the earth; for it is the
most ponderous matter of all the creation.

When (...) ( erets) is of the masculine gender, it signifies the earth, only
as to its own substance, without any relation to any thing flowing out of it,
unfruitful, and unadorned, as it was in its first form, and as it is since
spoken of in relation to its self only, as shells, potsheards, and the like.
When it is of the Feminine gender, it is to be understood as being the womb of
creatures flowing from it, as plants to adorn it, or Inhabitants to dwell upon
it, as the Earth in the Fields, Gardens, and such like places.

(...) ( h) emphatically is the prefix to earth here, as before to heavens, and
does teach us the same Lesson concerning things below: That the first form
that the Earth received, it had from God.

(...) ( veeth) and, is only the mark again of the accusative case, taking
(...) ( v) a conjunction copulative for its prefix.

(...) ( eth hashshamajim veeth haarets) Coelos, and terra, the heavens and the
earth. All was created by God, in the first matter, and form, together, on
this part of the first day, when God in beginning created them: as a workman
casts or forgeth a cup and cover both together, and afterward fashions and
beautifies it, or as an Egg, which when it is laid, has the white and the
yolke, but after it becomes a chicken, receives perfection of bones, and is
beautified with feathers, and other adornments. So were the Heavens and the
Earth first both created by God in the first motion and matter, and afterward
perfected in beauty and order.

From the whole Verse, there are some of the Hebrew Rabbis have been curious
in observations, (for they were strangely given that way, as appears by all
their writings) some of their conceits were thus:

First from the letter (...) which is as much, in number, as M. with us. That
because in this Verse it is six times expressed, that is, once in six of the
words: (...) ( hashshamajim) only wants it, that therefore this world is to
continue from the creation 6000 years, And some since have called the seventh
of the thousands, the eternal rest, and therefore consealed; in the mystery of
(...) ( hashshamajim) in which (...) is not found.

And a second observation is from the number of these seven words, that they
hold forth unto us the seven days in the week, in six of which God created the
world, and we are appointed to labor, and the seventh which is the Heavens,
does signify the day of rest.

But leaving the Rabbis to their curiosities, I will conclude at this time,
with this undeniable truth: That in beginning, God, who is Trinity in Unity,
and Unity in Trinity, created the heavens, and the Earth in the first form
thereof, of nothing; and this Heaven and Earth thus first made was the world,
though not yet set in perfect order, but afterward beautified by the Ornaments
of the six days work.

The End of the first Oration, concerning the first days work of the Creation.
THE Creation of the WORLD. BEING An Exposition on the Hebrew in Genesis the
first Chapter. The second Oration, concerning the first Days Work.
Right Honorable and the rest, Lovers of Virtue,
I Shall now (by Gods assistance) show you how the grossness of Creation, was
separated in the first form, from the spiritual nature, and what that
substance in its beginning was. I pray God give a blessing upon us. (...)

( vahaarets hajeta tohu vabohu vehhoshech ghnal-pene te^om)

Genesis 1.2. which Montanus translates into Latin thus: Et terra erat solitudo
and inanitas: et caligo super facies Abyssi. And in our English Bible; and the
Geneva; it is rendered, And the Earth was without form, and void, and darkness
was upon the face of the deep.

(...) (v) and, is a Conjunction Copulative, which (pointing to the ensuing
words) relates what the Creation was in its first form, as to its own
substance, even as a piece of wood cutrough out of the timber by the Carver, or
a stone-hewed out of the rock, by the Mason, intended for curious works to be
engraven and wrought, for the adorning of it, but as it is so, in its own rough
shape, and first form, it is only a block, or a stone, and no fashion, no
beauty put upon it.

I know that most of the Interpreters upon this place, are of opinion, that
these words which I have taken for this second theme, do relate only to the
Earth, and not any thing at all to those places where the Firmament or Heavens
now are.

But I shall make it very clear to your understandings, and prove it
positively out of the Scriptures, that these words do relate part of them to
the Earth, and part of them to the Heavens.

The former part, (...) ( vahaarets hejeta tohu vabohu) relates to the Earth.

And the next words (...) ( vehhoshech ghnal-pene tehom) extend to those higher
Orbs whither the Heavens afterward (in the second days work) expanded.

First concerning the Earth.
(...) (haarets) the Earth, Moses' calls it Earth, because it was so named long
before he writ the Hystory; but it was not Earth this first day, nor until God
caused the waters to gather together, and the dry land to appear, and then God
called it Earth, verse 10. and not before.

Some Mountains in Arabia, are called sandy hills, because nothing but sand is
to be found there, yet after showers of rain, the dust of gold is sprinkled
about their bottomes, even so the first form of the Creation, had not that
glorious beauty, which the divine showers of Gods fiat afterward distilled
from it.

And yet it had a being.

(...) (hajeta) was. She that was afterward so stately adorned by the divine
workings after the expiration of six days, had (even in the first day of her
barrenness) a substance, a form, a being, for so the root (...) haja
signifies, to have being.

As a tree in winter that has no fruit, no leaves, no beauty, yet it has both
a root in the ground, and a body, and branches spreading toward the Heavens.

But what was this form that it now had?

(...) (tohu vabohu) without form and void, says Moses, which the Prophet
Esaias explaines to be (...) (kav-tohu veachne bohu) the line of confusion, and
the stones of emptiness, Esaias 34.11. The line (...) ( tohu) confusion: The
perpendicular ( bohu) stones of emptiness.

But I shall explain each of these words distinctly apart.

(...) (tohu) without form, is a Noune Derivative of the Masculine Gender,
Ierom, translates it to signify empty, (that is without plants to adorn it,
or Inhabitants to dwell upon it.) The Septuagint, translate it invisible (no
plant nor creature, to be seen upon it) Pagnius, understands it, vast,
solitary, And some of the Hebrew Rabbis have called it a Chaos, as some remote
rocky Islands now are, where there is nothing to be found but stones, slime,
and rubbish, and it is derived of (...) to be solitary, and so it signifies a
desolation, or vast thing, without plants, or creatures.

Yet the Earth was not absolutely without a form, for then it had bin nothing:
Every thing that is, has a being by its form; but it was not yet severed from
the waters, compact, or made solid, adorned with plants to beautify it, nor
inhabited with creatures to dwell upon it. There was no Adam, no Garden of
Eden, with pleasant and delightful trees, and precious stones, all which it
had gloriously, when the Creation was finished.

For as the Prophet I say, says (...) (lo tohu ber aahh) the Lord did not
create it to be ((...) tohu that was not Gods end to have it remain so) vain,
but afterward formed it to be inhabited, Isa. 45.18. And it was looked upon by
God (in the eternal Council of the Deity) as having all its comely Ornaments
(in the Idea;) All things are in eternity in Gods presence.

(...) (bohu) void, is a Noune derivative of the masculine Gender, it comes of
(...) ( baha) (or (...) ( bubh) both which signify, to be empty or void, (and
so it signifies emptiness, or a vacuity) so as to be incapable of producing
plants, which virtue it received afterward in the third days work.

It was as a twig that a Gardener cuts off, which is not capable of bearing
fruit, until he has ingrafted it in the stock: It could not bring forth
plants until God joined his fiat with it.

Secondly, Concerning the Heavens.
(...) (hhoshech) darkness, is a noune derivative of the masculine Gender.
Some of the Rabbis understood it to mean the element of Fire; but then it
would have been transparent. Some suppose it to be that which we call night
(and no other darkness) going before the day; but we know that in the night,
there is (when it is darkest) some glimpse of light, from the influence of the
Stars at least.

In a word, it was not any thing created, but comes of (...) ( hhashach) to be
obscure, or dark) greater then the darkness of the night, a mere privation of
light. It is a maxim, both in Divinity and Philosophy, That darkness is the
principal thing in the very essence, and form of the Creature, until God
puts in light into it; (...) (shamajim) the Heavens (says Job, where all those
glorious bodies are) (...) (lo zaccu) are not clean in his sight, Job 15.15.
They were all (even the Angels themselves) dark creatures, until God put light
into them: And yet the dark obscures not from God, the light and darkness are
all one unto him.

And this darkness was not in the Chaos only, but (...) ( ghnal) upon the
Abisse, which is derived of (...) ( ghnala) to assend or rise up; it was above
the Chaos, but within the Creation.

(...) (pene) the face. It is the plural number, in construction, for (...)
(penim) faces, and is derived of (...) ( phana) to look, and so properly
signifies the aspect; As where God says in the second Commandment, Thou shall
have none other Gods but me. It is in the Hebrew, (...) (ghnal panaja) upon my
face; that is, in my sight.

And so here, this darkness did extend over all the vast empty Abyss.

(...) (tehom) the deep, is derived of (...) ( taha) as (...) ( tohu is) only
has a more large extent, taking (...) ( m) for its affix, as if it were an
Adverb; and signifies all that lay voydly, the whole solitary vacuity, the great
Abyss, bottomless emptiness, not that it absolutely wanted a bottom, but by
reason of its vastness.

Most men take this Deep for the Sea, but that is a mistake, for the Seas were
not yet gathered into their place: And Job treats of them each distinctly, as
several.

(...) ( tehom amar) the depth says, (...) ( vejam amar) and the Sea says.
Job 28.14.

And all that I have said, agrees with what the Prophet Jeremiah has written in
the holy Scripture. Ier. 4.23. (...) (raiti eth haarets vehinne tohu vabohu
veeth-hashshamajim veen oram.) I beheld the Earth, and lo, it was without
form, and void: And the Heavens, and they had no light. That which Moses calls
the depth, Jeremiah calls the Heavens; and that which is called darkness in
Genesis, is here called no light.

The End of the second Oration concerning the first days work of the Creation.
THE Creation of the WORLD. BEING An Exposition on the Hebrew in Genesis the
first Chapter. The Third Oration, concerning the first Days Work.
Right Honorable and the rest, Lovers of Virtue.
I Shall now (God willing) show you how the Spirit of God supported the
unformed world, and thereby the Divine power working upon Nature, formed, and
brought the Creation into figures, to the eternal glory of God, and
contemplations of Angels and Men.

(...)

( veruahh elohim merahhepheth ghnal-pene hammajim.)

Genesis 1.2. Which Montanus translates, Et Spiritus Dei motabat super facies
aquarum, and in the English Bible it is translated thus: And the Spirit of God
moved upon the face of the waters.

(...) (veruahh and the Spirit; (...) ( ruahh) is a Noun derivative, and is
sometimes in the Masculine gender, and sometimes the Feminine. Interpreters do
much differ about its signification in this place.

Tertullian, (as Doctor Willet reports) and so the later Jews generally also
say, that it is to be interpreted here wind; A mighty wind, or the wind of God,
but that is a mistake; for the wind was not yet created.

Theodoret, was of opinion, that by it, is meant the Air; but that cannot be,
for all the Creation was in the first form (only) in the Chaos.

Cajetanus, translated it an Angel, because Angels are said to be Ministering
spirits; but that is absurd: God needed not the help of Angels to create the
World, nor to sustain it, or to help to garnish it when the first form was
created: And besides, it does not seem probable, that the Angels could be,
before the Heavens were created; nor had God yet created the Light in its first
form, much less the Angels.

The old Rabbis (who were more able to interpret) say it signifies spirit, or
ghost, as we have it translated.

It is derived from (...) (ravahh) to breath, or cause breath, to inspire, or
put in an influence of motion; and from thence (...) ( ruahh) signifies a
breath, or spirit.

And it is here in the Feminine gender, holding forth the Spirit of God, to be
the Creator of spirits, and breath; which is testified by the Prophet Amos.
(...)

(Hinne jot ser harim ubore ruahh)

Lo, he that formed the mountains, and creates the spirit (or wind)

Amos 4.13.

And therefore the Prophet David, confesses unto God in the hundred and fourth
Psalm. (...)

(Teshallahh ruhhacha jibb areun)

Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created.



And so here it signifies the Spirit of God the Creator: And therefore it
follows,

(...) (Elohim) God, God in Trinity; (...) ( ruahh elohim) the Spirit, of God
in Trinity; that is, the Holy Ghost, the third person in the Deity.

As God is one in Unity, so he is three in the Hypostaces, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost.

The Father is from himself, the excellent glory, enjoying himself in his
eternal will.

The Son proceeds from the Father, and is the brightness of his glory, and
the express Image of his Person, enjoying himself in the eternity of his
Fathers will.

The Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father, and the Son, and is the Spirit of
glory, enjoying himself in the eternal motion, which is roused up, and stirred
from the eternal enjoyment, which the Father and the Son, have each in other.

This is a great mystery, and it cannot be fully explained to the senses of
mortal men; but we may see Emblems of the Trinity in the Sun; there is the
illustrious body of the Sun, the Light, and the Warmth: So the Father is the
excellent glory, the Son the brighnesse of that glory, and the Holy Ghost the
Spirit of glory. And God in Trinity, by the Spirit of glory, created and
beautified the world. And therefore says holy Job. (...)

(Beruhho shamajim shiphra)

By (or in) his Spirit, he garnished the Heaven.

And so here Moses, (...)

(Veruahh elohim mer ahhepheth ghnal pene hammajim.)

And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.



(...) (Merahhepheth) moved. There are very great controversies about the
meaning of this word; and many disputes have been among the Learned concerning
it: As for example:

The Septuagint translate it, was carried. The Spirit of God was carried upon
the face of the waters; that is, as a Bird is carried with her feathers,
swimming upon the waters, by the motion of her feet. But this is far fetched.

Tremellius translates it, did sit, the spirit of God did sit upon the waters,
that is, as a Hen sits over her young, and this I confess comes nearer to the
sense of it.

The latin translation renders it motaba, did flutter. The spirit of God did
flutter upon the faces of the waters; that is, as a Bird fluttereth
over-her-nest to warm and refresh her young.

But Calvin, in his Commentary upon this place renders two significations, as
so indifferent in his judgment, that says he, the Reader may take that which
he likes best. It may be understood says he, stirred itself, or, rested upon.

1 That the Spirit of God stirred it self upon the waters (to exercise his
strength.)

2 Rested upon them (to sustain them.)

The root from which (...) ( merahhepheth) is derived is (...) ( rahhaph) which
in the English Bible, is severally rendered.

Sometimes it is translated to shake, And so when the Prophet Jeremiah being
troubled at the peoples sins, said. (...) ( rahhaphu col-ghnatsmothai) which
is translated in our English Bibles thus, all my bones shake, that was, through
the influence that it wrought upon him, it made his bones to stir, and move
within him, all his bones did shake.

Sometimes again it is translated to flutter, as in Deuteronomie, where Moses
sets down Gods out-flowne love to his people, under the similitude of an Eagle
over her young, it is in the Hebrew. (...) ( ghnal-gozalaiv jerahheph) It is
translated fluttereth over her young, moves, expands, spreads, puts influence
in, by resting upon, as the sun that spreads its beams upon the Earth,
fluttereth over her eggs, not chickens, for so the word imports.

(...) ( gozel) signifies the young of any thing, as it is propagated and
brought forth in the birth, which of birds must be the eggs and nothing else:
It is derived of (...) ( gazal) which signifies to part away violently, which
must needs be the egg, and not the chicken. So that this fluttering (of the
Eagle) over her young, is her sitting upon her eggs to hatch them, which she
does by that warmth that flows from her into the eggs. And so the spirit of
God is said to sit, or move, here.

And there are five things more to be considered concerning this word (...)
(merahhepheth) he moved.

1. That it is a participle in Benoni, that is, moving, which shows unto us,
that all creatures subsist by motion, the Sun, Moon, and Stars are
preserved by motion; men, and all living creatures dye when they cease to
breath. And all things that grow, are in perpetual motion of putting forth
themselves, to budding, or ripening what flows from them, which ceasing, they
dye. 2 By the conjunction (...) ( v) prefix to (...) ( ruahh) we are to
consider that (...) (hajeta) was, is to be understood, for Moses now spoke of
the time past, for the creation was long before he was. 3. (...) (
merahhepheth) is here in the Conjugation Pihel, (though (...) ( hh) has no
dagesh, for it is one of those Letters that will not bear it, being as much as
double (...) ( h) it self:) And by the Grammar rules, signifies a doubling of
the sense, as to say moved, moved, that is, continually, or vehemently moved. 4
By the affix (...) ( th) it appears to be the Feminine Gender, and so to
signify such a motion as causes production, that is, to bring forth; what the
Trinity had decreed. 5 By the Termination (...) ( eth) it is the plural
number, and so holds forth the several workings of Gods spirit herein. First,
To preserve the first Form of nature which God had created. And secondly, To
cause that Form to put forth it self to production, as to what God by his
fiat afterward appointed it.
And thus the spirit of God is said to move upon the face of the waters.

(...) (ghnal-pene) upon the face, faces, or rather aspects.

(...) (hammajim) of the waters; for the waters then were higher then the
Chaos, But I shall refer that of the waters, until the second days work of the
Creation.

The End of the third Oration, concerning the first days work of the Creation.
The fourth and last Oration, concerning the first days work of the CREATION.
Right Honorable, and the rest, Lovers of Virtue:
COncerning the Light which God created the first day, Moses says, (as it is
rendered in the Hebrew) Genesis 1. verses 3, 4, 5. 3 (...)

4 (...)

5 (...)

1 ( Vajiomer elohim jehi-or: vaihi or.)

4 Vajiar elohim eth haor ci-tobh: vajiavhdil elohim ben haor uben hahhoshec.

5 Vajiikra elohim laor jom, velahhoshec kara laila vaihi-ghnerbh vaihi boker
jom ehhadh.)

Which Montanus renders in Latin, 3 Et dixit Deus: sit lux, and fuit lux.

4 Et vidit Deus lucem, quod bona; and divisit Deus inter lucem, and inter
tenebras.

5 Et vocavit Deus lucem diem, and tenebras vocavit noctem, and fuit vespera,
and fuit mane, dies unus.

And in our English Bibles it is translated thus: 3 And God said, Let there be
light; and there was light.

4 And God saw the light, that it was good; and God divided the light from the
darkness.

5 And God called the light day, and the darkness he called night: and the
evening and the morning, were the first day.



To begin with the third Verse.

(...) (Vajjomer elohim.) And God said, God in Trinity. The great question
disputed amongst the Learned is, How God here did say, or speak, seeing he is
a Spirit? To which I answer thus:

There are seven Hebrew words, which I find in the Bible all translated to
speak; but they differ thus, 1 (...) ( dabhabh) signifies to speak in wrath,
or what comes from anger. 2 (...) ( dabhar) to speak out a thing by argument,
or alleging reason. 3 (...) ( malal) to speak with power, efficacy, or
majesty. 4 (...) ( ghnana) to utter with the mouth, slowly, soberly, and
leasurely. 5 (...) ( naam) to speak pleasantly, and merrily, or singing, or
the like. 6 (...) ( hagha) to speak by a groan, or a sigh. And 7 (...) ( amar)
to speak by any way of manifesting what is in the mind or thought, as an
Artist that ingraves, carves, or paints a resemblance, to manifest what is in
his fancy.

We express what is in our minds by writing, as well as by words; and so the
Egyptians did the like by Hereglifixes: And men by their lives and
conversations thus speak what is in their hearts and minds: And therefore
says the Prophet David, Psalm. 94.4. (...) ( jithammeru col pongale aven) which
our English Translation renders thus. All the workers of iniquity boast
themselves, speak themselves, their hearts speak by their works.

And therefore says David in 53 Psalm, and the 1 Verse. (...) (amar nabhal
belibbo en elohim) the fool has said in his heart there is no God. Corrupt are
they, and have done abominable iniquity; That is, by the abominable iniquity of
his life, he has manifested that he has a corrupt heart, and that he does not
believe in God; he has avouched it by his conversation.

And where Moses says in the 26 Chapter of Deuteronomy verse. 17. (...) (Eth
Iehova heemarta hajjom lihjoth lecha lelohim) which is rendered in the English,
Thou have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God. And verse 18. the same word
is used again, and so translated. And the Lord (...) (heemirecha) has
avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people: That is, has manifested what
is in his mind toward thee.

God said: That is, It was in the counsel of the Almighty, That now there
should be light.

(...) (johi) Let there be, it is a branch of (...) ( haja) to cause being, and
is in the Future tense, and third person singular, by the prefix ( j) properly
it shall be, light shall have a being.

(...) (or) light. The Learned (both primative, and later Fathers) have been
very inquisitive to find out what this light was, that was this first day
created, and have much differed about it. I will tell you some of their
opinions.

1 I will begin with Austin, he thought it was a spiritual, and no natural,
or corporeal light; but that cannot be, because it did distinguish day and
night. 2 Catharinus, and others, conceived it to be the perfect light of the
Sun, now made this first day, and rehearsed again the fourth day; but that is
directly against the Text of the Scripture in verse 16. where it is expressly
said, That God made the Sun, as also the Moon and Stars. 3 Nazianzen, and so
Theodoret say, that it was such a bright cloud, that no mortal nature could
endure to look upon it whilst it was whole, and that therefore it was
afterward dispersed into several bodies of the Sun, Moon, and Stars: But that
is very improbable; for then the most absolute glory of the whole Creation
should have lost its perfection, before man was created. 4 Damascene supposed,
that this light proceeded from the element of fire; but that cannot be, for the
Element of fire was not (as yet) created. 5 Basil, and others, hold it to be a
light without a subject, afterward fastened to the body of the Sun: Indeed if
it had been (...) ( maor) there had been some ground for this opinion, but
being that it is (...) (or) a body of light, that appears a clear mistake. 6
Thomas Aquinas, relates this light to be the Sun, but as yet imperfect, and
afterward beautified, and finished. If he had only said it had been such a
light, and not called it the Sun, his relation had been more probable. 7 Beda,
Lyranus, the Master of sentences, and others, allege it to be a bright
lightsome cloud, which was carried about by a circular motion, and gave light
to the world, and indeed this is something to the purpose: But, 8 Others,
together with those quoted by Piscator, say, that this light was a little cloud
that had a glimmering light in it, brought out of those waters, where the
Spirit of God moved, and that by the power of the Almighty, it was caused to
move with a circular motion about the mass of waters, and Chaos; and this
seems to be most probable, and agreeing with the whole History.
And yet some go a step further, and say, that this little light was
afterward translated into the body of the Sun, on the fourth day when it was
created; but that is an extreme curiosity.

Verse 4. (...) (Vajjar elohim eth haor ci-tobh.) And God saw the light that it
was good. The exposition of this, I shall refer to the last verse of the
Chapter. It follows,

(...) (Vajjabhdil elohim) And God divided; God in Trinity, made the light to
be morning in one hemisphere, whilst it was darkness in the other. There was a
clear distinct division.

(...) (ben) between, for even the whole Chaos was between them; and what (...)
( haor this light was, I showed you out of the third verse. And what (...) (
hahhoshec) this darkness was, out of the second verse.

Verse 5. (...) (vajjikra elohim) And God called; and so also (...) (kara) He
called; they are both one word, only the former has the conjunction (...) (
v) and so is formed as the Future, but is the Preter tense, a phrase usual in
Hebrew in this manner. It signifies such a calling as does manifest, or
proclaim a thing, whereby the nature or quality thereof is rendered: And thus
God here did manifest, and proclaim (laor) to the light, (...) (velahhoshech)
and to the darkness, for both have the prefix (...) (l) to them.

(...) (jom) day, the light is very properly called day, being derived of (...)
( hamam) which signifies, to brandish, and put to flight; for so does the
brandishing luster of the day expel the darkness of the night.

(...) ( laila) night, it is derived of (...) ( lajal) to wander about, round
and round, and with circumferences, as one that goes up a pair of stairs; so
do men that walk in the night. And so does the darkness fly before the day in
its motion also. (...) (vaihi ghnereth) And the evening was, it is derived of
(...) ( ghnarabh) to mix, and when the evening comes, it mixes all things with
it self, in one conjunction of darkness.

(...) (vaihi boker) and the morning was. It is derived of (...) ( baker) to
inquire or ask; which as it relates what men then begin to do amongst
themselves, for it teaches us what is our duty toward God, even to ask of him
our daily bread, even all things whereof we stand in need.

(...) (vaihi) was, expressed both to the evening and to the morning, shows
that all the day, each of them had a manifest being in that hemisphere,
(wherein for the present they were each of them but) a part.

(...) (jom ehhadh) the first day, properly (it signifies) one day. It is not
usual in Hebrew to call any thing first, but God himself: (...) ( 'ehhadh) is
derived of (...) ( ahhadh) to join together, and so the joint motion of the
evening and morning made one day, for after the light was created, both night
and day were continually, for wheresoever it was day, it was at that present,
night on the other side of the World; as it is now with us, and the Hemisphere
in our Antipodes. But the evening was first every where, until the morning
light approached. And some think (and perhaps it may be so too) that this
light was made about the time we call six a clock in the morning, the day
being then about six hours long: And yet others think, that all that God made
of the Creation this day was succinct, immediately one thing after another,
about the time we call midnight, And so the whole day and night, succeeded in
all parts of the world in order after.

The end of the fourth and last Oration concerning the first days work of the
Creation.

