Folly Detected OR, Some Animadversions on a Book called, A Brief Discourse
concerning Singing in the Public Worship of God; Put forth by one Mr. Isaac
Marlow 1690, and an Appendix printed 1691.

Wherein the Weakness of his Arguments against Singing God's Praises, the
dangerousness of his Assertions, and his unaccountable Confidence is laid open;
and singing of Psalms, etc. in God's Worship proved a Gospel-Ordinance.

Matthew. 5.19. He that breaks the least of these Commandments, and teaches
Men so to do, shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven. By JOSEPH
WRIGHT.

London, Printed in the Year 1691. And sold by John Harris at the Harrow in the
Poultrey.

Animadversions upon I. M -- 's Book called, A Brief Discourse concerning
Singing in the Public Worship of God in the Church, printed 1690, and upon An
Appendix, printed 1691.
SIR,
I Find you conceitedly Zealous in all your Book: Your first words are mere
presumption; the Lord's poor afflicted People, are not so delivered out of the
Hands of their Enemies, as to serve the Lord without the fear of them; tho
notwithstanding we ought, it is true, to serve the Lord without the slavish fear
of Men, in Holiness and Righteousness before him all the days of their Life;
for which end he has given us his Son to die for us, and his holy Word as a
Rule for Faith and Practice, and has promised his holy Spirit to guide our
Feet in the Way of Peace: and for our present Liberty let us bless God.

Your next Paragraph is like it; We are not most unhappy, neither all nor many,
in the want of the perfect Union of the Church of Christ in this Life amongst
themselves, etc. It will be sufficient that his Church have perfect Union with
him, and that is their most happiness in this World: Nor is it evident that all
of them did attain to one and the same Conception of the Mind and Will of God
revealed to us in the Holy Scriptures, neither of lesser Moment or of greater
Consequence at any time, but otherwise: Yet also both the things which you call
of lesser Moment, (which you might have told us what they are) and those of
greater Consequence too, ^ught to be duly weighed in the Scales of Holy
Scripture, there being no liberty to us, to count any thing God commands
inconsiderable; so should weak Saints and bold Supplanters be prevented.

Your next Paragraph is more than the former, viz. [ And witnessed to by the
Sufferings of the purest Churches in our Age, who have born a lively Testimony,
not only against the humane prescribed and precomposed Forms of Prayers, but of
singing David's Psalms, and other Hymns or Songs precomposed by Man, as they
are frequently used as part of the constant and ordinary Worship of God
instituted in his Gospel Church.] This is matter of wonder, if it comes not
from a Novice; or if it do, that such consult no Counsel, but expose such
things which must be corrected, because not,

1. None of the purest Churches in this Age may be an Example to us to follow
further than they follow Christ, and therefore an useless Argument.

2. To say purest Churches in our Age; if it intend so, called amongst all Men,
then it admits all which are so called amongst Men to be so. But if it be to be
restrained to the purest Churches of Christ, then to such as are so in their
own Eyes, or others, or in Christ's. The last is hid yet from us, and the other
Notion is full of Emulation, as it is of Ignorance.

You should have told us who those purest Churches in our Age are, that we
might consult them, and compare them, for I see we may not trust you; for
though you may esteem some to be so, and which applaud you, I question whether
they be not polluted even with what you assoil them; and for any in particular
to assume it, is high presumption.

There are some Churches which are thought so, that allow their Members to be
at the Assemblies of Presbyterians and Independents, yea, while they sing
David's Psalms too; and that is as bad with you as other Forms of Prayers, in
being witnessed against too; if you will not count such purest Churches, they
will think so, and you beat the Air.

3. It is without ground that ever I heard or saw, that any true Church (let
Degrees be waved) have suffered, against a Form of Prayer, or singing David's
Psalms; nor has it been put in any ones Case, whether they were Affirmative or
Negative-Sufferers. But all the Sufferings in our Age by the Saints
Affirmatively, were for the Faith as it was once delivered to the Saints by
Christ and his Apostles, in all the parts of his Church-Gathering and
Discipline. And Negatively, against humane invented stated and imposed
Traditions; nor were there a witness born by suffering against any other.

4. You say they witnessed by their Sufferings against singing David's Psalms,
etc. which you affirm is a practice of so great an Error, as will lead them to
Apostasy, for which they have less to say than they who are for a Form of
Prayer. This is severe, filled and set off with extreme Ingredients of Danger
and Ignorance too. But having discharged that witnessing Sufferings in the
Superlative Degree also, I will examine, how it is a great Error as will lead
to Apostasy? and whether they which sing David's Psalms, etc. have less to say
than they who are for a Form of Prayer?

Every Error is dangerous; but that which will lead to Apostasy is most
dangerous. I have not observed any such Effects in any that have used it as
yet; nor can singing David's Psalms be charged with such a vile Consequence to
have followed it. Nor of all the Apostates, or Apostasies, which have not been
a few, yet no one of them have been begun, or have had their Increment from
singing David's Psalms; so that they must have an extraordinary Prejudice
against it, and confidence in your Infallibility, that shall quadrate with you
herein. These are very bold Assertions, condemning all that do use singing
David's Psalms, etc. This is uncharitableness with an ill witness, which has
no one Instance; it is the manner of weak Politics, that would hinder a thing
which Truth and Reason does further, to set fear of Sequels against the force
of known Verity, which you take refuge at, though you know no one Error has
grown out of this Fountain. You say, They have less to say for singing David's
Psalms, etc. than they who are for a Form of Prayer. This is Confidence with
Ignorance, because you have not yet known what they have to say.

What Form of Prayer is it which you intend? If you mean such as the Prelates
injoin all their Ministers to assent and consent to, and that all People should
conform to, on the Damage that may ensue upon Body and Goods, then you beat the
Air; after whose Text they whom you respect never Preached nor Writ, nor sung
David's Psalms, etc. Yet you say they have more to say; you mean by God's Word,
else I grant it to your rebuke. Those you respect, do neither impose their
Singing, nor judge them which dissent, but in all Bowels of Charity embrace them
in whatsoever they may: you can condemn unheard, without Charity and Truth.

And I tell you, if there could be as much said for imposed Forms of Prayer,
and Baby-Baptism, as there can be said for social singing David's Psalms in
private and public Worship to God; you and all your purest Churches are so
defiled, as you cannot be cleansed without true Repentance of all your
suffering Testimony and Witness you pretend to have given against Singing and
Forms of Prayer; such ill Notions you propose.

Many of the Ministers and Members of the Baptists have offered the
Pedobaptists, that if they can give us but one Instance that any newborn
Infant were either required to be baptized, or that were baptized by our Lord
Christ, or any of his Disciples, any Precept or Example in all the New
Testament, though never so private, and we would yield, and contend no more
against it; though we have so many pregnant Instances and public Testimonies
for us. And I am sure all Opposers would be confounded with the least evidence
of Example, although many Circumstances were wanting: were there but a bare
Practice to be seen, what a Structure would be raised upon it!

But notwithstanding our Lord Jesus Christ and his Disciples did sing in God's
Worship, and Paul and Silas sang Praise in God's Worship; and the holy Spirit
enjoined it without exception on the Church at Corinth, Ephesus, Coloss,
thereby confirming it to be acceptable in the Worship of God; and in James's
enjoining it to all Saints; and those Instances in the Revelations, which
encourage the use and continuance of it, you slight them all, and say, We have
less to say than they who are for a Form of Prayer.

You craftily forsook the proof of your Parallel, thinking to blind us with the
Lord's Prayer, which you can dispense with as well as those you oppose, and
begging the question under your Antagonist's Concession: but Men know not what
they do, that deny those Forms of Praises in the holy Scripture, to be used in
God's Worship.

And humble Christians ought always to be persuaded, that no Word, Psalm, Song
or Prayer, is vainly or rashly inserted into that Volume, which infinite
supreme Wisdom dictated, nor hastily censure any that use them verbatim in
God's Worship at some time, without putting them upon, or censuring others.

And yet further, I would yield to a Pedobaptist, if he had either Precept or
Example for him in all the New Testament: it may be you would not, because you
had rather follow some in our Age: the which if doing so, you would consider;
they will tell you that in things they esteem good to practice, yet dare not
impose. Have a care of breaking the Law of Charity, on purpose to cast the
Shreds at their Heads which desire to keep it; and do not ( Sampson-like) kill
your self, on purpose to destroy others, lest many things done and approved by
the Lord, be not so clear, as social singing David's Psalms in God's Worship.

King David was not the Author of all the Book of Psalms; most may be were
collected by him, many might be his; some were long before him, and some long
after him: if he collected some that were before him, some he did not, and
others that were made in his days. It shows the Lord gave his Church Psalms to
be sung in private and public Worship. They must have hard brows that dare
deny that God was not worshipped by singing of Psalms, which were sung by every
one that did sing Psalms since the beginning of the World, and that he is not
by his Church to the end of the World still worshipped thereby.

The Book of Psalms, according to the original Sepher Tehillim, properly
signifies the Book of Praises; not only styled so from the greater part, but
even penitential Psalms, which contain Confession, Repentance, and promise of
Amendment, yea whatever else therein contained, for thereby is Glory given unto
God; as Josh. 7.19. Rev. 16.9. Heb. 13.15. as the Margent (which waits on the
Text,) and such is the excellency of it, and all Scripture-Psalms being
wonderfully contrived for all Saints Occasions in what condition, and of what
condition soever.

Singing Psalms was used as part of God's Worship from the beginning of the
World, and must be unto the end of it, and for evermore; Job 37.7. No tolerable
Interpretation can be given of this Place uttered by God himself, except it be
understood of the Angels made the first Day, and that they were the Stars of
Heaven for Brightness, and Sons of God; for other Stars and Sons of God there
were none at the laying of the Foundation of the Earth, and the Cornerstone
thereof; When the Morning-Stars sang together, and all the Sons of God shouted
for joy; Called Angels of Light, 2 Cor. 11.14. and Stars for Brightness, Rev.
1, and 2. Morning-Stars, because made in the first Morning of the Worlds, that
they might behold the Creation of all other Creatures, though they had no hand
in it; and first praise God before any other living Creatures were made. These
Morning-Stars, and all the Sons of God sang together, and shouted for Joy at
the beginning of the World; like the shouting and singing Praise to God, at the
laying the Foundation and Cornerstone of the Temple, Zech. 4.7. Ezra 3.10, 11.
all which were Worship unto God.

And that it was used as part of public and private Worship to God amongst the
Jews, from the time they were a Nation; if David did collect the Book of
Psalms, all which were before, were delivered and given for the Worship of God,
and used when first given, as well as those which were made by him, and as used
in his time, some of which are supposed to have been before Israel went into
Egypt: Those in Exodus and Deuteronomy were by Moses delivered for the Worship
of God, though not included in David's Book, save in substance. Whether the
Book of Psalms was David's, or Asaph's, or other Prophets, or all of them were
Instruments, it matters not, it being the pleasure of God there should be so
many gathered into one Volume, which had been, as the Lord gave them, used as
part of God's Worship, whether Moses, Deborah and Barak, Hannah, David,
Solomon, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Habakkuk, Jonas, or others in the Old Testament; all
were delivered to be used as part of God's Worship by Song, and cannot with
modesty be gainsaid.

And it is unlearned to say, that not in the Wilderness-Condition of Israel
after the Flesh, and so not in the Wilderness-Condition of Israel after the
Spirit. Nor is there either ground or reason in what is urged thereabout, (as
shall appear in its place) but a mere Fancy: all Israel sang the Praise of the
Lord at the Red Sea, Psalm. 106.13. and Moses delivered unto them that Song and
others, which he put in their Hearts and Mouths, and which he did command to
teach their Children even all along in the Wilderness, and to David, and
afterward: And all the Children of Israel from the Red Sea were bound to teach
and learn to sing the Lord's Songs in every Time and Generation wheresoever,
and under what Condition soever, Deuteronomy. 31. 19, 21, 22. and chap. 32. I say,
these Songs were always to be kept in their Hearts and Mouths for God's Praise
in his Worship. And indeed a Psalm in any Language is more easily and readily
learned by Heart, and put in the Mouth, better remembered, and commonly received
and familiar for frequent use, than Words in another style.

Writing in Verse is very suitable where the Matter is laid deep in it, and
truly wrought out of the Affections; as those Scriptures which show forth
greatest Passions of Affections, are composed as sacred Flames of pearless Love
between Christ and his Spouse, in Canticles; the triumphant Joy and Praise by
Moses and all Israel, and Deborah and Barak, (who all sang [saith the Word of
God] and no Incongruity, as you do both dream and deny) the afflicting Grief of
Hezekiah and Jeremiah in his Lamentations, and Habakkuk. Passion is most free
in Verse, and has the greatest Scope when tied to Numbers, as that Deuteronomy. 32.
and Hannah, 1 Samuel 2.

But the Book of Psalms is a Crowd of all Affections, Love, Joy, Fear, Hope,
Anger and Zeal, all acting their parts, and wound up to the highest strains by
the holy Spirit, breathing poetical Eloquence and most divine Wisdom in those
holy Songs where the direful Agonies and Sufferings of our everblessed
Redeemer, is the most precious Stone above all else, fitly contrived for all
times; none can by singing them deny Christ come in the Flesh, as it is ill
imagined, because it commonly speaks of that which is fulfilled, as it were
with God from the Foundation of the World, who calls things which are not to
us, and which shall be as though they were.

Divine Songs raise the Soul, and infuse Comfort; Common and Profane do Satan
Service; and Spiritual, by Grace, Joy, Zeal, do God Service. If any thing be
able to warm and fire the Soul, and sweeten and ease the hard things which
God's Servants meet with here, this will: and was the special Solace at all
times of greatest Difficulties, and very often then delivered of God, to praise
him, and comfort and confirm them: and a most special Blessing I say again it
is, what ever any think of it to the contrary, that such Heavenly Cordials are
made ready for us.

The Singing of Scripture-Psalms have continued in use as part of God's Worship
ever since Christianity were, and will be to the end of the World. Christ and
his Disciples used it, and gave order for its Observation and Continuance. And
the most ancient Records and Monuments of Antiquity which remain unto this Day.
And it did never yet lead any into Apostasy. Tertullian in his Apology, etc.
says, Saints met before Day to sing Psalms to the Lord. Basil in his Epistle
says, When one of us has begun a Psalm, the rest set in to sing with him, all
with one Heart and one Voice; and this, says he, is the common practice of the
Churches in Egypt, Lybia, Thebes, Palestine, Syria, and those that dwell on
Euphrates, and generally where Singing of Psalms is of any Account. And
Eusebius testifies the like in his Ecclesiastical History.

And the New Testament Songs, of which there are about twelve in Singing Style,
if that will do, which shows the Holy Spirit was not against Singing Style, tho
he did not translate the Hebrew Poetry into Greek Poesy, not at any time
translating much together, seldom verbatim, but always the Substance and Truth
of it; you do not know whether he did not translate in Hebrew Poetry, tho in
Greek Words.

Those 12 aforesaid in the New Testament, being extended till the Judgment
executed upon the Great Whore, which preceeds the Marriage of the Lamb, do
intimate the allowed continuance of the Singing in God's Worship; and singing
Praise unto God will be for evermore: so were it not a Type, all Duties in this
Life else will cease, but the Triumphant Thanks, Praise, Love, and Joy shall be
for ever.

As touching Men's precomposing Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, I shall not
condemn their doing; yet I will affirm, that for Profit and Delight, and which
may truly be called Spiritual Songs, and the Word of Christ, the Psalms, in the
Holy Scriptures must have the preheminency far above whatsoever has since
been, or ever shall be dictated in this World, the which if God had not so
approved, he would have hinted it.

I come in the next place to Page 4. to your two Scriptures, Ephesians. 5.18, 19.
and Coloss. 3.16. to see if we have any better dealing.

You tell us that these two Scriptures are made a Foundation for vocal Singing
together in the constant Worship of God in the Gospel Church, page 5.

You might have told us who made them so; that if they were taken away, all the
Building would fall. it may be you suppose it, and so flatter your self to
prevail if you could dig them up, etc. You say that Ephesians. 5.19. is not to be
understood speaking to your selves, but in the Original it is speaking in your
selves, and that is keeping silence in the Church, compared with 1 Cor. 14.28.
and Pool's Annot.

Then we may read it so, Be not drunk with Wine wherein is Excess, but be
filled with the Spirit, that you may speak in your selves, keeping silence in
the Church, in Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, making Melody in your Hearts
to the Lord; any Novice would be ashamed of such an Interpretation: for this is
a Duty enjoined to the whole Church, therefore they are all to be filled with
the Spirit, and speak in themselves, keeping silence when they are all met
together, at least while they are so speaking in themselves. If thus at every
Meeting, how much of the time, some of it may be, much of it may be, and all
may be at one time, or at different times, so that some may be speaking in
silence, and another vocally; if all at any time in silence, then the Men and
Women too may be inditing and singing Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs,
making Melody in their Hearts to God in silence, for this is to be in the
Church-Assembly, an Assembly carrying on an Ordinance in Silence, and Women too
as much Administrators as any. Do you well to set your House on Fire on purpose
to burn your Neighbors? This intimates both Ministers and Members must keep
silence in the Church -- tho filled with the Spirit, and speak in themselves,
singing Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, making Melody in their Heart, etc.
not one Word heard. This is for that while a silent Meeting: and time must be
allowed for it, it is a Duty, and it is Quakerism.

Such a Meeting is a sign of something, but they must not tell what they are
about, nothing must be seen, heard, or understood by one another, which is
Barbarism and Confusion; for every particular Member may be upon different
Things and Subjects in God's Public Worship: this may be more like to lead to
Apostasy, than Social singing David's Psalms: but no Absurdity follows Truth.

Then seeing that this Ephesians. 5.18, 19. is a Command to the whole Church in
their Assembly and Worship, it does necessitate a Social Singing with Vocal
Voice, Psalms, as part of God's Worship. That Expression, (Be ye filled with
the Spirit) being Metaphorical, and intimating the Transport of Spiritual Joy
Christians should be filled with when they celebrate God's Praises by Singing,
they should be filled with all good Affections, as a due Preparation for this
part of Worship: They that have a Fullness of the Graces, Virtues, or Fruits of
the Spirit, may be said to be filled with the Spirit. For it is not to be
filled with its Essence without Operation, nor its Filling and Operations
without natural Faculties: and natural Light improved with the Spirit bettereth
and assists, and does not destroy. And all extraordinary and ordinary Gifts, or
Fillings of the Spirit, takes in for its effecting our Help. The sacred
Scriptures, or Counsel of God, by which we are to be guided here to glory
hereafter; so that they which by the help of the Spirit, have the holy
Scriptures in an holy, humble, and sober Understanding, plentifully in them;
without which none is capable to worship the Lord in Spirit and Truth; they may
be said to be filled with the Spirit, bringing the holy Scriptures to their
Remembrance, leading them into all Truth, showing them things to come, yet
unfulfilled, inabling them to learn and sing the holy Psalms, Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs, in the holy Scriptures. There is no filling of the Spirit
contrary to the holy Scriptures, nor can the whole Church be filled with the
Spirit, but the Matter must be holy Scripture, and it is a Command to the whole
Church to speak in, or to themselves in Psalms, etc. which must be Scriptural
Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs, because they are so, and can be no other.

Now speaking to your selves, is our last English Translation, and good enough
here; and one may as well except against every word else as the word To. And so
the Unlearned in Greek must either believe you against it, or it against you,
which if not very credulous, they will adhere to the latter; both cannot, it
being an uncertain Sound. I do not think that Pool were of your opinion about
Singing, but on the contrary: And I tell you by the way, that Divine Things or
Mysteries must not be brought to Words, but Words must be brought to them. It
would be exceeding unsound (as has been shown) to bring the Sense of the Text
to yours: and tho some Critics might pick at Words, as you and others, yet if
you were put to decline this compound Pronoun through all Cases, you might be out;
and those that critically note some Places, may find to cavil where there want
many words in the Original Greek and Hebrew too; but it is not good to strain
Cavils with the Holy Text, nor force it by seeming Significations besides the
Truth and Analogy of Faith; nor con those Scriptures, which are clear to be
interpreted by such as are more dark, especially where it has no Fellow: This
comes to pass because our Translation galls them.

Again, [speaking in your selves,] may be the very same as speaking to your
selves, (but not in your sense) for to and in, and among, are ordinarily put
indifferently for the same, and are convertible Terms, according to the Analogy
of Faith, Luke 17.21. To, or in your selves, implies a social Singing, a
joining together with Speech and Voices in Singing. The compound Pronoun (...)
signifies, and is not translated any where otherwise; and when it is to denote
inward Speaking, Judgment, Trust, or the like, the Preposition (...), in, is
always joined with it, as Mat. 3.9. and 9.21. Mark 9.50. Luke 3.8. 1 Cor.
11.13. 2 Cor. 1.9. Heb. 10.34. Jam. 2.4. in all which places the Preposition
(...), in, (...), in your selves, is joined together: And (...), as in this
Ephesians. 5. is always translated to your selves, as Mat. 13.9. Luke 16.9. and
17.3. and 21.34. Acts 5.35. 2 John 8 and it is both improper, absurd, and ill
^yntax, to translate it otherwise, or differ^nt from the same sense; so, in
your selv^, your Assemblies, or in your Family-Devot^ons; but to, or in your
selves, to be mute, never a word to be heard nor understood of another, and yet
to speak, and sing, and make Melody in the Heart to God, through being filled
with the Spirit too; not so much as Humming, short of Quakerism: this is
strange.

They which were filled with the Spirit, used to be in a strait till they could
speak to others beside themselves: Elihu said so, Job 32.18, 19, 20. David said
so, and sung it too, Psalm. 39.1, 2, 3. And so said they that were filled with
the Spirit, they could not but speak that which they had seen and heard, Acts
4.20. But your Interpretation of the Pronoun (...), and of the whole Text
Ephesians. 5.19. is that, All God's People may be filled with his Spirit, and may
speak to themselves in silence, in Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, singing
and making Melody in their Hearts to God, in Public Worship of him, and yet
all silent, neither Sign nor Token of any such thing, not one Word (nor Hum) of
what they are about all that while.

You alledg 1 Cor. 14.28. but it will not help you, you had better have letten
this Ephesians. 5.19. have been the same with Coloss. 3.16. which will be so do
what you can: And if you must needs oppose the Churches Inheritance, one and
the same wou^d have served, and you had no need to have divided them.

But I will suppose that some may have a Gift, or by learning to speak such a
Tongue at some time in the Church Assemblies, as none could either understand,
being all else unlearned, (as it may so be) 1 Cor. 14. Verse 16, 23, 24. and
cannot interpret what is by such an one spoken, the Holy Spirit shows the
inexpediency of his speaking, and forbids its use in the Church at such a time
only, and bids him speak to himself and to God. You say he must speak all he
could so speak at that time, (or you say nothing); so then he is to be
exercised in his Tongue, mute, keeping silence while that holds, and is
discharged joining with the Church in her Duties. Is this to be Men in
Understanding, or Children? And so if there were Ten in a like Condition, as
what is possible may be, is it decently and in order, be they more or less,
that the Church should be differently employed at one and the same time and
instant? And are the Spirits of the Prophets so contradictory to them, that
they will not suffer them to use common Discretion to take such Seasons to
speak to themselves, etc. as that they may not lose the Benefit and Blessing in
Union and Communion with the Church throughout all the Assembly, but as Ephesians.
5. must have a whole Church Silent-Meeting awhile? So some at Corinth might
keep the like. This is a strange Tongue, a part of Quakerism. But the Spirits
of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets in this Case also, that it does not
put them upon Disorder, Confusion or Indecency: And whatsoever any one's Gift
or Learning may be, (for we must take notice of both, and not any great
difference between them neither); for they that have learned a Tongue, are not
inferior to them that received it by Gift, as you may see in this Chapter:
they, I say, must not interfere, or cause them to be speaking to themselves,
and to God, in a silent mute frame, to either hinder themselves, or others,
from the benefit of the Ordinances of God, in all the Assemblies continuance
together: for every thing is beautiful in its time; but so is not the whole
Church, nor any of her Members in her Assemblies, to be mute and silent, and
yet speaking to themselves in singing Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs,
making Melody in their Heart to God, nor any to withdraw his Communion from the
Church at that instant, and be speaking to himself and to God in silence: I do
not question but such might speak at a convenient time and place, in uttering
all his Matter by word of Mouth to himself, and to God, and offend not, if he
did it not as some do, to be heard and not understood of others, which must be
his design that speaks where none can understand him.

The Holy Spirit did not give the Church Directions and Rules for that Time and
Generation only, or how extraordinary Gifts might be used, only the Lord
knowing what Gifts, Natural or Spiritual, he would give, and what is fittest
for our Generation, which these Rules respect all at all times.

I come to your second Part of the Foundation, as you call it, Coloss. 3.16. to
which you say, You confess, that vocal Singing is here to be understood,
otherwise it could not be Teaching and Admonishing to others in Word and Deed,
Verse. 17. Page 3.

But you intend us nothing by this your Confession, you restrain it absolutely
to Ministering Brethren; whose Work and Office it is to teach and admonish the
other Members; and to such too only, as by an extraordinary Gift of the Spirit,
such vocal Singing which was used in the Primitive Apostolical Church of
Christ, which you say was, and cannot be denied.

All you say makes this Proposition following, viz.

That some one Person at a time may sing in the Church, if he have received a
Spiritual Gift, (as Tongues and working of Miracles were received) that he can
extemporarially, as the Spirit gives him utterance, and instantly suggesteth
into his Mind, Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, Matter, Tune, and Time,
inspired; and it cannot be denied to be used now if there were any such; this
is all.

But how if there were never any such, (may we look for it)? It is evident that
the Holy Spirit requires all things should be done according to Men's natural
understanding, whether they had Gifts or none, whether they had Learning or
were Unlearned, whether they were Believers or Unbelievers: And that
Understanding should be admitted in the disposing and ordering their Gifts and
Duties, that even every one here mentioned might receive Profit; so that all
what you call Extraordinary, fell under the notice of all ordinary Capacities
when demonstrated unto them: I shall make this a Maxim all my way.

Now I must take what you have said about this to pieces, as I have done the
other. You say Coloss. 3.16. is meant of Ministering Brethren, whose Work and
Office it is to Teach, etc. But the Text is plain, that it is written to all
the Members as such, because not one Verse in all the Epistle can be taken from
them, or does speak to any other* and the Holy Spirit particularizeth them as
Members, (for even Pastors are Members too) viz. Wives, Husbands, Children,
Parents, Servants, Masters, comprehend the whole; and all the distinction that
is, that they which were Members only should say to Archippus, Take heed to the
Ministry which thou have received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it. Who must
say this to their Pastor? who must see this Epistle read amongst them, and that
it be read in the Church at Laodicea? It is no Particular of what degree
soever, that the Holy Spirit made a Depositum to, or concredited the Epistles
with; the Church consists not of them, but they of her.

I may be bold to assert, That those Hearts in which the Word of Christ dwells
most richly, contain the greatest Treasures of the best Wisdom, Prove. 15.23.
and 25.11.

Then I will consider;

First, What is meant by the Word of Christ.

Secondly, What it is to dwell in us richly in all Wisdom.

Thirdly, What Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs those are, which are to be
sung with singing Voice, with Grace in our Heart to the Lord.

First, The Word of Christ, is verily that Word mentioned by the Holy Spirit in
the first Chapter of this Epistle, Verse. 5. [The Word of the Truth of the
Gospel.] Verse. 6. Which came unto them, as it is in all the World, and brings
forth Fruit, as it does in you since the day ye heard of it, and knew the Grace
of God in Truth; whereof they had heard and learned, Verse. 7. It was not
contrary to it, it was the Word of Christ; it was of Christ as the Author, and
Speaker, and Redeemer, and Blesser, to cause it to bring forth Fruit, and able
to save their Souls. Which takes in all the Holy Scriptures, and whatsoever is
contained in them, and no other Word, or contrary thereto, from the Library of
Christ is the Word of the Gospel preached, proved and confirmed; it is the Word
of Christ, as he is one with the Father and Holy Spirit from all Eternity, in
sameness and oneness of Essence and Divine Nature, in which all Three are One
only God. It is the Word of Christ, as spoken by him and of him, as our
Redeemer, else we had never heard it, nor of him; and it still speaks of him,
both what he is, and has done and does, and will do for his Elect.

This is the Word of Christ, even the Word of God which must dwell richly in
us, in all Wisdom; and every Saint of his must labor that it be so: it is not
an uncertain Word instantly suggested, and vanishes in the Air, or left to
Tradition or uncertain Custody, but a sure Word, the Word of the Truth of the
Gospel, which has been less or more declared from the Foundation of the World,
in the Covenant God has made by Christ Jesus.

It is not the word Quakerism, or Quietists, etc. nor a transient Word, but the
Word which is to dwell richly in all Wisdom, used in all Wisdom, teaching and
admonishing one another therein: And lest the Poetical part of it should be
thought of no use, or that which has been sung should come into contempt, or
be counted a Type; besides the use of it, as all other Scriptures which are in
Prose, the Holy Spirit would that we always improve all our Wisdom to the
suitable use thereof; so that which is in Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs,
should be used as part of God's Worship, and Godly Exercise, singing with Grace
in our Hearts at all times, that whatsoever we do in Word or Deed, we may do it
in the Name of the Lord Jesus, giving Thanks to God and the Father by him.

If this be so, as I doubt not to vindicate it against all opposition, then the
Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs in Holy Scripture, are the Churches
Patrimony, to be used and sung as part of God's Worship, (I shall meet with
your Objections hereafter).

Secondly, To let the Word of Christ dwell in us richly in all Wisdom; truly it
being a Command, not for one Age, but all Times and Saints; not miraculous
Gifts or Operations, except all Saints Gifts may be called so, (and truly too)
this is verily to continue always, as long as the danger that Men may be drunk
with Wine; so long as that is to be avoided, so long Saints are to be filled
with the Spirit, and so long are they to let the Word of Christ dwell richly in
them in all Wisdom, to direct its Improvement and holy Use, and against the
Vice of Drunkenness. And here again I add, Prove. 15.23. and 25. 11, 12. A Man
has Joy by the Answer of his Mouth: viz. If his Mouth answers suitably,
timeing and subjecting his words aright, he has Joy. A Word spoken, is either
one Expression, or a Theme, or Speech, Song or Doctrine; in its season, how
good it is? It is fitly spoken upon the Wheel, thrusting it on in its going; it
is like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver: And as an Earring of Gold, and an
Ornament of fine Gold, so is a wise Reprover upon an obedient Ear. Which
shows that all Wisdom is required to the improvement of the rich in-dwelling
Word of Christ, that all the parts thereof may be disposed so, as the Method of
all our Duties may fall in their proper places, and not disturb, hinder, or
interfere with one another, etc. Prayer in its fit time, Singing in its fit
time, Preaching in its fit time in the Church, and all other Duties in their
season; so are they beautiful in their time, and under what pretense soever, in
the time of those Seasons, they must not be inverted. As for Instance, When the
Church is come together, and mutually consents that one of them should preach
the Word in a known Tongue, because there is not then there an Interpreter,
then may not he which has Matter to speak in another Tongue, may not he speak
it to himself, and to God? For if he be a Prophet, his Spirit is subject to
him, that he must not improve that time to the using it, but slay till he may
edify himself with it conveniently and undisturbed, which he cannot do then,
for he ought then to attend the Public Ordinance which is in present use, else
all things of the Churches Concerns, and God's Worship, will be in confusion,
and neither decent nor in order, which in all Wisdom we are to attend and
improve the in-dwelling Word of Christ, to worship the Lord in the beauty of
Holiness. And Wisdom is justified of her Children, if they dance when piped to,
and weep when mourned to, else not, etc.

We must let the Word of Christ dwell in us richly in all Wisdom, etc. Richly,
(...), Plusios, the Adverb, richly, or plentifully, (...), o, Plutos, Riches,
Wealth, of (...), Polu, much; and, (...), Etos, a Year; because Riches is the
return of many Years gathering; so the Word of Christ must dwell in us richly
in all Wisdom, in all our plentiful Gatherings which we are made partakers of,
in Reading, Praying, Meditating, Study, Hearing, Singing, holy Converse through
the Assistance of the Holy Spirit: in the use of such means is this Riches and
Wealth gathered plentiously, and enjoyed and kept. Nor were any Proficients
herein, that did either despise those Duties and Means, or were careless, or
had little Conscience about them, Mat. 7.7, 8. Joh. 5.39. So also David sung,
Psalm. 19.7, 8, 9. and sung again in the 13th part of the 119th Psalm, and again
otherwhere.

And [Let] is an Injunction to all Saints to use all the means as aforesaid,
gathering the returns thereof, laying it up in our Hearts plentifully, in all
Wisdom, improving it when we are holy careful to dispense it in fit Seasons to
God's Glory; it is to dwell, co-habit, and abide, continue, in all Fullness, out
of the Library of Christ's Word, which is the Word of God, the holy Scriptures,
through the assistance of his Spirit: It is our School and Schoolmaster, to
teach us when and how to pray, when and what to read, to profit, when and what
to meditate, when and what to sing, when and what to speak and hear; this is
the Fountain whereof the Prophet sings, Isa. 12. With Joy draw ye Waters out of
the Fountain of Salvation.

Thirdly; The Holy Scripture is the Fountain and Word of Christ, and especial
means under him, as aforesaid, from which may flow this rich fullness in Wisdom,
to teach and admonish one another even in Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs
therein contained, and that in singing with Voice and Grace in our Hearts to
the Lord.

And here I affirm that the Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, which are in
the Library of Canonical Scripture, are those which Saints should sing socially
as part of God's Worship to him. First, I shall prove Social Singing by Holy
Scripture, Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, to be intended in both these
Texts, Ephesians. and Coloss. under Consideration. Secondly, Give some Essays what
it is to sing with Grace in our Hearts, and making Melody in our Heart to the
Lord, toward the latter end of this Discourse.

1. By Social Singing, I mean Saints, as Saints, tho they be not all Ministering
Brethren, if some of them be, yet they are no other in my Intention here; (yet
I shall reckon with such in Office, as you have it hereafter.)

Prayer, Singing, Preaching, Communion at the Lord's Table, Collection,
Discipline, are the permanent standing Ordinances of the Church of Christ,
without exception to be made against any one of them, only Singing is called in
question, wherefore I shall mainly speak to it; wherefore these two Texts
Ephesians. 5. and Coloss. 3. do require a Social Singing, as well as a Vocal
Singing, which is confessed on Coloss. tho restrained to a Ministering Brother
as his Work and Office: I have already proved it to be commanded to the whole
Church. Now that in the Church at Colosse Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs,
may be sung vocally (as is confessed) and in the Church at Ephesus, they must
not (as is denied); but the speaking and singing must be inwardly in the Heart,
in vocal Voice heard, keeping silence in the Church, is a fond Conceit: For why
should not one Church of Christ have allowance to have Singing vocally, and not
another as well? And seeing there is neither difference in the Things to be
sung, both Places say the same, viz. Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, and
both require the like Singing and making Melody in the Heart to the Lord,
wherefore it must be Ignorance (or worse) that shall limit one short of the
other: and the Grant to one, is to both, and ^ll else. And I affirm to all Men
loving Truth and Honesty whatsoever; that whatsoever one Church of Christ may
do acceptably to God in matter of practice, as part of his Worship, all other
Churches of Christ may, yea ought to do, if they can, the same.

So then I have it against all Contradiction, that the Church at Ephesus had
the same Privilege as the Church at Colosse; any, if any one will be so
pertinacious in Error as to grant my Affirmative, and deny it from Ephesians
5.19. let them do it at their peril, there is no reasoning with them. Likewise
what one Church of Christ may do as part of God's Worship, all others may do
the same. Now the Church of Christ at Colosse had a Precept given them to sing
Vocally, and Socially, Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, as part of God's
Worship, so have all the Churches of Christ in the World to the end thereof,
all this stands together against all Opposition.

Nor is one or other of the Churches told that the Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual
Songs, should be an extemporary Gift, instantly revealed as they were together
in their Church-Meeting, and sung all of it by that Person only to whom by the
Spirit that Gift was given, nor forbid to sing all; or that the Psalms, Hymns,
and Spiritual Songs in the Holy Scripture, must not be sung in the Church,
which seeing they had been in constant use before, and were no Type nor Shadow,
must therefore be continued. And furthermore, I will again put the case, That
there were but one Instance of an Infant Baptized, would not all esteem that
Man mad and out of his Wits, that should deny it to be practiced now, though it
had been done by the greatest Spiritual gifted Person in the Primitive Times?
And would not all Men rather conclude, the greater the Minister, the greater is
the Confirmation and Approbation of the thing practiced?

Wherefore, I say, seeing you grant that Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, in
the Worship of God in the Primitive Times, let the Persons be what they will;
then it is the greater Confirmation of the practice, and is so far from taking
it away, that it both seals the Truth, and Authority of the Continuance of it
unto the end of the World, as being that, which among other things, Christ
commanded his Disciples to teach the Observation of.

All your Alligations are no better than those of the Non-Churchers, who deny
either Baptism, Breaking of Bread, and all Ordinances of Christ to be observed
and practiced by any in our Days. And they say that because Christ and his
Apostles, by miraculous Power, preached and administered Baptism, and other
Ordinances in the Churches in their Times, that we should impose it on all Men
and Women now as binding and constant, and show not alike Power: we do, they
say, impose that Authority on them we never had, because we have not the like
Power; and could we show them it, they would readily submit to all the things
we practice, could they see such Administrators. All that do these things now
run before they are sent, and act without Commission, they being only Spiritual
gifted extraordinary Persons that were so commissioned, and could work
Miracles, and they wait for God sending such.

The Ranters in their time said, God was gone out of Scripture-Forms, and
therefore they ought not to be observed. The Quakers, their Successors, said,
Scripture-Forms are Shells without Kernels, and Shadows without Substances, and
not to be observed. Most what you say against Scriptural Psalms, Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs, sung in the Church, is like all this; I wish you may make a
good Retreat, for you are on a Precipice, and all that admire you --: for you
ought not to take upon your self to deny that in one Church, which you confess
to be in another by the Lord's Allowance; you to confess Singing to be a
Primitive Practice in the Churches in the Worship of God, and deny its
Continuance, all the miraculous Spiritual Gifts did confirm to us all the
Duties which God required the Churches to practice.

Now, inasmuch as you confess that God does not require more of his Church and
People than he has given them Abilities to perform, page 43. it being
irrefragably proved, that God does require all his Church, throughout all Ages,
to sing Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs; it does likewise confirm and assure
us, that he has given them Abilities and Qualifications to perform it, tho not
that which you run upon, and would have, yet that which does sufficiently, and
to God acceptably, answer his Requirement, which is his Churches Patrimony,
that you labor to deprive her of, but shall never prevail.

The next is your Demonstration in Six Particulars, viz.

1. Of the Essence or Being of Singing. 2. Of David's Psalms. 3. Of Prescribed
Precomposed Songs and Hymns. 4. Of Women's Singing. 5. Of the Order of Singing.
6. Of Scripture and other Objections.
1. The Essence of Singing. What you would have by this new coined Appelation
of the Essence: sure I am I have heard your Notion counted a dull Invention for
it. Do you know what your Assertion about the Essence of Duties being in the
Heart or Spirit, does and may tend to? even to the exclusion of all vocal
discharge or external Performance of every Ordinance of Christ; but especially
your absurd and vile Notion about the Essence of Sin, is to be abhorred, as
leading into such an Error that your weak-head cannot perceive, nor are you
aware of. God deliver our People from such a Teacher. All I can gather about it
is, that whether Singing, Prayer, or Teaching, etc. and you do grant all three
to have been in the Primitive Church, that except they be first truly rooted in
the Heart, whatsoever is in the Tongue only, is not acceptable to God: And that
many times all three may be inwardly in the Heart, in the Substance of them, it
must be understood; for there is no need to draw them forth in length between
our Heart and God, to speak to him, as must and ought to be to one another; for
Prayer and Singing as well as Teaching is to be used outwardly for Edification.
I see little in this first Particular but noise, and impertinent Expositions
and Quotations; all signifies nothing in those four Pages, except you could
prove that Singing ought to be Mental, which we deny; for indeed that is no
proper Singing at all: for though there is a mental Praying, yet no proper
mental Singing, which you do not it seems understand, or otherwise will not
grant; though all Mankind generally as one Man will tell you it is so: All are
agreed about proper Singing, i. e. what a kind of Act it is of the bodily
Organ, as they are agreed, what Speaking, Reading, Preaching or Crying is, etc.
though you are not: the Objections you make, and Answers are insignificant.

2. Of David's Psalms. You say there was no Institution of Singing before
David's time (that word Institution is not in Scripture, not that I gainsay
its use, if pertinently placed. I have affirmed Psalms and Songs were appointed
to be sung, and commanded before David's time, in Worship to God, and that is
as sufficient as any Institution can be; so that your Denial is of no value,
nor all you say about wilderness-State, or your Notion in Parallels between
Israel after the Flesh in all the time before David, and so with the Gospel.
Israel all the time till Christ's second Coming, and between David's and
Solomon's time, and the seventh thousand Years reign, which is but Conceit, and
not for to establish Ordinances nor our worshipping of God upon, no more than
that very little time of Solomon's Temple top-Glory could be a Type of as
little time of the Glory you promise your self.

But that Singing should be a Type, and all the time till David a Type, and
David's Psalms a Type; and all the time from Christ's coming in the Flesh a
Type, till his second Coming. Moses's Tabernacle was a Temple, 1 Samuel 3.3. In
New Jerusalem there shall be no Temple; for whatsoever any may think about a
thousand years Reign on this Earth, and Christ's personal Presence all that
time, yet it is no Article of Faith on which Communion depends, nor the Lord's
present Worship. I say, all Types were fulfilled in Christ, who was and is the
Body of all Shadows: and whatsoever did annul the Tabernacle and its
Appurtenances which Moses made, did also annul and dissolve Solomon's Temple,
and all its Top-glory. I have seen Men, and to my sorrow their Madness, who
begun after this rate, and at length taught that the Jews must possess the Land
of literal Canaan, and build a third Temple, prophesied of by Ezekiel, and
offer all the Sacrifices, and observe the whole Law, till the Messiah's coming
to reign, and should sing too (though we may not:) and I can tell what End they
made.

Some make a great do with personal Reign, and 1000 years, as if the knowledge
thereof was of such import and concernment, and obliging to Duties and mighty
Matters, as nothing like it; and whatever is their Text, that is their Faith
and Doctrine too. But I see no such Cause nor Consequence: for it is not likely
that a thousand Pounds can do more with them, than infinite thousands of Pounds
can not. If eternal Life, and infinite Blessedness, which will have no end,
prevail not, I despair that 1000 years should, except Persons be conceitedly
affected with sensible and ending Objects, and visible corporal Things, and
pleasing carnal Enjoyments, the Delights whereof the like Nature can take in
and apprehend; but such as are invisible Realities and eternal, they have no
suitable Principle to, nor satisfactory Apprehensions of: And therefore from
such Ideas as correspond therewith, like Tempe, Elyzium, Helicon, Parnassus,
and the Turks Paradise, and the Jews present hopes that when their Messiah
comes, they shall be made Lords, and enjoy all wordly Enjoyments above other
Nations, and feasted on Behemoth, Zis, and the Wine of Paradise. Carnal things
suit carnal Minds, which have induced some into irregular Courses. And yet this
I will say more: and how far your Notions tend that way, which have no ground
and less fruits to Edification, but are Notions taking up Men's Minds and Time
too from practical Doctrines: And I care not who knows it, That I had rather be
ignorant of some things God may give his Saints hereafter, than be ignorant or
negligent in what is my present duty to do. It is not for want what to say,
that I pass many of your Lines, but because they are crude; and I am tired with
your obtruding, by an huge pretense of Zeal, those things upon us.

3. As to prescribed Songs and Hymns, and precomposed, I shall say little; let
them that either use them, or are for them, answer for themselves: Yet I do not
see any thing you have offered to amount to a solid Confutation, as you may
hear more when I come to 1 Cor. 14. So I shall pass at present your third
Particular; for whatever Truth you oppose, your many Arguments and Proofs
against it signify nothing.

4. Of Women's Singing, etc. You say, That Women ought neither to teach nor pray
vocally in the Church of Christ, is generally believed by all Orthodox
Christians, and say it is asserted from 1 Cor. 14.34, 35.

But we must consider who you call Orthodox, etc. If you mean such as agree in
Fundamentals of Faith, though they differ in Ordinances, then you take in for
Orthodox Episcopacy, Presbyterians, Independents, etc. who all are for Women's
singing in the Church, and teaching too, if singing Psalms and Hymns and
spiritual Songs be teaching, as it is in your sense, else they are none of them
Orthodox, or else all are not against Women's singing and teaching in the
Church, for they are for Women's singing in the Church.

But if you will restrain the word Orthodox Christians unto some certain
Professors distinct from them all, (and account them Heterodox) then you steal
away in a Presumption not hinted, and is next to a strange Tongue: For if you
say the first, you are false to your own knowledge, and all Orthodox Christians
do not generally believe it, but otherwise; else that Women singing in the
Church Psalms, Hymns and spiritual Songs, as part of God's Worship, is not that
Teaching in the Church which they are forbidden to do.

Women are under heavy Circumstances, if all spiritual things some imagine are
to be imposed upon them; and what they are winked at in Civils, which is
forbidden in the Word of God, it is no marvel they are of so little account, and
useless in the Church.

Yet Women do speak and teach in the Church, and must do so in their giving an
account of their Conversion and their Faith, sometimes long and excellently
too, and exceeding some Men, teaching by experience, in telling what God has
done for their Souls, and in giving their Evidence and Witness to Accusations
in the Rule of Discipline, where some teach and speak notably, and reprove
soundly also, and give Information that cannot be gainsaid; and yet this
neither clashes nor necessarily destroys the Word of God, nor leaves us without
a Rule of Worship, though it may Men's Ignorance: None of those Teachings or
Speakings are such as Women are forbidden, or commanded to learn in silence
with subjection. And they speak in the Church when they tell the next to them
the Proofs which were quoted; this is familiar, and yet breaks no Rule; of what
you pretend (if you have not spoken the Truth, you are at a loss how to find
it) so you be in more things than this. For it is evident you confound things,
not minding Matters contained in the Word of God, which is such a sweet
Harmony, as there is no Absurdity nor Contradiction in it.

There is Teaching which Women are forbidden in the Church, and yet Teaching
which they are not forbidden in the Church; and there is learning in silence,
and a learning vocally, which Women are allowed as abovesaid: likewise out of
the Church they may pray and prophesy too if they be covered: How should it be
a shame for them to be uncovered, if no Men see them, nor hear them? And what
can a Woman do with her Hair on, if the Place where it grows be not covered
with it, none can tell? which cannot be meant but of some place where it grows
not, viz. the Face.

Page 22. Your fifth Particular, which is of the Order of Singing, (this you
say) We have plainly and clearly delivered in 1 Cor. 14.26 to 34. How is it
then, Brethren? When ye come together, every one of you has a Psalm, has a
Doctrine, has a Tongue, has a Revelation, has an Interpretation: let all
things be done to edifying.

Here you say we have plain and clear the Order of Singing, etc. I say, If it
be, you have not left it so, etc. That we may have what is given us therein,
take it first as it is in the Original, viz. (...).

How is it Brethren? when you come together, (...), every one of you; this
word, (...), every one, is only read in the Singular Number, of (...), not
near, but separate, as one Man is from another, in fifteen places in the
New Testament: and it includes each and all, and that without exception, except
it be made, 1 Thessalonians. 2.11. Ephesians. 4.16. Rev. 20.13. Phil. 2.4. which is the same
word for every in all the places: (...), has, it is near 130 times in the
Present Tence [hath] in the New Testament, and in no other sense as (...). So
that from the Notation of the word [hath], and the following intimation in the
30th Verse, which admits, that if any thing be revealed to him that sits by,
there is a manifestation between has and what might be; therefore [hath] does
positively import, that at the Church's coming together, these five things
specified in Verse. 26, were or might be in some or all of the Church Members,
even at their first coming together: for it is not said, if any of these be
revealed, but, every one of you has; those Particulars were enjoined before,
they might come already furnished with some or all of them: So that it appears,
they were not then in the time of their Meeting, as extraordinary Gifts
immediately given, or to be depended upon to be immediately given or received;
for if so, the Text is no directive to the constant Worship of God, but to some
extraordinary kind. Then I observe, that some or all the Church Members were
furnished and prepared aforehand, and [had] even at their coming together, a
Psalm, Doctrine, Tongue, Revelation, Interpretation; all which, for the
constant Worship of God, which they were in such a manner to communicate, use,
and improve in the Church now met, to God's Glory, and their own Edification,
and Conviction of Unbelievers.

They had a Psalm, Doctrine, Tongue, Revelation, Interpretation, all ready to
use and improve, else they might have, and depend on, or expect
Silent-Meetings, for the Lord gives his Blessings to Saints in their private
Meditations, Reading, Studying, Prayers and Converse, in increasing and
multiplying Graces and Knowledge of himself, upon chewing the Cud, contemplating
upon what they have been taught, seeking, asking, knocking, unto which great
Promises are annexed, and fulfilled, and the Grounds and Substances of most
precious Truths are received and digested before the Church meets, according as
God distributes unto every one; so that some or all may have a Psalm, Doctrine,
Tongue, Revelation, Interpretation, to use in the constant Worship of God; for
God gives these ordinary Gifts when and to whom he pleases, and is not tied to
give them when the Church is all met together only; we are tied to Means, and
expect his Blessing in the Use.

Wherefore as that called Doctrine cannot be denied to be an ordinary and
constant Gift or Means in the Church, and by all allowed to be digested; and
one may or has it as soon as the Church is met, because, as before, it follows
that the other Four are likewise to be in readiness even as that, or else that
is all that is to be in readiness, and the ordinary and constant use in the
Church; or else if the other Four are extraordinary, and immediately to be
received in the instant of being met, so must Doctrine also: And this plain
Text is Direction for extraordinary Gifts only, and none else, from first to
last; and ordinary Gifts and constant Worship are not here to be found. But I
am not of that mind, but that it is all of it respecting the ordinary and
constant Worship of God in his Church, as met together in all Ages to the end
of the World; therefore I must sort it a little, laying the word Psalm and
Doctrine a little by, the last is not gainsaid, and speak unto the latter
three, Tongue, Revelation, Interpretation.

(...), has a Tongue; I say, this is by a Metonymy of the instrumental Cause,
and is put for Speech or Language, yea, a strange Tongue, (though the word
Strange be not there) a Tongue which few or none might understand. But now
whether this must be of necessity understood an immediate Gift here, because
such there was, while the Church was met together, or such a Tongue, as were
either Learned, for there might be as well Learned as Unlearned, or a Tongue
naturally spoken, and yet strange to all, most, or some? The first it could not
only respect, for then all the five Particulars may as well be so accounted
extraordinary immediately given, and Prophesy and Prophets too in the after
Verses, for such there were also in that time. But there were then also
Teachers, Prophecy, Revelations, Interpretations in an ordinary manner, and is
so still, (so must there be Singing too).

And a Saint of a strange Tongue, according to his Notion, may, upon occasion,
be at an Assembly, and have a Gift to speak, but being where none can,
interpret, he must keep silence there, and speak to himself and to God at
another time, and give attendance to the Ordinances there, as if he had no Gift
at all, according as he can understand them, else it will be confusion. I see
no Objection but what will lie against the Text.

And if it comes to pass that there are Saints which cannot understand one
another Tongue, so as what is taught, the Benefit should redound alike to
either: And this might happen in Greece, where Corinth was; there were six
Dialects in Greece, and each a strange Tongue to one another in very many
words, and difference in the same word, either in ^he Letters, Pronunciation,
or Accents, or Syntax, all which must not be demonstrated here, viz. the
Attick, Ionick, Dorick, Aeolick, Boetick, and Poetic: Yea, in our Britain
there are many natural Dialects, as besides the little Islands adjacent,
Cornwall, Wales, and South and North- Wales differ, so as they must have
Interpreters to one another; and Scotch, English, and ours differ, and even in
England too: And in Wales there is intermixture of both, so that at this day,
where it does happen that the Preacher speaks in the Welsh Tongue, and there be
but one Englishman or other that understands it not, he must interpret every
word in the English Tongue; and if the most part be English, and he speaks in
that Tongue, he must also repeat verbatim all in the Welsh Tongue, for their
sakes that are there; which must be done, though tedious, according to this
Rule, 1 Cor. 14.26. And these things I give for irrefragable Instances;
wherefore if strange Tongues were not ordinary, and still to be spoken in the
Church, some now might not speak nor hear; therefore the Holy Spirit requires
it be not forbidden, Verse. 39. as foreseeing the necessity always of it.

(...), has a Revelation: This Greek word signifies a Declaration,
Discovering, making Manifest, a Revealing. And this must be either
extraordinary, foretelling things to come, or infallibly making known some
Truth or practical Duty, which was not known or revealed before, or ordinary,
viz. An ability to open and prove, by God's Word, all or somewhat infallibly,
all which some in the Church had already received, and might increase in
Persons and Matter, as Verse. 30. and of which all might judge, which this latter
sense might fall under. The first is not only removed before, and further by
this, That the Church is no Judge of infallible Revelations, but must receive
them on the Author's account, the Holy Spirit.

Wherefore has a Revelation, is also an ordinary Ability to declare, discover,
and make manifest, what through the use of Means one has attained for
Edification or Interpretation, Verse. 6.

(...), has an Interpretation; which is Can Expound, or an Explanation, 1 Cor.
12.10. John 1.39. Mat. 1.23. Luke 24.27. where the same word is used, and may
imply an ordinary ability or pre-received Gift, or Learned, as well as an
instantly inspired in the time while met together; yea, the Church must know
that one can interpret, before they suffer one to speak in a strange Tongue. If
this have no place here, then all those five Particulars are all extraordinary
and miraculous Gifts, and instant Inspirations, and so felo de se, and no rule
for ordinary, and most generally pre-conceived, and pre-received to Meetings,
at least the Grounds of them; therefore all those particulars are so, and
respect the same Gifts which Saints commonly have to edify one another, and not
Inspirations, for there is no Means ordinary to obtain extraordinary Gifts.

(...), let all things be done to edifying; which is, to build, or found an
House; and by a Metaphor, to Admonish, to Correct, to cause one to profit. Now
so must all those Particulars be used, that the whole House of God, his Church,
may receive this Benefit, so they are not extraordinary, excepting ordinary,
for they are all of them not any more than of ordinary use in the Church, and
for that they all are.

Now I will return to the two first, viz. Psalm, Doctrine. Every one of you
has a Psalm: Psalmon, a Psalm; I will let it go for a general Name of all
singing to God, as Doctrine may go for all Teaching; and some of these five
Particulars may be near of Kin one to another. But sure I may be, that what
kind soever it is, it cannot be instantly inspired Singing, for the Reasons
aforesaid; and also I think there were never such extraordinary Gifts used in
Public Worship, that a Psalm were extempory, instantly, on a sudden inspired,
and sung as fast as inspired in the Church; but it was received before the
Meeting began, and committed to writing by an infallible Prophet, and so
committed unto the Church, for her Use and Edification; and they which expect
otherwise, must look for an infallible Prophet above all that have been yet,
for any thing I know. How easy is it for a People to be imposed upon by one who
pretends to an extraordinary Gift, when it may be no more than a common, may be
a natural Gift?

Wherefore I take [hath a Psalm] to be, as has a Doctrine, (in some respects,
though not all) then as Doctrine may be premeditated, so may a Psalm be
preconceived; all the Particulars are the common Benefit of the Church and its
Blessings for its Edification, of which there is no denial, and it may be
feared there has been too much formality in Prayer and Preaching too, and so
in singing, that being as unlike to escape as other things, but that does not
null a Duty.

And thence I will affirm, that Psalms, etc. already in the Holy Scriptures,
are every way to be preferred to and above what can be premeditated, or
preconceived by any one whatsoever; forasmuch as here, and our Savior, and
Paul and Silas; and in the Ephesians, Colossians, and James, the word is used
in a general way, and not of any extemporary, or instantly inspired, it does
show plainly all those Psalms were the then known Psalms already in use, and
such as without hesitancy they might with Heart and Voice join together to
sing: And they which do not condemn preconceived Doctrine, or Notes, may by no
means do it against Scripture-Psalms, according to James, every particular
Person might sing Psalms. For what is possible may be; so then every one must
have, or expect extraordinary, extemporary Inspirations, or they must betake
themselves to ordinary prereceived preconceived Psalms, and Spiritual Songs.
The first is not pretended, that it ever was or will be in this World; the
latter then is the thing I seek for, and it cannot be denied me; and one of
these two will follow, that either the Psalms, etc. which are already in the
Scriptures, or those that can may indite, and bring them into the Church for
its edification, or else both. I indeed prefer the first, though I will not
condemn the other till I hear what in them is amiss.

Nor dare I condemn the use of any Forms verbatim used in Public, which has
been made by the Lord for the edification of his Church since the World began,
(which were not typical) so they be used to edification, and decently, and in
order. And I will show my Opinion in Doctrine also, That the Teaching and
Preaching of Christ and his Apostles or Disciples, were after the same manner,
as are their Writings, using no strict nor topical Order, but freely passing,
and suddenly, from one Matter to another, as the Spirit led them, the Grounds
whereof they had before, Mat. 13.52.

And why cannot a spiritual Person as well choose a Scripture-Psalm, as choose a
Text to speak, or a Chapter to expound, it being plain a Psalm is allowed, yea,
commanded to be sung, and were sung in Private and Public? Could not Believers
under all the Types, etc. in the Law, be Spiritual to as high a degree as any
now? They were commanded to sing Praises with Understanding, Psalm. 47.7.
Wherefore as in many things, so in this, we are to use the directive Light of
Nature, which Grace destroys not, but perfects it by supernatural Relief,
whereby it becomes sufficient to guide us in those things, and the Obligation
of the Church unto it immutably, for the ordering all its Affairs, as the Times
and Seasons of her Assemblies, the Order and Decency wherein all things are to
be transacted in them; the bounding of them as to the number of Saints,
exceeding the proportion capable of Edification: Especially Advantages are to
be made use of in the Order and Worship of the Church, such as are Methods in
every Duty, in Preaching; what Translation in Psalms, which and what Tunes in
singing; continuance in Public Duties, and how often the Lord's Supper, and the
like: The things themselves being divinely appointed, are capable of such
general Directions, in and by the Light of Nature, as with ordinary Christian
Prudence be on all occasions applied and accommodated unto the Use, Practice,
and Profit of the Church. This respect of the Gospel-Church-State unto the
Light of Nature, the Holy Spirit demonstrates in his frequent Appeals unto it,
in things which do belong unto Church Order, 1 Cor. 7.29, 33. and 9.7, 11, 14,
15, 16. and 14.8, 9, 10, 11, 32, 33. notwithstanding the Commendations of the
Wisdom and Gifts which they came not behind in.

And furthermore, this Epistle was not written or directed to Brethren in
Office, if there were then any such, but to the Church as such, for there is no
mention of any in Office; some were for Paul, some for Apollo, some for Cephas,
and some for Christ; and such as were most fit, were with Paul at that time in
the upper parts of Greece, 1 Cor. 16.15, 16, 17, 18. And the Conclusion says,
they were Assistants in writing this Epistle, there being a Church when there
are not Brethren in Office, which is the Custos Rotulorum of all Divine Things
to be observed. The Church is essential before its ordinary Officers, and
cannot, as to its continuance, depend on any succession of theirs, which they
have none but what is given unto them; and when they have such, I do not mean
they should do any thing without, or in distinction from them, but in
concurrence, whence all may be esteemed the Acts of the whole Church, (see if
you please Clemens Romanus his Epistle to this Church, in the second Century,
celebrated for a venerable Work by all that read it, etc.)

There is no ground to conclude those Particulars to be only the Work of
Ministering Brethren in Office. Also it ought to be noted, Sing^^^ the Praises
of God, being always per^^^rmed in God's Worship, with united Voices, and not
one Man to sing in the Church alone; it follows, that so it was, and ought to
be practiced now, and was then in the Church of the Corinthians. And thus sang
they in the Jewish Church, and thus Christ and his Apostles sang, and Paul and
Silas, and this was and has been the practice or manner of religious Singing
always amongst the Godly in all Ages; no Instance can be given of one Man
singing singly alone in the Church, either by a^ ^xtraordinary or ordinary
Spirit; nor can it be proved from this place, whatsoever Men dream or fancy to
the contrary. O how vain and dangerous a Position is it to assert, none must or
ought to discharge this Sacred Ordinance, unless with immediate Inspiration, or
by an extraordinary Gift? for by the same Argument none must nor ought to
Preach, nor Pray neither, etc. unless miraculously and immediately inspired;
it is known, some erroneous and deceived People have asserted the same things.
Ordinances must be considered in their Administrations, according to the Nature
and Quality, and how always performed: Thus this Mr. Marlow, like a poor
ignorant and unwary Person, seems to justify and plead for the practice of
those Impostors, called, The sweet Singers of Israel, who plead for one single
Person to sing in Public Worship alone, and that too by Inspira^^^^; both
Matter and Mode must be all ^^mediately given to him, or else all his carnal or
formal Worship, etc.

And now I come to the VIth, [Objections Answered.] I will be as brief as I
can, because I suppose there is few but your own. I have proved, That Moses and
the Children of Israel did sing together, Psalm. 106.12. and that in Worship to
God. And Moses did put the Lord's Songs in their Hearts, and in their Mouths,
by Command, and all their Child^^^ after them, Deuteronomy. 31.19, 21, 22. unto while
they are a People. And Deborah and Barak sung both, Judge. 5.1. and no
incongruity, the Holy Spirit says it. Nor is it any thing against our Singing,
that formerly there were Music or Tunes, or Sacrifices; their Faith was the
same with ours, though it was not so plainly, yet it was savingly revealed.
Singing Praises to God were no Figures nor Types, no more than their Faith by
which they were accepted. Singing God's Praises were before the Law, under the
Law and the Gospel, and so no Type; nor was their Singing with Music a Rule
for us, for we have a Gospel-Command, which is our Rule, and so had they for
what they did in that.

P. 26. Your Objections and Answers, many of them, are trifling; and your
division between Israel's Wilderness-State, and David and Solomon's
Temple-State, is your pleasant Dreams, a Chase which I have something else to
do than to follow. Cant. 2.11, 12. [Birds] is not in the Original. Heb. 8.9.
You make all things, building of the Tabernacle and first Testament, to be a
Pattern or Figure of the Erection and Dedication of the Gospel Church, etc. and
make neither it nor Solomon's Temple to be a Figure of Christ, quite beside the
Design of the Holy Spirit, and the Nature of the things: Christ is the Antitype
of them all, and no Body can make these things what they were not like your
self.

P. 29. Christ and his Disciples says, the Holy Spirit did sing; when they had
hymned, is the same. Let your Learned Men say what they please, few or none of
them were of your Notion, against singing in the Church; and they which
translated, sung an Hymn, were as learned as they: And as some of the old
Translations read that Text Grace, if you should preach only by that
Translation, I know what you would be accounted of, or others you mention. I
have seen a Translation which calls Solomon's Song, A Ballad of Ballads, and
Paul the Knave of Jesus Christ; and I have seen Grace in Rhyme. Nor will your
Dutch Translation avail you more, than the French Protestants will me, which
says, Chante le Cantique, Mat. 26.30.

The like is your Instance about lifting up their Voice; as if Singular, which
is not, because it is their Voice, which is Plural. There may be the Voice of a
Multitude, In Rama was a Voice heard, which were Bethlehem and all the Coasts
thereof, a Voice of all, for their Children which Herod slew from two Years old
and under, Mat. 2.18. Rev. 9.9. The Voice of their Wings were as the sound of
Chariots, of many Horses running to the Battle. (...), the same Greek word in
all, Acts 2.6. (...), when this Voice was made, Margent, it were many spoke it,
and heard it; it could not be by one Person, but many made this Voice, it being
but one Matter; and Rev. 14.2. says it clearly.

And see Numb. 21.3. Deuteronomy. 1.45. Judge. 20.13. Acts 19.34. Rev. 19.6. where
Voice is the Speech of many: thus are we imposed upon by an Imagination; and I
might have expected that because it is in Ephesians. 5.19. said Heart not Hearts,
that therefore it must be singular too; how it escaped is much; they could by
one Spirit make one Voice, and lift up their Voice together. You run many
dangerous Quibbles: it does not necessitate the like in all public Prayers,
nor at any time except the free Operation of the Spirit, which may be without
confusion; wherefore you have said nothing to confute a vocal Singing together,
but showed your Weakness, etc.

And I assert a vocal Singing together from Mat. 26.30. and Acts 4.24. a vocal
Praying together; and I will assert a prescribed Form of singing Psalms in the
Scriptures, and yet avoid bringing in a prescribed Form of Prayer, invented
either by you or any in our days, except you will prove your selves as
infallible as Scripture; for the same Arguments will not promote one and the
same, because they differ not a little in their Infallibility: for before the
Law, and under it, Believers had prescribed Forms of Singing, but none of
Prayer; and tho the Lord's Prayer be alleged for a Pattern, I fear too few
understand it; and it would be intolerable Pride for any to forbid its use, or
to prescribe a Form because Christ did so. It is dangerous to make that
Negative which the holy Spirit makes Affirmative. Paul and Silas did both pray
and sing Praise; Nature can do this, how much more they that are filled with
the Spirit, which all Saints are required to be? The Prisoners did hear them,
tho you will not: many have before now learned Psalms, and can sing them
together. To deny we ought to sing in a mixed Congregation, is so foolish and
frivolous a Notion, that I need say nothing to it: What have we to do with
others, or to judge them who are without? Must not the Church sing Psalms, etc.
and worship God together, because Strangers are assembled with them? If they
must not sing God's Praises in such a Congregation, they must not pray then,
because others will it is like, and daily do, join in their Hearts with the
Church in that Ordinance, which is a closer Union than that of uniting the
Voice: nay, we must not admit them so much as to say Amen to our Prayers if
this were so. The Church is met together to worship God; and ought they to omit
so great and God-glorifying an Ordinance, because some Unbelievers may be
amongst them? If Sinners do that which they have no warrant to do, let them
answer for it: you may as well forbid them to read the Psalms of David, etc. as
not to sing them, Reading being also an Ordinance of God as well as Singing and
Praying. They make the Psalm no more their own in singing it, than they do in
reading it.

Page 36. You tell us that in this Life the Joys and Consolations of our
Redemption-Grace are mixed with Sorrows for Sin, Temptations, Troubles,
Afflictions, which deprive us of the constant exercise of the Grace of Joy in
our Souls, so that it is not a time to sing.

So had all the Saints from the beginning of the World since Sin entered into
it, not David excepted, nor Christ nor his Disciples, nor Paul nor Silas, which
sung under raw Stripes, unwashed or plaistered to mitigate their Pain; and the
Church under the New Testament were under as ill Circumstances as any can be,
and yet are commanded to sing Psalms, and to rejoice, and again to rejoice with
Joy unspeakable and full of Glory.

Indeed notwithstanding your great pretense to both Knowledge and Power, you
talk like one that is neither truly seasoned with Grace and Experience in the
true sense thereof, you do so confound things and jumble them, having gotten a
Notion, but want that which you condemn others for. What different Seasons
soever Joy and Sorrow and Affliction may have, they are not at such an
unreconciled distance, but may meet in one day and less: We may mourn with them
that mourn, and rejoice with them that rejoice, undeceived too.

Your Words rather enforce Saints to continue in their Unbelief, which is the
cause of their want of Spirit and Joy, flattering a compliance through their
Weakness, persuading them their Case is worse than under the Law, who did sing
under all their Doubtings, Despondencies, which were the way to quicken them,
if Ordinances be: to sit in a doubting moping Condition, as if to be truly
religious were the most disconsolate Condition in the World, affrighting to
such as are ignorant of it. A poor ignorant Saint has more true Joy in any
Condition than all the Hectors in the Earth. And as it is no reason that you
have rejected singing Praise to the Lord many years, except your Humor must be
an Example: some that are as serious as you, and talk as much, have rejected
such things as you call Truth in your opinion as long; but as you begun, you
make an end, and so shall I.

By telling you, that though your self and others may think you have done the
Church or Truth service, what Gift soever you have, for my part I do seriously
think you have done foully amiss, thrusting a crude and undigested thing with
no advantage to your Talent, but many ways to the Scandal and Detriment of the
Gospel, directly opposing what Christ has commanded, which though I be sure
of, yet would I not rashly censure those that modestly differ from me; for this
Theme has not been much controverted as yet that I have seen.

And you had done better before you printed it, to have made Enquiry how many
were otherwise minded, and where, and have sent it to them, to have had returns
or approbation; but it is easy for Persons to be puffed up with their own
conceit: I have admired at the Church at Corinth that had really such great
Gifts and Parts among them, and yet even such were incapable to use them to
real advantage for themselves or others, so no marvel what is now.

In the next place I will propose something to this Subject, as I proposed,
page 28.

That seeing singing Psalms in Praise to God, is both an ancient, commanded,
and commendable Work, which has been truly proved, as we see through all
Series of Times, from the beginning of the World, Christ and his Apostles gave
order for it, for the comfort of those which make conscience of it aright in
using it, does abundantly prove it so to be.

This ought to provoke us to enquire, and that with all diligence, how this
Worship may be solemnized by us aright; for many excellent Duty is spoiled in
the observation of it; hearing, reading, praying, preaching, partaking at the
Lord's Table, giving to the Poor, are all excellent things in themselves, holy
Duties; but the simple doing of them is not enough, or all, no it is the least
part of them; there may be a Praying which is Sin; reading, and not consider;
hearing a savor of Death, partaking at the Lord's Table to Judgment; giving
all to the Poor, and profit nothing.

Wherefore as in Singing, etc. so all our Duties ought to be done in Spirit and
Truth, with Understanding and Grace in our Hearts to the Lord, we must in all
our Duties have an especial care to our Hearts, understand the inward Man
thereby; to it God looks directly; the Grace of the Heart, Spirit, and
Understanding, are the same: It is a right understanding of that, and an entire
desire to offer to God in his Worship what he requires; the Understanding must
join fervently with what the Lips utter, Psalm. 4.7. 1 Cor. 14.15.

Consider, that singing Psalms is to be reverently performed for God's Glory
and Honor, and not for the pleasing our selves, so that one must suit his
inward Thoughts to the Matter; if it be of Praise to God, our Hearts must be
elevated and cheerful; if therein be Prayer, fervent; if threatening, great awe
of God; if Deliverance, raised in hope; if Judgment, fear; if Duty, holy
purpose to obey; if of Promises, to believe; of Prophecy, with attentive
admiration of the Wisdom of God: thus may that be attained which is called
Grace in the Heart to God, and with the Spirit and Understanding also, and in
Spirit and Truth: it shall not be a Lip-service, an Exercise of Diversion, or
Vanity, (as among many) but of Piety and true Worship to God, it will bring the
whole Man in a right frame, and make the outward deportment such, as the
reverence and gravity that such a sacred Work does require; and the same is the
tendency of all Ordinances whatsoever.

Wherefore as singing of Psalms is a Duty well-becoming the Lord's People in
all Conditions, and of all Conditions in all Ages, as the due acknowledgment of
his Kindness: It was one of King David's Jewels in his Crown, that he is styled
the sweet Singer of Israel; and we cannot but commend it in him, that he bound
himself to it; and in commending it in him, we lay a necessity of it in our
selves; for whatsoever things are honest, and of good report always, Phil. 4.8.
How can we but think that all those Worthies abovementioned, had not a most
Heavenly Spirit, who were so much employed in this Divine Work? Does it not
sometimes raise our Hearts, when we do but read seriously those ravishing Songs
of so-often repeated Praises, having nothing many times but Praises in their
Mouths? How much would it rejoice and refresh our Hearts, to be skilled and
accustomed in this heavenly Work our selves?

O therefore let God's Praise, be much in our Mouths; for in the Mouth of the
Upright his Praise is comely, Psalm. 33.1. Seven times a day did David praise
him, Psalm. 119.164. Yea, his Praise was continually of him, Psalm. 71.6. And he
that offers Praise, glorifieth him, Psalm. 50.23. Praise our God, for it is
good; sing Praise, for it is pleasant, Psalm. 135.3. and 147.1. Let us rejoice
and triumph in his Praise, Psalm. 106.47. Here is a further Benefit, we are
confirmed in this Duty, we do it not at random; nor is it Will Worship, nor
leads to Apostasy, we do it upon Certainty and Truth; we have encouragement
in Private and Public to observe it, it being a necessary Duty, not left to
our Wills and Pleasures; it informs us in the Matter and Manner of the Psalms
in the Holy Scripture, through the help of the Spirit making melody in our
inward Man, that we may not, for want of so doing, bring the Duty into Contempt
with God or Man. I advise, that such as will understand this, do read his Book
with it, comparing together.

Now when I had finished these Animadversions, I was unawares, upon April 23,
1691. visited with an Appendix, consisting of 48 Pages; which assaults me with
a pretense greatly tending to the clearing and confirmation of the Truth
discoursed in the former Part, as in the Preface of the first Part shows.

Verily, I am exceedingly burdened in my Thoughts, that such a Man had no
better Conduct, than to print his first Part, till he had better consulted such
as he might; but truly I am grieved at my Heart, that his Pretenses being so
high, he should force me to buy his first Part twice, or else I may not have
his Appendix to answer. One may think he intends to make a Trade on it, to sell
the same Thing twice; he ought to have printed his Appendix by it self, if it
must needs be published, and not impose upon any, one thing twice: I do not
like it, and he might have had a little patience to have seen how his first was
resented, before he troubled us with more, for which either he or I must be
ashamed. I say, truly, to the best of my apprehension, he will get little, save
some Money, for what he has hung to his first Book, as will appear when well
considered.

In his first Section of it, he tells us, That he shall premise, that to praise
God, or praising of God, is not confined to Songs of Praise, but that there are
other Ways and Manners of praising God, than with such melodious Singing. What
an Invention is here, as strange as to see the Sun shine!

I will suppose he has had always an Antagonist to seek, so that this is
needless, and all he has said to it, and Dr. Owen too, though I may not
believe every thing which either says, no nor from that Text Heb. 2.12. But
although this worthy Author would not have God's Praise confined to Songs of
Praise only, no more would any one. What makes this for you, that would confine
it from all Songs ever since Christianity began, if not a thousand Years before,
till a thousand Years Reign in any ordinary Gift or Manner: Thus did not Dr.
Owen; and I tell you that you have abused him (and I fear your own Conscience)
in your Quotation, for in your 5th Page, line 29, Appendix, you draw a black
Line -- betwixt God, and this; which if filled up, as it ought to have been,
would have drawn a black Line upon your Book and Appendix, as the Reader shall
see; the words you have left out are these following, viz. (to praise God) [for
the Work of his Love, and Grace in our Redemption by Christ Jesus, This he
promised to go before them in. And what he led them unto, is by them to be
persisted in]. This indeed is the End of Church-gathering, and of all Duties
that are performed therein and thereby.

Now all that had acquaintance with the Doctor, knows, that notwithstanding he
would not have praising God in the Church to be restrained to melodious singing
God's Praise, yet he did own it a Duty which ought to be performed and
persisted in, amongst others, to sing Praise to God with melodious Voice, in
Private and Public: And those words which you have left wittingly out, do of
necessity imply it, what [Christ leads them unto, is by them to be persisted
in]. Now Christ did lead his Church unto singing Praise to God, by his personal
Example, and joining with them, Matthew. 26.30. and commanded it in the Church as
aforesaid; wherefore it is a Duty by them to be persisted in, as well as to
praise God other ways; and sure I am, this was Dr. Owen's Judgment and
Practice, which I will challenge any one to disprove, both after this were
printed as well as before. And Dr. Owen's Labors, and unwearied Pains and
Honesty, may not be abused by curtailing his Words and true Meaning; nor the
Reader, who it is probable has not his Book to see whether he be wronged or not.

Dr. Owen would not have God's Praise to be restrained to Words and Hymns,
particularly expressing it; but all Ordinances, Faith and Obedience, ordered
aright, to be giving Glory to God, and they must have more Confidence than
Honesty that deny it. But here is no exception against praising God by
particular Words and Hymns in God's Worship; wherefore you have beat the Air,
or Dust into your Eyes, discovering a deceitful Pen.

And I may guess such is your Anger against particular Words and Hymns of
Praise to God, that you would very fain deny even all Words and Hymns to be
singing melodiously Praise to God, at all in Meter, or Verse or Song, or else
all your Labor in your 2d Section is in vain, if some gain is not in it: for
you would cast a Mist by your long Harangue in this 2d Section, that we might
not know in all the New Testament, in what sense to take the word Hymns in; or
whether in any place it denotes a Song to be sung to the praise of God
melodiously. I could give as many critical Names, but I like not, and do stick
to our last English Translation, as apprehending those that did it to be every
way their Equals that oppose it.

Nor is your Supposition like this; how much without measure Christ himself had
of the Spirit, seeing they all sung an Hymn as well as he who had not received
extraordinary Gifts in that nature; that Christ's Practice did agree with the
Rule of Worship, whereby his Church in all Ages by him were appointed.

Wherefore because Christ and his Disciples did sing altogether in an ordinary
Manner, and no other Psalms were spoken of to be such but Scripture-Psalms, and
Singing was used in the Primitive Times, it is our Duty now; and because you
have not, you will not receive it, let it be on your own Peril.

Your 3d Section is deceitful in your two first Propositions.

You say, That such Spiritual Singing as was in the Primitive Church, was from
a special Gift of the Holy Spirit, for the proof of which you alledg ten
Scriptures or more, to prove that there were Spiritual singing Psalms, Hymns,
and Spiritual Songs melodiously in God's Worship, or else you say nothing.
2dly. And that it was from a special Gift of the Holy Spirit; both which I
grant, and yet you get nothing; for you do not say in your Proposition, it was
from an extraordinary Gift (as much as any Miracle or immediate strange Tongue
inspired) but a special Gift. It were so, if it were ordinary, to sing with the
Spirit, and with Understanding also; but you can never prove these two to be
extraordinary Gifts, viz. Spirit and Understanding; inasmuch as Understanding
is the greater, without which the other is unfruitful: the Understanding was an
ordinary Gift in all, and exhorted to be observed, which had not been, and must
direct every Gift whatsoever in its use for Edification; wherefore as he that
prophesies is greater than he that speaks with Tongues, 1 Cor. 14.5. and yet
that Prophecy is an ordinary Gift, and such as every Member is to have less or
more, for they are all exhorted to covet it, and it is a continued Gift in the
Church always. A strange Tongue without an Interpreter, is a meaner Gift than
Prophecy, both for the Church, and in respect of our Understanding; for
Prophecy will help it aright, but the Understanding mu^^ direct and guide a
strange Tongue, or els^ it becomes unprofitable; thus is your first Proposition
rendered invalid.

Your second Proposition is impertinent, viz.

2dly. That the Gifts of the Holy Spirit were not given alike to every peculiar
Member of the Church of Christ for Public Worship.

The veriest Novice would have made a better; who did ever affirm such a piece
of Ignoramus? The holy Spirit did never give Gifts alike to every Apostle,
Evangelist or Elder, nor it may be never will; much less to every particular
Member; though every particular One had not Gifts alike for public Worship,
nor ever will in this World, yet every particular Member ought to have less or
more of every Gift and Grace of the Spirit ordinarily, or else there will be no
communion between Information and Acceptance, which every Gift either tends
to edify and build, else he that speaks is unfruitful. If either Experience
do not speak to Experience, and Spirit to Spirit, so that there is a likeness
of Gift between Speaker and Hearer, or else he has not an Ear to hear, or the
Speaker but an Imagination; there is a likeness as to the nature of the Gift in
each in the Quality, though not in the Quantity: in all things that tend (...)
the perfection of the Saints and God's Worship, were not one thing in the
Primitive Times and another now.

All your Stories told in your third Section, in page 13. is conceited
Tautologies, Objections to no purpose, and answering to as little compared with
your former Part. In p. 20. you say, that the 26th ver. of 1 Cor. 14. cannot be
taken for a positive Command to sing a Psalm, seeing it is put by way of
question [if they had a Psalm, etc.] You dare deal ill with holy Scriptures.
Pray in what Copy did you ever read that 26th verse so? I could never find that
word [If] nor any that I have heard of. Would you bring Scripture to your
Opinion, which all your Discourse is strong of? you have hoped for a credulous
Reader; but we must beware of you.

Your Fourth, I leave to them concerned: a little to your 5th Section, etc.

In your handling 1 Cor. 14.34. you say, this Scripture though it has such
relation to the following verse, as to forbid Women asking any Question in the
Church, during the Worship and Service of God therein, yet it tends to more,
etc.

1. We are (seeing it is so) to enquire what is meant by Church. 2dly. What is
meant during the time of Worship and Service of God therein. The Church cannot
be understood here but as it is in an Assembly together precisely: then her
Assembly is either when the Lord's Day is come, or the time therein appointed
by her to meet; whether few or more be come, then the Church is met. And I
question if Women be looked to, that they say nothing, nor ask Questions in the
Meeting Place from first to last, or that it is any Evil in so doing; but if it
intend that after the Minister has begun till he ends, then I think Men may
not ask Questions in your Opinion while another is speaking. But Women are
under such Circumstances as Men are not. I grant, yet it is the Church in and
to which they are to give an account of their Faith, and evidence against an
evil Doer, and Acknowledgment of their Faults when dealt with in the Church;
therefore in several Cases Women cannot be under Silence, nor hindered giving
good Counsel, and teaching in some kind, yet not that Teaching which they are
forbidden in the Church, for all your Confidence, with unreconcilable
Objections, it is through your ill handling them.

If she will learn any thing, she must ask her Husband at home. She must come
into the Church to learn too, or else what does she there if not to learn? She
must learn in Silence. So must every one else while one is speaking. How if she
have no Husband? how if she be more able to teach him, or he is an Unbeliever?
how if she be a Virgin or Widow? Truly as she must learn in Silence, as all
others, while one is speaking, so she may learn all that come to her, if she
ask her Husband at home leave to learn all that will hear her pray or prophesy.
If she have no Husband, she has power in her own House, and all the
Church Members and Pastors too, may come and hear her, it being no
Church-meeting, else Women may not pray nor prophesy any where at all in Men's
hearing. All the Members may teach and learn one another in Psalms, etc. but
all Males and Females may not teach and learn one another in the time of
public Worship except in this, and this is commanded without exception, but an
Exception is made against any thing else but Psalms in time of Worship; nor is
it possible that a Woman should be in a Transgression to lead Men to be
deceived herein, which otherways might be, nor does she usurp Authority over
the Man by answering him in the same Sayings and Melody; for she harmonizes
with him, and shows her greatest Agreement, more than her Silence forced, till
she can vent it; but she joins with her Heart, making melody therein with all
others to the Lord, and is not guilty of any Breach of the moral Law (more than
Miriam, and Deborah, Hannah, or the Virgin Mary,) which you can set up and pull
down at your pleasure, if one had nothing else to do but to trace you.

Your Sixth Section is a Presumption, what shall be fulfilled in the 7th
thousand Years of the World, and we must not sing till then by your leave; so
let it go for your redolent Dream.

All your Appendix is out of my Question; such as is concerned, may look to
you; I well hope I have spoken in seriousness, tho not so much as you would,
yet longer than I would, if I knew how to help it. I commend it to the Wise to
judge.

The 70 and vulgar Latin upon Psalm. 19. latter end of the 4th Verse, translate,
He has placed his Tabernacle in the Sun, which countenances Idolatry, instead
of, he has set in them a Tabernacle for the Sun.

POSTSCRIPT.
REader, I never saw Mr. Keach's Book, called, The Breach Repaired, etc. till
after I had quite finished this Tract; but since I came up to London I have
seen it, and also Mr. Marlow's Sheet he has dispersed amongst the Churches,
etc. wherein he pretends Mr. Keach has misrepresented what he has wrote, and
contradicted himself, and intimates as if he had left most or great part of his
chief Arguments unanswered: which I find to be such a piece of Pride, Falsehood,
and Arrogance, as has been hardly seen. For if any wary and discreet Reader
compares those Books, they will see it is no such thing which he boldly affirms;
which I suppose Mr. Keach, or some other Person for him, will suddenly make
appear to his shame. It Is a strange and unaccountable way to answer a Book, to
leave all the argumentative Part, and to quarrel with a few Words, and that
without any just reason too, which will appear to all unbiassed and
understanding Men, upon a strict Examination of the Matter.

This Man ('it is judged by wise and thinking Men, who are not of our Mind) has
done more hurt, and brought more reproach on the holy Name of God, than any one
Person for many Years; and a Shame it is to his Abbeters who countenance him in
his nonsensical and ridiculous way of Scribbling, in opposing a precious
Ordinance of God.

FINIS.
An APPENDIX: OR, A Brief Answer to Mr. Marlow's Notion of the Essence of
Singing.
By T. W. Pastor of a Baptized Congregation.
SIR,
THat Question the Lord uses to convince his Servant Job of his unadvised
words, I would have you to consider, Job 38.2. Who is this that darkneth
Counsel by Words without Knowledge? for I find some hard words made use of by
you in your little Book, to darken and obscure a plain Truth: And the best
Construction I can put upon them, is, to hope you did deliver some things
ignorantly, not well understanding what you have affirmed: And therefore that I
might discharge my Duty toward the Lord, (in bearing Witness to and for that
God-honouring, Gospel-adorning, and Soul-comforting Ordinance of Singing
Psalms, etc. in the Public Worship of God, to his Glory and our mutual
Edification) and also toward you, in showing your great Mistakes and Errors,
which, whilst you have militated against the Truth, you have run into, and to
remove that Stumbling Block you have laid before the Weak, and shall not
trouble my self at present to trace you in all your Mistakes that are out in
Print, because that has been done by other Hands, but shall with all
convenient brevity show your Mistake and Error about that which you call the
Essence of Singing, Sin, and Prayer; desiring the Lord to bless it to your
Conviction.

What I shall at present take notice of, shall be in Answer to this Question;

Whether the Essence of Sin, Prayer, and Praise, consists only in the Heart, or
in an inward spiritual Exercise of the Soul or Mind of Man? as Mr. Marlow
endeavors to prove, Page 5, 6, 7, of his Book of Singing.

. I shall first of all endeavor to explain the Term Essence, to see what it
imports in its proper Notion, and then apply it to the above Particulars. The
Essence of a Thing, is the Nature and Being thereof. Est totum per quod res in
proprio esse intrinsice constituitur, says the Author of Ars sciendi. Sive est
totum illud per quod res est id, quod est. It Is that which gives Being to a
Thing; it denotes the bare Nature of a Thing abstract from all Modes and
Accidents. Whatever may be separated from the Nature of a Thing, and yet the
Thing still remain, this does not appertain to the Essence of it. This term
[Essence] as I humbly conceive, belongs primarily and properly (Entibus
realibus) to real Beings, in opposition to Nonentia and entia rationis: for all
Modes, Accidents, and Entia rationis, tho they have Existence, yet have no
Essence properly so called, because Essence (as Schuler speaks) is formale
Entis, the very Nature of a positive Being; and therefore real positive Beings
alone are said to have Essence. But in a large Sense and borrowed Acceptance,
it is sometimes applied to Modes and Accidents, whether they be Actions,
Relations or Privations, etc. and so denotes their Nature and Being, such as it
is. But so much for the term [Essence], which properly denotes the Quiddity,
the Nature and Being of a Thing.

Now whether the Essence of Sin, Prayer, and Praise, does consist in the Heart,
Mind, or Spirit, I conceive will be easily made appear by opening the true
Nature of these Things; because the Essence of a Thing, and the Nature of it,
as before minded, is all one.

. 1. First then as to the Nature of Sin. I humbly conceive it lies here; It Is
the want of that Rectitude and Conformity to the Law (whether it be of Nature,
Quality or Action) that ought to be found in a rational Creature; I say
rational Creature, because it is the Property or Adjunct of reasonable
Creatures. Brutes are not under a Law, properly so called, and consequently are
not Subjects capable of Sin. I place its Nature in the want of Rectitude, with
relation to the Law; because it is a privative, not positive Being. All positive
Beings are derived from God: and if Sin has properly an Essence, God must be
the Creator of it, which is Blasphemy to assert. And from this very Notion,
that Sin has a positive Essence, the Manichees fell into the Heresy of two
first Principles. They taught there were two chief independent Beings, namely,
a good God and a bad One, from whom they derived all Good and Evil: Into which
Heresy Austin is reported to have fallen in his first Days; concluding that
Sin, if it was a positive Being, must certainly have an efficient Cause. But
afterward better understanding its Nature, he bewales his Error, and rejects
the Notion with great Abhorrence (as may be seen in his Confessions.) Sin
therefore I conclude, has no positive Being, neither has it an efficient, but
rather (if I may so call it) a deficient Cause. It Is the want of that Rectitude
which should be in the Creature, with reference to God's Law. And so St. John
defines it, 1 John 3.4. (...), (i. e.) Sin is the transgression of, or the want
of due conformity to the Law of God. Hence the Learned Turrettine defines it
thus, (says he) Hinc sequitur rationem formalem peccati in (...), and
privatione consistere, quae notat carentiam rectitudinis seu bonitatis secundum
prescriptum Legis debitae inesse Creaturae rationali, sive ea naturae sit, seu
qualitatum, sive actionum, etc. Lib. 1. P. 651. And others thus, It Is an
Inclination, Action, or Omission, opposing the Law of God, or wanting that due
legal Rectitude it ought to have.

. 2. But so much for the Nature of Sin in general, which is usually divided
into Original, and that either Inherent, or Imputed and Actual; and that either
of Thought, Word, or Action. Original Sin respects Man's Person and Nature, of
which he is guilty as soon as born. For first of all, we are born without that
original Righteousness wherewith Adam was created, and which the Law of God
requires should be in us; because we were in Adam as a public Person, whose
Duty it was to have kept himself in the Estate wherein God made him; so in this
respect we have not due conformity to the Law of God, even in our very Natures
and Qualities. Now this very want of original Righteousness is properly Sin,
because it is the want of what ought to be in us. We have not that moral Image
of God, consisting in Knowledge, Righteousness and Holiness, which God gave us
in our first Parents. Our Natures are deprived of original Righteousness, and
those moral Perfections wherewith Adam was created, and are now propense and
prone to all Sin; and this is that we call Original Sin, and of which we read
in Scripture, especially Psalm. 51.5. Ephesians. 2.1. Job 14.4, etc. 2ly, We are born
guilty of Adam's actual Transgression which he first committed, which by just
imputation becomes ours, because then Adam stood not as a private, but as a
public Person: all were to stand and fall in him, he being the Root and
Representative of Mankind. Adam therefore being made our Head in that first
Covenant, by Divine Ordination, therefore his Transgression is accounted ours;
we sinned in him as our public Head, and fell with him as the Branches fall
with the Body of the Tree, according to that of the Apostle, in him all sinned,
and all died, Romans 5.12. But thus much for Original Sin.

. 3. Now Mr. Marlow, in his description of the Essence of Sin, (as he
improperly and confusedly is pleased to call it) seems wholly to exclude
Original Sin, (tho I am apt to believe he is no Arminian) for when in Page 6.
he says, The Essence of Sin is in the Spirit; (1.) Either by this Expression
he means the same as he did before, Page 5. when he spoke of Singing. The
Essence of Sin is in the Spirit, (that is) it consists in an inward spiritual
Exercise of the Soul or Mind of Man: And if so, then he wholly excludes
Original Sin, which does not consist in the Act or Exercise of the Mind, but is
born with us, and speaks only of Actual Sin; and neither does he speak of all
Actual Sin, but only of one Species or Kind, namely of Heart and Thought; and
if he takes the term (Essence) in its proper signification, it belongs to no
Sin, which (as I said before) is a privation, unless he is running himself, and
would have others follow him, into the old exploded Error of the Manichees.
And, lastly, neither is it a description of the Essence of actual Sin in the
Thoughts; for let him mean what he will by Essence of Sin, it is certain that
Actual Sin in the Thoughts, does not consist in an inward spiritual Exercise of
the Mind or Spirit; this in it self is no Sin, but a natural Act of a
reasonable Creature; the being therefore of this very Species of actual Sin,
consists not in the Exercise of the Soul or Mind considered in it self, but as
it relates to God's Law, and wants such due conformity to it as it should have.
Therefore I am persuaded, that either Mr. M. is under some pernicious Error in
Judgment concerning Sin, or else that he does not understand what he asserts,
(I hope the latter.) The word Essence is a hard Term, especially when we talk
of the Essence of Sin; and I have too much cause to fear, from mine own
knowledge, that by this means he has laid a Stumbling Block before the Weak, to
cause them to err in Judgment concerning Sin, and other things that his Notions
lead to: I hope the Lord will make him sensible of it, and give him Repentance.

. 4. Or, secondly, by the Essence of Sin in the Spirit, he means, it is in the
Soul or Spirit as its Subject; and in this sense it is in part true, (tho the
word Essence in a proper sense must not be allowed) for the Soul of Man is the
proper Subject of Sin, yet not exclusive of the Body; for the whole Man, which
consists of Body and Soul, is the Subject of Sin. But if he means thus, it is in
the Spirit as its Subject; tho it is true in part, yet it is nothing to his
purpose, for here is no description of the Nature of Sin wherein it consists,
which is the very thing he pretends to declare, but only a relation of what
Subject it is in; all one as if a Person should ask me, What is the true Nature
and Essence of Whiteness? And I reply thus, Whiteness is in the Wall: you may
very well answer, so it is in Milk, and in a Man's Body, etc. But what is this
to the Nature of it? And the same I reply to Mr. M. Actual Sin is in a Man's
Words and Actions, as well as in his Thoughts and Spirit. But I suppose he
takes not that Expression in this latter sense, viz. the Essence of Sin is in
the Spirit as its Subject; but in the former, it is in the Spirit, as it
consists in an inward spiritual Exercise of the Soul or Mind of Man, which he
intimates to be his meaning in the words just preceding that particular; for,
says he, Page 6. The Scriptures do clearly witness, that the Essence of Prayer
and Praise, and of Sin, do all consist in an inward Exercise of Soul or Spirit.
And then proceeds to prove each in particular, viz. First, (says he) The
Essence of Sin is in the Spirit. This plainly shows, he takes the Expression in
the former sense, which we examined above. But in my Judgment he speaks one
thing for another, for there is a great deal of difference between the Essence
of Sin as in the Spirit, and the Essence of Sin consisting in an inward
spiritual Exercise of the Soul or Spirit. But in such dark Shades do Men
wander, when they oppose the Truth of God which they should love and honor.
But hitherto of the Nature of Sin.

. 5. As for the Nature or Essence of Prayer, I conceive it thus; Prayer is a
Duty we owe to God, and an Action of a reasonable Creature, whereby he
expresses his Mind to the Lord, sometimes with words, and sometimes without
words, in petitioning for things agreeable to his Will. Prayer is therefore
either Mental or Vocal; these are two Species of Prayer in general. Now to say
Vocal Prayer is not Prayer, because Mental is, is all one as to say, two
Species cannot agree in one Genus, or that a Man is not an Animal, because a
Brute is; but such Absurdities are unworthy Confutation. The Essence therefore
of Prayer, consists not in the Mode of performance, whether it be done with the
Mind only, or with the Voice also. Therefore when Mr. M. says, Page 6. The
Essence of Prayer is in the Heart or Spirit: This is true in the general of one
Species of Prayer, namely, Mental; but not of Vocal Prayer; for the Nature and
Essence of this consists in the Voice, as well as in the Mind; and tho God will
be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth, Joh. 4. yet who doubts but Spiritual
Worship may be performed by bodily Organs? As to the other Scriptures he
mentions, to prove his lame definition of Prayer, they relate only to Mental
Prayer; and the Scripture is as plentiful in other Instances for Vocal Prayer,
had he been willing to collect them; but this indeed would have showed him,
that the Essence of Prayer is not only in the Spirit.

. 6. As to the Nature of Singing, I conceive it lies here: It Is an Ordinance
of God, and an holy Action of a reasonable Creature, wherein, by a fit
Modulation of Voice, suitable to the nature of the Matter sung, they sound forth
God's Praises. It Is a Mode of speaking; it is a solemn or melodious way of
sounding forth the Praises of God. And how this which is a mode of speaking can
consist in the Heart and Spirit, ( i. e. in an inward exercise of the Soul)
where there is no speaking at all, for my part I cannot understand, unless
Accidents may exist separate from their Subjects, which is contrary to the
Rules of all Logic. Whereas therefore Mr. M. Page 7. thus argues, If the
Essence of Prayer be inwardly in the Spirit, why not of Singing also? Not to
repeat what I have said of Prayer, I reply, for very good reason; Because
Prayer may be performed by the Mind without the Voice: mental Prayer, is an
Action and Accident of the Mind; this is not separate from its subject, though
the Voice be wanting. But Singing is a Mode and Adjunct of the Voice; and
therefore when we speak of proper, not Metaphorical Singing, it always
presupposes the Voice as its Subject, and can in no wise be performed without
it. It Is true, a Man may praise God with his Heart and Mind, for there is
mental Praise (though no mental Singing) as well as mental Prayer: but vocal
Praise, whether by Speaking or Singing, cannot be performed without the Voice,
(says Dr. Roberts) how gross and Ignorant a Contradiction in the Adject, and
absurd nonsense is it, to talk of Singing in Heart without the Voice? Methinks
I cannot but admire, that any Man of common Understanding, should expose to the
view of the World, such nonsensical gross Absurdities, to justify his long
neglect of a holy Ordinance of God, that is as ancient as the World, and will
continue to the Glory of God when it ends. But farther to convince him, or any
others that are misled by him, that the Essence of Singing is not in the
Spirit, etc. 'twill appear thus.

1. If Singing, in its Nature and Essence, is a Mode of Speaking, then the
Essence of Singing does not consist in a Spiritual inward Exercise of the Soul
or Mind, etc. (for here is no Speaking, consequently no Singing) but Singing in
its Nature and Essence, is a Mode of Speaking; for seeing it consists in a
Modulation of the Voice, therefore nothing else but a Mode of Speaking, and
consequently implies and presupposes Speaking.

2. If there can be no Singing without Speaking, then the Essence of Singing
does not consist in an inward Act of the Mind. This is plain, because here is
no Speaking, and the Essence of a thing cannot be there, where the thing it
self is not. But there can be no Singing without Speaking, as appears thus: If
Accidents cannot exist separate from their Subjects, then there can be no
Singing without Speaking: But Accidents cannot exist separate from their
Subjects (Accidentis enim esse est inesse) it is the very Nature and Essence of
Accidents to exist in another, and therefore Singing an Accident cannot be
without Speaking (its proximate Subject) and consequently consists not in an
inward Act of the Mind only.

3. If you confine Singing to the Heart and Spirit, because God will be
worshipped in Spirit and in Truth, John 4.24. and those that sing, ought to
sing with the Spirit and Understanding, 1 Cor. 14.15. by the same Rule (as you
have been told by others) you may confine Prayer and Preaching to the Heart and
Spirit, to the Internal Acts of the Soul or Mind; for we ought to pray with the
Spirit and with Understanding, and Ministers ought to preach with the Spirit
and Understanding. In short, the Consequence of your Discourse about that which
you call the Essence of Prayer and Singing (as the Reverend Mr. Knollyes and
Mr. Keach have told you) opens a wide Door for silent Meetings, and
establishes the Quakers in their mute Principles; though God is a Spirit, yet
he requires us to worship him with our Bodies as well as our Spirits, 1 Cor.
6.20. Vocal Prayer, and vocal Singing, may and ought to be with the Spirit; and
it is of no other Prayer and Singing the Apostle there speaks, but what ought to
be done to the edification of the Church. But who shall be edified by your
inward Singing, that you plead for? That Ordinance of Singing that the Church
of God before the giving of the Law of Sinai, and under the Law practiced, and
our Lord Jesus by his Command and Example to his Churches, has enjoined them
to practice in their Assemblies in the Gospel-day, is vocal Singing, to their
mutual Edification, Col. 3.16. which you and others neglecting, and some
opposing, do therein militate against a positive Statute Law of Heaven; Rob the
Church as much as in you lies of an Ordinance which our Lord Christ has
ordained for their edification and comfort; lay stumbling blocks before the
weak, to lead them into Error; which the Lord make you sensible of, and give
you true Repentance for, lest you repent it when too late; take heed of adding
Sin to Sin, and kindly accept of the Admonitions that have been given you in
Private and in Public; quarrel not with those that have showed your Mistakes,
but seriously consider of what has been said, and the Lord give you true
repentance for what you have done in opposing so plain a Truth of God.

FINIS.

