A View of the Face Unmasked.

OR, AN ANSWER TO A Scandalous Pamphlet, published by diverse Ministers, and
Entitled, The Common Prayer Book Unmasked.

Wherein the lawfulness of using that Book is maintained, by Answering their
Five (as they boast) undeniable Arguments brought against it.

Whereunto are added also some Arguments for the retaining of that Book in our
Church, from the same heads, whereby they plead against it; namely, From
The Name of it. The Original of it. The Matter contained in it. The Manner of
using it. The Effects of it upon the whole Land.


By Sam. Wotton, D. D. sometime Fellow of Kings College in Cambridge.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Newcomb* 166^

TO THE Impartial Reader.
Christian Reader,
THough I have all my life time hitherto declined to show my self any ways in
this kind; yet now in my last days, I can no longer keep my self out of the
over-burdened Press; For having seen this Book, not only publicly sold in
Westminster Hall, but also reprinted without control, and no answer that I can
hear of yet made to it; I thought it better to make this brief Answer thereto,
then to let it seduce and abuse so many people as might be hurt by it, if it
should pass for such an unanswerable piece, as it is pretended to be. I have
therefore set down all their arguments, and given plain and direct answers to
them; their vain extravagancy, and most uncivil railings, I have either wholly
passed over, or very lightly sometime touched upon them, that I might neither
too much enlarge my Book, nor write in a style so contrary to my natural
disposition, and so unfitting my quality and profession. First then in answer
to their Epistle to the Reader, they tell us there, that Out of a respect to
the glory of God, which is a God that will be worshipped in spirit and truth;
as also with a desire of the Readers eternal good, they present this Treatise.

To which I say also, that out of a respect to the glory of God, which is not a
God of confusion, but of peace, and so 1 Cor. 14. 33.
of order, without which there is nothing but confusion, and no true peace; as
also out of a tender care of the honor and glory of the Church of England; and
lastly out of a desire of thy good, that thou may not be misled by faction,
ignorance and blind zeal, I present unto thee this Answer to their book, set
forth in ^^ew against the Common Prayer Book, but in deed and truth against the
Church of England, as by this answer will appear.

Secondly, they tell us, That this Treatise was formerly penned by some eminent
Orthodox Divines, late Non-conformists, wherein are solid arguments. Concerning
which vain glorious boast, for eminency how much soever I fall short of them,
they being many and I but one, yet for Orthodoxness, let any man judge of their
writing and my answer, to whom that title does best belong; and for their last
title of late Non-conformists, I am more troubled to understand what they aim
at by it, then to answer it; for if they be still Non-conformists, why do they
prefix that word late, as implying that now they are not so; and if they be no
longer such, why or how then do they own such a book now? To that therefore I
say no more, but hope that my title of present conformity shall be as well
accepted by the indifferent Reader, as theirs of late or present difformity.

Thirdly they say, That three sorts of Readers shall be helped by this Book,
the doubtful shall be fully resolved, the users of the Common Prayer Book shall
be brought off, and the refusers of it encouraged; not only because Gods
people, but God himself mislikes it.

To this I rejoyn that those three sorts of people shall by my answer be more
profited then by their accusation; for the first sort, the doubtful, may be
hereby resolved to use it; the second sort which use it shall be confirmed in
their conformity and obedience; the third may be either changed or ashamed, not
only because humane authority does directly, but Divine authority also
consequently command it, by enjoining us to obey the powers set over us.

Fourthly, they press the Covenant as an unaswerable argument against the book,
To which I answer, that the Covenant is nothing at all against our Common
Prayer Book; for we shall plainly show when we come to the motive, that neither
they which for fear of present ruin, did in some sort seem to join in that
Covenant by Tyranuy imposed on them, nor they which through ignorance or
weakness of judgment did easily and willingly yield to it, are in any sort now
bound thereby to reject the Common Prayer Book.

Lastly, they tell us, That their book will inform us of the truth, and if the
truth (as the Scripture says) make us free, we shall be free indeed.

To this I say, that my answer truly performing that, which they only
promise, shall bring us out of the darkeness of error in this point, into the
light of truth, that being in the light, we may (as the Scripture speaks) walk
as children of the light, that is, in obedience to God, by obeying our
Governors, which are the Ministers of God for our wealth. And this freedom of
ours does in no sort come behind Romans 13. 4.
that of theirs; for hereby we are the servants of God* whose service (as with
our book in our daily Collect we confess) is perfect freedom. This freedom we
shall ever pray for, but freedom from government, discipline, order, decency,
or whatsoever other freedom in that kind they mean, we neither desire our
selves, nor (as we hope) shall they ever attain to that, most of all desire it.
So desiring thee (equal Reader) to weigh their bare arguments, with my plain
answers, and to let their railings, revilings, trouble thy head no more then
they have done my pen, I commit thee to Gods blessing, in this, and all thy
Christian endeavors, and rest

Thine in the Lord S. Wotton.

A View of the Face Unmasked.
CHAP. I. To the Preface.
HEre they begin with a mentioning of Loyalty, telling us, That

As Loyalty is the very Fortress of Policy; so pure Religion is the Fountain
and Root of Loyalty; yea, Equity, Charity, Sobriety, and Loyalty, are the
Virgin-Daughters of unspotted Piety.

Had they as much Loyalty in their hearts, as in their mouths, never would they
have presumed now, especially in these days, to reprint this Pamphlet, so
bitterly and sordidly inveighing against a Book by Law and Authority set forth
so long ago, and now allowed by His Royal Majesty, and constantly read before
Him in His Sacred Chapel. But as the Lord said of the Jews, so may the King of
these: They have Loyalty and Obedience in their Isai. 29. 23.
mouths, but in their actions they are far from it. And if as they tell us,
Pure and undefiled Religion be the Fountain of Loyalty; and Equity, Charity,
Sobriety, and Loyalty be the Virgin-Daughters of unspotted Piety: Let them take
heed, that the want of these four, which they abundantly discover in their
Book, do not out of their own mouth condemn the pretended Purity of their
Religion; for more then ordinary defects in these, shall this answer abundantly
show in their Book. But they will not be large, as they say, here in this
theme, no more will I: But I hasten with them to the p^rticular ^^tter, viz.
The Common Prayer Book, the Principal Subject of their discourse, but in which
they aim and strike at the Bishops, ^s they presently confess; upon this
supposal, that one of these two cannot stand without the other; for so they
tell us, saying,

As it is true, That no Ceremony, no Bishop; so it is as true, That no
Service Book, no Ceremony. This they do very well bring in with this, As and
So; for one of these is just as true as the other, there being no truth at all
in the one, or the other: For the Bishops might still have their Authority,
Dignity, and Estates which they now have, though all the Ceremonies we have
were abolished; and we might also have more Ceremonies then now we have, though
we had another Common Prayer Book, or none at all; which is too clear, to have
any place left for proof.

The next Page of this Chapter, is an inveighing against Superstition in
general: Concerning which, I will meddle no more with them, then they do
therein with our Common Prayer Book; for I am as much against Superstition as
they* But nothing said against Superstition can be against the Book, till the
Book be proved Superstitious. Which that it is, they attempt to prove in these
words very courageously.

If our Liturgy be not a mass of Superstition (...) superstitious Ceremonies,
we know not what Superstition is.

To which Proposition, if they will let me assume rightly, thus; But our
Liturgy is not a mass of Superstitions, etc. I grant all; and for their
Information, will tell them a little, That it is Superstition to make that a
matter of Conscience which they need not, or to make that a part of Gods
worship and service which is not simply so but a thing of it self indifferent,
Whether then it be Superstition to use our Book and Ceremonies, because
commanded, or to reject them upon a pretense of their being not indifferent,
but simply unlawful, when God has not forbidden them, and the Church has
commanded them, let Reason judge.

But to proceed with them, they endeavor to prove the Common Prayer to be
superstitious, because it appoints kneeling at the Communion, thus;

The grand ceremony of adoration or kneeling at the Communion, has it not been
the staff and strength of that abominable Idol the breaden God? In which
words with the rest there following, they charge us in kneeling to agree with
the Lutherans and Papists in this point, concerning the matter, but leaving the
manner.

We answer, That we neither suppose Lutherane Consubstantiation, nor Popish
Transubstantiation hereby, but we deny both; and so does our book, as by the
words and form of Administration in the book is clear enough. Neither is our
kneeling any adoration of the creature, as they would have it supposed, but the
most fit and convenient gesture that can be used in the time of Prayer, which
we are all in at the very receiving of that blessed Sacrament, as is plain
enough by the very words used at the delivering it. Now if any particular man
seem to these men to incline too much toward Popery in this point, that is
nothing to our Common Prayer Book, the defense whereof is my only task;
whatsoever therefore may be said in any particular man's defense I pass by;
Therefore also I omit the mentioning of the Liturgy which they talk of sent to
Scotland, with all the Chimerical conceits of their English brain concerning
that which they call the Scottish Hydra.

Lastly, Whereas they tell us,

The superstitions of this book are such, and so many, that if Paul were here
and saw them, as he saw that of Athens, he would cry out undoubtedly, ye are
too superstitious, Act. 17. 22.

We say no more to this, but if that we may presume to know St. Paul's mind as
well as they, we may better say, That which he appointed to the Corinthians,
14. 40 that have we observed in our Liturgy. But that we may not stand too long
upon these general extravagancies in their preface, let us come to the
particular charges against that Book to which they are such adversaries; the
first whereof is the Name in the next Chapter.

CHAP. II. To the Name.
THe scope of this Chapter is to prove our Common Prayer Book unlawful, because
it has the same name with the Popish Mass book; which that it has, they prove
thus in the beginning of the Chapter.

The Service Book men, and the Papists do mutually interchange the name of
Liturgy and Mass; the later calling their Mass by the name of Liturgy, and our
men owning the name of Mass to our Service Book, witness Pocklington, Cozens,
and Montague; in the name then is an unaminous agreement; If these men can be
ashamed of any thing, they may be ashamed of this ridiculous caviling with our
Common Prayer Book in this kind. If some men should call them schismatics,
make-bates, sowers of sedition, rebels, etc. would they count this to be a
sufficient argument, to cause them to be banished out of our Land, or cast out
of our Church? If they would think this hard measure against themselves, where
is their equity in dealing thus with others? Here me thinks Dame equity the
first of the Virgin daughters mentioned in their preface, is foully vitiated,
and so there is a sore blemish laid upon their unspotted piety the mother
hereof. Secondly, if this were granted, that the names were the same absolutely
in both, is the name enough to destroy the thing? If they be offended (as many
we know are) in the places of Gods worship among us, as well as with the manner
of our worshipping there, they have the same argument for demolishing of them;
for Papists call their Churches as we do ours. If they be angry with St. Jude
for speaking against railers upon them that are in authority, they may as well
cry down all he says by this argument of the name, because he has the same
with Iscariot the traitor. But being conscious to themselves (I presume) of the
vanity of this argument (though perhaps some simple one may be seduced by it)
they quickly fly from the name to the thing, and tell us that for matter they
are one.

What difference (say they) is there between our Liturgy and theirs, but a pair
of sheers, and putting ours in a coat of another tongue, ours having nothing to
a word but out of theirs?

All which is very unseasonably stuffed into this present Chapter; for this
belongs to the next Chapter, concerning the matter and the original, and not to
this of the name; and therefore they promise to show this more abundantly
hereafter, to which when we come we shall answer accordingly; in the mean time
to follow their immethodical manner of proceeding: I answer for the present,
that first this accusation is false; for where can they show in the Mass book
our thanksgivings for deliverance from the plague, for victory over our
enemies, for rain, for fair weather, etc? Secondly, If every word in ours were
in the Mass book, yet as long as all that is evil in the Mass book is left out
in ours, what is that which is good in ours the worse for being in the Mass
book? If that good thing in that book, is so polluted by being there among the
evil, that it can be good nowhere else? what will they say to all the texts of
Scripture read in that book? must they be expunged out of our Bibles because
they are taken into the Mass book? Let any man judge of this arguing. But to
return with them back again to the name, they say,

Names are the very images of things; and there being an unanimous agreement,
as in the names, so in the things; what reason is there that we should groan
still under the burden of a Liturgy born in upon us, under the name and nature
of a Mass?

The assertion here is to no purpose, except the names do truly set forth the
nature of the things. To the question we answer, that we do not at all groan
under such a burden; for neither is the book any such burden, as in my answer
shall appear; neither does our book own any such name. Next then after a
railing discourse, they ask a company of questions, which being truly
answered, the answer would be very unpleasant to them; for they ask,

Who has cast the State into this consumption of money? who has made the heart
to ache, and the souls to groan of honest householders, etc? Who have caused the
Kings liege people for obeying the Laws of God and man, to be carried to
stifling prisons? who caused some to be tortured, etc? who have been the
Incendiaries and firebrands to melt away the Kings love to his Subjects, and
their true loyalty to the King?

To all these questions of theirs, they might have added one more, Who have so
horribly murdered their King and many thousands of his subjects? To all these
questions, Whither the defenders of the Common Prayer book, or the opposers of
it, must be answered, let the whole world judge, and let them like the answer
as they please, and deny it as they can; I will appeal to others, and be silent
my self in this point. The rest of this Chapter, till they come to their
Syllogism, is nothing but railing, which I pass by; only concerning one
passage therein, where they speaking of the Scots rising up in arms, they
conclude with this exhortation, Up in the name of the Lord and do the like.

Here I must needs ask them Whither this speech savor of loyalty or rebellion?
If this were not a direct incitement to rebellion, let the world judge. Here
then we see Lady Loyalty the fourth of the Virgin daughters so notorious, that
we cannot but condemn the mother of impious treason instead of commending her
for unspotted piety; but that fire of rebellion through the infinite mercy of
God being now quenched, I will not rake into the ashes of it, but come to their
Syllogism.

We must not name an Idol but with detestation, much less are we to offer it as
a worship of God: But the Service book is an idol Therefore we are not to name
it, etc.

The Proposition in this syllogism, which no man will deny, they labor to prove
by several texts of Scripture, which I pass as brought to no purpose. The
assumption which should be throughtly proved, they promise to prove in the next
point, where I promise also (God willing) to answer their proofs; and to that
which they brag to be already granted, that our Service book is a Mass book, I
have already disproved.

CHAP. III. To the Original.
IN this Chapter they begin with a Syllogism, and fall to their idle
extravagancies afterward, quite contrary to their course in the former Chapter.

That whose original and rise is naught, must needs be naught in it self: But
such is our Service book: Therefore it is naught.

The Proposition they seem to prove, by saying thus, Can there come clean water
out of a corrupt fountain? The assumption they would prove, by proving our book
to be taken wholly from the Mass book and other Popish pieces. This they
endeavor to prove in this Chapter three several ways. 1. By comparing the
books. 2. By the mutual liking that our Liturgy Masters, as they call them, and
the Mass book men have one of another piece. 3. From the evidence given from
the Kings Counsel of England; most of his Chapter is spent in those three last
proofs of the Assumption. The Proposition they strive not to prove any further.
And yet if that be false, the whole argument is nothing worth. To that
therefore I answer first, and deny the truth of it simply, and in it self; for
it is then only to be granted as true when the original is wholly and
absolutely evil without any good in it; but if there be a mixture of good
therein as well as evil, that which arises from that part which is good may be
good, as well as that which arises from that evil is evil. If then there be
any good in the Mass book, and that only our book takes from thence, wholly
rejecting all the evil, it cannot follow that our book must be evil though
taken thence, any more then a Pearl or precious stone must be naught, if raked
out of a dunghill. For the objection against this; that the Case is different,
because that Pearl or stone was not bred in the dunghill; We answer that is
nothing against us.

For first, Those good things which we have in our book, and are also in the
Mass book, were not bred there, but taken out of the Scriptures, Fathers, or
Ancient Liturgy of the Church, and put in theirs.

Secondly, A thing bred in that which is evil in that sense we speak, that is
not totally evil, may be good, coming from evil, as the precious stone in the
head of a Toade is not venomous though the Toad be. But for their instance of
the fountain, it is very unsufficient and unfit in this case; because though
the fountain were not totally evil, yet the evil and good in the water is so
mixed, that one cannot be severed from the other in the flowing out; but in
collecting good things out of a book where are also evil, and more evil then
good, the case is very different, and the work easy.

This their Proposition then being thus unsound, what proof soever they make of
that which follows, their conclusion cannot hold; yet I am content to take a
view of the triple proof of their Assumption also: The first whereof is from
the comparing of the Mass book, and our Common Prayer Book together: Between
which they pretend there is such a consent, that every piece and parcel of our
Book is taken from thence; but the falsity of this we showed in the former
Chapter, in which they spoke of this matter, and named there what we have in
our book, which the Mass book has not. And we add now, That if we had never a
word but what is there, yet we having none of the evil that is there, it cannot
follow that ours must be evil, for having in it somewhat that is there.
Secondly, For the mutual complacency they talk of, I answer that to accuse all
that like our Liturgy, to be likers also of the Mass, is so shameless and foul
a slander, as none can be more. And of the other side for the Papists approving
of our Liturgy, it is more a commendation of it then otherwise, it arguing our
Service to be so good, that our very adversaries, which in all things else are
so bitter against us, yet can say nothing against that: Whereas therefore they
say, That if the Papists like it, it cannot be good, because they are against
all good.

I answer, This is intolerable; for thus they may as well condemn much of our
Doctrine, as well as our Liturgy; as namely, all Divine and necessary Truths
which we hold and teach concerning the Unity of Essence, and Trinity of persons
in the Divine Nature; all the Artributes of God; and in a word all the first
part of Divinity in Thomas, wherein we and the Papists have hardly any
difference. So then this second argument makes more for our book then against
it. All those sound parts and doctrines in Divinity, which we with them held
jointly, not having their Original from them or their writings, but from the
Scriptures, whence we and they also took them.

The rest of the words which they use in this Chapter concerning this second
argument, as having nothing in them, but foul and shameful expressions of their
rancorous and m^licious hearts against all those that are not of their strain,
I pass over as nothing to purpose for the business we have in hand; And so I
come to the last evidence they bring against us which they call, The undeniable
testimony of the King, namely of King Edward the sixth, and of his council;
Where they bring in a piece of a letter, telling us, they have the rest by
them, which may be as true as all they say else; but granting all they say; if
the King and State, to draw the Papists back to us, and win them to our Church,
did write to that purpose; what is that to the prejudice of our Liturgy, as
long as all the evil in the Mass book is left out in ours? If ours be no new
Service but the old, and what is in ours be theirs, to assure the Papists
hereof must needs be an especial argument to move the Papists not to abhor our
Churches, but too frequent them and join with us in our Liturgy, though perhaps
they cannot rest satisfied with it, but will privately have their own Mass
besides it also.

Thus I have done with their third proof also. Now their Syllogism made
hereupon is this.

That which is word for word out of the Popish Mass book, is not to be offered
to God as a worship, but to be abolished as abomination to him. But the Liturgy
in controversy is so, as has been abundantly proved: Therefore is not to be
offered, etc.

To this we answer briefly; That which they here brag to be proved to the full,
we have by our answer showed to be utterly false. For if there be any thing in
the Mass not in ours, as abundantly there is; or any thing in ours not in
theirs, then is not ours word for word out of theirs. But both these we have
already showed, and so their argument is fully answered. Vainly therefore do
they spend so many words following by several places of Scripture to prove that
which no man denies. And as needless is their following Invective against the
Mass which we defend not; and to no purpose concerning this business, is their
answering two texts of Scripture used in defense of the Mass by the Papists;
all which words helping only to fill up their book, and nothing touching our
Common Prayer Book, I pass by.

One only thing more have I to add concerning this Chapter, that for the
original of our Common Prayer book, whereas in this whole discourse thereof,
they seem to suppose that we went to the Mass and no further, to frame a
Liturgy from thence; this is a mere fancy of theirs; we follow the old Liturgy
before the Popish Mass; but the truth is, when we having been a long time with
the Mass amongst us, and other Idolatrous ceremonies very notoriously faulty in
the worship of God, did according to our duties begin to reform our selves, we
did only cast off such things as were inevitably offensive, and did retain the
rest; concerning which, whereas they tell us It was great incogitancy (to speak
the least) in our Reformers in King Edwards days, to take a Monk from among
the Canaanites, etc.

We answer for those our holy Ancestors, that they took the most advised, pious
and Christian course that could be taken in that kind. For first, hereby they
took the most likely course that could be thought on to draw many of the
Papists to our Religion, wherein we departed no farther from them then they had
first departed from the word of God; all other things we still retained, that
they that would but reform notorious abuses, might still retain fellowship with
us. Secondly, they hereby declared sufficiently to all the world, that this
alteration made, was neither out of hatred to them, or love of novelty, or
singularity, or any high conceit of any excellency in fancies, or devices of
our own brains above our forefathers, but would be content with what we had
from them, as far as it was consonant to the word of God, or not contrary to
it. Thirdly, by this means they avoided combustion in Church and State, making
as little stir or noise as could be in the reformation which is always
especially to be regarded by all quiet spirits and lovers of peace in any
change whatsoever. Fourthly, by this dealing they followed the Apostles rule by
showing their meekness, softness and gentleness to all men, as is required. So
that retaining thus much of the Mass book when we Phil. 4. 5.
cast off Popery, was so far from incogitancy, or any other scandal to be laid
upon our forefathers, that we may rather admire, or at least must much commend
their wisdom, meekness, love of peace, and charitable desire of converting
others thereby. For the conclusion then of this Chapter, wherein they brag so
much of success, telling us, That

It will fall out, as it did with the Scribes and Pharisees, envying that the
people should follow Christ. Perceive ye not (say they) how ye prevail nothing?
the world is gone after him, Joh 12. 19. It is so in this case of the worship
of Christ, etc. We shall prevail nothing, etc.

To this we need not answer any thing to them; the times (we humbly praise God
for it) have answered for us; this book which was so long cast off, being now
generally taken up again, and used with reverence, devotion, and thankfulness
to the Lord for it in the most principal places and most Cuurches of this
Kingdom, so that the saying they cite there of the Pharisees and Scribes, may
better be applied to these people that cite in it then to those to (...)

CHAP. IV. Of the Matter.
HEre they inveigh against the Common Prayer Book in respect of the matter of
it, telling us that

The matter is partly false, partly ridiculously frivolous, yea and some part
of it is not without a tincture of blasphemy.

The first of these charges they go about to prove three ways, saying,

For the general we lay down these three instances, In false or corrupt
translations of the word, additi^ns to the word, and substractions; all which
the Service Book not only allows, but injoyns subscription to them.

To these things we answer, first in general, that it is no sufficient plea
against the book to cry it down wholly, for some particular defects in it, but
to desire rather to have those things amended, then the whole book, so
excellent in several respects, totally to be abolished, for some imperfections
in it. Secondly, to come to them more particularly, to the first of false
translations, we answer. 1. That if that be sufficient for a particular place
to reject a whole book or volum, what shall become of our English Bible in the
last and best translation that we have? for in that we shall find such a
translation as no English man can make sense of, namely Phil. 1. 21. which
words there agree with the Latin, which these men are so much against; for it
is there Vivere est mihi Christus; to me to dye is Christ; but neither that
Latin nor the English can express either the Apostles meaning, or can indeed
be understood what they mean themselves. They put the Greek verbatim into
English, which the idiome of our tongue cannot bear; and herein they reject
Calvin, and Beza's, and Junius, and Tremilius translations, and agree with the
Vulgar Latin; yet no man wholly rejects this our new translation, as
containing false matter, but it is not unworthily esteemed as one of the best
translations extant in any language. Again that word (...), 1 Cor. 11. 29 is in
both our translations rendered Damnation, which is neither according to the
signification of the word in it self, nor according to the Apostles meaning in
that place, for he proves that which he says there in the words following,
directly mentioning temporal judgment, as verse. 30. But I will not strive to
defame our translations, as they do our Common Prayer Book by searching how
many places are not so translated as they should be; but were there more
defects then there are, who could hereupon reject totally our English Bibles,
as these do our Service Book, upon that score of falsity in matter, through
some imperfections in the translation?

Secondly, then I pass to the next particular which they call additions.

To add to the word of God in general, as to propound any thing for Gods word,
which is not so indeed, I grant to be abominable; but to add to any particular
part of Scripture some words taken out of some other part of Scripture, is no
addition to the word of God; for it does not affirm any thing to be Gods word
which is not indeed. Now of this kind are the additions they speak. In Psalm.
14. the words in the end added, are not only taken out of Gods word in several
places, but also all collected together by Saint Paul, and added to the
precedent words in this Psalm, as we see Romans 3. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
neither are thrust into the Psalm by the composers of the Common Prayer book,
but are in the old Latin Bibles whence those Psalms were translated; and how
reasonably and fitly they are there, our Bibles do note after the end of Psalm.
14. where they show why they are not put into our Bibles. For the next addition
mentioned in Psalm. 13. what is that but a concluding of that Psalm, with the
very words of Scripture also? for the same expression we find in two other
Psalms near adjoining, viz. Psalm. 7. 17. and Psalm. 9. 3.

For the third addition it is an addition of their own making, not found in the
book in that 24. Psalm.

Whereas therefore they say lastly, That they will not reckon diverse additions
more, they do well in that point; but they had done better if they had not
reckoned this neither, unless there had been more truth in it. I also will add
no more of this matter, but come to their next accusation, which is concerning
substractions or omissions. And therein first they accuse us for omitting the
titles of diverse Psalms. Secondly, for omitting the words (Praise ye the Lord)
Thirdly, for omitting the conclusion in the Lords Prayer. For which last;
First, if we took the Lords Prayer out of Luke 11. we omit none of it; and why
may we not use it sometime as it is in one place, sometime as it is in another?
so that the cavil is only for want of a better; for the two former omissions,
the book makes no omission, but renders the Psalms as it found them in the
translations whence they were taken. Their last omission is, Leaving out many
Chapters and some whole books unread for the Lesson, in the Calendar appointed.
But this is not taking away any thing from the word of God, except the book did
profess, that it has appointed the whole word of God to be read for the
Lessons; but this the book does not, only it appoints such parts of the word of
God to be read at such times, and leaves the rest to be read of the people
privately. The next thing is, the reading of the Apochrypha, very
immethodically brought in here; for that should rather have come in among the
additions, then the omissions, yet it is not any addition to the word of God;
for we read it not as a part of Scripture to build our faith upon, or to
establish any doctrine of divinity thereby, but for moral instruction; then if
they ask What need of that, the Scripture being sufficient for that also? We
answer, that we do it not as supposing defect therein, but because they are
books written by holy men, and have been continually read publicly by the
Church of God, in reverence thereto we thought not fit wholly to reject them,
or cast them out of our Church; but whereas they tell us here, That some things
are appointed to be out of them which are utterly false: We tell them that is
more then they can prove to be true; but if any of them be to read any such
Chapter at any time, which he counts not to be profitable to be read to the
people, he may read one out of the New Testament instead of it: as Dr. Spark
shows concerning this matter in his brotherly persuasion to unity and
uniformity, Chap. 10. whether for brevity sake in this treatise, I refer any
reasonable man, adding only thus much, that if those and such other objections
seem to any man not to be sufficiently answered, yet they cannot make the book
wholly to be rejected, but needful in some particulars to be corrected and
amended.

The next thing they come, is the grand accusation against Epistles and
Gospels; which I presume belongs to their second head of frivolous things; for
though they began orderly with the first particular of false matters, yet they
proceed not so; but I must be forced to follow them as they go up and down from
one thing to another. Concerning Epistles and Gospels then they have three
weighty charges, with which they begin thus.

We may subjoyn that profaning gross abuse of Epistles and Gospels in which
there are three strange and remarkable occurrences, for which there is no
ground or reason but from the Mass Book. First,

These three remarkable things are. 1. That the Acts of the Apostles, and some
books of the old Testament, are read for, and called Epistles. 2. That we read
not whole Chapters, but scraps and shreds, as they disgracefully call them. 3.
That at the Epistles there is silence, sitting, etc. at the Gospels, standing,
scraping, bowing, and responds before and after.

To the first of these concerning the name of Epistles given to books, not so
called in Scripture. What great matter is this to be set out under those words
of profane and gross abuse? For first we know, the old Testament is in the new
sometime called the Law and the Prophets, sometimes the Law, Prophets, and
Psalms. These several expressions show, that the word Prophets is sometimes
largely taken for all the old Testament, except the five books of Moses,
sometime more strictly for the other books only; but excluding the Psalms, why
then also may not the word Epistles be sometime taken generally for all the
Scripture, except the four Gospels, and sometimes more strictly, except the
Acts, Gospel and Revelation; and sometime most strictly for those books which
we commonly call the Canonical Epistles? taking the word in the two former
acceptions, what hurt in calling all that we read for Epistles by the name of
Epistles, especially considering, secondly, that the whole Scripture is a
letter or Epistle indicted by the Holy Ghost, and so sent from God by the holy
writers thereof into the world, or more especially to his Church; and the
fitness of this appellation they themselves confess, and tell us, The holy
fathers spoke so; only they tell us, They spoke so in a different sense from
us, which difference if they had showed we had either answered them, or yielded
to them.

To their second accusation, That our Epistle and Gospels are but scraps of
Scripture, and never a full passage in them. If by full passage they mean a
whole Chapter, we desire to know why a whole Chapter must always be at once,
and neither more nor less? but if by never a full passage they mean that we
break off abruptly in respect of the matter read, then any one may see they do
us notorious wrong, and the Book answers for it self without my help. To avoid
therefore the guilt of so foul a slander, I am willing to take them in the
former sense, but must withal tell them, that so they may as well accuse all
our Preaching of this gross abuse, and say we preach not upon the Word of God,
but upon scraps and shreds of it, and that less shreds too then the other; few
Texts being half the length of the very shortest Epistles we have. But why
either our Texts, or Epistles, and Gospels, should be thus taxed, I see not,
the division of Chapters not being Canonical, but made according to humane
wisdom and discretion: Of this therefore no more.

I come to the third charge, which is concerning Silence, Sitting, Bowing, etc.
To which I must first tell them, That this comes in very unseasonably in this
place; this belongs rather to the ridiculous manner of our Service, then to the
matter of it; but their want of method I must needs pass over many times, lest
my Book should grow too big.

Secondly, I must tell them again, that the Book appoints none of these things
they here inveigh against; therefore if those things were as bad indeed as they
would make them, all this were nothing to purpose against the Book, which they
pretend only to write against. Nevertheless, being in many passages they labor
to disgrace our Church what they can, as well as the Book they write against; I
would, if they would come to particulars, assay to answer all, and as far as I
can by these general words guess at their meaning, I will briefly answer them.
It has been the custom long ago in many Churches, to stand up at the Gospel;
and it was also usual at the naming of the Gospel to say, Glory be to thee O
Lord; and after the end of the Gospel, to say Thanks be unto God. These I
presume are the things they aim at (for the bowing at the name of Jesus, was,
and is as much used in all parts of Service and Sermon, as of the Gospel.) To
the other three therefore, as proper to the Gospel, I will only speak: And
first to the standing up: We know many men at the naming of the Text, and many
times in the Sermon will stand up, not only for their ease, but to hearken the
more attentively: Why then is it not as lawful so to do at the Gospel? We know
standing up, when we hear one beginning to speak to us, does both show respect
to what is spoken, and a readiness to receive what is spoken willingly and
cheerfully: By standing up then at the reading of the Gospel, we show our
gladness and readiness to receive it; and what profaneness or grand abuse can
be in this? Then for saying, Glory be to thee, O Lord. We know when the Angel
first brought word of our Saviors birth, the Author of the Gospel, there were
presently with him a multitude of Heavenly Angels, saying, Glory be to God on
high. If the Church then in memory Luke 2. 13, 14.
hereof, do at the naming of the Gospel use part of that Angelical Hymn, what
grand abuse is this? when our Savior first came into the world, this was the
Angels praising God; and when we hear mention made of the Gospel, which
declares and preaches these glad tidings to us, with the benefits coming to us
thereby, we do with like words give glory to God the Son, and we are counted
profane for it. Lastly, when we have heard some of the Gospel read, which
publishes these things to us, we presently give thanks to God for this. Now
what superstition or profane abuse there is in this standing and respond, as
they call it, before, at and after the Gospel, let any indifferent man judge.

Now upon these their grievous complaints, they flee to the Parliament as
supreme Judges to vindicate this dishonor done to God: Which how it can stand
with the loyalty mentioned in their Preface; or with the subscription which
they have, or should all have subscribed, if they be rightly Ministers, and
Orthodox, as they pretend to be, let them say, who acknowledge the King supreme
Judge in all Causes, and over all Persons. Lastly, Whereas they say in the end
of this Section, That the discovery of some evil in the Apocrypha condemns our
Common Prayer Book for appointing it to be read. I answer, It follows not,
except it did appoint those Books to be read as parts of Canonical Scripture,
which we know it does not. This for the grand abuses in general in Epistles and
Gospels.

Now we must with them to particular untruths by them charged upon us, bidding
us to

Look upon that egregiously abused place, or Christ abused by our dealing with
that place, namely Revel. 12. 1. Michael and his Angels fought, etc. Which
words the Book appoints for the Collect, they mean the Epistle for Michaels
day; where they make Christ by misapplying the place, a created Angel.

Here they make much ado to prove Michael to be Christ, which being granted
them with such ado, their accusation is never the truer, nor our Cause or Book
the worse. The reading the Epistle on Michaelmas day, in no sort makes Christ a
created Angel; but the keeping of Michaelmas day as we keep it, is only in
memory of Michael (or Christ if they please) who is called an Angel, Mal. 3. 1.
Who with all his created holy Angels, fought against the Devil and his Angels.
We call Christ an Angel, so does the Scripture, but it calls not a created
Angel, no more does our Book, nor we; but in memory of that victory of that
Michael and his Angel, we keep that day, praising God for it; and so read that
part of Scripture which relates it.

Secondly, They tax the words in the latter end of the Benedicite, but to no
purpose; if that were the Song of the Three Children we do not know; we do not
now exhort them three to praise the Lord, but sing their song in memory of
them, and their miraculous deliverance. When we read David's Psalms, we do not
in many of them pray for the things that he in those Psalms prayed for.

The third particular here, is a clause or sentence in our Burial of the dead;
for which very particular, I refer the Reader to Dr. Sparge, in Chap. 12. page
62. where that matt^r is expressly handled; and where I know another man has
answered any thing, to avoid prolixity, I say nothing. Next then comes their
Syllogism.

That which is man's device, and has been an Idol in Gods worship, must of
necessity be so still: But the Ceremonies mentioned in the Service Book, have
been Idols in Gods worship, as Cross, Surplice, etc. Ergo, They must be Idols
still in the worship of God.

To this I answer. First, The Proposition is false; their proof is from some
few particulars to a general, which whosoever has the least smatch of Logic
in him, knows to be nothing worth. We may by this rule as well demolish our
Churches and Ch^ppels; nay somewhat more may be said against them, then our
Surplices; for the very particular individual Churches which we now have, have
been abused to Idolatry, which our particular Surplices have not: And so the
Minor also is faulty, namely, our Crosses, Surplices, and particular
Ceremonies, which we now use, have never been Idols at all: And so we deny, and
have proved their later Proposition also false, which they tell us none can
deny. For the other supposed abuses in the Sacraments, in the Churching, the
Confirmation, etc. I refer the Reader again to Dr. Sparge to satisfy all. Next
they tell us*

We would not have the Lent Fast forgotten, which the Patrons of our Liturgy
make a Religious Fast, abusing places of Scripture by mis-application of
Scriptures, as Joel 2. 12. Matthew. 6. 16. and 4. 10. 2 Cor. 6. 2.

This Lent Fast which they would not have forgotten, no more would I. For the
abusing the places of Scripture mentioned by them, if they did particularly
show wherein the supposed abuses consist, I would answer them more
particularly; but howsoever supposing they count the Scriptures which speak of
Fasting, to be abused by being read in Lent, which is not a Religious but a
Politic Fast, as they seem to say. I answer, that the Lent is indeed by our
Laws, and the Kings late Proclamation a Politic Fast; nevertheless, if any man
observing our Lent according to Law, by abstinence from flesh totally, do also
by temperance, and an abstemious and spare diet all that time, and by absolute
Fasting sometime in the Lent, keep a Religious Fast, by subduing the flesh, by
Mortification and Repentance, more then ordinary humbling himself before God:
This man as he shows himself in that respect a Loyal Subject by the former, so
he does the duty of a good Christian by the later, pleasing God by both; for
his better help and assistance then in the later, the places of Scripture which
he shall hear read in the time of Lent, are useful and beneficial to him.
Neither do we incline to Popery in this Religious Fasting, nor approve of their
superstitious Fast, nor Fast in imitation of them; for they that do celebrate
such a Religious Fast in the time of Lent, take not the example of the Papists
to follow therein, but of the ancient Christian Church, which did so fast many
years before Popery was hatched. This Religious Fast therefore, though we press
not as by Law required, yet may we safely and profitably persuade to, and
preach and read concerning it, from the example of the Church in former times.

Lastly, In this Chapter they come to that which they call Fopperies and
fooleries in our Book: Touching also again upon false Translations, that they
may be still like themselves, observing no method or order in any thing: But to
the point having answered already, I come with them to their fooleries.

What can be said for those Tautologies and Battologies used in the
Service Book, as Lord have mercy upon us, Christ have mercy, etc. condemned
Matthew. 6. 7. And by and by, One foppery more, that mutual salutation between
Priest and People, in these words, The Lord be with you; And with thy spirit.
Last of all they conclude thus; Tritenhemius wrote a Book upon Dominus
Vobiscum, in which are many fruitless questions, and so we are sure the thing
it self is fruitless.

If it be a vain Tautology to repeat those words a few times in praying to God,
what will they say to the Prophet David, for repeating the same words so often
in praising God? namely Psalm. 118. the same words five times; and Psalm. 136.
the very same words twenty six times more.

Next for the Salutation, as they call it. I answer it is no foolish
salutation, as they would have it, but a mutual praying of the Minister and
people each for other severally, before they begin jointly to pray the prayers
following altogether: And in no sort can this be unlawful, or foolish, or
unfitting, but rather very fit and convenient for each other hereby to express
their mutual charity; without which, none of their ensuing prayers can be
either pleasing unto God, or profitable to themselves. First therefore the
Minister to show his charity, prays to God to be with the people in their
prayers, that they may with heart and voice, faith and fervency pray to God the
prayers following; then they pray the like for him, only emphatically they
mention his Spirit, as most desiring Gods assistance of it. Thus praying
charitably each for other, they do all jointly and more unanimously pray
altogether, resting upon that promise of our Savior, Matthew. 18. 19.

Lastly, To conclude this Chapter; whereas they do in the last place, by a
quirk conclude this to be a fruitless salutation, because such a man has made
many fruitless questions about it. This is as ridiculous an Argument, as to say
also, That our Liturgy must needs be evil, because these men have made such an
evil discourse about it.

CHAP. V. Of the Letany.
HErein passing over all their railing flourishes in the former part of the
Chapter, I have these six several accusations of our Letany to answer to; and
then a Syllogism against all the Book. To these now in their otder.

The first is of several Repetitions of the same words. Good Lord deliver us:
And we beseech thee to hear us good Lord. Concerning which words, we say they
are no vain Repetitions, but so many several Prayers for so many several
things. And that these men should be so bitter against Repetitions, is very
unreasonable, considering what Prayers diverse of them make before their
Sermons, wherein they have such strange Repetitions, and runnings backward and
forward, That he that shall come into the Church in the time of their Prayer,
cannot tell whither they are near the beginning, middle or end; and they that
hear them all the while, from first to last, cannot tell when they are toward
an end, till they have in a manner quite done. And I have heard of one (whom I
do not commend for so spending the time) that reckoning how often one of them
repeated the word Lord in his Prayer found it to be betwixt Four and five
hundred times: And if that word were drawn out at length, as some of them draul
it out sometime (that they may think of what to say next before they have done
with that) the repeating of that word alone would take up more time, then our
twenty eight Repetitions as they count them in the Letany.

The second accusation is, That we pray

To be delivered from such things, from which there is not the least
appearance, no more then of the French Pox, the danger of being drunk at a
Whitsun-Ale, or a Purse cut at a Stage Play, and not so much.

If these be sober expressions, well and good, otherwise their unspotted Piety
may again be questioned for bringing such a Strumpet instead of
Virgin-sobriety. But to the matter of the Argument, I answer; If they had named
those things prayed against in our Letany, which they suppose there is no
danger, I could easily have answered more particularly to this charge: But now
only I say in general, I know no evil prayed against in the Letany which may
not possibly fall upon us; and the more secure we might count our selves from
it, so that we should scorn to pray against it, the more danger there would be,
that through the just judgment of God it might come upon us.

Secondly, If there be any evils which others have suffered, or do suffer,
which we in this Land are in great danger of; yet considering the Communion of
Saints, we may justly pray, as we do against such things, by the word us, not
understanding our selves here in England, but us Christians in general; for all
whom we do, or ought to pray as for our selves.

Thirdly, By that expression of Fornication, and all other deadly sins, they
say we make some sins venial: But I answer, no such matter; we use not that
expression there by way of distinction of several kinds of sins, but by way of
explication of the nature of sin; and most fitly in that place do we so use it,
because we know some Papists make simple fornication to be scarce any sin, at
most but a small venial one: Which doctrine we detesting, do fitly say,
Fornication and all other deadly sin, by the word other, including Fornication
for one.

Fourthly, They accuse those expressions, By thine agony and bloody sweat, by
thy cross, etc. to be a kind of conjuring or adjuring: But if these
expressions be such, what is that of St. Paul, Romans 12. 1.
By the mercies of God, I beseech you, etc. and diverse others in that kind in
several places?

Fifthly, they add, That we may not come short of the Papists idolizing the
Letany, we have not only our ordinary and weekly Letanies, but our annual or
yearly Letanies acted in Procession.

To this first, The Annual Procession not being by our Common Prayer Book
appointed, is nothing to purpose against the Book; therefore the bringing of it
in thus here, shows their malice against our Church in general, as much as
against our Common Prayer Book. Therefore, secondly, had they said any thing
against that Procession in particular, I would have particularly answered it;
but now seeing no fault in it, nor knowing what fault they can forge against
it, I can say no more of it.

Sixthly and lastly, They accuse our Letany for a Prayer against the Tyranny of
the Pope, which they say has been expunged since King Edward's days. To which
I say, If out Letany want any thing that should be in, it may be said to be
defective, and need an addition, but not to be cast off as superstitious; the
want of some good, which should be in any thing, makes not the rest of the good
which is in it to be stark naught.

Now though this be all that is in this Chapter objected against the Letany,
yet here are two or three things more in it to be spoken of: For though the
title of it be only of the Letany, yet that they may be still like themselves,
they shuffle other things in also; as namely, The cavil against the Collect on
the twelfth Sunday after Trinity, asking us how we can justify those words in
the Collect? giving unto us that which our Prayers dare not presume to ask,
because what we dare not pray for, we shall never obtain.

To this we must answer, that we can justify that Petition by the right
expounding the meaning of it; which is this, as in the former part of the
Prayer we acknowledge Gods readiness to hear us, and abundant mercy in giving
beyond our deservings or desirings; so now we desire him to give us more then
we dare particularly crave at his hands, that whatsoever he sees fitting for
us, he would grant, though we dare not particularly mention it to him. And
whereas they say, What we dare not ask, we shall never obtain, that has no
truth in it; for Solomon asking only wisdom, and daring to go no farther, yet
we know he obtained honor and riches also.

Thus much for their particular exceptions, now we come to the general
Syllogism.

That Service, the matter or bulk whereof, is partly false, partly foolish and
frivolous, should not be presented unto God. But the parts of the Service are
such, as has been fully proved. Therefore they should not be presented to God.

To this, first it fails in form, and so concludes not the question, that the
Service Book is not to be presented to God, but only that some parts of it are
not to be presented; and so they seem to express in the conclusion, not saying
as they should: Therefore it is not to be presented, that is, the Common
Prayer Book is not to be presented: But therefore they are not, etc. i. e. the
vicious parts of it; and so they conclude not, that the whole Book is to be
rejected, but some things in it to be expunged or amended. Which had they only
desired, and that in any civil way, and sober manner, it might happily have
been done long ago without strife, hatred and uproars; but for some pretended
abuses, nothing but a total abolition could serve their turns. But to come to
the matter of their Syllogism; the Minnor is utterly false, neither all the
parts of the book, or any part of it having been fully proved to be frivolous
and foolish; neither can the Major be granted, except the denomination of
false, frivolous, and foolish, be given to the whole book or matter from the
greater part of it; which granting all they have said for true (how false
soever we know it is) yet cannot that denomination be justly given to the book,
and so it does not follow that it may not be used in Gods service.

So now having answered all they have said in this Chapter also, I must now
come upon a little to question their piety again; for some words in this
Chapter, they say thus;

It is true we have left out the Saints in our Liturgy; that was too gross; but
had the Laudenses got their colors fixed, ere this the Letany had been flanked
with this stuff.

Concerning which to pass by that title which they give in scorn to all that
are not of their stamp, passing that by, I must take notice of their
charitable censure here, accusing all those they mislike of an intention of
bringing praying to Saints into our Liturgies and Letany. Is this any Christian
charity? If this censure argue no charity, as I presume no man will say it
does; charity by their own words in their Preface, Being one of the four virgin
daughters of unspotted piety; their piety must be either very much spotted in
bringing forth such a Charity, or else very barren in bringing forth virgin
d^ughters, having brought forth neither loyalty nor sobriety, as we have showed
already; nor charity as appeared before, and now again is evident; so that if
Dame Equity come not forth at last to save her mothers credit, little unspotted
piety will be found in these Unmaskers, if we examine them by their own
principles. Of their equity therefore I shall speak also in due place; In the
mean while having done with the matter of our Liturgy, I am next to come to the
manner of it.

CHAP. VI. Of the Manner.
AFter their usual fashion of an idle preamble, they procceed to name these
particulars in blaming the manner of our Church Service.

First to the Minister, whose change of voice, place and posture, is strange
and ridiculous; for first he must say some things with a loud voice, not all;
what can be the reason of this, but that of the Mass-Priests, that there are
some mysteries which the profane Laics must not hear?

Instead of a ridiculous manner of serving God according to our Com. Pr. book,
I shall show the contrary God willing in due time: in the interim to this whole
charge in this Chapter, it is utterly false in all the particulars. First for
that here first mentioned, of the Ministers change of voice; the book appoints
no such change, nor bids him say any thing at all softly, but only puts him in
mind, sometime of speaking out that he may be heard of all, but not one word or
syllable is there in the Book to move him to speak any thing otherwise then
with an audible voice; the thing then he laid to our charge being wholly
false, we need say nothing to the forged reason hereof; only let me ask what
Charity or Equity there can be in this dealing? Instead of Equity and Charity
herein, what can it be but extreme unjustice and malice both to forge such an
accusation against us, that they may fain such a reason of it as is far worse
then the thing it self? If here be Equity or Charity, let the producers hereof
be judged men of unspotted piety.

Their second exception against the Minister, we have in these words.

Secondly, For his posture, besides the windings, turnings and cringings, his
face must be sometime toward the people, and sometime his back.

Concerning these postures, we have nothing in the book, or any word tending
that way, except they catch at these places. 1. Where the Minister is appointed
at reading the Lessons, to stand, and so turn himself that he may be best heard
of the people. 2. When at the Communion, when he is appointed to turn to the
people in reading the blessing, this is all of the turning so condemned. And
for the first of these, for him to stand at the reading of the Lessons, it is
according to Christ's own example, Luke 4. And for standing, so as he may be
best heard, reason might persuade it, if it were not commanded; and so likewise
for turning toward the people at the blessing of them. Other standing besides
this, is but three times appointed in all the Service; namely first at the
Creed, which is for the people as much as the Minister, and the fitness thereof
shall be showed in due place. 2. At the Versicles, O Lord show thy mercy upon
us, etc. where the people are to answer the Minister; And 3. At the communion,
that the people may the better see his demeanor in the consecration. If any
particular exceptions were made against any of these Postures, they should be
answered particularly; but without that, to possess the people with a conceit
of I know not what ridiculous turnings, windings, and cringings in general
terms, from these fit, few, decent and convenient at least, if not needful
actions and gestures of kneeling at prayer, standing at the confession of
faith, and some other times, that his voice may be the better heard, and his
actions the better seen of the people; if this savor of any ingenuity or
conscience in these Unmaskers, let any indifferent man say.

Thirdly, they complain that The Priest says somewhat in the Church, somewhat
in the Chancel, getting himself from the people as far as he can, etc.

To this ag^in I say, there is no such thing by the book appointed, nor is the
Minister bound to perform any p^rt of the Service in the Chancel, but at the
communion, nor then neither except the table stand there; nevertheless, if any
Minister reading that part of the Service which belongs to the Communion, do
use to go to that table to read it, if they can make any particular exceptions
against it, they that use it will be able to answer them; but howsoever, most
unexcusable are they that blame our book for that, which, be it better or
worse, the book enjoins not at all. This for the first head of their exceptions
against the Ministers manner of Service.

In the second place comes the unmannerly handling of the matter. First they
have many short Collects, etc.

This unmannerly dealing, they branch out into three particulars. ^. That there
be many short Collects, but a long and tedious Service. 2. That it is several
times said, Let us pray. 3. That the people answer and say any thing in the
Service with the Minister. And to make this charge good, they bring two
similitudes of little Girls cutting cloth to pieces, and of an Ambassador.

We answer, first to all in general, concerning unmannerliness in Gods service,
let them show what of manners in particular there is, or what part of good
manners we offend against, either toward God or man, in any thing we follow the
book in, and they shall be particularly satisfied; In the mean time let the
world judge, whether it be not more rudeness, unmannerliness, and incivility to
wear their hats in time of Divine Service, to sit or loll or lean unreverently
this way or that way, neither standing nor kneeling in the very time of prayer,
then to go reverently and civilly out of the Desk to the Communion table.
Secondly, to the particulars. 1. What is the hurt in short prayers? much good
and convenience we see therein, when diverse persons coming into the Church in
time of prayer, when one short prayer is ended, they can presently at the
beginning of the next join with the Congregation, and so go on with all the
rest to the end. 2. For the better stirring up and inciting the peoples too too
dull hearts and minds, by putting them often in mind of what they are or should
be all about, it is not only not amiss, but needful to call upon them, with
Let us pray, when any wandering or straggling thoughts have averted their minds.
3. For the answering of the people, it is such an especial means to keep from
drowsiness, du^ness, and to rouse up their spirits and affections to be wholly
occupied in those sacred duties they are about, ^s nothing can be more. And
whereas they talk of the peoples interrupting the Minister by their saying with
him, or answering him, it is so far from interrupting or hindering his devotion,
that it does comfort him, encourage him, and elevate his heart and spirit to
hear his Congregation with one heart and voice, as it were joining with him,
and answering to him in his heavenly devotions. So that as David said, so every
faithful Minister that desires the peoples good as his own must necessarily,
heartily rejoice in hearing Psalm. 122. 1.
that concent of the people with him in prasing God, or praying unto him; and
happiest are those Ministers which have such Congregations; I grieve for the
want of it.

In the next place come their similitudes, but all men know that similitudes
prove nothing; they may illustrate a thing when fitly and rightly applied, but
prove they cannot. And these are such as do not that; the first as being an
idle thing in it self, so is nothing to our purpose, or resembling the business
in hand: The other which seems to hit the nail on the head, does not hurt us.
For though it be not fit or ordinary when an Ambassador is delivering his
message, for his attendants by, to meddle to speak any thing, they not knowing
what his embassage is, nor being concerned in it; yet to make some resemblance
between the case of an Ambassador, and this of ours, if the Ambassador were to
treat of such a business, wherein the consents of all present were necessary to
be expressed to the King to whom he speaks, and he should desire to hear it;
then what unfitness were it for the people at such and such set periods, to
speak such words as should be appointed to express their hearts that way? This
is the case in the Ministers and Peoples praising God, and praying to him: But
these being no p^oofs, I pass hence, and come to the last thing in this
Chapter, which is this Syllogism.

That worship of God, which for Name, Original, Matter, and Manner, is naught
all over, is not to be suffered, head nor tail, but wholly to be cast out of
Gods house: But the Liturgy is such a worship, etc. Therefore it is to be cast
out.

To this the answer is plain; the falsity of the Minor in all the particulars
has appeared by this my answer, I hope sufficiently; And so I might finish
this Chapter, but for one wonder which herein they make, and I am willing to
satisfy them therein; they propound their mind thus.

To shut up the point, one thing we cannot but wonder at, why the Popish,
Prelatical Priests, do admit the common people a share in saying of Service,
who will not have the people in any case to try, muchless to judge of the
Doctrines of their Teachers.

The case is plain enough, because many men may be fit for one thing, which are
not fit for another. It is an easier thing to join with others in the Worship
and Service of God for matter and manner once rightly instituted and appointed,
then to know how thus to order such a Service, for the glory of God and good of
his Church: All therefore are bound to do the one, few able, and so few
suffered to do the other. Yet by the way you may take notice concerning your
last clause, we hinder not the people to do like the Bereans, to try and
examine what they are taught by Acts 17.
the Scriptures; but we allow not the Learners to teach their Teachers how, or
what to teach. But of this enough.

CHAP. VII. Of the Effects.
HEre they come to the pretended evil effects of our Common Prayer Book, which
they tell us, are first, upon the Ministers; secondly, upon the Ordinances;
thirdly, upon the people; fourthly, against God most of all.

For the first, They tell us that Ministers which are good workmen, and bad
workmen, and no workmen, are all hurt by the Common Prayer Book.

And first they instance in the last of these, thus: Where Ministers should be
apt to teach, etc. this Book settles such blind fellows over people, who can
neither feed nor lead.

To this the answer is plain, the Book appoints not at all what Ministers we
shall have settled in Churches, but what they shall do that are settled in them.
And if we have any such as they here speak of, and call them dumb dogs, saying,
Sir John's, etc. These are not hurt, nor the Churches that have them, hurt; but
benefited by the Common Prayer Book; for hereby they that can do no other good,
yet are forced to do some, by reading that Book duly to and among the people;
for by that reading, the ignorant people are instructed by the Word of God read
to them, according to the Book: They have also a Confession of Faith, the Ten
Commandments, the Lords Prayer, by frequent reading, taught them, with many
other excellent and godly Prayers; whereby they call upon God agreeably to his
Word, wherewith they praise God with Songs and Hymns in this Book which without
it, they could not tell how to do. So then all the bad Ministers, whether no
Preachers or bad Preachers, are all helped by this Book; those that cannot
preach at all, if any such be now, do good by reading; these which are evil
Preachers, and could do nothing but hurt (if any such there be) by idle and
senseless Prayers, and erroneous Doctrine which they preach and make
themselves, which they would do only, shall by reading the Book do some good,
both to themselves and others. Then for the good Ministers, which they divide
into two sorts, some Conformists to whom the Book they say is a burden; some
Non-Conformists, which for this Book are sufferers. I answer, the first are not
hurt by the Book, but by their own erroneous Conscience, which makes that a
burden to them, which of it self is no such thing: For the other which are
sufferers for their disobedience, it is either their weakness, or their
obstinacy which causes them to suffer, and not the Common Prayer Book; which is
at the most but a remote Causa sine qua non; of their sufferings, if they
suffer only for refusing that, else it is not so much: And I believe there are
few sufferers, if any at all, which have had no fault but nonconformity to the
Book laid to their charge; this for the Ministers then is nothing. Secondly,
they tell us the Ordinances suffer by this Book, namely, Preaching is hindered
by it; but this experience shows to be otherwise, no Toleration being given to
neglect preaching for reading the Book; but where it is most punctually
observed, Sermons are as good, though perhaps not so long, as in those places
where it is neglected; and we know it is not the length of the Sermon that
makes the people edify; but many times the untolerable tediousness thereof,
makes many even shun them, rather then frequent them. Neither do any of us
esteem more of the Service Book (as they accuse us) then of preaching in
general; but to esteem more of the set Prayers made by the most Judicious
Fathers, and by Law established, and of the Word of God truly and plainly read,
then of such ex tempore Prayers and Sermons, as many of the enemies of the
Common Prayer Book make sometimes, no man that understands himself, and the
Word of God, can possibly forbid, without manifest impiety: And that such
Prayers and Sermons are not more properly Fardels of men's devices, then the
Liturgy which has so much of the sincere Word of God in it, no reasonable man
can say. Then for those words in the Canon, which they allege of Divine
Service and Sermon, they do not in the least sort make preaching no part of, or
a lesser part of Gods service then reading and praying; but speaking in that
Canon for the ordering of the people, they speak in the peoples language,
wherein it is usual to say Service and Sermon: So that had they said only
Divine Service, and not added Sermon, some would have excluded the Sermon from
being understood in the Canon; but the Canon to show that we esteem of Sermons
as well as of Service, appoints the same reverence to be used in the one, that
is in the other. This cavil therefore is most idle.

Thirdly, They speak of evil effects of our Liturgy upon the people.

And herein first they tell us of an evil effect the Book has upon the Law,
because some have been punished for not reading the Book contrary to Law.

Which I answer to thus: If this were true, it is merely accidental to the
Book, and partly the f^ult of disobedient men, and partly of unjust Judges. But
if the Act for the observing that Book be well looked into, they shall quickly
see, that the offenses in this kind have not been punished beyond the rigor of
the Law, but have rather had more favor then the Law allows: For the Statute is
plain, That whosoever shall preach or speak any thing in the derogation or
depraving of the said Book, or any thing therein contained, or any part
thereof, and shall be convict thereof, etc. shall forfeit all his Spiritual
Promotions coming or arising in one whole year. How would these fellows storm
if this Act were put in execution against them!

But to proceed; they tell us next, That this Book affronts Religion; and
herein they spend many words in nothing but unchristian and unhumane railing,
telling us, That many good people have suffered, etc. Which discourse, how
horribly f^lse soever it be, yet is to no purpose, if supposed true; for
whatsoever men have suffered for seditious and rebellious words and actions,
they would here make the ignorant people believe, has been wholly for not
conforming to the Book; just like the Papists, who when a Jesuit or Priest is
put to death for Treason, say, He is martyred here for his Religion.

They tell us next, That many people have been destroyed by being brought in
ignorance hereby: Which is so false and impossible, as nothing more; the Common
Prayer Book, if well observed and used, has enough in it to show any man the
way to everlasting life, by the Scriptures read, and such Confessions of Faith
as are necessary to salvation; and such Prayers, a^ if faithfully prayed, and
mercifully granted, we shall be happy enough in this world for a time, and
perfectly happy in the world to come, for ever and ever. Whereas on the other
side, many of their magnified Sermons fill poor souls with Errors, Heresies,
and Doctrines of Devils, inciting and moving men to Rebellions, Murders,
Treasons, and the most damnable villainies that ever has been committed in our
Land, as the murdering our late King, and many other horrid acts in the late
times committed.

Lastly, For those three things which they propound to be considered from Queen
Mary's days, Page 41. For the present we can as truly deny them, as they falsely
affirm them; and if they would instance of them more p^rticularly, they should
receive answer accordingly.

The fourth kind of evil effects follows, namely, against God himself; which
they tell us of, are these two. Feastival days to Saints, and kneeling at the
Communion. These I confess are rightly laid to the charge of the Common
Prayer Book, which nothing else in all this Chapter is; but both these things
we defend as good and lawful: For that the Church of God has not power to
appoint and set apart some days to be kept holy to God upon particular
occasions, is a fancy against the generality of their own parties opinion and
practice, as well as against the truth it self: For did not they continually in
all these late years, in which they had all the sway in their own hands, and
all others but mere slaves to them; did not they, I say, set apart more days to
keep holy in their reign, for Thanksgiving, Humiliation, etc. then ever were
appointed before (except in some time of Plague) in five times so many years?
And as their practice was then, so their judgment was before, none of them ever
questioning the lawfulness of keeping the Fifth of November for a day of
Thanksgiving, or the days of Fasting for Prayer and Humiliation in the times of
Pestilence, or any other grievous calamity. Neither do the two places quoted by
them, Gal. 4. 10. Col. 2. 16. any thing touch our holy days; for they forbid
not the Christian Churches to appoint any particular holy days, as they should
see cause; but forbid Christians to be in bondage to the Jewish Feastivals,
being but shadows of things to come at first, and so ending with the Sacrifice
of Christ the Substance.

For the second thing, Kneeling at the Communion; they would prove it to be
Idolatry thus:

To adore in, by, or before a Creature respectively, with relation to the
Creature, is Idolatry.

But to kneel at the Sacrament, is so to adore: Therefore it is Idolatry.

In this Syllogism we deny the Minor, as having no truth in it; we do no
otherwise adore, then we do always at Prayer; and in the act of delivering and
receiving the Sacrament we are in prayer, joining in our hearts with the words
of the Minister praying to God, That the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ may preserve our bodies and souls unto Everlasting Life. And being thus
in Prayer unto God, no action is so fitting as kneeling.

The last Argument in this Chapter against us, is this, God will not hear the
prayer of the Service Book: Therefore they are not to be offered.

Then that God will not hear the Prayers in our Liturgy, they would prove by
this, That they are not according to Gods will. Which they suppose, they have
proved by all that they h^ve said in this Book. This if they have not proved,
but all their Arguments to that purpose, have been by me sufficiently answered
and confuted; then is this last Argument nothing worth. Whether therefore of
the two is true, let the Reader judge, and I will say no more of this matter.

Now for the Cross in Baptism, which they only do but mention, and refer us to
Zions plea. I may as well, I make no doubt, refer you to the answer thereto,
though I must confess I have never seen the one or the other. So having done
with the matter and arguments in this Chapter; for their most unchristian
railings in it, and all the rest of that stuff, which their Book is stuffed
withal, if St. Peter's words, and St. Judes, can neither stop their mouths, nor
make others stop their ears against such speeches, by those two places, 2 Pet.
2. 10, 11, 12. and Jude v. 9, 10. they may proceed without control; only being
their Virgin-Daughter Sobriety, does behave her self so loosely and uncivilly
in this Chapter, that neither she, nor any of her sisters, can be found in this
Book untainted, according to their own confession in the beginning of their
Preface, we have little reason to suppose unspotted Piety to have been the
Author of their Treatise. So I proceed.

CHAP. VIII. Entitled three Motives.
IN this Chapter they beg for the taking away of the Common Prayer in this sort.

Let us humbly crave you would be pleased for the love that you bear and owe to
the Lord Jesus; to the purity of his worship; to the thrivings of our bodies,
souls, and estates; to the turning away of Gods judgments, etc, by all these
and many more, we again and again entreat you to pluck up the plant of the
Service Book, which God never set.

What is all this, but according to their censure of our Letany, upon those
words, By thine agony, etc. but a mere conjuring? for here they pray, as we
there, by several motives, By the love you bear to the Lord Jesus; by the love
you bear to the purity of his worship, etc. Yet these things here they count no
conjuring, no more do I; but let me ask them, what equity there can be in
condemning that in us, which they allow in themselves? here is a poor Virgin
shrewdly vitiated by them. Alas poor mother Piety, that have all thy daughters
so often abused by thy pretended friends!

The next of note in this Chapter, is an idle extravagant discourse which they
make of Mr Womacke, which how easily soever it might perhaps be answered, yet I
will wholly pass by for brevities s^ke, and keep me to the work in hand; namely
to the defense of the Common Prayer Book; for they confess themselves at the
end of this excursion, That all this is nothing to the purpose, which might be
as truly said of a great deal more in their book though they do not confess it.

Against their next stroke, against the Bishops, desiring to have them and the
book destroyed together, as being the upholders of one another; we showed the
vanity of that argument when they first mentioned it; of that therefore no
more; for though I am forced by their want of method, to follow them sometimes
forward and b^ckward, yet do ^ live to say the same thing over and again in
several words as they do.

Lastly, then for their vain and needless discourse of Christ's governing his
Church, which no man ever made question of it, to their argument gathered
thence against us, because Christ has appointed what we must have in Liturgy
and Government.

I answer to all in a word; Christ has appointed in general that which all
must, and we do follow; but he has left the particulars of order and decency
to his Church; else what ground could they have for any other Prayer then the
Lords Prayer? or for any prayer at all before their Sermons, finding no precept
or example of Christ or his Apostles in that kind in all the Scripture?

This may suffice for the matter of all this Chapter, the title whereof is, of
three motives, but we have hitherto met with never an one of them; they are now
at last only named in the end of the Chapter, and follow in the Chapters now
to come. The first whereof they take from the example of others; the second
from the danger of not doint what they desire; the third is from the covenant.
The two first we have in the next Chapter, the last in Chapter ten. To which I
come in their order.

CHAP. IX. Of the Pattern.
TO follow their disorderly proceedings still like themselves, as in the former
Chapter they entitled it, of three Motives, and yet meddled with never a one;
so this Chapter they give the title of one motive only, namely of the
Pattern, and yet handle two; the Pattern for doing, and the danger of not
doing what they would have done. First then of the Pattern. Wherein 1. They
tell us, that all the reformed Churches have done it. 2. They press us with the
example of the Scots. To the first we answer, That their Allegation is not
true, but they name some Churches that have done it, yet many more might be
named which have not done it. 2. For the Scots, we are neither bound to follow
their examples, nor any other further then they have done well, nor so far, if
we shall not do well also in following; for it will not always hold that what
is or has been done well by some in some places, can be done well by all
others in other places. I have no mind to censure other men and their actions,
but will rather proceed to their next motive. Only I must touch one thing in a
word which here they say, namely, They seem to hope for the bringing back of
the King; which through the infinite mercy of God (blessed be his n^me for it
for ever) we see now effected; if they desired the Kings return before, or be
glad of it now, it is done, let them express so much in suffering him to be a
King now he is returned, and not force or appoint him, how to govern that
Church, which God as to a nursing father has committed to his charge. And so I
come to the second motive, the danger of not doing what they demand to be done.
Which danger they propound to be looked upon in a twofold respect, a Priori,
and a Posteriori, from what is past, and what is like to ensue. The former they
say is to be looked upon in way of prophecy, or in a way of performance.
Concerning the former they tell us How the servants of God have prophesied of
the increase of Popery, and the suffering of true Religion, by many revolting
in times of trial. Now the ground of all this, if you will believe them, is the
Common prayer, and the Bishops, one upholding the other; which later clause I
have already refuted where they first mention it in their Preface, whether I
refer the Reader; and for the former part faining the Bishops and book to be
ground of the increase of Popery, who sees not the quite contrary, that rather
rebels and schismatics have done it, Popery having got more strength, and our
Church more shame and slander in these late times they have born the sway, then
all the time since the reformation before? So that as it was a godly Prayer set
forth to be used upon the fifth of November by Act of Parliament to be used,
that upon that horrible treason of the Papists, through the goodness of God so
happily discovered, God would strengthen the hands of our gracious King, the
Nobles and Magistrates of the Land, with judgment and justice to cut off those
workers of iniquity; so we have as much cause to pray against these detestable
Sects and murderers of King and all Subjects which most strangely opposed their
damnable and devilish proceedings; the cause of all which doings whether it
were the Bishop and book, as these men would have it, or the rebellious minds
of the enemies thereto, it is needless now to say; and whether the chief want
of a through reformation be not suffering such spirits, rather then suffering
the Bishops and the book to remain, these late times have showed, wherein the
two later books and Bishops have been all the while in a total Eclipse, and
the former rebels and Schismatics shining in full and unlimited power and
luster.

Next for future dangers they allege Zions plea again, against which we must
also again oppose the answer thereto.

In the rest of this Chapter after much vain and idle railing according to
their custom, they come to particular dangers to those to whom they write
their book, if they obey them in an extirpation of the true pretended enemies;
wherein they bring no new arguments, but use a flourishing exhortation to
perform the work they would have done, all which exhortation being grounded
only upon the supposed unlawfulness of the book, proved as they think, by
their undeniable arguments, as they call them, all those arguments having been
sufficiently answered, and so no proof of any unlawfulness in the use of the
book remaining good, this brave exhortation falls of it self, so that the third
Motive only is left.

CHAP. X. Of the Covenant.
COncerning the Covenant in general we need say but this. 1. As they moved men
to break the Oath of Allegiance, and Canonical obedience, by saying (though
most wickedly and falsely) That they were unlawful Oaths, and so better brok^n
then kept, that may we truly say to them concerning the Covenant, and so their
mouths ought to be stopped; and for the unlawfulness of that so unjustly and
tyrannically imposed Covenant, that it was utterly unlawful, may easily and
clearly appear in these two respects.

1. In that it was absolutely forbid by our Dread Sovereign Lord the King then
being. 2. By the matter of it in it self.
For the first, it is a truth without any question or dispute, that it is
simply unlawful for any subjects though never so many and powerful to make any
solemn League or Covenant concerning any innovation or alteration in government
to be made by them without the Kings consent; much more then when his Majesty
has not only given no consent, but also declared absolutely against it, and
peremptorily forbidden it, as we all know the King did, while the Covenant was
in hand.

Secondly, for the matter of it, if any one particular in it were simply
unlawful, the Covenant is thereby unlawful.

Now the extirpation of the Church Government by Archbishops and Bishops in our
Kingdom, where the Gospel has so long and so abundantly flourished under it,
the Kingdom with it, and by it; which Government also has been even in the
Church of Christ since the Primitive times, and is most agreeable to the word
of God; the extirpation I say of this Government, and the ruin of all the
officers therein, without any just cause or ground, but upon distaste taken
against some of them, which way it can be lawful, is not in imagination
possible. Secondly, the Covenant being one entire thing consisting of many
branches, the principal point being wholly broken by the murder of the King,
and the alteration and change of the fundamental Laws of the Realm, the whole
Covenant is broken, void, and annihilated in respect of any tie upon those
which either took it voluntarily, or were by force or fear compelled to it.

Lastly, If this Covenant were never so punctually observed, yet might the
Common prayer book still continue in use amongst us, there being never a word
in the Covenant concerning the abolishing of it. So for the Covenant in general
this may suffice.

Now to the particulars which therein they insist upon for the abolishing the
book, wherein they divide the Covenant into three parts. 1. For the defense of
Religion, the King and State. 2. For opposing Popery and Popish innovations. 3.
To maintain the peace of the three Kingdoms, of England, Scotland, and Ireland.

Hence they draw these two arguments. 1. If all Popery, etc. be to be opposed,
then it follows that our Liturgy and ceremonies must be opposed; but the former
is to be done; therefore the later.

We deny the consequence, because no superstition or Popery has been proved to
be in our book and ceremonies, as by this answer conferred with the charge by
them drawn is evident enough.

Then for their new additional proof here, to make these things superstitious,
Because by Christ they are not commanded; We answer if they mean expressly, and
totidem verbis appointed by Christ; they may as well except against our
Churches, Gowns, Pulpits, reading-Deskes, etc. none of which Christ
particularly commanded to be used; but we must tell them also, that although
none of these are particularly appointed by Christ to us, nor generally by
Christ appointed to the whole Church throughout the world; yet none of these
being forbidden to any Church, and being by the authority of our Superiors
commanded in our Church, they and all other ceremonies so commanded, and by Law
established amongst us, are by Christ consequently and mediately commanded by
those places which command us to be subject to authority, and to do all things
without murmurings or disputings; as Romans 13. 1. Phil. 2. 14. with other places
formerly quoted.

The second argument is, From our mutual Oath between us and the Scots to
maintain the peace of the three Kingdoms, which the Scotch Commissioners are
persuaded cannot be maintained without unity in the worship of God, and so
consequently (as these men would bear us in hand) without our conformity to the
Scots. But who sees not, that it may as well be by their conformity to us? And
they that are bound to endeavor a unity and conformity among three, must needs
see it more likely and more reason^ble to bring one to two, then two to one;
but all this may now be very well spared; for the Scots have sufficiently
declared that they press not this Covenant as these men do, but will be in
perfect love and peace with us, enjoying our Liturgy and Government with us
established, and themselves enjoying their own; and so to press the Covenant by
any of them as to reach to us, they make no better reason in them that shall do
it. If therefore these men would be as reasonable as desirous of peace and
quiet as the Scots, we should hear no more of this matter. Thus having done
with the two arguments drawn from the Covenant, they bring two more; One from
Erasmus, another for Smectymnuus: The first whereof, they say, tells us, That
we are not only to abolish things evil in themselves, but th^se also that have
any appearance of evil, for which they needed not have made any use of humane
authority, St. Paul says enough in that kind; and so that matter no man can
deny; but this is nothing 1 Timothy 1. 22.
to their purpose, to move against our Book of Common Prayer or Episcopacy, no
appearance of evil being in either of them to men of judgment and
understanding that way; but if every particular weak ignorant man shall be
admitted as a judge of what is good or evil either truly or in appearance,
there will be no worship of God at all allowed of, witness so many under-Sects
misliking the Covenant, the Directory, and many other things which the great
Architectaries allow and highly approve of; only all in general mislike
Government, order, decency, and whatsoever is not their own invention, and so
concerning particulars are ready to fall together by the ears among themselves,
though all presently ready to join against what they call the common enemy,
that is, truth it self, Law, Monarchy and Episcopacy, the Defenders and
m^intainers of it.

Next for that of Smectymnus, we answer in a word, that removing of such
factious spirits, and Incendiaries, would quickly settle a more happy peace and
uniformity in the Church, then ever the removing of the Common Prayer book can
do.

Lastly, they come in this Chapter to the Surplice, In which to omit idle
words, the argument they use against the Surplice, is this,

If the Surplice be man's device, and has been an Idol in Gods worship, it must
be so still; but our Surplices are of such; therefore they are ido's still.

To this first, we deny the consequence, for there is no necessity that any
thing that has been abused once must be so abused always, or else destroyed;
the abuse may be taken away, and the thing continued in its being still, and a
lawful use made of it. A very Crucifix, or any Saints picture worshipped by
Papists, taken into our houses, and kept only as an ornament or picture to
deck a room, is no longer an Idol. Our Churches we^e all in time of Popery
abused to gross Idolatry, but are, blessed be God, neither demolished, nor so
abused now. The Surplice also was so abused among the Papists once in this very
Land, but is not so now, being not used as any invention of man necessarily to
be added to make Gods worship and service to be complete and perfecter then it
could be without it, but is only used as an ornament indifferent in it self,
and only necessary, where and when it is commanded in respect of the command
only, and not of any thing in it self; and were it by authority forbidden, as
it is commanded, it were the same sin then to use it, that now it is not to use
it. Then for the Minor, I answer again that is false; also our particular and
individual Surplices which we now wear, never were Idols, nor ever can be, if
used no otherwise then we are commanded to use them; and for the rise and
original of the Surplices, we answer, that we retain them not as relics of
Popery or superstition, neither take we them up from the Papists, but from the
ancient use of them in the true Church of Christ, which used them before ever
they were idolized by Papists, or railed upon by Schismatics.

CHAP. XI. Entitled, The Objections.
HEre they tell us, They will remove some Objections, wherein they will show
them to be of no great weight, and there say, they will use but few words. And
I believe indeed, that such Objections or Arguments as they will bring forth
for themselves to answer, shall have no great weight in them, lest they should
take upon them such a burden, as they are neither able to bear, nor to cast
down ag^in handsomely, after they have once taken it up. Briefly therefore
running over the Arguments here brought, and their answers to them, I shall at
last use some Arguments my self, for the continuance of our Liturgy among us,
as well as they have done for the abolishing of it; but first to their
Objections.

The first, they bring from the antiquity of it; to which they tell us
Smectymnuus has answered, whom I never saw, and so know not what his answer
is, and so can say nothing to him. But whereas they answer here, That antiquity
without truth is nothing: I grant that, but tell them withal, this is nothing
to their purpose; because, what is most ancient, must be supposed most true
till the contrary be proved: Therefore their answer to the antiquity of this
Book, is nothing against it, till they have proved the unlawfulness of it a
little better then yet they have done.

Secondly, They s^y, Many good men have liked it: To which they answer, That
their approbation is not sufficient. To this I rejoyn, nor is their misliking
and railing at it, enough to condemn it: For though they brag of more light
then our forefathers (this new light is the common argument in these days for
all things done against the old light of Gods Word) yet all their l^ght has
not showed them how to frame such a Liturgy as we have received from our
forefathers; and till they have made a better, they might be content with this.

Thirdly, They say Our Book has many good things in it; but answer, So has
the Alcoran and the Talmud. But we reply, that those Books, if they have some
good things in them, which they are pleased to call many, yet they are not many
in respect of the evil with which they abound; but our Book abunds with good,
if not free from some defaults: The denomination then being to be taken from
the greater part, our Book, and so the Apochrypha, which here they also gird
at, are to be called good, and the other two evil.

Fourthly, It is better to amend then to cashiere. To this first, They suppose
an impossibility of amending. Secondly, They say, It is contrary to Gods
course, who commands the Altars to be thrown down, etc To this we say, It is a
vain and groundless supposition that every thing amiss in our Liturgy, might
not easily be amended. Neither is it to be doubted, but that they whom it
concerns would sooner amend what is distastful to any quiet and moderate men,
if the violent opposition of troublesome and factious spirits not hinder it, by
the unreasonableness of their demands; whom when nothing in that kind done can
satisfy, it is to no purpose in respect of them, to do any thing.

To the second we answer, concerning Gods command to cut down the Altars, burn
the Groves, etc. the case is very far different from ours here: Those Groves
and Altars were directly against the express command of God, for worshipping
only in the place by himself chosen, namely the Temple at Jerusalem. And
again, there is great difference between that Idolatrous worship, and some
defects and imperfections in the right worship of the true God. Lastly, It is
not Gods course always in correcting abuses, rather to abolish the thing, then
to take away the abuse; for we know our Savior speaking against the abuses in
Fasting, Prayer, and Alms, does not take them away, or forbid any of them, but
shows how to amend the abuses: And to make their answer good here, they must
plead against our Churches, as well as our Liturgy.

To the fifth, This Book, they say, has Acts of Parliament to confirm it. To
which they answer, first, That this Book is not established by Act of
Parliament. Secondly, That the thing it self being simply evil, no Act can make
it good.

To these we say again, The Act before the Book, is plain; but they tell us,
The Books we now use, have been altered since the Act, and so the Act is not
for them. To this we answer, If there be any such alterations in the Books,
that by the strictness of Law, or tricks of Lawyers, the Act cannot take such
hold of Non-conformists, as to make them liable to the penalties there
appointed; yet in conscience, whatsoever is not altered in the Book, is by
virtue of that Act obediently to be observed, and yielded to the intention of
the Lawgiver, being as much or more to be regarded, then the Letter of the
Law. And again, those alterations being made according to Law, that is, by a
Commission given forth by His Majesty then being, King James of Blessed memory,
under the Broad Seal of England, to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and
others, according to the form which the Laws of this Realm prescribe to be used
(as we see in His Majesty's Proclamation before the Book of Common Prayer) all
are as much bound to observe the Book so altered, as if no alteration at all
had been made in it.

To the second answer we say, That the supposition there made of the evilness
of the Book, has been by my answer so taken away, that the ground of this
answer fails.

And so I have at last done with their Five undeniable Arguments, as they call
them, and their three Motives for the taking off our Common Book, and the
Answers to the Objections which they were pleased to bring against themselves.
There remains now only to take a view of their opinion concerning any Liturgy
at all, or any set form of Prayer; for if these two be unlawful, it is a
sufficient Argument against the Common Prayer Book.

In delivering their opinion herein, they say, They will answer these two
questions. First, Whether they do allow of any set Prayers in a more private
way? Secondly, Whether of any set Liturgy? To which two questions, they might
very well have spared their pains in answering, we not much caring for their
opinions herein; yet seeing they would thus express themselves, we will see
what they say, and deliver our minds thereto.

First, They say, They allow the ignorant only set forms of Prayer in private.
To which, if by these set forms they mean set prayers made by others, we are
willing with them to allow them only to such as cannot make better themselves;
but in general to use set forms for the very best of men, is not only lawful,
but very good, and most carefully to be done, that we may observe that of the
wisest of men, Eccles. 5. 1.

For the second. A set Liturgy they say they allow in general; but come to the
particular use of any particular Liturgy, they flee off again, and will have
their set Liturgy, only a pattern for a Liturgy, made it seems ex tempore
every time; because the words they tell us, must follow the affections, and not
the affections the words.

In this they do but dally with us, making our Liturgy no Liturgy, and turn
public Prayers into private; every one by this means, as their affections are
different, so praying differently; whereas in public Prayers all must pray at
the same time the same prayer, or else there is not one common and joint prayer
of all, but several prayers as several persons. And for their Argument, that
the words should follow the affections; that may as well be in a set prayer, as
in an ex tempore one: For the heart does first conceive the prayer, and then
frames words to express it by. Now such prayers being made, and read, and known
to all, so that all have them by heart, they do thereunto first conform their
affections, and praying with the Minister, their words inwardly conceived, if
they speak not, or also outwardly uttered, if they speak, do follow the
affections of their hearts. If they say this is not enough, but every man's
private affections should be the rule or guide of his words and prayer; I
answer then, that if there be never so many praying at the same time, in the
same place, they differing in their affections, and so in their inward or
outward words, viz. their several forms of prayer, there are but so many
several private prayers made, and not one joint public prayer by all. And
there is no more efficacy in the prayers of them in the Church, then in so many
particular prayers elsewhere: For these prayers want the condition by our
Savior expounded, Matthew 18. 19. and so cannot truly claim the promise there
made. Thus I have done with their Book, in respect of the sum or substance,
which I have fully answered, their extravagancies and railings lightly passed
by; I will add no more to all they say but this, If any man desire to be
contentious, we have no such custom, nor the Churches of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 16.

CHAP. XII. Arguments for our Common Prayer Book.
HAving hitherto answered what has been said against our Liturgy, and now
desirous to say somewhat more for it; I have thought it best briefly to draw
some Arguments for it from the same heads, whence the Unmaskers have fetched
all the matter they have brought against it; namely, from the name of it; the
original of it; the matter contained in it; the manner of using it, and the
effects of it upon our whole Land. By all which I hope, they whom it may
concern, will correcting what they see cause, not totally destroy, but continue
our Liturgy, and Church Government.

First then I will begin with the name; not the ignominious name of Mass which
they would cast upon it, but the name which it owns, and we all call it by; And
that is the name of The Common Prayer Book, a name challenging all liking and
acceptance, considering the excellency and efficacy of the common and public
prayers of all, above the particular and private prayers of any one, how holy
or pious soever he be. If Christ promise, as we know he does, Matthew. 18. 19,
20. That where two or three be gathered together, etc. how much more will he be
present with a whole congregation, or a whole Land publicly with the same
desires, words, and affections, calling upon him, and praising his name? If
then the nickname of a Mass, odiously by our enemies cast upon our Liturgy,
make it seem to some distasteful; yet let its own proper name rightly belonging
to it, cause us in that respect, that it is a Book of Common Prayer for us all,
cause us in that respect to love and esteem it, and to desire the continued use
of it among us.

Secondly for the original. This Book had its first rise and original from the
ancient fathers of the Church in the Primitive times, long before Popery was
known or thought of, and its immediate original here, as it is now with us,
from the very beginning of that blessed Reformation, which we still by the
mercy of God enjoy, and except the interruption of some few years in the days
of Queen Mary, and in the late rebellions and distractions amongst us, we have
still, blessed be God, retained and flourished under it. Out of the respect
then to our blessed Ancestors of former times, and our Predecessors here, that
first established this Book, and for the happy continuance of it, from the very
beginning and first settling of the true Protestant Religion in England, let us
love this Book, and with thankfulness for it, diligently use and constantly
retain it.

Thirdly for the matter of it, that ought to be a more prevalent argument for
it then both the former; for had it never so good a name, if that name were
dissonant from its nature, I could not urge it; or had it never so good a
beginning in the respects forementioned, yet were the matter of it naught, the
good efficient cause would not sufficiently make amends for the evil material
cause; but if that be as or more excellent then the other, sure then may it
well move us to regard it. What then is the matter of this Book? wholly prayers
made only to God himself, through the mediation of no Saints, or Angels, but
only through Jesus Christ, whom Gotappointed the sole and absolute Mediator
between him and us.

Secondly, We have the Word of God read in it to instruct and teach us in the
knowledge and service of God, which he is pleased to impart to us, and require
of us.

Thirdly, Songs and Hymns of praise and thanks to God, either Divine and
Canonical parts of the Scripture it self, or made by holy men, altogether
consonant to the Word of God in he Scripture.

Fourthly, Confessions of Faith, briefly comprising the main, chief, and
principal points which a Christian is bound to believe, and to profess to
salvation.

This is generally the matter of our Common Prayer Book; which matter is so,
and in such order and manner set down, and so disposed of; and every thing in
the Book appointed to be used in such admirable manner and order, that from
thence, we have another strong argument for the maintenance and retaining of
the Book.

Fourthly, Therefore I come to the excellent manner and order of using this
book, and used in this book; concerning which I must take a brief view of the
order appointed, and so deliver it unto you.

First, when we are come into the house of God for his public worship and
service, how can we better begin this sacred work, then with some words out of
the Word of God himself? This is without controversy; but with what words we
should begin, or what piece of Gods word is fittest to be the first word that
should be spoken in his house, is perhaps more difficult to be absolutely
determined; that therefore is not absolutely appointed, and to all enjoined,
but in this kind some liberty left to the Ministers discretion at every
particular time and occasion. If any man think it most fit to begin with some
short prayer he may; to this end we have these sentences, Turn thy face away
from our sins, O Lord, and correct us, O Lord; and yet in thy judgment, etc.
If it be thought more fit to move the people a little to humility in respect of
their sins, that they more earnestly mind this sacred duty they are met about,
we have to that purpose, Rent your hearts and not your garments, etc. If we say
that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, etc. I will go to my father and
say, etc. If thirdly some think it more needful first to propound comfort and
consolation, that the people, may with the more faith call upon God, and serve
him with the more heart and spirit, we have to that end, At what time soever a
sinner does repent, etc. So that beginning the service of God with the word of
God in the house of God, we have several sentences for several times and
several occasions to be used, as is most convenient at any time. Then follows
most fitly a brief, but grave and serious exhortation to put the people in mind
of, and stir them to that duty which they are come together about. After which
immediately they make a most excellent, short and pithy confession of their
sins, humbly kneeling upon their knees. After confession we know follows
absolution, according to that of Solomon, Prove. 28. 13. and of David. So then
proceeds our Liturgy to a Declaration of Gods pardoning the penitent, by which
we are Psalm. 32. 3.
all the more heartned and encouraged with faith to pray to God for all things
necessary to soul or body; we do this therefore presently in that form of
Prayer which our Savior himself taught us. Having thus faithfully prayed, and
not doubting but what we have faithfully asked, shall effectually be obtained;
we are bound in the next place, as reason as well as Religion will teach us, to
praise God for this his mercy toward us, which we being not able to do without
Gods assistance, we do first desire him to open our lips, that our mouth may
show forth his praise; and through our earnest desire presently to perform this
holy duty, we desire God to make speed and haste to help us in this kind; and
then with a short doxology expressing our faith in and of the Trinity, we
proceed to Psalms of praise.

First, we have one set Psalm every day, being a Psalm of special note to stir
up to this holy duty; and then every day several Psalms in such order, that the
whole Psalter is read through once every month. Having thus far proceeded in
this excellent manner and order, we must not yet leave thus, but because he
that goes not forward in Religion daily, will quickly go backward, we must
endeavor daily to increase in the knowledge of God, which will be by reading
and hearing the word of God, and that chiefly in the house of God; therefore in
the next place we have two Lessons read to us, one out of the old Testament,
another out of the new; and between those Lessons, and after them, excellent
Hymns of praise and thanksgiving to God, in sending our Savior especially, and
also for all his mercies and favors, spiritual or temporal to our souls or
bodies; let any man of reason and judgment now say if our book do not orderly
lead us all this way; yet here I confess is not enough; as we do diligently and
daily learn somewhat out of the Word of God, in the house of God; so it is most
fit we should there also show what we have learned, and make some profession
and confession; next therefore most fitly follows a solemn and public
confession of our Christian faith, comprised in the Creed, which we are all to
say with the Minister, and that standing, which gesture is most convenient in
these two respects.

First, to declare our readiness and willingness to make that confession, and
that we do all join in it, which if we sat still could not so easily be
perceived, it being an easy thing to observe who stand and who sit, but hard
to see who speaks, and who do not.

Secondly to testify by this gesture of standing up, that this faith we are
not afraid or ashamed publicly to stand to, but that this we are ready to
maintain and defend against all opposition whatsoever, as that faith we will
live and dye in.

Lastly after all this thus devoutly, decently, and reverently performed; how
can we better conclude this holy work then with prayer altogether unto God, to
confirm, settle, strengthen, and establish us in that holy Faith which we do
profess, and have now made confession of; and to (...)ase our knowledge, and to
grant us all mercies and favors (...)full for souls and bodies, and to keep us
from evils, to the one or to the other? In which prayers first we begin with a
mutual short prayer of the Minister and people each for other, to testify each
to other their perfect love and charity one to another, that so they may the
more cheerfully and unanimously join as one in the ensuing prayers; in which
after a brief praying for Gods mercy in general, we begin again. First with the
Lords prayer, the most absolute and perfect pattern for all our prayers. Then
after some few short ejaculations of the Minister and the people answering,
which is an especial means to rouse and stir up the dull affections of the
people, subject to be weary and faint in holy duties, we proceed to the set and
solemn prayers ensuing. The first of which is varied every day almost, and upon
the most solemn and great days fitted to the day, as the present occasion
requires; and so on every particular holy day. The other prayers for peace,
grace, increase of knowledge, and protection against perils and dangers, and
so the prayers for the King, etc. being most necessary at all times, are every
day to be used; and after all, the blessing pronounced to all.

Thus I have briefly touched upon you see, our excellent way and manner of
serving God according to our Common Prayer book appointed daily. It would be no
difficult matter to run through all the other matters in that book, as the
administration of the Sacraments, solemnization of Matrimony with all the other
Rites and Ceremonies; I desiring brevity, this may suffice for this my fourth
argument for the Liturgy, the excellent order and manner of using it.

I come now to the fifth and last argument for it, the blessed and happy
effects of this our worshipping and serving God in this sort from the beginning
of the Reign of that never enough praised and admired Queen Elizabeth of
blessed and eternal memory. How wonderfully did the Lord bless and preserve her
with a long, happy, and prosperous Reign that did establish and settle this
Liturgy in her Kingdoms? How did the whole Nation flourish in piety, peace, and
prosperity under her Government? ever since her Reign began, during the time of
it, and since the end of it, no Nation in the Christian world has received
more, and more miraculous mercies and favors from Gods hand then our Nation. We
have abounded in honor, glory, and estimation abroad, increased abundan^ly in
wealth, learning and knowledge at home; We have h^d as excellent and powerful
preaching, and as frequent; as learned and pious books written as any place in
the world. We have had such uniformity and decency in the worship and service
of God, as no Church in Christendom more, till of late d^yes, wherein this
book, and our Bishops and Church Government by them have been cried down, and
thrust by force and violence against all reason, conscience, and Laws of God
and man out of their places; and our Church; during which time of their exi^e,
what treasons, rebellions, murder, and all horrible acts of prophanness, and
abominable impiety have abounded in the Land no tongue can express. What
strange Sects have risen? how has Popery increased? how insolency and
ignorance, under pretense of new light has overspread a great part of the
Land, woeful experience has showed more then I am able to express. These
effects may justly be imputed to the want of Bishops, and a Set form of divine
worship amongst us; for immediately upon the abolition of them they began to
grow, and increased all the time of their much lamented absence, and now
through the great mercy of God, since the restoring of them, they are much
abated and decayed daily; and by the continuance of them now again amongst us,
in some reasonable time, if without interruption or disturbance, it please the
Lord of his infinite goodness to continue this blessing to us, we doubt not by
the grace of God the falling down, or vanishing away of all these Sects again;
The book being an especial help to the simple and ignorant in the worship and
service of God, and the authority of the Bishops, an approved and effectual
means to keep under the insolency and perverseness of willful disturbers of the
Churches peace; which happiness that we may enjoin again, as we have formerly
had it, as we are daily to beg and crave at the hands of Almighty God, with
earnest and uncessant prayers; so do we humbly for the conclusion of this
Treatise, desire of his sacred Majesty, and the most reverend Fathers in God,
the Lords Archbishops, the right reverend Fathers in God the Lords Bishops of
our Church, by his Majesty chiefly entrusted in this business, and by the Law
of God; and of this chiefly, with the instructing and teaching of his people,
and governing his Church, that amending whatsoever in their wisdom they see fit
for the glory of God, the good of this Church of England in general, and the
satisfactions of the minds, desires and consciences of the peaceable and weak,
but faithful members thereof, they would still continue our Liturgy, which we
have had so long among us, and so happily flourished under, and with which God
of his mercy grant that this Church and State may still flourish and prosper to
the end of the world. Amen.

May 2. 1661.
A Collection of some choice Expressions of the Equity, Charity, Sobriety and
Loyalty, the four Virgin Daughters of the unspotted Piety of these unknown
Unmaskers of our Common Prayer Book.
1. THe Service Book is evinced to be a rank Impostor in Gods worship, and a
violent intruder into the house of God. To the Reader, Page 1. 2. The said Book
is called, The overwhelming storm of the purity of worship. Chap. 1. p. 1. 3.
It is called, A Superstitious and Popish Liturgy. ibid. 4. If our Liturgy be
not a Mass of Superstition, and Superstitious Ceremonies, we know not what
Superstition is. p. 3. 5. Kneeling at the Communion is said to be the staff and
strength of that abominable Idol, the Breaden God. ibid. 6. Our Service Book is
called The Mother of that Hydra of the Scottish Liturgy, and the young Dragon in
that Nation, and the Mass Book, the Mother of our and theirs too. ibid. 7.
Except our Liturgy had been full of Serpents, it could not have hatched the
Dragon that was sent into Scotland. ibid. 8. The Superstitions of this Book are
such, and so many, that we may apply that saying, That it is not only hurtful
and dangerous, but cursed and execrable. P. 4. 9. Their Liturgy (that is, the
Papists) is the very Lethargy of worship; and what difference between ours and
theirs? Truly nothing but a pair sheers betwixt them, and putting ours in a
coat of another tongue. Chap. 2. p. 5. 10. What reason is there, that we should
groan under the burden of a Liturgy borne in upon us, under the name and nature
of a Mass, which is nothing but a mass of Idolatry, and an Idol of abomination.
ibid. 11. The Service Book is the main engine; it is the saddle, and we the
asses, etc. Page 6. from the middle to the end. 12. Though Ave Maria be not
actually in it, (namely, in our Liturgy) yet if purpose had holden, it was more
then in a fair possibility to have been the head-corner stone of the Liturgy.
Chap. 3. p. 8. 13. This Symbolization of Papists and Prelate-men, in the name
and nature of Mass and Liturgy, discovers how they conspire against the truth,
and those who desire to worship God in spirit and truth. P. 10. 14. If this
(our Liturgy) were the true worship of God, the Papists and the Prelatical crew
would never endure it, but would stone, tear in pieces, imprison, burn, banish,
and kill, with all manner of cruelty, as they do and have done, those that
worship God according to his will. ibid. 15. They must bear false witness in
proclaiming under their hands by subscription, that this stinking puddle is the
River of God; when indeed it is the Euphrates of Babylon. Ibidem to the end,
and almost to the middle of P. 11. 16. If the Altars now er ^cted were of God,
they would be an abemination to the Prelates and their faction. ibid. 17. It
was great incogitancy (to speak the least) in our Reformers in King Edward's
days, to take a Monk from among the Canaanites, and putting a coat of English
cloth upon it, to represent it, being an unclean beast, as a service to the
Lord. It is no better truly, then the excommunicate thing. P. 16. 18. To cause
Ministers to subscribe to it, is no less then treason against the high and
mighty God Ch^p. 4. p. 22, 23. 19. That Jewish, Popish Institution of
Churching-women, called Purification, and that bast^rdly piece of Confirmation
P. 25. 20. The Letany is not a stump or limb of Dagon, but the head of the
Mass Book. Chap 5. p 26. 21. Of this it may be truly said, as one said of the
Pharisees sin, tha^ it was either the sin against the Holy Ghost, or else very
nigh to it; so the Letany is either blasphemy, or very nigh blasphemy. P. 27.
22. They call us Popish, Prelatical Priests; they say we fill their brains with
the froth of that stuff, and their mouths with that confused noise of words, to
shut them out from the soul-saving words, and the Word from them, and then the
Priests bear rule and tyrannize over them at pleasure. Chap. 6. p. 31. 23. This
Letany is the very fascinating Fardel of Tautologies and Battologies, besides
its other faults: P. 27. 24. We have left out the Saints in our Liturgy, that
was too gross; but had the Laudenses got their colors fixed, ere this the
Letany had been flanked with this stuff. Chap. 5. p. 28. 25. This Book settles
blind fellows over the people, etc. Page 32. Also page 33. and 34. are wholly
railings and revilings. 26. As our Liturgian Mass-mongers esteem more of the
Service then Preaching; so they justle out, and keep out Preaching with it.
Chap. 7. p. 35. 27. It is ordinary with the Journey-men Levites, and Letany
Priests, to spin out all the time in making up that course thread of the Service
that is allotted for Sermons; and this they do of malice, like the dog in the
manger. P. 36. 28, The Arsenical gobbets of that poisonful Book which is worse
then the Iron furnace. P. 38. See also the rest of that page, and p. 39, 40.
29. We have had woeful experience, how the Hierarchical crew endeavor with tooth
and nail, and therein worse then the Manichees, to supplant Gods Law, of whom
we might justly say with the Prophet, They have almost undone thy Law. Chap. 8.
p. 45. 30 Our Liturgy is the garment spotted with the flesh, condemned by the
Apostle Jude v. 23. P. 49. see p. 51. 31. The Babylonians and Ed^mites,
Prelates and Jesuits under the favor of their Canons, got at length such
footing, and made such head for Popery, Arminianism, etc. that Religion and
Polity, the two twins of Gods favor, were like Archimedes Tomb, so overgrown
with thorns that it could not be found. Chap. 9. page 55. where see more. 32.
The Hierarchy and Service are resembled already to Mother and child; so may
they be twins begotten and born of Pride and Superstition, nursed and brought
up in the lap of Covetousness; these twins are born together, live together,
and must die together. p. 56. 33. Above all put away the Ashtaroth, the
Service Book, for that we may well call the very Caterpiller of Gods husbandry.
p. 57. 34. If all Popery and Popish inn^vations are to be opposed, then it will
follow, that the Service Book and Ceremonies are to be opposed. Chap. 10. p.
58. 35. By the malignity of the Masters of those Ceremonies, the bulk was
increased, and would have been like Crocodiles, who grow as long as they have a
being, if you had not come in place, etc. p. 59. 36. That Service, Government,
and Officers, being none of Christ's, but the main evil, and cause of all evil
in the three Nations, etc. P. 60. where see more. And in the next page, they
call it a Mock-Ordinance, or Will Worship of the Service Book. 37. The Surplice
is called not the least of all the idolatrous Rites and Ceremonies* yea worse
then a plague sore clou^^ p. 61. 38. They pray to cast it out, and all the
rest, as carcasses of abominable things; and withal to set the Masters of
Wardrobe on packing with them. P. 63. see more there. 39. For our Liturgy, what
can be said for form, or has been said, that cannot be said for the Popish
Liturgy, but the clothing of it in another tongue? Chap. 11. p. 68. 40. Our
Liturgy is said to be the headpiece of all our evils. ibid.

Much more stuff of this kind might have been collected, but I am to weary of
this, and have even forced my self to gather these things together, and so to
present them to thy view, that thou may see what temper and spirit these men
are of, and so be no more deceived by their pretended holiness, then by their
unchristian, uncharitable, uncivil, unsober and disloyal Writings.

FINIS.

