ELEYTHEPOSIS TS Aletheias.

TRVTH ASSERTED BY THE DOCTRINE AND Practice of the Apostles, seconded by the
Testimony of Synods, Fathers, and Doctors, from the Apostles to this Day.

Viz. That Episcopacie is Iure Divino.

BY Sir Francis VVortley Knight and Baronet.

LONDON Printed by A. N. for I. K. and T. W. and are to be sold at the White
Horse in PAVLES Churchyard. 1641.

To the most High and Illustrious Charles Prince of GREAT BRITAIN.
SIR,
YOu set back the Clock of my age and make it dayspring, when it is past the
mid noone of my life. I court my fancy in my observations of you. My first
Love, my first Master, your Uncle Prince Henry, whose name is, and ever must
be sacred to Mars and the Muses, whose memory is still precious to the World,
justly was the Rival and Competitour to Honor, with your glorious Grandsier
Henry the Great, of France the greatest. In you dear Sir I find the Character
of them both, as if you were sole heir to both; and it joys my Soul to see
it. I had the Honor to gird the first sword about you, with this wish, that
you might use it in peace, like our Northern Solomon King James, and drawn, as
that Boanerges the son of Thunder, the glory of France, your Grandfather.
When your Father (whose goodness makes him glorious) shall be gathered to his
Fathers, his Titles must as your Birthright descend on you; amongst the rest
that which is (...), Defender of the faith. This, as it is well worthy
observation, was given by him who they say could not err in Cathedra, plenario
Consistorio and pleno Concilio, to him who as some of his Successors say even
in that gave him the lie, who gave him the title; it is true it was an unkind
requital, but there was Digitus Dei in it, for it was like the selling of
Joseph into Egypt, faelix scelus in eventu, guided by that hand which cannot
err. It was a work of great and high daring, a voyage wherein many of his
Predecessors had suffered shipwreck, and Sir Walter Rawleigh observes the
work suited the man, and the man was made for the work: as Nebuchadonezar was
for Tire. Sure it is strange that out of the ruins of good works faith should
spring, and disorder set all the Church in order, Sed Deus est qui fecit, and
est mirum in occulis nostris. Sir, the Title is the most glorious your Royal
father has, and his Second is, that he is the best Friend living. It was a
promise of the Prophets, that Kings should be Nursing Fathers, and Queens
Nursing Mothers to the Church. And believe me Sir, the words are Emphaticall,
for the Fathers wisdom and power should provide for the child ad extra, the
mothers care ad intra; The fathers is and should be protegendo, instruendo,
promovendo, corrigendo; The mothers in her Oeconomicks pro victu and amictu,
Necessaries and Decency, and all with a* Nurses affection. And I am so much
Irish, that as they love, the Children the Nurse, and the Children their
Nurses, and foster brothers as much or more then their own: such mutual love
wish I betwixt the Prince and the Church, and as that habit is acquired partly,
and partly infused, So may God infuse that into your heart, and by many mutual
reciprocal actions may it become habitual. So shall the Church be happy in
future, and you shall be glorious in your timely reign, and blessed in your
Succession, as your Father is in you, and the Prayers of the Church attracted
as the Dew and Exhalations, by the glory and heat of the Sun above, shall
be returned in rich showers of blessing upon you and yours.

Poets are Prophets, or at least would be;
If I be one this is my prophecy:
Your name's no stranger to the Imperial seat,
Our turn comes next, we must have Charles the Great.
Your highnesses most humble servant, FRANCIS WORTLEY.

To the well affected Reader, or otherwise.
PRuning and reformation I allow, but eradication and deformation I tremble to
hear of, and hope never to see. God forbid that personal errors should destroy
an Institution so ancient and sealed with the blood of so many blessed
Martyrs. Though Judas die in the consciousnesse of his treason, yet an other
must succeed him in his Bishopric. As an obedient son to my mother the
Church I wish her honor, and happiness to the Common Weal, as a member of
it; and that these two as Mercy and Truth may kiss each other, and in their
unity make the Soul and Body, the King and his people happy, so shall our
Commonweal flourish, and our Church be glorious, and God even our own God
shall bless us: Peace shall be within our Walls, and plenty within our
palaces.

I study Multum in parvo, and to put as much as I can into a little room, and
hope to give satisfaction to such as are not more addicted to their wills then
reason, if mine deceive me not. However I have discharged the duty I ow my
conscience, and hope to find the benefit of that, which is all I look for, and
is sufficient to arm me against the obloquies or misconstructions of those,
whose hearts are full of that, which their tongues must utter, or their hearts
will break with their Plerophory* I protest I have no end in it but Gods glory
and the discharge of my own studied thoughts, and have therein conquered my
inclination by the assistance of my reason grounded upon much more pains then
the World holds me guilty of. And thus satisfied I would not that succeeding
ages should find my name amongst those who consented to eradicate Episcopacie.
For my part I had rather suffer the censure of the malevolent then to be
thought to consent to that which my conscience approves not. If this excuse me
for my writing, I am glad, If not, I have pleased my self in discharge of my
troubled thoughts and conscience.

ELEYTHEPOSIS TS Aletheias.
Truth asserted, by the practice of the Apostles, confirmed by the Testimony
of Synods, Fathers, and Doctors from Christ's time to this day.
IN Discourses Rhetorical men desire to show the power of Nature improved by
Art, which we call Eloquence: in Logical Disputes, the quickness of
apprehension, and the improvement of judgment. The one often makes a
difference betwixt subtilties, and attempts to puzle Reason: The other rightly
employed defines and settles a Truth obscured by different falsities. In
matters of Faith we lay aside reason, and yield to Scriptures truth, as other
faculties of the body do to their informer the Rational soul, and as young
Scholars to their Ipse dixit. We believe therefore what neither sense nor
reason can make us to conceive.

I believe the Scripture to be the sacred Word of God: and what truth I find
therein, I conceive it to be Iure Divino. My reason, I confess, is bound, and
yields in the point of Episcopacie, that it is Iure Divino, because I find for
it so many ipse dixit's in sacred Writ. My judgment also is further strengthened
therein by Reasons sufficient to settle humane belief.

Opinion, we define, Haerens and dubia deveritate quorumvis in animo
praesumptio; A questionable and doubtful presuming in ones conceit that a
matter is true; And Cognitio est rerum conceptarum per experientiam scientia;
Knowledge is a sure apprehension of the matters which we conceive by experience
of their causes and undoubted grounds of truth; And Resolution is Dubii
depositio, the abandoning of all doubting. I am past opinion, and acknowledge
my self satisfied, and well resolved, that Episcopacie is Iure Divino: and am
ready to give an account thereof: and endeavor so to do in this Discourse. I
will not (...), withstand and resist, or seek evasions, or subtle answers to
elude Gods Truth. Nor do I love (...) to be in suspense: having well weighed
the truth here asserted, I find cause to say (...), Great is the force of
truth, and has prevailed. To satisfy the World, what reason I have of this my
confidence, I leave a Testimony thereof in this my discourse.

I define Episcopum Presbyterum cum additamento superioritatis quoad regimen in
Ecclesia: A Bishop to be a Presbyter, having an addition of superiority for
the government of Gods Church: his charge is to oversee the Clergy, and their
flocks. The word I confess in a large signification may be taken for a Major
of a City: for he is Over-seer thereof: In Homer Ajex is, (...), the Bishop
or Orderer of his Army: But our Episcopus est Cleri and Gregis in sua Dioecesi,
Is Over-seer of his Clergy, and his flock, bounded within his own Diocese.
He is also called Presbyter an ancient, and therefore experienced and able to
inform and direct.

As for the inferior Presbyter or ancient, and Diaconus Minister or Servant,
they are distinct and subordinate to the Bishop or superior Presbyter, both in
the New Testament, and in the practice of the first Centurie, and in all Ages
even to this day. Let it not stumble any man that the Apostles sometimes term
themselves and Bishops by the title of Presbyters, they call themselves also
Diaconos, Deacons, in a general notion.

Our Presbyterians would have Bishops to be Pastores jure divine Praesides jure
Ecclesiastico, Principes jure humano and Diabolico, Pastors by Gods Law,
Presidents by Ecclesiastical Law, Lords by humane and Diabolical law. How
faulty this assertion is, let my following Discourse testify.

Our Bishop is a Presbyter or ancient Pastor set in eminent superiority over
the Clergy and their flocks with a relation to the government of them in
matters Ecclesiastical. And such I say the Apostles instituted, and to them
gave a charg how to demean themselves. A perpetual Succession hereof by
practice has continued from Christ's Apostles to this day.

Now for Ius divinum, I take that to be of Divine Right which is warranted in
sacred Scripture de credendis and agendis in matters to be believed or done.
Let this serve for the present, it will be more enlarged occasionally in some
part of this treatise. Only here I add, that (...) the practice of the
Apostles, which never was questioned or excepted against, and is recorded in
the canonical Scripture; has in it Ius Divinum, and shows what is of divine
right defacto.

These things* being premised, I proceed to Objections Object.
against my Assertion, and Answer unto each of them particularly.

Eminent superiority, and Lordly authority over their people is that which the
Lords of the Gentiles may and do challenge and practice, as their due, Iure
human^, by humane right. Therefore, (...), by law of things opposite, eminent
superiority and Lordly authority over the Clergy and the people of God is that
which Bishops ought not to challeng or practice Iure Divino. For proof hereof
see Mat. 20. 25. 26. The Princes of the Gentiles Dominantur, Lordly rule over
them, but you non sic, not so, or, it shall not be so with you. And 1. Pet. 5.
2. 3. Feed the flock of the Lord taking the oversight thereof not by
constraint, but willingly, not for filthy Lucre, but of a ready mind, neither
as being Lords over Gods Heritage.

To this I answer, that the measure of domination, Answ.
not the matter lies in the word [ sic] and so is expounded by the words
aforegoing, not by constraint, but willingly, not churlishly or covetously, not
as though ye were Lords domineering over them, but that ye may be ensamples to
the flock. Non herile aut Regale imperium exercentes, sed pastorali
superioritate, and paterna gubernatione utentes, Not exercising a masterlike or
Kingly command, but using a pastoral superiority and fatherly government. And
so this rather (as I conceive) confirms superiority and Episcopacy then
destroies them. For the word sic, so, takes not away the legality, but
qualifies the power given, by saying, let it be used sic, so. This I prove to
be the meaning of the Apostle by this argument.

The practice of the Apostles is not contrary to Christ's and their Doctrine,
and the sense thereof: But the Apostles did practice eminent superiority, and
such lawful authority as Christ forbids not, over the Clergy and flock, and
instituted successors. Therefore their doctrine allowed the same. And so that
cannot be meant by the words above, which is pretended: viz. that there should
be a parity in the Clergy, and that Episcopacie is Dominium in Clerum, a
Lordly rule over the Clergy, and (...) an usurped authority.

The successors which they instituted are warranted by Christ, when he said, I
am with you to the end of the world: that is, I am with you, whilst you live,
and with successors in your stead governing and teaching the Church to the
worlds end. Hence it was that the Apostles ordained Bishops to succeed them, so
did the ancient Fathers in the purer times. This course continued ever since.

The practice of the Apostles was in a superiority above others of the Clergy:
and to the Bishops whom they constituted to succeed themselves in place over
the Clergy, they gave a superior authority: neither did they either practice,
or ever mention that parity in power, which the presbyteria^s so much endeavor
to introduce. And therefore the Apostles never understood the words as these
men do, viz. that they should disallow of Bishops in superior authority above
other of the Clergy.

To make the practice of the Apostles more evident, I appeal to Saint Paul,
who gave to Timothy and Titus Episcopal power. To the one in Ephesus, to the
other in Creet.

Now to clear this, let us first cleanse the spring head, and then the
streams will run clear down to the after times. I have to his end above
defined Episcopum a Bishop: if we observe what he is, then shall we evidently
see, whether Saint* Paul did institute such a calling or no.

Of Civil Bishops I speak not: but of Spiritual. A Bishop of this kind I
defined to be Presbyterum cum additamento superioritatis quoad regimen in
Ecclesia: he governs the Clergy and their flocks in spiritual matters.
Bishops of this Kind Saint Paul did institute. He made Timothy and Titus
Episcopos Cleri and Gregis quoad regimen in Ecclesia, Bishops of the Clergy
and their flocks, and to have Ecclesiastical government over them: whereas
before they were but Presbyters, or Disciples brought up under him. By this
institution were other Presbyters made subordinate to them in governing and
teaching the Church. Which to prove I thus argue.

He that is ordained, and so ordained that he has power Constituere
Presbyteres per civitates, to ordain presbyters in every City, is greater then
those, who have no such power in their Cities or Churches: and those who may
correct, what is defective, are superior to those for whom matters defective
are corrected. But Titus and Timothy had such power given them, and did so
correct things defective, and none of the Presbyters had the same from the
Apostles. Therefore I conclude undeniably that Titus and Timothy were superiors
as Bishops over their Presbyters in their several charges and Divisions, viz*
Titus in Creet, and Timothy in Ephesus.

That they had this power given them by Paul appears 1. Tim. 5. 22. Lay hands
suddenly on no man. Tit. 1. 5. For this cause I left thee in Creet, that thou
should set in order things which are wanting, and ordain Elders in every
City, as I had appointed thee. If any other in these Churches could have
ordained Presbyters, why was Timothy sent to Ephesus, and Titus left at Creet
for this very purpose. And if the Cretians and their Presbyters could have set
in order things defective, what need was there that Tit. alone should have
this commission.

Saint Ierom himself, who was accounted no great friend, but rather harsh
against Episcopacie, in his Epistle to Evagrius, page 329. gives us this as a
distinction, (...), remarkable betwixt a Presbyter and a Bishop, saying, Quid
facit excepta ordinatione Episcopus, quod non facit Presbyter? What does a
Bishop, except the ordaining of others, which a Presbyter does not? And it is
worth the observation that the ancient Father and great Champion for the
blessed Trinity Athanasius has in his second Apology, viz. that Colythus a
Presbyter of the Church of Alexandria had constituted Presbyters, but what
became of them? Rescissa est haec ejus ordinatio, and omnes ab eo constituti in
laicorum ordinem redacti fuere, The ordaining of others by him, was made
invalid, and they who were ordained by him, were degraded and made Laics.

So then you see that Bishops are in this eminenter superiores Presbyteris,
eminently superior to Presbyters, having power affirmative and negative by the
opinion and practice of the ancient Fathers. This confirms what the Apostles
had taught and practiced, and appointed others in place above the ordinary
Presbyters to do.

Now I come to show a second difference betwixt a Bishop and a Presbyter, and
wherein a Bishop has, eminentem superioritatem, a clear superiority above a
Presbyter, That is, excommunication, and was called Mucro Episcopalis, the
Episcopal weapon, and was a power given to Bishops successors of the Apostles,
and was ever practiced by them. This appears in that an account of it was and
is expected at their hands, as is manifested by the quarrel, which our blessed
Savior had against the Angel of the Church of Pergamus, namely, that he
suffered some of his Church who held the doctrine of the Nicolaitans; and
against the Angel of the Church of Thyatira, viz. That he suffered the woman
Iezabell to teach and seduce the people. By this it is apparent that Christ
expected they should do, what they had by their places power to do; namely,
that they being Angels of their Churches (whom I affirm to be also Bishops
thereof, and successors to the Apostles, as is sufficiently proved by the most
reverend and learned Archbishop of Armach, and by Beza himself called (...),
men in place above others) should haereticos coercere and ex Ecclesia ejicere,
Keep under Heretics and cast them out of the Church.

If here it be objected, that we must* not argue Object.
from dark and mystical places of Scripture, such Answ.
as the Apocalypse. I answer, that I argue from a plain place, and from the
plain words, and direct scope of the place, and not the mystical sense or
interpretation. Neither can we here admit of that distinction, that Angelus is
in this place to be taken collectively pro tota Ecclesia, for the whole
Church. For I conceive that there is not a word in the Scripture, but has its
weight: and was it not as easy to have said [ Ecclesiae] as [ Angelo
Ecclesiae] if [ Angelus] had not something more in it then [ Ecclesiae.] And
why not Angelus Ecclesi^, but Angelus Ecclesiae, The Angel the Church, but the
Angel of the Church, if it had been to be taken collectively? But the terms
be distinct and of a different force, like those, panis Domini, the bread of
the Lord, and panis Dominus, bread representing the Lord.

Besides, to return to Timothy and Titus, they are enjoined to command others
(...) not to teach other doctrine, and obturare ora deceptorum, and haereticos
rejicere, to stop the mouths of deceivers, and to reject Heretics. These
things were commanded them, and an account accordingly exspected of the
performance thereof: which manifestly proves that every Church had his Angelum,
who had Episcopal authority and jurisdiction eminent above other inferior
Clergymen: And not many Angels in each of these Churches all of equal
authority and place. Or at least the Angel in each of the seven churches was
so absolute in his power, that he was (...), chief Governor, the Presbyters
assistants to him: he a spiritual Justicer and of the Quorum, they of the
Counsel.

The difference also of Episcopal authority from that of Presbyters appears, in
the cause of excommunication: where there was an appeal to the Synods, which
either confirmd them, or dissolved them, but none to the people, none to the
presbyters. This is confirmed by the ancient Council at Nice Can. 5. and at
Antioch Can. 6. And Ierom himself writing to Riparius concerning Vigilantius
an Heretical Presbyter, is angry that the Bishop under whom he was, did
acquiescere eius furori, and non virga Apostolica, virgaque ferreavas inutile
confringere, and tradere ad interitum carnis, ut spiritus salvu^ fiat, Did
quietly give way to his fury, and not rather break in pieces that unprofitable
vessel with his Apostolic staff and rod of iron, and deliver him up to the
destruction of the flesh, that his soul might be saved.

And it seems strange to me that any should think, that our blessed Savior
his Excecutors, Administrators, and assigns knew not the meaning of his will
and Testament, as well, as we in these days. Christ who ascending into Heaven
gave gifts unto many, would not deny this gift so necessary. He, I say,
giving supereminent gifts to his Apostles ad fundandam Ecclesiam, for the
founding his Church, would not deny to their successors those, which were
necessary Ecclesiae fundatae, to the Church being founded: and so necessary
that nothing more concerns the Church. Would he not, or could he not inform
his Trustees how he pleased to have his Church his household governed in his
absence? To say he would not, is derogatory to his wisdom and goodness; to
say he could not, to his Almighty and Sovereigne power.

I therefore conclude these 2. points.

1 That Ordination of Presbyters was left to Titus and Timothy, as to men of
higher place and authority, and not to the Presbyters who were of inferior
degree. 2 That the power, given to the Angels of Ephesus and the other
Churches, puts a difference of superiority and eminence betwixt a Bishop, and
an ordinary Presbyter, and others the teachers of the Churches, and gives them
commission prae caeteris tam Clericis quam Laicis, above others both Clergy
and Laity, yea a coercive and castigative power.
Further they object and say. That Episcopacie Object. 2.
is not Iure Divino, because Christ did not command it in the Gospel.

To this I answer. That Ius Divinum aliter se Answ.
habet in rebus credendis, aliter in agendis; aliter in rebus fidei, aliter in
rebus facti, There is a difference of Divine right between matters to be
believed, and matters to be done; betwixt matters of faith, and matters of
fact. In matters of faith there must be textus manifestus, aut convincens
deductio, a clear text, or a sound consequence. As for example. In the
beginning God made all things. Here is textus manifestus. But there is only
convincens deductio, concerning the mystery of the blessed Trinity: for the
Trinity is proved not by an express Text, but by convincing deductions out of
sacred Scriptures; as thus.

There came down at the Baptism of Christ the Holy Spirit in the form of a
Dove, and a voice was heard saying, This is my beloved Son, in who^ I am well
pleased. Here we find the Spirit in the form of a Dove: There is heard a
voice: And Christ is seen in the water. We know both by the sacred Scriptures
and by the light of nature, that there is but one God: and that from one all
things are, and that in one they terminate: and that there is aliud medium
copulans primum and ultimum, one between both coupling the first and the last.
Seeing also we read that there is a Father, a Son, and a Spirit, and that
there is but one God, we hence infer by necessary deduction, that there are
three persons and but one God. Besides this deduction is further confirmed by
that place (...), These three are one: which in some sort is textus manifestus,
a clear text.

Now a matter of fact may be inferred to be Iure Divino (as I suppose) if I
prove,

1 That the same fact was the practice of the Apostles. 2 That it is analogical
to the institution of the Church of the Jews, which was settled according to
Gods appointment by the mediation of Angels, by the Ministry of Moses and
Aaron. 3 That it is pointed at and insinuated in the New Testament. 4 That it
has successively continued since the Apostles time. And as elsewhere, so
particularly in Britain.
If these points can be proved concerning the fact ( viz. Government by
Bishops) in question, I hope that none will deny it to be Iure Divino.

Now for proof and confirmation of my Tenent, That Episcopacie is Iure Divino,
I will prove these points, and then say something more concerning the practice
of some other Churches.

1 Saint Paul the Apostle and Doctor of the Gentiles Of the first point.
gave power and authority to Titus and Timothy ordinare dignos, to ordain men
worthy, and to examine such as were faulty, to reprove and discharge such as
were guilty, and did (...), teach other Doctrine, and were offensive to the
honor of their callings, and to cherish such as did well. These things are
evident in the Epistles of Paul to Timothy and of that to Titus. From Paul's
practice of superiority over these two, and from the institution of Timothy and
Titus to be Bishops, the one of Ephesus, the other at Creet, I prove
Episcopacie to be practiced by the Apostles. To make which good thus I argue.

If Saint Paul himself practiced an eminent superiority, and in the Epistles
alleged gave all that power, which of right Bishops challeng, or does belong
to the definition of a Bishop, to Timothy and Titus then Paul himself did not
only practice Episcopacie, but did also constitute and institute them Bishops.
But verum prius, ergo and posterius. That he had (...), a Bishopric as the
other Apostles had, Act. 1. 20. and did diligently run his course therein, no
man will deny. And that he gave power to Timothy and Titus (the same which
himself had)

1 To ordain, 2 To convent, 3 To punish, 4 To reward duplici honor* with
double honor, the Epistles alleged do sufficiently prove. Therefore Paul
himself practiced superiority, and constituted Timothy and Titus Bishops in
place superior to Presbyters, whom they had authority to ordain, convent,
punish, and reward.
If they further object, That the Presbyters with Object.
their President may do the same, even all things which are commanded Timothy
and Titus, and therefore these things were spoken to Timothy and Titus and to
their Presbyters collectively in the persons of Timothy and Titus.

I answer, this is petere principium: this evasion I Answ.
formerly took away. And now further I argue. Such as the charge is, such is
the power: but the tharge is personal, that is, given to Timothy and Titus
particularly; and therefore the power and authority given is personal: to them
for their time, and to their successors in place after them; and not to them
and the Presbytery collectively: nothing in places where such charge is given
does intimate the Presbyters or Deacons interposing themselves in these
Episcopal actions with Timothy and Titus. If they will have these privileges
and performances to belong to their President, they must plead them due to him
as he is successor to Timothy and Titus: and so he is in effect (if you give
him continuance in his place) a Bishop indeed; the bare name of President
cannot make him of a different calling from a Bishop, when as he acts the
part of a Bishop in all points by Saint Paul prescribed. The practice of all
times, especially of the first Century warrants not a monthly or yearly
President doing nothing for ordination, convention, punishment, and reward
without the advice and consent of a company of Presbyters: but it allows
Bishops superiority to presbyters, and Presbyters to Deacons: Yea, it placed
Bishops as successors to the Apostles, as were Timothy and Titus; and
Presbyters and Deacons subordinat to Bishops, as to the Apostles, whilst they
lived.

Saint Ignatius the next Bishop to Evodius: He received Episcopal charge from
the Apostles: and writing to them at Antioch, when he was carried Epist. ad
Antioch.
prisoner to Rome, uses these words to the Laity, Obsequium praebete
Presbyteris and diaconis, Be ye obedient to your Presbyters and Deacons, and
adds to the Presbyters, pascite gregem apud vos, done^ Deus ostendit (...),
feed the flock under you, until God show who shall be your governor: and
hereby establishes superiority to Bishops, and enjoyneth the Presbyters
obedience. The same Father in an Epistle to the Ephesians acknowledges
ONESIMVS (named often by Saint Paul) to be their Bishop, and exhorts them
saying, (...), as it becomes you submit your selves to your Bishops advice.
Thus here we find Saint Paul's charge and ordination observed and followed by
Ignatius, who lived in the first century, and whose worth and authority clouds
of witnesses do confirm.

In the same journey he writes to the Church of Smyrna and salutes their Bishop
by name, and exhorts the flock, (...), to follow their Bishop as Jesus Christ
did his Father: and the Presbytery, as the Apostles. The Bishop here spoken of
was Polycarpus, as Ireneus his successor affirms: with whom Ireneus was
contemporaneus and multa accepit ab illo de Sancti Ioannis vita and
conversatione, contemporary, and by whom Ireneus was informed in many things
concerning Saint John's life and conversation.

In the life time of Trajan the Emperor, Saint John returning from his
banishment out of Patmos, where he wrote his Revelation, summoned the seven
Bishops, who are conceived to be those named in the Apocalypse the Angels of
the seven Churches, and used their ministry for settling and ordering his own
Metropolis of Ephesus, and the other Churches in Asia, as the ancient Greek
Records found in the Library of Photius testify. Concerning his Apostolical
superiority and practice of constitution and ordination of Bishops is frequent
mention in Ireneus, Eusebius, and Ierom.

So then, by that which has been said, we see that Episcopacie is (...),
warranted by the practice of the Apostles, because that viventibus, videntibus,
constituentibus, confirmantibus Apostolis and viris Apostolicis, patribus and
Doctoribus testantibus, The Apostles and Apostolic men being alive, seeing it,
appointing it, and confirming it, and the Fathers and Doctors being eye
witnesses thereof, There were these three distinct degrees in the Clergy,
Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons.

Now to the second Point. That Episcopacie is The second point.
analogicall to the institution and constitution of the Church government of
the Jews in the old Testament: Which Moses as a Prince did establish by Gods
appointment in the wilderness, and which continued in force till the veil of
the Temple was rent, and the Gentiles became heirs to Abraham, and the promises
made to him, were made good to us his heirs by faith and adoption: Because the
Jews, Abraham's heirs according to the flesh, by their own default and
disobedience forfeited their interest in that conveiance of inheritance, which
they claimed from their Father Abraham by the evidences registered in Moses and
the Prophets. Episcopacie and subordination thereunto, I say, holds Analogy
and a kind of proportion with the Jewish Church government. For God in it
appointed an High Priest, Priests and Levits subordinate one to the other, Such
is the subordinatio^ of the three degrees in the Clergy in the new Testament
Church. This subordination of the Christian Church Saint Ierom near the end of
his Epistle to Evagrius observes, and* says, Scimus traditiones Apostolorum
sumptas de veteri Testamento. Quod Aaron and filii ejus atque Levitae in Templo
fuere, hoc Episcopi, Presbyteri and Diaconi sibi vendicant in Ecclesia, scil*
Christiana. The orders delivered to the Church by the Apostles, were taken out
of the old Testament. The same subordination which was seen in Aaron, his sons,
and the Levits, now appears in the Christian Church, in our Bishops,
Presbyters, and Deacons. This proportion is made undeniable by Saint Jude, who
charge some with the gainsaying of Koreth. Now there can be no gainsaying
like that of Koreh in the Christian Church, except there be distinction and
subordination of superiors and inferiors in the Clergy, as there was: and was
gainsaid by Koreh and his accomplices, desirous of superior honor, and of
higher degrees and places, then they had a calling unto. Here then you see that
God would have a proportion of Church Government betwixt the Old and New
Testament.

It is further worthy the observation that both the Church and Commonwealth of
the Jews had in their government a kind of proportion established by God. For
as the Church was Monarchical in Moses, Aristocraticall in some select Priests
and Levits governing under Aaron, and Democraticall in the rest of the Priests
and Levits: So was the Commonwealth Monarchical in Moses, Aristocraticall in
some select Princes of each Tribe governing under Moses, and Democraticall in
the rest, and in the whole body of the people. Such is the proportion betwixt
our Church and Commonwealth, and such has it been from the first foundation.
This will, I hope, appear, when I come to speak of the succession in our
Church. And what kind of government thus suitable to that of the Jews, is in any
one Church, may be in all Churches: namely, all degrees of men subordinate to
their Princes, and all the Princes or Kings subordinate to Christ, without
having any King on earth Head over the rest: as all degrees of men in the
Churches were subordinate to the Apostles, and the Apostles going to several
and far remote Nations were all equally subordinate to Christ, and no one of
them Head over the rest.

To conclude then, seeing the Constitution of Episcopal government is so
agreeable to that which was most absolute, and was established by that wisdom,
that no other Commonwealth and Church ever was; as one observes, Dictante Deo,
constituente Mose, God ordaining it, and Moses putting it in practice: Why
should we endeavor to alter it? Such an attempt might prove with us, as it
did with the people of Capua, when Pacuvius saved the Senators. It is held an
axiom among Architectors, that it is scarce wisdom to pull down one of the
main posts of a building, especially so ancient, except another be settled and
fixed, which we are sure is right and fitted to our purpose: which yet for all
the workmans skill may have a private flaw in it, which cannot be discovered by
the most skillful: and so may the building fall on the builders head.

Thus much for the analogy and proportion betwixt Episcopacie and the Church
government of the Jews.

Now in the third place we come to prove that The third point.
Episcopacie was pointed at, and in some sort deciphered in the New Testament.
What I produced before concerning the authority of Ordination, convention,
punishment, and reward, put upon some special persons, may serve sufficiently
to this purpose: yet some thing more I will here add. Be it so, that when the
Apostle says, (...), If any one desire the office of a Bishop, he desires a
good work, that this is spoken of an inferior Bishop, or Presbyter, who is an
Overseer of the people committed to his charge, as well as of a Bishop
Superior, who has the oversight of the Clergy and people: yet will it
follow, that if the office of an inferior Bishop or Over-seer of his flock be
a good work (as indeed it is) then much more they, who first have labored in
that painful harvest, and afterward in their elder years are advanced to the
Superior Bishops office of Over-seeing the Clergy, of ordaining, conventing
and the like as above, undergo and perform (...), A good work of greater
eminency and more notable. For certainly there cannot be a more blessed work,
nor more holy calling in the Clergy, then to succeed the glorious Apostles,
and Martyrs in their places and callings, as heirs do their parents in their
estates and possessions, and to deliver and teach sacred Doctrine to faithful
men, who shall be able to teach others also: as Saint Paul bids Timothy* 2 Timothy 2.

To this purpose, S. Austin upon that, Ps. 44. or as we have it, 4^.
Propatribus tibi nati sunt filii, Children shall rise in steed of their
Fathers, says Patres m^ssi sunt Apostoli, pro Apostolis filii tibi nati sunt,
constituti sunt Episcopi. Hodie enim Episcopi qui sunt per ^orum orbem, unde
nati sunt? Ipsa Ecclesia Pa^tes illes appellat: Ipsa filios genuit, and ipsa
illos constituit in sedibus Patrum: The Fathers sent to us were the Apostles,
insteede of the Apostles, the sons which were appointed are Bishops. For at
this day the Bishops in all the World, from whom did they arise? The Church it
self calls them Fathers: she her self begot these Sons, and she her self
has put them into the seats of the Fathers. Here ye see the succession of
Bishops proved plainly by Saint Augustine, as before by Ireneus, Eusebius,
Ignatius, and a cloud of witnesses, who sealed their witness with their blood,
and are those whose robes are washed in the blood of the Lamb, and who shall
shine more brightly then the Cynosure amongst other stars of Heaven.

Besides all the witnesses and proofs already brought, I will produce one text
more to prove Bishops to be successors of the Apostles Iure divino. In that
great Synod. ACT. 1. where were assembled the eleven Disciples, and (...) fere
centum and viginti, other persons believer: 120. Saint Peter moved the
consideration of an election of one in the place of Judas, and urges two
places of the Psalms, as prophecies, which must be fulfilled, Psalm. 69. 26.
and 109. 6. There the Holy Ghost prophesied by the mouth of David concerning
Judas: Let his habitation be void, and let no man dwell therein: (...), and let
another take his Bishopric. Mark we well the words, and grant we these two
assertions.

1 That no man will say that there is a Tautologie or Vaniloquium in the words
of sacred Scripture, or that any word may be altered or can be beitered. 2 That
the Scriptures should be understood, as near as we can, literally, and as the
plain sense of the place will bear, and so as may stand with the Analogy of
other Scriptures.
These things being granted, I thus argue. That which the spirit of God by the
mouth of a Prophet has foretold, and the blessed Apostles in a Synod have
ratified, that is an undeniable truth, and may plead its Ius divinum. But
David did foretell by the inspiration of the Spirit of Prophecy, that
Episcopacie should succeed Apostleship, and the Apostles ratified it in their
Synod. Therefore Episcopacie succeeded the Apostleship, Iure divino. It is not
any other word which is attributed to Matthias place, but (...), a Bishopric:
and he succeeded Judas.

If any here object, that Matthias had (...), Object.
the Bishopric of Judas, so that Judas his Apostleship is there called a
Bishopric in a general notion, as it imports an office or charge. And that
therefore Episcopacy did not succeed Apostleship, but both of them were of
right attributed to the 12 chosen by Christ, and both given to Matthias, who
succeeded Judas.

I answer. Suppose this be granted, it makes Answ.
much more for what I intend. For first, if they be terms of so near
affinity, that they serve to express one and the same office in a different
regard: then it follows, that in regard of their affinity, the one may more
easily succeed in the other place; for where there is a likeness of nature,
there is facilior transitus, an easier change of one thing into another, as of
air into fire, because of their agreement in the quality of heat. Secondly,
Seeing the term of Apostle was by those and aftertimes in some sort
appropriate to some few: it remained that the other term, viz. Bishop, should
be left and turned over to their successors. And with respect to this, Matthias
is expressly said to succeed in Judas his Episcopacie: and the chief Officers
of the Clergy are termed Bishops rather then by any other name. This we read
to have been the constant practice of the first Century, in which (as it is
likely) the Executors and Feoffees in trust of our Lord, best understood the
meaning of the Testatour, and had gifts extraordinary, ad Ecclesiam and fidem
stabiliendam, as to establish our faith, so Gods Church too, and could best fit
right terms to persons and callings.

But to come close to our selves. This Isle received The fourth point.
Christianity very soon, even in the days of Tiberius, as Gildas Brito a grave
Author writes: who wrote, Anno 493. And as another Gildas after him
confirms. This Gildas was called Albanicus, and, as some will have it, preceded
the other. He testifies, that after the dispersing of the Disciples, by reason
of the persecution, Philip sent out of France, Joseph of Arimathea, and diverse
others, who preached the Gospel in this Kingdom. Their Doctrine (as Malmesbury
has it) was afterward confirmed by other Preachers and Doctors here. This is
also witnessed both by Origin and Theodoret; not to speak of those, who some
of them affirm that Paul, some that James, some that Peter were in this
Island, and visited the Church here established, as Baronius a Romish Writer,
and of special note in that Church, has it. It Is further said, that Insula
glacialis (which we now call Glastenbury) was granted them by Arviragus King of
the Britains. This is witnessed unto by diverse memorable Records alleged by
the studious and learned Searchers into the British and Saxon Antiquities.

As for that report of Lucius and Eleutherius mentioned by Beda and Marianus
Scotus, and so often alleged by diverse others, I must either think that Rome
had changed her customs, and many of her Tenants, or question the Truth of the
relation: My Reason for this is: because, when in the year 601. Austin the Monk
first required obedience to the Roman Church in three things, viz. 1. in
Paschate celebrando, 2. in Baptismo ministrando, 3. in praedicando Anglis
Saxonibus, In celebrating Easter, in administering Baptism, in preaching to the
English, His motion was refused, and Austin utterly disliked. Quia (to use the
words of another) Augustini fastum spernebant, they disliked Austins pride. And
well they might, for he was haughty and harsh, and did contrary to his
directions from Gregory Bishop of Rome, who sent him hither. For he incensed
Edlefred so against the poor Christians of Bangor, that he put twelve hundred
of them to the sword. Of this the Reason is given: Quia noluere obsequium
Augustino praebere, because they would not submit to Austins will. For this was
indeed the quarrel, as our Writers say. This their refusal to yield to Austin
the Monk, I produce as a proof, that the Christians, which he found here,
held in many things with the Eastern Churches, as having their doctrine from
Jerusalem and Sion, whence the Gospel was to be sent, Esaias 2. 3. Mic. 4. 2. to
the Nations. And whence as Salvation went, Psalm. 14. 7. So likewise the
Doctrine of salvation: for Christ, who gave the Apostles Commission to go to
all Nations, and preach to them the Gospel, did bid them stay at Jerusalem,
till the Holy Ghost furnished them with gifts for the work commanded. This
further appears by that resolute answer, which the Abbot of Bangor gave to
Austin the Monk, Anno 601. viz. That he and his acknowledged no Superiority in
the Bishop of Rome over them, nor any Superior but their own Archbishop
Caer-leonis, or (as some have it) Senovensis, qui sub Deo solus positus fuit
super illos ad supervidendum, and ad faciendum illos servare viam spiritualem,
Who alone under God was made an Over-seer or Bishop to them, that he might
make them observe the spiritual way. Seeing this stout Champion thus answered,
it is probable that they were of the Primitive institution. And this I the
rather give credit unto; because if the Bishop of Rome had then held the
present Tenet of that Church: That their City is the spiritual Metropolis,
and that their Bishop is Caput Ecclesiae, our Predecessors would have
acknowledged the Pope and his See, as they had been taught. But Baronius says,
that our British Bishops are as ancient as those of Rome. And it is probable they
were so.

For this we have good proof; that at a Council at Arles held Anno Dom. 314.
we had three Bishops, viz. 1. Eborius de Civitate Eboraci Episcopus, 2.
Restitutus de civitate Londini Episcopus, 3. Aldelfius de civitate Coloniae
Londinensium, and exinde Sacerdos Presbyter, Arminius Diaconus, Eborius Bishop
of York, Restitutus Bishop of London, Adelfius Bishop of Colchester, and after
them Sacerdos a Presbyter, Arminius a Deacon. These subscribed in this Synod.
Here therefore I observe, that Anno 314. we had Bishops, Presbyters, and
Deacons: the very Governors now in question. And Romish they were not, as I
conceive: because they then acknowledged not a Subordination to Rome: and
because Urban the second called learned Anselme, Patriarcha Britaniae, the
Patriarch of Britain.

Therefore, me thinks, it should not now be questioned, whether Episcopacy be a
Romish Relicke, but rather, that it should be confirmed as an Evangelicall
Ordinance, and as ancient, as the first institution of Churches, and as a
calling appointed by the Apostles. What more have we for Baptism of Infants?
What more for our Sunday, or the Lords day, but convincing deductions from the
Scriptures, or the practice of the Apostles, and the observation of the same in
the Churches of God successively to this very day? yet we hold both these to
be sacred Ordinances and of divine institution: though they both be questioned
by some learned men of the reformed Churches, as Episcopacie is among some of
ours. The case is alike, and as clear, if not much more, for Episcopacie: that
it had a divine institution.

If what is formerly said, satisfy not, I will only use this argument more, to
prove that Episcopacie is Iure Divino. If the charge given 1 Timothy 6. 14. be to
Timothy personally, and be perpetual, then it is to one person, namely to
Timothy, and to the successors in his place: For Timothy was mortal, so that
the perpetuity of the charge must reach to all his successors, till the
appearing of the Lord Christ Jesus. But the charge is personal to Timothy, and
perpetual even to the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore it is to
one person, viz. to Timothy and to his successors for ever.

If it be here objected, that the charge there was Object.
given to Timothy, as elsewhere the Keys to PETER, and according to that, which
is said, Quod dixit Petro, dixit caeteris Apostolis, What was spoken to Peter,
was spoken to the other Apostles also: I Answ.
Answer, It is so. For what was said to Timothy, was said caeterisque Episcopis
and successoribus eorum, both to other Bishops, and their successors: as
Christ's giving the keys to Peter were to him and the other Apostles: But not to
all the Disciples, Deacons and widows.

To sum up all in a word; since it appears that Episcopacie, Presbytery and
Diaconatus are according to the practice of the Apostles analogicall and
agreeable to the constitution of the Jewish Church appointed by God, and
established by Moses; pointed at, and in some kind deciphered in the New
Testament; and strongly insinuated by the successors of the Apostles, to have
been received and practiced by them, as commended to them from divine
authority: since these three orders in our Church are derived so high, have
continued so long, even from the primitive times to this day: we may well
conclude, that as Presbyters and Deacons, so Bishops are Iure divino:
especially seeing Episcopacie is so generally confirmed, and has been so
constantly continued by the Apostles, Apostolic men, Councills, Fathers, and
Doctors.

And much the rather am I induced thus, as I have said, to judge of
Episcopacie: because the contrary part have not the like proofs, warrant, and
approbation for their Presbytery; and can bring no sufficient and convincing
authority for a quarterly or yearly President, joint Presbyters and Lay Elders
usurping pastoral and Episcopal jurisdiction. And here in confidence of my
cause I add, that if they have any lawful general Council, or any Synod
(except their own) which established a Church Government by such a President,
Presbyters, and Lay Elders, as above, I will yield the cause.

Now it concerns us very much to be well advised and truly to judge of these
matters; because it appears in that dangerous and seditious Pamphlet
concerning the late Protestation, that the Author thereof, and such as he is,
care not what government be established, so that Popery (which we wish more
rightly then they) be abolished, Episcopacie and the present government (which
change how inconvenient it may be, they know not) be altered, and that they may
have liberty and toleration (which what state will permit) to profess what
manner of Religion they make choice of.

So may we have as many religions, as there be at Amsterdam, and unpeople all
our plantations by calling many fantastical schismatics home, who under
color of dislike of the Church Government here, have fallen out with our
Religion, and framed to themselves diverse opinions, if not Religions, contrary
to ours, not only in form, but in reality.

Seeing there is but one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and father of
all, let us endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace:
that there may be one body and one spirit, even as we are called in one hope of
our calling, Ephesians. 4. Let us stick fast to that one truth, which we are taught,
and be steadfast in one faith: and agree jointly with one accord, like children
of one Father and Mother. Let us not lose the honor of our Church Government,
but reform the personal errors. And since reformation signifies nothing
else, but the reducing and setting matters into the form in which they were
most perfect: let us constantly hold our-selves to the form kept and practiced
in the Primitive times, and in the first and second Ce^turies. In which we shall
find the Order Episcopal, Presbyteriall, and Diaconall observed, and ever
since confirmed by National Synods and Councils of our own, near 1400 years
ago, or at least 1000, and practiced by many Successions before and since.
What then remains, but that we establish the present Government of our
Church, which is so agreeable to the ancient Constitution?

As for that which is alleged by Saint Jerome, in his Dialogue against the
Luciferians, concerning those things which were rather in honorem sacerdotii,
quam legis necessitate, gratia Principum and Conciliorum authoritate data and
collata, for the honor of the Ministry, then the necessity of any Law, given
and bestowed by the bounty of Princes, and authority of Councils; I say for
these things, I take them not to be Iure divino, though Deo data: I know that
God is to be honored with our substance, and that it is as lawful since
Christ's time to vow or give to him, according as he blesses out labors and
means, as it was for David, Solomon, and their worthies; and how offensive it
may be to him to alter what is given or vowed, as it was of old to change and
give a bad lamb for a good, I leave to the grave consideration of others. Only
I here wish that we may save the honor of our dear and aged Mother; and
punish her sons, if any have dishonored her by Pride, Tyranny, or
Covetousness: and that the Church and Commonwealth may hold such
correspondencie, as they did in the days of David and Solomon: and that as
Kings were Nursing Fathers, and Queens Nursing Mothers to the Church in her
infancy; so in her age she may find Kings to support her, if weak: and if
any of her children be like those of Elies, their fathers may correct them so,
that their Mother be not dishonored nor ruined.

To say no more, I conclude with that of Saint Augustine, Siquid tota Ecclesia
hodie per orbem frequentat, hoc quin ita sit faciendum, disputare
insolentissimae est insaniae, If any thing at this day be of frequent use in
the whole Church, to question and dispute whether it ought so to be is a most
insolent madness. Epist. 118. And that it is Aerianisme to say, that
Presbyters (in the common acception) are equal to Bishops, such namely as were
successors of the Apostles, and such as Saint Augustine himself was. This
Epiphanius reckons among the ancient Heresies, and time has not bettered it:
and whether it resembles and comes near to the Antilogie of Koreh, or not, my
self not being rigid, or prone to censure, I leave to be determined by others.

FINIS.

